Agius v Hannaford [2025] ACTMC 19 (30 October 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Agius v Hannaford
[2025] ACTMC 19
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Magistrate Temby
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL LAW –
SENTENCING –
judgment and
punishment – Work Health and Safety – Category 2 offence –
asbestos exposure
Legislation Cited:
Work Health and Safety Act 2011(ACT), ss 19, 32
Work Health and Safety Regulation 2011
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Cases Cited:
Smithers v Capitol Chilled Foods (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2023] ACTMC
SafeWork NSW v Onsite Rental Group Operations Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWDC
SafeWork NSW v Modco Homes Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWDC 565
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW)
Comcare v Commonwealth of Australia
[2007] FCA 662
SafeWork NSW v
McConnel Dowell Constructors (Aust) Pty Limited (No 3)
[2021] NSWDC
Bulga Underground Operations Pty Limited v Nash
[2016] NSWCCA 37
(2016) 93 NSWLR 338
SafeWork NSW v Carricks Plumbing and Gasfitting Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWDC
SafeWork NSW v Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC 580
WorkCover Authority (NSW) v Profab Industries Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWIRComm 142
Darter v Diden
[2006] SASC 152
Mahdi Jahandideh v R
[2014] NSWCCA 178
Jacqueline Agius (Informant)
Benjamin Hannaford (Defendant)
Representation:
Act Director of Public Prosecutions
Bevan & Co (Defendant)
File Numbers:
CC 41864 of 2023
CC 40757 of 2024
MAGISTRATE TEMBY:
Defendant, Mr Benjamin Hannaford, was a person conducting a business or
undertaking (
) which involved plumbing and general maintenance work.
He traded under the business name ‘RnB Plumbing’.
4 May 2022 an individual, Mr Khan, engaged Mr Hannaford to replace the roof on
his garden shed. The work included the removal of
material from the site after
the roof had been replaced. The agreed price was $1,643 plus GST.
3 June 2022, Mr Hannaford attended Mr Khan’s address with another man who
assisted him (“Mr X”). Mr Hannaford
removed and replaced the garden
shed roof but he did not take the old roof sheets away. He left the sheets,
which contained asbestos,
on the ground beside the shed. Mr Hannaford was not a
licensed asbestos removalist.
10 June 2022, Mr Khan asked Mr Hannaford why he had not removed the old roofing
sheets. Mr Hannaford advised Mr Khan that the sheets
contained asbestos and he
was arranging for them to be double bagged and removed. He asked for an
additional $270 to dispose of the
old roofing sheets, which Mr Khan agreed to
19 June 2022, Mr Hannaford attended Mr Khan’s property with another man,
Mr Church. Mr Church had agreed to Mr Hannaford
using his box trailer to load
the sheets, however Mr Hannaford did not tell Mr Church that the sheets
contained asbestos. He told
him that they were collecting an old fence.
Hannaford loaded the trailer while Mr Church stayed in the car. Mr Church then
drove Mr Hannaford to Mr Church’s residence
at the caravan park in which
he and Mr Hannaford both lived. Mr Church’s trailer, with the asbestos
material, was left covered
with a blue plastic tarp outside Mr Church’s
residence for over three weeks. On 14 July 2022, Mr Church drove his trailer to
Mr Hannaford’s residence and, with the assistance of Mr Hannaford’s
partner, transferred the roofing sheets to Mr Hannaford’s
18 July 2022, two WorkSafe ACT Inspectors attended Mr Hannaford's residence
after receiving a complaint. They observed that Mr
Hannaford’s trailer was
uncovered and full of asbestos corrugated roof sheeting which had not been
wrapped in accordance with
the relevant
Work Health and Safety Regulation
WHS Regulation
19 July 2022, WorkSafe ACT issued a notice to Mr Hannaford requiring him to
engage a suitably qualified asbestos removalist to
dispose of the materials
within 48 hours. Mr Hannaford did not respond to the notice and WorkSafe ACT
Inspectors attended his premises
on 22 July 2022. They observed that Mr
Hannaford had not complied with the notice. As a result, WorkSafe ACT engaged
licensed asbestos
removal companies to remove the material that
Breach of Work Health and Safety duties
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Hannaford had a duty to ensure that the health and safety of other persons was
not put at risk from work carried out as part
of the conduct of his
s 32 of the WHS Act, a person commits a Category 2 offence if:
(a) the person has a health and safety duty;
(b) the person fails to comply with that duty; and
(c) the failure exposes an individual to a risk of death or serious injury or
Hannaford pleaded guilty to having committed a Category 2 offence as a result of
his actions (
the Principal Offence
). Specifically, he accepted that he
failed to take one or more of the following reasonably practicable measures to
eliminate or minimise
the risks to health and safety of workers of his business
(namely, Mr X and Mr Church):
(a) engaging, or advisding Mr Khan that he needed to engage, a licensed asbestos
removalist to remove the asbestos sheets;
(b) dealing with the asbestos, including its removal, transport and storage, in
a way that complied with relevant provisions of the
WHS Regulation – for
(i) ensuring that anyone engaged as a worker for his business had completed a
recognised asbestos awareness course or training;
(ii) ensuring that anyone engaged as a worker for his business was aware that
the old roofing sheets contained asbestos;
(iii) ensuring that his business had an asbestos control removal plan;
(iv) using water suppression and ensuring that anyone engaged as a worker for
his business wore the recommended personal protective
(v) using the regulated asbestos disposal bags and/or ensuring that the asbestos
was sealed in a double-lined, heavy duty polyethylene
sheeting; and
(vi) ensuring that, during the transportation and subsequent storage of the old
sheets, the box trailer was properly covered.
Prosecution case is that these failings exposed Mr X and Mr Church to the risk
of inhaling airborne asbestos fibres. Inhaling
airborne asbestos fibres can
damage lung tissue which, over time, may lead to lung disease including
asbestosis, lung cancer and
mesothelioma. Mr Hannaford did not challenge these
propositions.
Hannaford’s failings also exposed Mr Khan, Mr Hannaford’s partner
and other people at the caravan park to the risk
of inhaling airborne asbestos
fibres. Mr Hannaford accepts that, as a result, he committed a further Category
2 offence (
the Additional Offence
) which I am to take into account in
sentencing him for the Principal Offence (
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
maximum penalty for a Category 2 offence when committed by an individual as a
PCBU, as Mr Hannaford was, was a fine of $300,000
at the time of Mr
Hannaford’s offence.
Objective seriousness
General principles
objective seriousness of an offence against the WHS Act involving a failure to
comply with a health and safety duty is determined
by the extent of the duty
holder’s failure to ensure, so far as was reasonably practicable, that
workers were not exposed to
risks to their safety (
Smithers v Capitol Chilled
Foods (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2023] ACTMC 5
SafeWork NSW v Onsite
Rental Group Operations Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWDC 228
). Considerations
which are relevant to an assessment of the duty holder’s culpability
SafeWork NSW v Modco Homes Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWDC 565
(a) the potential consequences of the risk (noting that the focus must be on the
risk arising from the failure to take reasonably
practicable steps to avoid
injury, not the likelihood of injury resulting – conduct will be more
serious, the more serious
the potential injuries, whether or not they are likely
to materialise –
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW)
NSWCCA 96 at
(b) the availability of steps to eliminate or minimise the risk;
(c) the ease with which mitigating steps could have been taken;
(d) whether the risk was an obvious or clear one;
(e) whether the risk was known, or ought reasonably to have been known to or
identified by the offender (it is an aggravating factor
if the risk was
foreseeable even if the precise cause or circumstance of exposure to the risk
were not foreseeable and it is a further
aggravating factor if the risk was not
only foreseeable but in fact foreseen by the offender -
Commonwealth of Australia
[2007] FCA 662
, Madgwick J noted at [120]); and
(f) the vulnerability of the workers exposed to the risk.
culpability of an offender will turn on an evaluation of all the various
factors, which may pull in different directions (
Nash v Silver City Drilling
NSWCCA 96 at [42]). By way of example, the following scenarios have
been considered in other cases:
(a) an offence will be serious where there is an obvious or foreseeable risk to
safety against which appropriate measures were not
taken even though such
measures were available and feasible (
Smithers v Capitol Chilled Foods
(Australia) Pty Ltd
[2023] ACTMC 5
SafeWork NSW v CCP Remedial
[2021] NSWDC 86
(b) the culpability of an offender has been found to be reasonably high in
circumstances where, while the relevant risk was not expected
to occur often,
the seriousness of the foreseeable resultant harm was extreme and the steps to
be taken to avoid it were straightforward
and involved only minor inconvenience
and little cost (
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW)
NSWCCA 96); and
(c) the neglect of simple, well-known, precautions to deal with an evident and
great risk of injury, take a matter towards the worst-case
v Commonwealth of Australia
[2007] FCA 662
Assessment of objective seriousness of Mr Hannaford’s conduct in
relation to the Principal Offence
my view, this is a serious example of a Category 2 WHS offence. Mr Hannaford was
prohibited from carrying out, or directing or
allowing a worker to carry out,
work involving asbestos (s 419(1), WHS Regulations). That prohibition extended
to work in relation
to the supply, transport, storage, removal, handling,
disposing of or disturbing asbestos (s 419(2), WHS Regulations).
Mr Hannaford may not have known that the old roof sheets contained asbestos when
he agreed to replace Mr Khan’s roof on
his garden shed, he was required to
ensure that all asbestos that was likely to be disturbed by the refurbishment
was identified
and removed by a licensed asbestos removalist before the
refurbishment commenced (ss 453(1), 458(1) WHS Regulations). There were
mitigatory steps that Mr Hannaford could have taken to protect himself and Mr X
in the event that the sheets did contain asbestos,
such as wearing appropriate
personal protective equipment and clothing and using water suppression
techniques, which he did not take.
Mr Hannaford’s advice to Mr Khan on 10 June 2022 that the old roof sheets
contained asbestos, it is clear that Mr Hannaford
realised, at some point during
the removal of those sheets from the garden shed, that they contained asbestos.
This view is consistent
with Mr Hannaford’s statement to the author of the
Court Duty Report that he was informed by a neighbour of Mr Khan that the
contained asbestos when he placed them into a pile in Mr Khan’s
this, he did not engage a licensed asbestos removalist. Nor did he take any
other mitigatory steps, such as using the regulated
asbestos disposal bags or
sealing the asbestos in a double-lined, heavy duty polyethylene sheeting.
Hannaford told the author of the Court Duty Report that the additional amount he
had asked Mr Khan to pay was the sum that another
tradesman had quoted to remove
the sheets before realising that they contained asbestos. He said that he
‘freaked out a bit’
and removed the sheets himself rather than
obtaining further quotes.
submissions, Mr Hannaford said that he did make further enquiries, which
revealed that the cost of engaging a licensed asbestos
removalist (around
$2,500) was much higher than the sum he had quoted Mr Khan ($270), and that he
could not afford the difference.
He conceded that he ignored the issue rather
than asking Mr Khan for additional funds.
he made the additional enquiries before or after he removed the roof sheets from
Mr Khan’s property, I accept the Prosecution
submission that the issue was
easily remediable. Mr Khan had agreed to pay an additional amount for the safe
removal of the asbestos
sheets and Mr Hannaford simply needed to obtain a quote
from a licensed asbestos removalist and ask Mr Khan to pay the cost. It is
unlikely that Mr Khan would have refused.
Hannaford’s eschewal of his responsibilities continued with his engagement
of Mr Church, who was not a licensed asbestos
removalist. Worse still, he
deliberately sought to deceive Mr Church by telling him that they were only
going to collect an old fence
when he knew that the roof sheets contained
noted earlier in these reasons, the risk to which Mr Hannaford exposed Mr X and
Mr Church, as a result of the breach of his duty,
was the risk of them inhaling
airborne asbestos fibres. Generally speaking, the risk of inhaling airborne
asbestos fibres from disturbed
asbestos, and the significant health risks posed
by exposure to asbestos (as also outlined earlier in these reasons), are
is not clear how likely it was that Mr X or Mr Church might inhale airborne
asbestos fibres from roof sheeting that was mainly
stored in a stationary
position outside, nor how likely it is that Mr X or Mr Church might develop any
of the illnesses which, in
a general sense, may be caused by the inhalation of
airborne asbestos fibres, from the exposure to the roof sheeting that they had.
Nevertheless, Mr Hannaford accepts that he knew that he had exposed Mr X and Mr
Church to the risk of inhaling asbestos fibres and,
therefore, that he exposed
them to a significant risk of harm (by which I understood that he was referring
to the risk of developing
one of the serious health consequences that inhalation
of asbestos fibres may result in).
is clear from Mr Hannaford’s message to Mr Khan of 10 June 2025 that Mr
Hannaford was aware that exposure to asbestos poses
health risks, given his
advice that he needed to take protective steps (double bagging the roof sheets)
before removing the sheets
from Mr Khan’s property. He knew that Mr X had
been exposed to the asbestos to some extent on the day the old roof sheets were
replaced and he knew that Mr Church could be exposed to the asbestos for an
extended period given that Mr Church took the sheets
storage (which ended up being from 19 June to 14 July 2022).
were mitigatory measures which were available and feasible, as identified
earlier in these reasons, that Mr Hannaford could
have taken to eliminate or
reduce the risk of Mr X or Mr Church inhaling airborne asbestos fibres. They
were not onerous, burdensome
Ultimately,
Mr Hannaford did not take any steps to deal with the asbestos in a way that
complied with the WHS Regulation. He only
covered the sheets with a tarp once Mr
Church removed them to his residence.
Assessment of objective
seriousness of Mr Hannaford’s conduct in relation to the Additional
the same reasons as I have set out above in relation to the Principal Offence, I
consider that the Additional Offence is also
a serious example of a Category 2
WHS offence. Mr Hannaford accepts that he exposed Mr Khan, Mr Hannaford’s
partner and other
residents of the carpark where he lived to the risk of
inhaling airborne asbestos fibres and that he failed to take any appropriate
available and feasible steps to eliminate or reduce the risk.
Mr Hannaford focused in submissions on the three day period when the roof sheets
were at his residence, after he had received
notice that his storage of the roof
sheets was not compliant with his regulatory obligations, I find that he was
aware that he was
non-compliant, and risked exposing the victims of the
Additional Offence, from the time when he removed the old roof sheets from
Khan’s garden shed. The notice he received from WorkSafe Act only
confirmed what Mr Hannaford already knew.
particular, while Mr Hannaford submitted that he believed he had double bagged
the sheets in compliance with his regulatory obligations,
that submission is not
consistent with the agreed facts. He told Mr Khan that the roof sheets needed to
be double bagged, but the
facts record that he only covered them with a tarp
once Mr Church removed them to his residence.
circumstances
Hannaford is 47 years of age. He has strong support from his parents and from
his partner, with whom he lives in a Housing ACT
property. He has had previous
periods of problematic alcohol and drug use, however he does not currently use
illicit drugs and does
not consider that his use of alcohol is problematic.
Mr Hannaford has generally held employment throughout his adult life, he has not
worked since early 2024 as a result of suffering
health complications following
a motorcycle accident. He has been in receipt of Centrelink benefits for the
past 18 months and is
only just able to afford his weekly living expenses. He
would have difficulty paying a fine at this stage.
Fortunately,
Mr Hannaford’s health is now improving and he is looking for employment.
He is able to undertake community service
Criminal history
Hannaford has a number of entries on his criminal history, however the majority
of his convictions are for driving offences. He
has no history of committing
Work Health and Safety offences.
Hannaford is entitled to some leniency in relation to the present offence. The
absence of any like offences suggests that the present
offence is an aberration
that is not likely to be repeated. This lessens the significance of specific
deterrence as a sentencing
consideration in this matter, although it remains
relevant as discussed below.
Plea of guilty
Hannaford submits that he is entitled to the full discount for his plea of
guilty. Although he did not enter a plea of not guilty,
and the matter was never
listed for hearing, his plea came more than 18 months after the commencement of
proceedings and the utility
of his plea is reduced on account of that delay. I
will allow a discount of 20%.
Comparable cases
Prosecution identified one case in which an individual who was a PCBU was
sentenced for a Category 2 offence involving asbestos
exposure. The Prosecution
provided a summary of the outcome of that case from the Queensland Office of the
Work Health and Safety
Prosecutor.
defendant in that case attended a residential home to clean the roof using a
high pressure water device. The roof was constructed
in the 1960s and contained
asbestos. Despite the fact that the age of the house gave rise to an obvious
risk of asbestos being present
in the roof, and despite there being several
simple control measures to minimise or remove the risk of asbestos exposure, the
took no appropriate protective measures. The defendant also failed to
comply with three compliance notes which directed that the
asbestos-contaminated
) be removed by a licensed asbestos removalist.
found ACD in greater than minor quantities on cars, plants, the ground and the
house exterior and fence. Traces of ACD
were also found at an adjacent
residential property. Accordingly, it was clear that the defendant’s
conduct exposed his co-worker
and several other individuals carrying out
unrelated work inside the house to the risk of inhaling ACD and, therefore, to a
of serious illness.
Court considered that the overall criminality of the offending warranted a fine
of $34,000 but moderated the penalty having regard
to the defendant’s
subjective circumstances. The Court imposed a court-ordered work health and
safety undertaking with a good
behaviour order for a period of two years and a
recognisance of $25,000 for the Category 2 offences and a fine of $9,000 for the
non-compliance with the improvement notices. The Court took into account the
defendant’s early guilty plea, lack of relevant
criminal history and the
fact that the defendant was reliant on social welfare payments to support
himself and his children.
Relevant purposes of sentencing
and specific deterrence are particularly relevant factors in light of the
objects and terms of the WHS Act (
Comcare v Commonwealth of Australia
[2007] FCA 662
). As the Court in
SafeWork NSW v McConnel Dowell
Constructors (Aust) Pty Limited (No 3)
[2021] NSWDC 105
The penalty imposed in relation to this offence must provide
for general deterrence. Employers must take the obligations imposed by
very seriously. The community is entitled to expect that both small and large
employers will comply with safety requirements.
General deterrence is a
significant factor when obligations are breached:
Bulga Underground
Operations Pty Limited v Nash
[2016] NSWCCA 37
; (2016) 93 NSWLR 338 at
deterrence is also relevant given that the defendant continues to operate his
SafeWork NSW v McConnel Dowell Constructors (Aust) Pty Limited (No
[2021] NSWDC 105
is a need to make Mr Hannaford accountable and also to denounce his conduct,
particularly the way in which he misled Mr Church.
I also recognise the harm
caused to the victims of Mr Hannaford’s conduct. While it is difficult to
identify the extent to
which each of the victims of the Principal and Additional
Offences were exposed to the risk of inhaling airborne asbestos fibres,
accepted that they were exposed to that risk, and to the risk of developing
serious health conditions as a result. At a minimum,
the victims are likely to
have experienced some anxiety about that risk
materialising.
primary considerations to which I must have regard in determining an appropriate
sentence are the objective seriousness of the
offending conduct and the
importance of the sentence reflecting the need for general and specific
deterrence (
SafeWork NSW v Carricks Plumbing and Gasfitting Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWDC 175
SafeWork NSW v Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWDC 580
omcare v Commonwealth of Australia
[2007] FCA 662
at [120]). Mr Hannaford’s offending conduct (with respect to both the
Principal and Additional Offences) was serious and general
deterrence is the
dominant sentencing purpose.
factors play a subsidiary role and should not be permitted to produce a sentence
which fails to adequately reflect the
seriousness of the offence (
Authority (NSW) v Profab Industries Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWIRComm 142
(2000) 49 NSWLR 700
Hannaford’s strained financial circumstances are relevant to the sentence
which should be imposed but they are not determinative
Darter v Diden
[2006] SASC 152
, quoted with approval in
Mahdi Jahandideh v R
is appropriate to impose a significant punishment on Mr Hannaford to achieve the
relevant purposes of sentencing. Given his strained
financial circumstances, it
is impractical to impose a significant fine and I have therefore determined to
impose a comparatively
modest fine (compared to the maximum penalty) of $8,000,
reduced from $10,000 for Mr Hannaford’s plea of guilty, together with
imposition of a good behaviour order requiring Mr Hannaford to complete a
substantial number of community service work hours.
make the following orders:
(a) On the charge of committing a category 2 offence, contrary to
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
, the Defendant is convicted.
(b) The Defendant is required to pay a fine of $8,000 within the next 12
(c) The Defendant is to enter into a Good Behaviour Order for a period of 24
months. He is required to sign an undertaking to comply
with his good behaviour
obligations under the
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
period with the following additional conditions:
(i) The Defendant will be on probation, subject to the supervision of the
Director-General of Corrective Services (or delegate) and
must obey all
reasonable directions of that person during the period of the Good Behaviour
Order, or such lesser period as determined
to be appropriate by the supervising
(ii) The Defendant is to report to the Corrective Services Court Duty officer
immediately.
(iii) The Defendant is to perform community service work for a period of 100
hours within 24 months from the date of this order.
I certify that the preceding forty-nine [49] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Decision of his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Noelle-Alexis Bowles
Date: 30 October 2025
RTF format (196 KB)
Signed PDF/A format