Almassey and Omari and ACT Multicultural Council Inc [2008] ACTDT 2 (31 March 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
CITATION: ALMASSEY AND OMARI AND ACT MULTICULTURAL COUNCIL INC
[2008] ACTDT 2
(31 MARCH 2008)
DT05/71 and DT05/72
Catchwords:
Discrimination - goods, services and facilities - disability
- complainant attended at council premises - complainant sought information
from council staff and to address committee meeting - council president spoke
to complainant in derogatory manner and suggested she
had mental illness -
complainant not mentally ill but taking medication for rheumatoid arthritis -
committee voted on president's
motion to eject complainant from premises -
whether conduct in relation to goods, services or facilities - whether
complainant was
treated unfavourably because of disability - whether council
vicariously liable.
Discrimination - goods, services and facilities - disability - damages -
claims for lost wages, domestic assistance, exemplary
and general damages -
principles of assessment of damages for discrimination.
Discrimination Act 1991
[1997] HCA 30
(1998) 191 CLR 1
HREOC v Mt Isa Mines
(1993) 46 FCR 301
Purvis v NSW
[2003] HCA 62
(2003) 217 CLR 92
University of Ballarat v Bridges
[1995] VICSC 90
[1995] 2 VR 418
Re Prezzi and Discrimination Commissioner
(1996) 39 ALD 729
Lewin v ACT Health & Community Care Service
[2002] ACTDT 2
Alexander v Home Office
[1988] 2 All ER 118
Hall v A & A Sheiban Pty Ltd and ors
[1989] FCA 72
(1989) 20 FCR 217
Re Marshall and Discrimination Commissioner & ors
[1998] ACTAAT
Walker v Advance Supermarkets
[2000] ACTDT 5
Hughes v Car Buyers Pty Ltd
[2004] FMCA 526
Cross v Hughes
[2006] FMCA 976
Butcher v The Key King Pty Ltd
[2000] ACTDT 3
Bloomfield v Westco Jeans Pty Ltd
[2001] ACTDT 4
Kilgariff v Aerial Taxi Cabs Ltd
[2001] ACTDT 3
Whiting v ACT Health
[2008] ACTDT 1
Mr R J Cahill, President
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL ) NO: DT05/71
ALENA ALMASSEY
Complainant
MOHAMED OMARI
First Respondent
ACT MULTICULTURAL COUNCIL INC
Second Respondent
Mr R J Cahill, President
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS:
1. That the Respondent Mohamed Omari pay the Complainant Alena Almassey the
sum of $1,500 by way of compensation for the loss and
damage suffered as a
result of the unlawful discrimination of the Respondent.
2. That the complaint against the Respondent ACT Multicultural Council Inc be
dismissed on the ground that it has not been substantiated.
...................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL ) NO: DT05/71
ALENA ALMASSEY
Complainant
MOHAMED OMARI
First Respondent
ACT MULTICULTURAL COUNCIL INC
Second Respondent
31 March 2008 Mr R J Cahill, President
1. This case concerns a complaint by Alena Almassey, a member and delegate of
the ACT Multicultural Council (the Multicultural
Council), under the
Discrimination Act 1991
(the Act). She alleges discrimination on the
part of Mohamed Omari, the then President of the Council, and the Council
itself vicariously.
On 12 March I announced my decision in this matter and
stated I would provide written reasons. I now do so.
Procedural History
2. On 22 April 2005 the Respondents were ordered to file and serve their reply
by 9 June. On 10 June they were ordered to file
any outstanding material by 1
July. They were granted extensions of time to comply with this order on 12
August and 4 November.
Affixed to this last order was a note warning that a
failure to comply may result in the hearing proceeding in the absence of the
Respondents' evidence. On 19 January 2006, the Complainant advised the
Tribunal that the Respondents had still not complied. The
hearing proceeded on
3 February 2006 in the Respondents' absence. On 5 May a further hearing was
held, with the Respondents given
leave to appear and make submissions but not
to present evidence.
3. The facts emerge from the witness statements of Ms Almassey and Ms
Forostenko dated 20 April 2005 and admitted as Exhibits A
and B respectively,
and the T documents, some of which were also admitted separately as
4. On 27 November 2003 Ms Almassey attended the office of the Multicultural
Council. Her purpose was to ask the staff about why
she had not been receiving
information and to check her address details in the Council's database.
5. A meeting of the Council executive had also been called for that day. Ms
Almassey had arrived 15 minutes before the executive
meeting was due to start.
She was not at that time a member of the executive. There were, however, two
vacancies on the executive,
one of which was due to the death of one of the two
Vice-Presidents. Ms Almassey sought to put a case for filling that vacancy to
the rest of the executive. Also on the agenda for that meeting was the
selection of delegates to attend the Federation of Ethnic
of Australia (FECCA) conference scheduled for the following month in Melbourne.
Ms Almassey wished to attend
and sought selection as one of the delegates. Ms
Forostenko, a member of the executive at the time, had invited Ms Almassey to
the meeting for these purposes.
6. Mr Omari arrived shortly before the meeting began, saying "I have all the
proxies". When he saw Ms Almassey he started yelling,
saying "get this woman
out of here, get her out of my office. She has no right to be here. She is
7. Ms Almassey responded by saying "I have every right to be in the office",
and explaining that she had come to find out why she
hadn't been receiving
information about the Multicultural Council. Mr Omari replied by instructing
the office administrator to "call
the police[;] I want this woman out of my
office." He then turned to the others present (Mr Ng, Mr Yoon and Ms
Forostenko) and asked
"who brought this woman off the street?"
8. Ms Forostenko said that she had invited Ms Almassey, stating "[s]he has a
right to come to the office" and adding that she wished
to address the
executive about filling the Vice-President vacancy. Mr Omari then told her
"[y]ou invited her, you remove her from
the office." Ms Forostenko replied: "I
will not, she has every right to be here."
9. Mr Omari responded to this by saying:
I want her to leave immediately. This is an Executive Committee meeting, she
is not welcome and she has no right to be here. She
is not worthy to be on the
Executive because of her mental state, I know about her, she is on medication
and mentally unstable.
We don't want her.
10. Mr Omari then said to the others "[w]e will put this to a vote. I want
you to vote as to whether she stays of goes". This
may have been said after Ms
Almassey asked them "how can you just sit there as leaders of your communities
and let this kind of behaviour
continue." In any event, Mr Yoon and Mr Ng
voted for Ms Almassey's expulsion.
11. The office administrator voiced a complaint that she was finding the
working conditions stressful. Ms Almassey offered to
Omari said "I have had enough of you." He then said to Ms Forostenko "[h]ow
dare you bring this woman off
the street." Ms Almassey left at this time.
The Legislative Scheme - Discrimination
12. Discrimination is defined in
of the Act:
8 What constitutes discrimination
(1) For this Act, a person
discriminates
against another person
(a) the person treats or proposes to treat the other person unfavourably
because the other person has an attribute referred to
(b) the person imposes or proposes to impose a condition or requirement that
has, or is likely to have, the effect of disadvantaging
people because they
have an attribute referred to in
(2) Subsection (1) (b) does not apply to a condition or requirement that is
reasonable in the circumstances.
(3) In deciding whether a condition or requirement is reasonable in the
circumstances, the matters to be taken into account include--
(a) the nature and extent of the resultant disadvantage; and
(b) the feasibility of overcoming or mitigating the disadvantage; and
(c) whether the disadvantage is disproportionate to the result sought by the
person who imposes or proposes to impose the condition
or requirement.
13. Among the attributes mention in
, relevantly, are sex and disability.
Disability is defined in
5AA Meaning of
(1) In this Act:
(a) total or partial loss of a bodily function; or
(b) total or partial loss of a part of the body; or
(c) malfunction of a part of the body; or
(d) malformation or disfigurement of a part of the body; or
(e) the presence in the body of organisms that cause or are capable of causing
disease; or
(f) an illness or condition which impairs a person's thought processes,
perception of reality, emotions or judgment or which results
in disturbed
behaviour; or
(g) an intellectual disability or developmental delay.
(2) Except in
(Work related discrimination) and
(Discrimination by qualifying bodies etc),
disability--
(a) that the person has, or is thought to have (whether or not the person in
fact has the disability); or
(b) that the person had in the past, or is thought to have had in the past
(whether or not the person in fact had the disability);
(c) that the person will have in the future, or is thought will have in the
future (whether or not the person in fact will have
the disability).
14. A discriminatory act must occur in an area of public life covered in
The relevant ones here are access to public premises
provision of goods, services and facilities
19 Access to premises
It is unlawful for a person to discriminate against another person--
(a) by refusing to allow the other person access to, or the use of, any
public premises
) that the public or a section of the
public is entitled or allowed to enter or use (whether for payment or not);
(b) in the terms or conditions on which the discriminator is prepared to allow
the other person access to, or the use of, public
premises; or
(c) in relation to the provision of means of access to public premises; or
(d) by refusing to allow the other person the use of any facilities
public facilities
) in public premises that the public or a
section of the public is entitled or allowed to use (whether for payment or
(e) in the terms or conditions on which the discriminator is prepared to allow
the other person the use of public facilities; or
(f) by requiring the other person to leave public premises or cease to use
such facilities.
20 Goods, services and facilities
It is unlawful for a person (the
) who (whether for
payment or not) provides goods or services, or makes facilities available, to
discriminate against another person--
(a) by refusing to provide those goods or services or make those facilities
available to the other person; or
(b) in the terms or conditions on which the provider provides those goods or
services or makes those facilities available to the
other person; or
(c) in the way in which the provider provides those goods or services or makes
those facilities available to the other person.
Unfavourable treatment in relation to goods, services and facilities
15. Ms Almassey submits that the Multicultural Council provided services in
the form of information to members and assistance with
inquiries. In
Brennan CJ and McHugh J note
that "services" has a wide meaning. Their Honours further state that "in an
appropriate case allowing
the use of property or facilities owned by or under
the control of the [Perth City] Council may constitute the provision of a
by that Council", and this may include "the provision of intangibles
such as advice and information in respect of building and town
. In addition, the
(Cth) entitles Ms Almassey to verify the accuracy of her membership
details stored on the Multicultural Council's database.
16. It seems, therefore, that the Multicultural Council provided a service to
its members of supplying them with information.
Section 20 of the Act does not
require services to be available to the public at large. It is not necessary
to consider whether
answering inquiries by members of the public is a service
covered by the Act.
17. It cannot be said that the Multicultural Council refused to provide that
service to Ms Almassey. She had entered the office
prior to the meeting
beginning and had been able to ask staff present about checking the database,
albeit without success. In her
statement (Exhibit A), Ms Almassey quotes the
office administrator as telling her "I had been instructed not to give you
information".
Without further evidence as to who gave the instruction and why,
one cannot say this was a discriminatory act, even if it does seem
improper on
18. On the other hand, the conduct of persons involved in delivering a service
is clearly part of the "way" in which the service
is provided. Mr Omari, upon
his arrival, immediately demanded Ms Almassey leave, thus interrupting her
efforts to obtain the information
she sought. In the event I am satisfied she
was treated unfavourably in relation to the provision of services or
facilities.
"Because of"
19. Under the Act, unfavourable treatment must be "because of" an attribute
mentioned in
The meaning of "because of" is affected by s 4A(2), which
In this Act, a reference to doing
a particular matter includes a reference to doing an act because of 2 or more
matters that include the particular matter,
whether or not the particular
matter is the dominant or substantial reason for doing the act.
20. The Respondents deny that Ms Almassey was asked to leave because of her
sex or disability; rather, she was asked to leave because
she had no right to
be present at the executive committee meeting.
, Kirby J discussed
the effect of a similar provision in the Western Australian anti-discrimination
legislation at issue in that case.
Although his Honour was in dissent, the
majority did not discuss the application of the provision. Kirby J said that
an act will
be taken to have been done on a discriminatory ground if it "truly
played a causative part" in the act and was "not [a] trivial or
insubstantial"
reason or ground. I consider that this approach more closely accords with the
text of s 4A(2).
22. Under the Act, the use of insulting or offensive words to a person is not
discriminatory
, even though it is unfavourable treatment of that
person because of an attribute (although the words may amount to vilification
There has to be a connection between the words used and an area
of public life mentioned in
Relevantly, there must be a connection
between the words and the denial of public premises (s 19) or the provision of
goods, services
or facilities (s 20).
23. Clearly, the use of such words would be part of "the way in which the
provider provides ... goods or services" or facilities
(s20(c)). They would
not, however, be part of the "conditions" within the meaning of ss 19(b), 19(e)
and 20(b); the context in which
that word appears in those provisions (as part
of the phrase "terms and conditions") indicates that the intended meaning is
contractual
conditions. The words may also serve as evidence of a
person's motive, state of mind or state of knowledge when doing an act
in ss 19 and 20, and thus show that the act was "because of" an
24. The test for discrimination is an objective one. "This task may involve
the consideration of subjective material such as the
intention or even motive,
purpose or reason of the alleged discriminator; but its significance will vary
from case to case ..." (Lockhart
HREOC v Mt Isa Mines
Purvis v NSW
, Gummow, Hayne & Heydon JJ stated that the central
question is "
was the aggrieved person treated as he or she was?
[emphasis in original]" Their Honours further stated that "Motive, purpose,
may all bear on that question" (Ibid).
University of Ballarat v Bridges
, Ormiston J said that "motive
and purpose should be treated as largely irrelevant so long as it can be shown
that the person charged
intended to do an act which in fact amounts to unlawful
discrimination".
A similar approach has been
taken in this jurisdiction. The Administrative Appeals Tribunal ruled in
Prezzi and Discrimination Commissioner & anor
that it was sufficient to prove that a person acted
advertently with knowledge of another person's disability or its essential
manifestations.
This Tribunal accepted that approach in
Lewin v ACT Health
and Community Care Service
26. Ms Almassey cites the words "woman off the street" as evidence that the
Respondents discriminated against her on the basis
of sex, as they connote a
prostitute in her culture. While they may very well carry that connotation in
Ms Almassey's culture, they
do not carry that connotation in other cultures.
There is no evidence about what the phrase means in Mr Omari's culture, but to
native English speaker the phrase "woman (or "man" or "person") off the
street" means a person picked at random, indistinguishable
from any other
member of the public. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, I do not
think that Mr Omari intended his use of
the phrase to refer to a prostitute.
27. There is no evidence that Mr Omari knew that Ms Almassey would take the
words used to mean "prostitute", nor even that a reasonable
person in his
position would have known that. Accordingly, Mr Omari did not treat Ms
Almassey unfavourably because of her sex.
28. In relation to disability discrimination, Ms Almassey cites phrases such
as "she is on medication" and "she is mentally unstable".
Ms Almassey does not
actually have any mental disability; however s 5AA(2) defines disability as
including a disability a person
is thought to have, whether or not they
actually do.
29. The evidence is clear that Mr Omari believed she had a mental disability
and that he took that into account in asking her to
leave. Among other things,
he said (emphasis added):
* "Get this woman out of here, get her out of my office.
She has no right
to be here. She is unstable
* "I want her to leave immediately. This is an Executive Committee meeting,
she is not welcome and she has no right to be here.
She is not worthy to be
on the Executive because of her mental state, I know about her, she is on
medication and mentally unstable.
We don't want her
30. In his response to the Discrimination Commissioner, entered as Exhibit E
at the hearing, Mr Omari stated that his "understanding"
of Ms Almassey's
condition was that "she must continue her medications intake or she will become
unstable person [sic]." In actual
fact, Ms Almassey was taking medication for
rheumatoid arthritis at the time.
31. It is therefore likely that Mr Omari acted to remove Ms Almassey because
he perceived her to be mentally unstable.
32. This is an unusual case, in that the discrimination, in my view, can be
brought under the mental illness aspect; although in
fact mental illness was
not actually suffered by the complainant, the allegation was made that she did.
Under the Act, the lack of
possession of the particular disability is not a
disqualifying factor for discrimination on the basis of disability. In my
I am satisfied that discrimination is made out.
Vicarious liability
33. Ms Almassey submits that, as Mr Omari was the President of the
Multicultural Council at the time, the Council is said to be
vicariously liable
for his actions. In this respect, Ms Almassey cites s 108H of the Act, now
, and s 108I(4) (as it was from 9 April 2004).
I note at the outset that, by virtue of s 108I(2), that
section applied to prosecutions for offences; it has no application here.
vote by the executive is said to have amounted to an endorsement by the Council
of Mr Omari's discriminatory actions.
34. Mr Omari was President of the Multicultural Council at the time these
events occurred. The minutes record that Mr Omari was
chairing the executive
meeting. They state "As a Chair [sic] Mohamed [Omari] has put the matter [ie
Ms Almassey's expulsion] to
the Executive Committee members."
35. Although Mr Omari was the president and chairing the meeting, I am not
satisfied that he had implied authority to do what he
did in respect of Ms
Almassey on behalf of the Multicultural Council. I do not consider that the
committee voting for her expulsion
is the same as adopting and being
vicariously liable for the statements by Mr Omari that amount to
discrimination; I do not think
that that decision goes far enough to say they
completely supported Mr Omari's conduct and made the council liable for
it. Accordingly,
I find that vicarious liability on the part of the
Multicultural Council is not made out, and Ms Almassey's complaint against the
Council fails.
36. Remedies were formerly provided for in s 102 of the Act. The current
provision is s 99(3), and is not materially different:
99 Decisions following hearing
(3) If the tribunal is satisfied that the respondent has engaged in unlawful
conduct, the tribunal must make 1 or more of the following
(a) that the respondent not repeat or continue the unlawful conduct;
(b) that the respondent perform a stated reasonable act to redress any loss or
damage suffered by a person because of the unlawful
(c) except if the complaint has been dealt with as a representative
complaint--that the respondent pay to a person a stated amount
compensation for any loss or damage suffered by the person because of the
unlawful conduct.
37. Ms Almassey has sought $4,000, a written apology from Mr Omari and
publication of the payment in the next Annual Report of
the Multicultural
Council. She also claims out of pocket expenses and "exemplary damages".
Alexander v Home Office
May LJ declared that the objective of awards of damages in discrimination
cases was restitution.
Hall v A & A Sheiban Pty Ltd & ors
the full Federal Court discussed the principles
applicable to awards of damages under anti-discrimination laws. French J
that the measure of damages was to be found in the words of the statute
and not through the principles applicable to damages in tort.
It may be that while there are events for which the conduct complained of is a
sine qua non, they would not be recognised in any
practical sense as arising
"by reason of" it. Exclusion principles analogous to concepts of remoteness,
and failure to mitigate
may then be seen to operate. In the end, however,
these are to be subsumed in a practical judgment of cause and effect.
40. Lockhart J took a similar approach to French J. His Honour stated that it
would be "difficult" and "unwise" to prescribe an
inflexible measure of damages
in discrimination cases; "in particular, to do so exclusively be reference to
common law tests in branches
of the law that are not the same, though analogous
in varying degrees, with anti-discrimination law".
Nevertheless, Lockhart J accepted that the measure of
damages in tort was the closest analogy and one that "in most foreseeable
cases" was a "sensible and sound" test:
Generally speaking, the correct way to approach the assessment of damages ...
is to compare the position in which the complainant
might have been expected to
be if the discriminatory conduct had not occurred with the situation in which
he or she was placed by
reason of the conduct of the respondent.
41. The ACT Administrative Appeals Tribunal, citing
Hall v Sheiban
accepted that, while tort may be a useful analogy, "the extent of damages must
be governed by the language of the statute".
This Tribunal has previously endorsed Lockhart J's
approach to damages quoted above.
42. With regard to exemplary damages, both Lockhart J and French J expressed
doubt about their availability.
recently, in
Hughes v Car Buyers Pty Ltd
Cross v Hughes
the Federal Magistrates Court has stated that such
damages are not available in discrimination cases.
Special damages
43. Ms Almassey has filed an affidavit outlining her claimed loss and damage.
Annexed to the affidavit are a letter from her treating
GP, Dr Kristine Powell,
dated 1 March 2006 and several payslips from her employer, the Australian
National University. Among the
particularised claims are costs associated with
travelling to Adelaide to visit relatives "for support", lost wages and amounts
compensate for domestic assistance provided by family and friends. This
last is essentially a
Griffiths v Kerkemeyer
44. Dr Powell's letter demonstrates that Ms Almassey was diagnosed with
rheumatoid arthritis in 1998. From November 2003 through
2004, she attended at
the surgery every 1-2 months. November 2003 was the time of the incident. The
letter does not indicate whether
this was an increase in frequency of visits.
The letter indicates that Ms Almassey has been taking immunosuppressive
medication,
anti-inflammatories and analgesics, but gives no specifics on what
the drugs used to treat her condition.
45. Dr Powell says "I would also suggest that stress from other sources will
adversely affect any patient's experience of chronic
disease." From this one
can infer that the discriminatory conduct of the Respondents would likely have
aggravated her condition;
however, to what extent, if at all, it did so in Ms
Almassey's case is not explained. This prevents the awarding of special
for medical expenses.
46. The payslips indicate that Ms Almassey worked 11.5 hours in the
(presumably) fortnight ending 28 January 2004. In the period
ending 7 April
2004 she worked 4 hours. Both of those were as "Theatre Staff - Paid Extra
Rates". In the period ending 8 September
2004, she worked 19.5 hours as an
"ANU Officer Grade 3", and the following fortnight she worked 48.5 hours. In
paragraph 7 of her
affidavit, Ms Almassey swears that she filled in
"emergencies" on 28 January and 7 April 2004; otherwise, she was off work from
January 2004 to May that year. She estimates her lost income for that
period as $6,400, based on working 20 hours per week at a
rate of $20 per hour
for four months.
47. The payslips for September 2004 suggest a before-tax wage rate of $21.69
per hour. In
Butcher v The Key King Pty Ltd
this Tribunal determined that compensation should be
assessed on the basis of the net lost wage. The net wage loss seems to differ
between the two payslips. The 8 September payslip shows that net wages were
just under $20 per hour, while the 22 September payslip
discloses a net rate of
$17 per hour.
48. It must be noted that the payslips all postdate the incident in November
2003. There is no evidence of Ms Almassey's income
before then other than her
estimate of $20 per hour contained in her affidavit. In
contrast, there was evidence of the complainant's wages for the last six months
of employment. Ms Almassey's estimate fails
to distinguish between net income
and gross income. The payslips, as noted above, indicate that the net wage
rate could vary, as
could her hours. Overall, the evidence is insufficient to
accurately calculate Ms Almassey's lost wages.
49. There is no evidence that Ms Almassey's decision to take time off work was
medically justified. This is not a case of discrimination
at the workplace.
The discriminatory conduct occurred quite separately from Ms Almassey's
employment. There would need to be a causal
link between the act and her
decision to take time off work. There is no evidence of such a link.
50. Similar considerations apply to the
Griffiths v Kerkemeyer
claim. Ms Almassey estimates the value of the assistance she received at $25
per hour; but there is nothing to support the
valuation. Nor is there evidence
showing the need for such assistance, especially for a four-month period.
51. Lastly, there is the claim for travel to Adelaide. Again, the evidence
does not demonstrate that this travel was necessary
for Ms Almassey's recovery
from the incident.
52. In all the circumstances of this case, I do not believe special damages
General damages
53. The awards for general damages made in this Tribunal range from $250
with $2,500 being the most frequently awarded amount. I
recently made an award of $2,500 for employment discrimination in respect
health worker.
54. Ms Almassey suffers from rheumatoid arthritis. This condition causes her
chronic pain and psychological stress. Ms Almassey
asserts, and Dr Powell
agrees, that stress aggravates her condition. I accept that there would be
some aggravation of a person's
general wellbeing and wellness if an allegation
of the sort made in this case was aired and dealt with in the way that Mr Omari
55. This matter, obviously, was very upsetting for the complainant; there is
no doubt about that. However, it was restricted to
the one occasion. I am
satisfied that Ms Almassy was humiliated, hurt and belittled as a result
of what happened.
56. On the question of the amount of damages, I am satisfied that the general
damages, taking in mind other awards, should be listed
at $1,500; I award that
against Mr Omari personally.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL
APPEARANCE DETAILS
To be completed by Member's Staff
_______________________________________________________________________
DT05/71 & DT05/72
COMPLAINANT:
ALENA ALMASSEY
FIRST RESPONDENT:
MOHAMED OMARI
SECOND RESPONDENT:
ACT MULTICULTURAL COUNCIL INC
COUNSEL APPEARING: COMPLAINANT:
MS T WARWICK
RESPONDENTS:
SOLICITORS: COMPLAINANT:
RESPONDENTS:
OTHER: COMPLAINANT:
RESPONDENTS:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
MR R J CAHILL, PRESIDENT
DATE OF HEARING:
DATE OF DECISION:
[1997] HCA 30
(1998) 191 CLR 1
[1997] HCA 30
(1998) 191 CLR 1
[1997] HCA 30
(1998) 191 CLR 1
(1993) 46 FCR 301
at 325 (Black CJ agreeing
[2003] HCA 62
(2003) 217 CLR 92
[1995] VICSC 90
[1995] 2 VR 418
at 433. See also Tadgell J
(1996) 39 ALD 729
[2002] ACTDT 2
Section 108I was omitted on 1 November
[1988] 2 All ER 118
[1989] FCA 72
(1989) 20 FCR 217
[1989] FCA 72
(1989) 20 FCR 217
[1989] FCA 72
(1989) 20 FCR 217
Re Marshall and Discrimination
Commissioner & ors
[1998] ACTAAT 287
Walker v Advance Supermarkets
[2000] ACTDT 5
Hall v Sheiban
at 240-1 (Lockhart
J), 282 (French J)
[2004] FMCA 526
[2006] FMCA 976
[2000] ACTDT 3
Bloomfield v Westco Jeans Pty Ltd
[2001] ACTDT 4
Kilgariff v Aerial Taxi Cabs Ltd
[2001] ACTDT 3
Whiting v ACT Health
[2008] ACTDT 1
RTF format (70.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format