Law Society v Ford (No 2) [2024] ACTSCFC 2 (19 December 2024)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Law Society v Ford (No 2)
[2024] ACTSCFC 2
Hearing Dates:
4-5 November 2024
Decision Date:
Mossop and McWilliam JJ, Ainslie-Wallace AJ
Catchwords:
LEGAL PRACTITIONERS
– DISCIPLINE – Application for
removal from the roll of legal practitioners – recommendation by ACAT that
be removed from the roll of legal practitioners for professional
misconduct and unsatisfactory professional conduct – whether
defendant is
a fit and proper person to practise law – where defendant shows no insight
into inadequacies of his own conduct
– unfitness indefinite –
defendant’s name removed from the roll of legal practitioners
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– JURISDICTION – Factual findings
by ACAT of professional misconduct and unsatisfactory professional conduct
defendant sought to have Supreme Court conduct fresh fact-finding
– inconsistent with statutory regime to permit unchallenged
reached as part of ACAT process to be undermined in subsequent proceedings
– factual findings of ACAT to be applied
by Supreme Court in determining
fitness to remain on the roll
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– JURISDICTION – Whether Supreme
Court has jurisdiction to hear and determine proceedings – submission by
that original decisions of Law Society invalid – submission that
all subsequent proceedings, including present proceedings,
were without
Profession Act 2006
(ACT) enlivens jurisdiction of Supreme Court to consider
removal from the roll – separate statutory rights of appeal to Appeal
Tribunal of ACAT and Supreme Court – no orders made in appeals or properly
constituted judicial review proceedings setting
aside ACAT orders – not
open to seek prerogative relief by application in current proceedings
Legislation Cited:
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
(ACT), ss 79,
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), r 5052
Legal Profession
, Ch 4, Dictionary
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
(ACT), rr 4, 5, 19,
Cases Cited:
A Solicitor v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
216 CLR 253
Barlow v Law Society of the Australian Capital
[2013] ACTSC 68
272 FLR 470
Council of the Law Society of
the ACT v Bandarage
[2019] ACTSCFC 1
Council of the Law Society of the
Australian Capital Territory v Giles
[2020] ACTSCFC 1
Council of the
Law Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner LP 202012 (Hugh Ford) (Occupational
Discipline)
[2024] ACAT 11
Council of the Law Society of the
Australian Capital Territory v LP 202012 (Hugh Ford) (Occupational
Discipline)
[2020] ACAT 80
Harlech Enterprises Pty Ltd v Beno
Excavations Pty Ltd
[2022] ACTCA 42
18 ACTLR 245
In re Weare, a
Solicitor; In re The Solicitors Act, 1888
[1893] UKLawRpKQB 130
[1893] 2 QB 439
Incorporated
Law Institute of New South Wales v Meagher
[1909] HCA 87
(1909) 9 CLR 655
Ltd v Secretary, Department of Health and Aged Care
[2003] FCAFC 288
Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR
Law Society of New South Wales v Jones
(NSW Court of Appeal,
unreported, 27 July 1978)
Law Society of the ACT v Powrie
12 ACTLR 184
Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v
[2017] ACTSCFC 2
Law Society v Ford
[2024] ACTSC
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the Australian
Capital Territory
[2011] ACTSC 110
Legal Practitioner LP 202012 v The
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
[2023] ACTSC
LP9 v Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital
[2024] ACTSC 116
LP 202012 (Hugh Ford) v Council of the Law
Society of the ACT (Appeal)
[2024] ACAT 12
Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs v Bhardwaj
[2002] HCA 11
209 CLR 597
South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
Re DP and the
Legal Practitioners Act 1970
[2005] ACTSC
Southern Law Society v Westbrook
[1910] HCA 31
(1910) 10 CLR 609
v The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2008] NSWCA 93
The Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v LP
[2018] ACTCA 60
14 ACTLR 45
The Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
(Plaintiff)
Hugh Ford (Defendant)
Representation:
D Moujalli (Plaintiff)
Self-represented (Defendant)
Thomson Geer (Plaintiff)
Self-represented (Defendant)
File Number:
SC 10 of 2024
Introduction
Council of the Law Society of the ACT (Law Society) has, by originating
application filed 11 January 2024, sought an
order, pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2006
(ACT) (LP Act) and/or the inherent jurisdiction
powers of the court, that the name of the defendant, Hugh Russell Ford, be
from the roll of people admitted to the legal profession maintained by
the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory pursuant
to s 27 of the LP
Act. At the hearing, the Law Society made it clear that it only relied upon the
inherent jurisdiction of the court
in a limited and contingent way. The matter
was conducted on the basis that it was a statutory application relying upon
defendant was admitted as a barrister and solicitor of the Supreme Court of the
ACT on 20 October 1995. He held a barrister
practising certificate issued by the
Law Society from 9 January 2007 to 30 June 2008.
a restricted practising certificate from 3 December 2009 until 30 June
an unrestricted practising certificate from 1 July 2011 to 21 June 2018.
June 2018, the defendant’s practising certificate was cancelled. The
defendant appealed against this decision
but, at the hearing of his appeal on
18 December 2018, he consented to its dismissal, and it was dismissed.
July 2020, the Law Society made four applications to the ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (ACAT) for disciplinary
orders in relation to the
defendant. The ACAT file numbers for the applications were OR 12/2020,
OR 13/2020, OR 14/2020 and OR 15/2020.
October 2020, the ACAT made a decision dismissing an application by the
defendant for summary dismissal of those four
applications:
Council of the
Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v LP 202012 (Hugh Ford)
(Occupational Discipline)
[2020] ACAT 80 (ACAT
application was made on the grounds that the decision by the Law Society under s
410 of the LP Act was
ultra vires because, following the cancellation of his
practising certificate, he was not subject to Ch 4 of the LP Act, and, further,
that the decision under s 410 was made for an improper purpose.
hearing of the four applications took place on 15, 16 and 17 March 2021 and
6 May 2021. The defendant was legally represented.
On 8 November 2021,
the ACAT made a decision on the four applications for disciplinary orders and
recommended, pursuant to s 425(3)(a)
of the LP Act, that the defendant’s
name be removed from the roll of legal practitioners kept by the Supreme Court
of the ACT:
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner LP
202012 (Hugh Ford) (Occupational Discipline)
[2024] ACAT 11 (ACAT
defendant appealed from that decision on 3 December 2021. The hearing took place
on 14, 15 and 16 June 2022. The defendant
was not legally represented at this
hearing. On 10 March 2023, the Appeal Tribunal of the ACAT confirmed the
original order of the
LP 202012 (Hugh Ford) v Council of the Law
Society of the ACT (Appeal)
[2024] ACAT 12 (ACAT
April 2023, the defendant filed an application for leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court from the Appeal Tribunal’s
decision. However, on 14 December
2023, Curtin AJ dismissed the application for leave to appeal from the Appeal
Legal Practitioner LP 202012 v The Council of the
Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
[2023] ACTSC 391 (Leave
Decision). No appeal or application for leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal
was filed in relation to the decision of Curtin AJ.
originating application in the present proceedings was filed by the Law Society
on 11 January 2024.
application for an adjournment of the hearing made by the defendant was
dismissed on 16 August 2024:
Law Society v Ford
[2024] ACTSC
hearing of the present proceedings took place on 4-5 November 2024 before a Full
Court of the Supreme Court.
Applications under s 431
14․ Section
431 comes towards the end of Pt 4.7 of the LP Act, which relates to applications
for disciplinary action made to
the ACAT. One of the powers of the ACAT
following a disciplinary proceeding is to make an order recommending that the
name of the
practitioner be removed from the local roll: s 425(3)(a).
Section 431(3) then provides:
(3) If the ACAT makes an order recommending that the name of an Australian legal
practitioner who is a local lawyer be removed from
the local roll—
(a) a copy of the order may be filed in the Supreme Court; and
(b) the Supreme Court may order the removal of the name from the roll.
application made pursuant to s 431(3), the process to be followed is distinct
from that which is followed if the application
is made in the inherent
decides the issues on the basis
of the ACAT’s findings of fact. The
process of filing the order of ACAT under s 431(3)(a) is what enlivens the
Supreme Court’s
findings of ACAT on which the recommendation order is founded. It is the
consequences of those findings which the Supreme Court is then empowered to
consider under s 431(3)(b).
differs from the situation if the application is made in the inherent
background facts for itself:
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Bandarage
[2019] ACTSCFC 1
present case, the originating application made reference to both s 431 as well
as the inherent jurisdiction of the
court. Counsel for the Law Society explained
that the basis for the application was s 431(3). He said that the inherent
of the court was not relied upon in order to establish a basis for
removal of the defendant from the roll but was only relied upon
in the event
that the court concluded that removal from the roll was not appropriate, in
order to leave open the possibility that
some other form of relief, such as a
suspension from practice, was available. Counsel submitted that this was an
issue which was
left open by the decision in
Law Society of the ACT v
[2017] ACTSCFC 4
12 ACTLR 184
. Having regard to the manner
in which the claim was put, it is appropriate to focus upon the statutory
requirement of s 431(3). As
will become apparent, it is not necessary to
address the possible invocation of the inherent jurisdiction of the court to
an order different to that contemplated in s 431(3)(b).
The defendant’s approach to the application
approach of the defendant to the application had two main components. First, he
sought to challenge the jurisdiction
of this court by contending that the
decisions of ACAT were void and, hence, could not provide a basis for the
invocation of the
to adduce evidence in order to have this court make factual findings
conduct which were different to, and inconsistent with, the findings made by the
ACAT (and confirmed by the Appeal Tribunal).
from these two matters, the defendant adduced only limited evidence as to his
personal circumstances or other evidence
that, notwithstanding the findings of
the ACAT, might provide a basis for determining that it was not appropriate to
make an order
under s 431(3)(b) removing his name from the roll.
the reasons that follow, it is now not open to the defendant to challenge the
decisions were void, or to adduce
evidence for the purpose of having this court make findings of fact which are
inconsistent with
findings of fact made by the ACAT. Because of the existence of
authority directly on point, it is convenient to first address the
relating to findings of fact made by the ACAT.
Departure from ACAT’s findings of fact
defendant sought to have admitted into evidence a substantial amount of evidence
directed to having the Supreme Court
make findings of fact about his conduct for
itself, and to do so even where those findings were inconsistent with the
findings of
fact made by the ACAT. The Law Society submitted that, having regard
to earlier decisions of the Supreme Court, the factual foundations
application were determined by the decision of the ACAT and it was not open,
upon an application under s 431(3), for the
parties to adduce evidence to
contradict or qualify the findings of the ACAT as to its findings of
unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct.
approach to findings of fact contended for by the defendant cannot be accepted,
as it does not accord with the consistent
authority of this court.
, a Full Court of the Supreme Court considered a legal
practitioner’s submission that a Full Court was entitled to review the
findings and determinations of the ACAT and to make different and conflicting
findings if it so chose. The conclusion was based upon
the terms of the LP Act
and the concept of issue estoppel. The Court described these two reasons as
“not unconnected”.
So far as the terms of the LP Act were concerned,
the Court said (at [79]):
one considers the statutory regime in the LPA as a whole, including the
authority given to the ACAT to determine whether conduct
constitutes
professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional conduct, and the
availability of appeals from such determination,
it is impossible to conceive
that the legislature intended that this Court, in determining whether to accept
and act upon a recommendation
of the ACAT that the name of a practitioner be
removed from the roll, would engage in a review of those determinations. To
the relevant provisions of the LPA otherwise would be to effectively
grant the practitioner a right of appeal outside the terms of
the statute. Such
a construction would also negate the very purpose of the provisions, because
there would effectively be no difference
between the Court considering a
recommendation of the ACAT under s 425 of the LPA, and the exercise of its
inherent jurisdiction.
In the statutory process for disciplining practitioners
found in the LPA, the legislature has seen fit to bestow upon the ACAT, and
upon this Court, the authority to make findings of fact and to determine how the
facts as found are to be characterised. To construe
the LPA as submitted by the
practitioner would be to render that conferral of authority
similar conclusion was reached by reference to the concept of issue estoppel.
The court was satisfied “that the
legislature did intend that the relevant
findings and determinations of the ACAT are to be final, subject to the exercise
right of appeal”:
approach was followed in
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v
[2019] ACTSCFC 1
, where the court said (at [130]):
exercising its statutory function under s 431(3), the Full Court must apply the
Tribunal’s findings of fact, including any
findings as to the
practitioner’s state of mind or motive in relation to relevant conduct,
and any findings that the conduct
was unprofessional conduct or professional
misconduct:
at [83]-[84]. The Court cannot make findings
inconsistent with those made by the Tribunal.
Court followed
Council of the Law
Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Giles
[2020] ACTSCFC 1
. The Full Court also noted that it was not bound to accept the
ACAT’s recommendation that the practitioner be removed from
the roll but
must make its own independent determination of whether the practitioner’s
conduct (as found by that Tribunal)
warranted removal.
oral submissions, the defendant said that he challenged the correctness of these
decisions. He was encouraged by the
Court on two occasions to make any
submissions that he wished to as to why the decisions were not correct. However,
ultimately, he
made no submissions as to why they were incorrect. In those
circumstances, they should be followed, as for reasons explained below
relation to the jurisdictional challenge, they accurately reflect the proper
construction and consequences of the statutory scheme.
said that, the factual findings of the ACAT, and findings characterising conduct
as unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct, must be
distinguished from the opinions expressed about the consequence of those
findings for the defendant’s
fitness to practise law, which led the ACAT
to recommend removal of the practitioner from the roll. One example of this is
the statements
made by the ACAT, which are quoted at [105] below. While the
Court cannot trespass on the findings, the ACAT’s opinion as to
consequences, and whether to accept the ACAT’s recommendation, is the very
issue before the Court on the application.
Challenge to jurisdiction
defendant sought to challenge the jurisdiction of the Court to hear the Law
Society’s application. He sought to
do this by way of an application in
proceeding dated 30 May 2024, which sought:
(a) a declaration that the Law Society’s decision to cancel his practising
certificate involved a jurisdictional error and
that this decision be
(b) a declaration that the decision of the ACAT disclosed a jurisdictional error
and an order of certiorari quashing that decision;
(c) mandamus to compel the Law Society to grant the defendant an unrestricted
practising certificate;
(d) an order that the defendant is “not liable to pay any costs in the
matter”; and
(e) an order that the Law Society’s application to have his name removed
from the roll be dismissed.
grounds set out in the application in proceeding indicate that the defendant
contended that the decisions of the Law
Society to cancel his practising
certificate and to make the applications to ACAT, and the decision of the ACAT
itself each involved
Therefore, there was, so the argument went, never a decision of the ACAT to
the removal of the defendant from the roll which could enliven
s 431(3) and, as a consequence, the court had no jurisdiction to deal
the application.
as the decisions of the Law Society were concerned, the grounds made reference
to a decision under s 410 of the LP
Act to make an application to the ACAT,
although the grounds related to the earlier decision to cancel the
defendant’s practising
certificate. The relationship between these two
different decisions was not made clear. In total, 15 different matters were
put forward.
Each ground was in the nature of an administrative law ground for
asserting an error in one or other of the decisions of the Law
the grounds asserted that the LP Act gave no jurisdiction to regulate the
conduct of a solicitor in the Federal Circuit
Court. However, during the course
of oral submissions the defendant indicated that he did not press this
as the challenge to the decision of the ACAT was concerned, this involved
grounds related to the decision of the
Law Society under s 410 of the LP Act to
bring the proceedings to the ACAT, as well as errors in, or relating to, the
proceedings
themselves in the ACAT. The application asserts that:
ACAT was asked to determine whether it had the jurisdiction to deal with the
matter. The ACAT however refused to make such a determination.
application then lists 12 different matters, each of which was in the nature of
an administrative law ground for asserting
proceedings. The grounds set out did not include the grounds relied upon to
challenge the jurisdiction
in the defendant’s summary dismissal
application that was rejected in the ACAT Jurisdiction Decision. A number of the
errors had been considered by the Appeal Tribunal or by the Supreme
Court at an earlier stage and had been rejected: see ACAT Appeal
at [41]-[136];
Leave Decision at [87]-[96], [124]-[155].
the attempt to re-agitate those matters already considered and rejected may be
precluded, it is not necessary to
consider the matter in a piecemeal way. It is
similarly not necessary to consider the defendant’s reliance on
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Bhardwaj
209 CLR 597
, which founded his argument that an administrative
decision affected by jurisdictional error is properly regarded as no decision
all and could not, therefore, found the plaintiff’s application to remove
him from the roll. The reliance on
was misplaced, as what is
required is consideration of the legislation under which the decision-maker acts
to determine the consequences
of any jurisdictional error found: see
at [11] per Gleeson CJ; at [54]-[60] per Gaudron and Gummow JJ (with McHugh
J agreeing at [63]). See also
Jadwan Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of
Health and Aged Care
[2003] FCAFC 288
that entire issue (as to whether there were any jurisdictional errors and if so,
what were the consequences) may also be
put to one side.
is because, having regard to the scheme of the LP Act and its relationship with
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
(ACT) (ACAT Act),
including the availability of separate appeal mechanisms in relation to the
decision of the Law Society to cancel
the defendant’s practising
certificate and the separate appeal provisions in relation to the decisions of
the ACAT, it is not
open to the defendant in these proceedings to challenge the
validity of those antecedent proceedings. That is the situation whether
those appeal mechanisms were invoked, or issues were previously raised and
determined.
order to explain why this is the case, it is first necessary to identify the
available pathways for challenging the decision
to cancel the practising
certificate and the decision of the ACAT. So far as the decision of the Law
Society to cancel the defendant’s
practising certificate, this occurred on
18 June 2018. Although the decision was given significant prominence in the
submissions
made by the defendant, it was not clear by what means the asserted
invalidity of this decision could have affected the jurisdiction
of the ACAT.
The cancellation decision was a separate decision from the application for
disciplinary orders made two years later,
made under a separate part of the LP
Act. There was no statutory requirement for the Law Society to have validly
cancelled the defendant’s
practising certificate prior to making any
application to the ACAT for the disciplinary orders that are the subject of the
proceeding.
38․ Leaving
that question aside, the defendant had an entitlement to appeal from that
decision to the Supreme Court, pursuant
to s 81(1)(b) of the LP Act. That
appeal was in the nature of a hearing de novo:
Legal Practitioner v Council
of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
[2011] ACTSC 110
Barlow v Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
[2013] ACTSC 68
272 FLR 470
LP9 v Council of the Law Society of the Australian
Capital Territory
[2024] ACTSC 116
. The defendant exercised that
right, but, at the hearing of the appeal on 18 December 2018, the defendant
consented to an order that
the appeal be dismissed, and it was dismissed.
as the decision of the ACAT is concerned, the defendant challenged the
and, in the ACAT Jurisdiction
Decision, the ACAT rejected that challenge. The matter then proceeded and was
determined by the ACAT.
The defendant then appealed that decision to the Appeal
Tribunal of the ACAT pursuant to s 79 of the ACAT Act. The Appeal Tribunal
confirmed the ACAT’s decision. In doing so, it determined numerous
challenges to the jurisdiction of the ACAT and allegations
of jurisdictional
error in the ACAT Decision. The Appeal Tribunal described the defendant as
having “alleged literally hundreds
of errors, mostly characterised as
allegations that the
decision to cancel the defendant’s practising
certificate was void and the submission that the Law Society had no authority
make the applications to ACAT.
defendant then made an application to the Supreme Court for leave to appeal from
the ACAT Appeal Decision. That application
was made pursuant to s 86 of the ACAT
Act. In the Leave Decision, Curtin AJ dismissed the application and,
notwithstanding the potential
for an appeal from that decision to the Court of
Appeal, the defendant did not seek to appeal his Honour’s decision.
history illustrates that the statutory scheme in which s 431(3) operates
includes the following:
(a) A statutory process in which questions of jurisdiction may be raised and
determined between the same parties as those ultimately
involved in proceedings
under s 431(3).
(b) A statutory path for internal and external appeals in which questions of
(c) A limitation on appeals to the Supreme Court, requiring that they be by
leave and not as of right.
(d) The original and appeal proceedings in the ACAT being also potentially
subject to the supervisory jurisdiction of the Supreme
(e) The “filing” of the ACAT orders in the Supreme Court being
consistent with those being the finalised product of the
separate ACAT process.
42․ Section
431 is a section entitled “Compliance with ACAT orders”. It operates
by reference to ACAT orders that
have been arrived at in accordance with the
ACAT Act, with its scheme for appeals, including internal appeal mechanisms and
the potential
for appeals on fact and law to the Supreme Court.
as it was held in
(at [79]) that the statutory scheme was
inconsistent with a legal practitioner being able to challenge the findings of
the ACAT in
proceedings commenced pursuant to s 431(3), so too is it
inconsistent with that statutory scheme that the jurisdiction of the ACAT
open to challenge on administrative law grounds within the scope of a s 431(3)
application.
44․ Rather,
the existence of the separate regime for the determination of factual matters
and the separate regime for appeals
in relation to determinations, is sufficient
to indicate that what is required for the purposes of s 431(3) is the filing of
If that order has not been set aside or quashed in properly
constituted proceedings, then it is an order which is sufficient to enliven
order might have been the product of a decision
made by the ACAT which was
affected by an error that could have caused the order to be set aside at an
earlier stage in properly
constituted proceedings. The scope of proceedings
under s 431(3) is impliedly limited by the broader statutory context in which it
sits. This is a form of statutory preclusion arising by implication from the
context in which s 431(3) exists and reflects the fundamental
importance of
achieving finality: see the discussion in
Harlech Enterprises Pty Ltd v Beno
Excavations Pty Ltd
[2022] ACTCA 42
18 ACTLR 245.
It does not depend upon
questions of issue estoppel or abuse of process, although, if it was necessary,
the concept of abuse of process
would be flexible enough to encompass this form
of preclusion:
Harlech Enterprises
administrative law challenge to the ACAT Decision was to be made, it needed to
be made pursuant to the appeal regime
in the ACAT Act or through properly
constituted judicial review proceedings. To hold otherwise would be to undermine
the statutory
scheme by providing, in the language of
practitioner a right of appeal outside the terms of the statute”. It would
be clearly inconsistent with the detailed
statutory regime to permit the
unchallenged finality reached as part of the ACAT process to be undermined in
subsequent proceedings
between the same parties. This means that it is not open
to the defendant to either ‘save up’ administrative law arguments
affecting the validity of the ACAT orders and then run them when those orders
are filed under s 431(3), or repeat such arguments
that were made and rejected
in the ACAT or on appeal from a decision of the ACAT.
the effect of the above interpretation of the jurisdictional foundation in s
431(3) is that, like the position in
relation to factual conclusions, any
administrative law challenges to the decision of the ACAT must be made within
the available
statutory appellate hierarchy or within properly constituted
judicial review proceedings.
47․ Consistently
with the language of s 431(3), this interpretation means that the scope of
proceedings under that section is
confined to determining if an order has been
filed and then making a discretionary decision as to whether or not to remove
the practitioner
from the roll. That involves acceptance of the facts as found
by the ACAT and consideration of any other evidence that is relevant
discretionary decision. It does not involve a fact-finding exercise in order to
contradict the facts found by the ACAT, nor
does it involve judicial review
proceedings in relation to the decision of the ACAT.
defendant did not seek leave to commence separate judicial review proceedings
out of time in relation to either the
decision of the Law Society, or the
decisions of the ACAT. Nor did he seek leave to appeal out of time to the Court
of Appeal from
the decision of Curtin AJ refusing him leave to appeal from the
ACAT Appeal.
49․ Because
the ACAT Decision has not been set aside or quashed in appropriately constituted
proceedings, the ACAT Decision
provides a jurisdictional foundation for the
present proceedings and the defendant’s application in proceeding dated
2024 must be dismissed.
Evidence admissible on the application
the purposes of the application, the Law Society relied upon the two decisions
of the ACAT and the decision of Curtin
AJ dismissing the application for leave
to appeal from the Appeal Tribunal. Leave was granted to file in Court each of
the ACAT decisions,
which included the relevant order (noting the terms of s
431(3)). As a consequence, it was not necessary for the decisions to be
into evidence separately. Had it been necessary, they would have been. So far as
the decision of Curtin AJ was concerned,
the Court indicated that it would take
judicial notice of the existence of that decision and the reasons for the
defendant did not expressly read the affidavits that he had filed. However, the
parties appeared to proceed on the basis
that each of those affidavits would be
read and, subject to the Law Society’s objections, admitted into evidence.
The relevant
affidavits were affidavits made by the defendant on 9 April 2024,
30 May 2024, 26 June 2024, 27 June 2024 (two) and 27 July 2024.
Law Society’s objections were to those parts of the affidavits which
sought to re-agitate factual issues determined by
the ACAT. Having regard to the
determination earlier in these reasons that it is not open to a practitioner to
challenge the factual
findings of the ACAT, the Law Society’s objections
must be upheld and those portions of the affidavits objected to not admitted
into evidence.
Application to issue a subpoena
the hearing of the appeal, the defendant made an application to the court for
the issue of a subpoena to compel the attendance
of Mr Robert Reis to give
evidence. That arose in the following circumstances. The Law Society had filed
and served an affidavit
of Mr Reis dated 9 January 2024. This provided some
basic chronological information about the defendant’s admission as a
and the periods during which he held practising certificates. It also
annexed the two decisions of the ACAT and the Leave Decision
of Curtin AJ. It
appears that the defendant gave notice that he wished to cross‑examine Mr
Reis. The Law Society then indicated
to him that Mr Reis would not be called to
give evidence. Instead, the Law Society would simply tender the documents
directly or,
if necessary, through a different witness.
clear to the Law Society and was made clear to the court by the conduct of the
defendant, that the intention of any
cross-examination of Mr Reis would be to
pursue factual matters said to be relevant to the administrative law grounds
the defendant sought to challenge the Law Society’s decisions
to cancel his practising certificate and make applications to
the ACAT. He
thereby sought to challenge the lawfulness of the decisions of the ACAT.
54․ Following
the Court’s ruling that both decisions of the ACAT were to be filed in
Court for the purposes of s 431(3)
(see [50] above), rather than admitted into
evidence through an affidavit, the defendant sought to have a subpoena issued to
so as to require him to attend and give evidence. After hearing
submissions on the application, the court dismissed the oral application
refused leave to issue a subpoena to Mr Reis. The court reserved its reasons for
that decision.
reasons that the application was dismissed were:
(a) It was not open to the defendant to challenge the jurisdiction of the court
in circumstances where the decision of the ACAT had
not been set aside or
quashed in properly constituted proceedings: see [49] above.
(b) It was not open to the defendant to adduce evidence in order to challenge
the factual conclusions reached by the ACAT that gave
rise to the finding of
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct: see [20]
(c) In those circumstances, any evidence that might be adduced from Mr Reis was
irrelevant and, therefore, the court should not permit
the issue of a subpoena
to compel him to give evidence.
ACAT’s findings
were four separate applications made to the ACAT: OR 12/2020, OR 13/2020,
OR 14/2020 and OR 15/2020. In chronological
order, the proceedings had
their genesis in complaints or correspondence received by the Law
(a) OR 13/2020: a complaint from a practitioner identified as “Mr D”
(b) OR 12/2020: a complaint raised by the Law Society following the receipt of
correspondence from the Registrar of the Federal Circuit
Court dated
28 March 2018;
(c) OR 15/2020: a complaint raised by the Law Society following the receipt of
correspondence from an Acting Assistant Secretary
of the Department of Home
Affairs dated 11 May 2018; and
(d) OR 14/2020: a complaint raised by the Law Society following the receipt of
correspondence from the Registrar of the Federal Circuit
Court dated
1 June 2018.
references to complaints being raised by the Law Society are to the Law Society
itself making a complaint as it was
entitled to do pursuant to LP Act, s
were a total of 28 charges particularised within those ACAT proceedings. The
ACAT found 26 of the charges proved. It
found that the conduct in relation to 24
of them constituted professional misconduct and the conduct in relation to two
of them constituted
unsatisfactory professional conduct. A table summarising the
proceedings and the charges that were proved and not proved is as
Application Number
two charges that were characterised as unsatisfactory professional conduct, as
distinct from professional misconduct,
were charge 2 in OR 14/2020 and
charge 16 in OR 13/2020.
Relevant provisions of the Solicitors Rules
provisions of the
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
(Solicitors Rules) relevant to the ACAT Decision were as follows:
FUNDAMENTAL ETHICAL DUTIES
4.1 A solicitor must
4.1.1 act in the best interests of a client in any matter in which the
solicitor represents the client;
4.1.2 be honest and courteous in all dealings in the course of legal
4.1.3 deliver legal services competently, diligently and as promptly as
reasonably possible;
4.1.4 avoid any compromise to their integrity and professional independence;
4.1.5 comply with these Rules and the law.
AND DISREPUTABLE CONDUCT
5.1 A solicitor must not engage in
conduct, in the course of practice or otherwise, which demonstrates that the
solicitor is not a
fit and proper person to practise law, or which is likely to
a material degree to:
5.1.1 be prejudicial to, or diminish the public confidence in, the
administration of justice; or
5.1.2 bring the profession into disrepute.
19.1 A solicitor must not deceive or knowingly or
recklessly mislead the court.
19.2 A solicitor must take all necessary steps to correct any misleading
statement made by the solicitor to a court as soon as possible
solicitor becomes aware that the statement was misleading.
WITH THE REGULATORY AUTHORITY
43.1 Subject only to his or her
duty to the client, a solicitor must be open and frank in his or her dealings
with a regulatory authority.
43.2 A solicitor must respond within a reasonable time and in any event
within 14 days (or such extended time as the regulatory authority
may allow) to
any requirement of the regulatory authority for comments or information in
relation to the solicitor’s conduct
or professional behaviour in the
course of the regulatory authority investigating conduct which may be
unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct and in doing so
the solicitor must furnish in writing a full and accurate account of his or her
conduct in relation to the matter.
61․ Application
number OR 12/2020 arose from a complaint raised by the Law Society following the
receipt of correspondence from
the Registrar of the Federal Circuit Court in
relation to the defendant's conduct in multiple proceedings in the High Court
and Federal
Circuit Court, including two matters identified as the “C7
proceeding” and the “C7 transfer proceeding”.
proceedings were court proceedings between a plaintiff identified as
“C7” and the Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection. There
were proceedings in the High Court before Bell J and, following the remittal of
the proceedings by Bell
J, proceedings in the Federal Circuit Court before Judge
Neville. Following remittal, the matter came before Judge Neville on 26
September 2017. The defendant made an oral application to transfer the
proceedings to Darwin. He told Judge Neville that his client
had been living in
Darwin for “[a]pproximately six months”. His Honour ordered that the
transfer application should be
decided on the papers and that the defendant was
to file and serve a transfer application and written submissions by
10 October 2017.
The defendant then filed an affidavit of his client which
said, contrary to what the court had previously been told, that he had
Darwin for four years. He did not file any transfer application or written
submissions. When asked to show cause why Judge
Neville’s reasons for
judgment should not be referred to the Law Society, the defendant said that, in
his view, written submissions
were “otiose”.
ACAT found that a charge (charge 1) alleging that the defendant had repeatedly
made an argument without merit was not
ACAT found that the defendant had failed to file submissions in compliance with
the orders of the court because he decided
that they were not necessary. Charge
2 was that the defendant had breached rr 4.1.1 and 4.1.3 of the Solicitors Rules
to comply with orders of the court for the filing and service of
documents in the C7 transfer proceedings. The ACAT found this charge
proved: ACAT Decision [68]. Along with other charges involving a failure to act
competently and diligently, this was characterised
as meeting the definition of
professional misconduct: ACAT Decision [343].
3 was found to be proved in that the defendant had breached r 19.2 of the
Solicitors Rules by failing to discharge
his duty of honesty and candour to the
court when he informed the court that the applicant had lived in Darwin for
“[a]pproximately
six months”. The ACAT found that this statement was
made carelessly and that the subsequent affidavit neither explained nor
corrected the earlier misleading statement: ACAT Decision [72]-[73]. Along with
other charges involving recklessly misleading the
court, the failure to correct
an earlier misleading statement made carelessly was characterised as involving
professional misconduct:
ACAT Decision [344].
66․ Application
number OR 13/2020 arose from a complaint from a practitioner identified as
“Mr D” about the defendant’s
conduct in proceedings in the
Federal Circuit Court, identified as the “AXY17
proceeding”.
1 was not proved.
AXY17 proceeding involved a plaintiff identified as “AXY17”. The
facts of charge 2 were outlined in detail
by the ACAT at [74]-[145]. In short, a
person identified as “Ms O” had consulted a migration agent by the
Melany Ramos in relation to an application for a protection visa. Ms
O then made an application for a protection visa, which was
refused by a
delegate of the Minister. There was a 28-day period in which an application for
review of that decision could be made
to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(AAT). Ms Ramos claimed that she had completed an online application for review
of the decision
on the second last day on which an application could be made and
pressed “Enter” on her computer. She said that she had
only realised
that there was a problem with her IT system that prevented the application from
being uploaded the day after the time
limit for lodgement. She then lodged
another application outside the relevant time limit. The AAT subsequently
determined that it
did not have jurisdiction to hear the application because it
was filed out of time. Ms Ramos had some discussions with a lawyer,
Mr D, but he
was never engaged to act on behalf of Ms O. Ms Ramos did not give instructions
to the defendant that Mr D had been assisting
her in relation to the AAT matter
before the AAT made its decision.
March 2017, the defendant filed an application in the Federal Circuit Court on
behalf of Ms O seeking judicial review
of the AAT decision and an extension of
time for filing the application in the Federal Circuit Court. Charge 1 related
to a statement
made in an affidavit made by the defendant in support of this
application, which was alleged to have been incorrect. However, this
not proved because the statement was not found to have been incorrect: ACAT
Decision [214].
defendant prepared submissions on 30 March 2017 in support of the application
for an extension of time: ACAT Decision
[101]. They were filed on 31 July 2017:
ACAT Decision [215]. Those submissions contained a representation that the
solicitor, Mr
D, had been engaged prior to the deadline for the filing of the
AAT application, that he was “well aware” of the time
which to seek the review of the decision but that he “was unable to get
the papers into the Tribunal within the prescribed
period”: ACAT Decision
[101]. It also contained the representation that “[b]oth Ms Ramos and [Mr
D] would be prepared
to put on an affidavit attesting to the situation.”
The ACAT found that the allegations about Mr D lacked any proper evidentiary
basis, and that the defendant lacked any genuine belief that the statements were
true and made the statements not caring whether
or not they were true: ACAT
Decision [142]-[143].
allegation in charge 2 was of a breach of rr 19.1 and/or 19.2 and the
defendant’s common law duty of honesty and
candour to the court by making
these two statements to the Federal Circuit Court dishonestly, knowing the
statements to be false,
or recklessly indifferent to their truth or falsity or,
if the statement was made mistakenly, failing to take steps to correct the
misleading statement. The ACAT found that the defendant had breached r 19.1 and
his common law duty of honesty and candour to the
court by recklessly misleading
the court: ACAT Decision [217]. It also found that there had been a breach of r
19.2 and his common
law duty of honesty and candour to the court by failing to
correct the misleading statements as soon as possible: ACAT Decision [168],
[218]. This, along with other occasions on which the defendant recklessly misled
the court, was characterised as professional misconduct:
ACAT Decision
3 related to oral submissions made to the court in the AXY17 proceeding on
19 July 2017. This was the hearing for
the application for an extension of
time before Judge Neville. During the course of that hearing, the defendant said
to Judge Neville:
Well, I’m saying the circumstances in this case, your Honour - and I think
you should exercise your discretion to allow the
extension of time because the
circumstances were sort of not of the making of the applicant. They were ---
unfortunately, we had
one agent who made every effort to lodge the application
within time,
and then attempted to elicit the support of not one but two very
experienced migration lawyers, who unfortunately let the applicant
most unprofessional way, when it was quite clear that what they should have done
is lodge these documents as soon as possible,
but they chose not to
And unfortunately, the applicant is
now suffering as a consequence of the
poor professional practice of two other migration lawyers, one of which is
highly respected
and should have known better
than - in conclusion, your
Honour, the applicant really shouldn’t be punished, for want of a better
word, for the actions of
not one but two experienced migration lawyers.
(Emphasis added.)
ACAT interpreted these remarks as going to the timing of the lodgement of the
application to the court rather than to
the AAT: ACAT Decision [168]. Before the
ACAT, the representative of the defendant acknowledged that the submissions were
and unfounded”: ACAT Decision [222]. The ACAT found that,
in making the submission, the defendant breached r 19.1 and his common
of honesty and candour by recklessly misleading the court: ACAT Decision [171],
[223]. This, along with other occasions
on which the court was recklessly
misled, was characterised as professional misconduct: ACAT Decision
Charges 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13
74․ Charges
4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 alleged a breach of rr 43.1 and 43.2 and the
defendant’s common law duty
to inform and assist the Law Society by making
a statement to the Law Society in connection with its investigation of the
knowing the statement to be false or recklessly indifferent to its
truth or falsity.
terms of rr 43.1 and 43.2 are outlined above. The common law duties were
articulated in
Re DP and the
Legal Practitioners Act 1970
[2005] ACTSC 78
The Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
[2018] ACTCA 60
14 ACTLR 45
charges arose out of the response by the defendant to the Law Society’s
investigation. That investigation was
commenced on 16 October 2017. The
defendant provided a response to the notice of the Law Society’s decision
to investigate
on 10 November 2017. The whole of that response was set out
in the ACAT Decision (at [183]) and the ACAT highlighted several passages
where it found that the respondent “made statements that he knew were
false”. Further, the ACAT found that “the
response demonstrates the
[defendant’s] lack of candour, dishonesty, and lack of insight in
responding to the complaint”:
ACAT Decision [183].
solicitors for the Law Society wrote to him on 31 January 2018 seeking further
information: ACAT Decision [184]. The
defendant made statements in his email
response on 5 March 2018 which were the subjects of charges 4, 5 and 6.
March 2018, the solicitors for the Law Society wrote to the defendant again in
relation to their earlier request for
information, which remained partly
unanswered. The defendant responded on 6 April 2018 and made statements which
gave rise to charge
7 (“I did not draft or settle the Affidavit [of
Ms Ramos]”, discussed below) and charge 8 (“I confirm that my
submissions
in the matter are accurate”): ACAT Decision [191].
May 2018, the solicitors for the Law Society wrote to him again requesting a
copy of his affidavit made on 6 March
2017. He responded on
22 May 2018 by an email which included a number of
statements:
(a) that he “did not file any affidavit in this matter”: ACAT
Decision [194]; and
(b) that Judge Neville had “refused to allow the tender of the [affidavit
of Ms Ramos] and refused to allow her to give evidence”:
Decision [195].
further email sent that day, he said:
(a) that he did file an affidavit but that the affidavit “did not
summarise the facts. It just attached the decision of the
(b) that there was no affidavit of Ms Ramos tendered to the court; and
(c) that he was not paid.
content of the emails on 22 May 2018 gave rise to charges 9, 10, 11, 12 and
of the following charges were proved and found to have established a breach of
rr 43.1 and 43.2 and the defendant’s
common law duty to inform and
assist the inquiry of the Law Society:
(a) Charge 4 related to the statement on 5 March 2018 that Mr D
“acknowledges that he was involved in the appeal to the AAT”.
statement was found to be more than careless, with the ACAT finding that it was
made knowing it to be false or with reckless
indifference as to its truth or
falsity: ACAT Decision [186], [229].
(b) Charge 5 related to the statement on 5 March 2018 that “there was
never at any time any misrepresentation of the facts
by me”. The ACAT
found that the defendant knew that this statement was false when he made it:
ACAT Decision [187], [230].
(c) Charge 6 relates to the statement on 5 March 2018 that Mr D “withdrew
from the matter before the Federal Circuit Court”.
The ACAT found that the
defendant knew that this statement was false when he made it: ACAT Decision
[188]-[189], [231].
(d) Charge 8 related to the statement in the defendant’s letter to the
solicitors for the Law Society dated 6 April 2018 that
his submission in the
matter was accurate. The ACAT found that the defendant knew that the statement
was false when he made it: ACAT
Decision [193], [232].
(e) Charge 9 related to the statement on 22 May 2018 (the ACAT mistakenly refers
to this as 22 April 2018) that the defendant did
not file any affidavit in the
matter. The ACAT found that the defendant knew that the statement was false when
he made it: ACAT Decision
[194], [233].
(f) Charge 10 related to the statement on 22 May 2018 (the ACAT mistakenly
refers to this as 22 April 2018) to the effect that Judge
Neville refused to
allow the defendant to tender Ms Ramos’ affidavit and for her to give
evidence. The ACAT found that the
defendant knew that this statement was false
when he made it: ACAT Decision [195], [234].
(g) Charge 11 related to the statement on 22 May 2018 (the ACAT mistakenly
refers to this as 22 April 2018) to the effect that the
affidavit did not
summarise the facts. The ACAT’s finding at [235] refers to it being Ms
Ramos’s affidavit, but it is
apparent from the findings at [197]-[198]
that the charge related to the defendant’s affidavit. The ACAT found that
the defendant
made the statement knowing that it was false and noted that in
cross-examination he admitted that he knew that the statement was
untrue: ACAT
Decision [197]-[198], [235].
(h) Charge 12 related to the statement on 22 May 2018 (the ACAT mistakenly
refers to this as 22 April 2018) to the effect that there
was no affidavit of
Ms Ramos’ tendered to the court. The ACAT found that the defendant
made the statement knowing it to be
untrue: [197]-[198], [236].
(i) Charge 13 relates to the statement on 22 May 2018 (the ACAT mistakenly
refers to this as 22 April 2018) that the defendant was
not paid. The ACAT found
that the defendant made the statement knowing it to be untrue: ACAT Decision
[197]-[198], [237].
83․ Charges
4-6 and 8-13 were found to meet the definition of professional misconduct: ACAT
Decision [351].
7 involved rr 43.1 and 43.2 and the defendant’s common law duty to inform
and assist the Law Society. It relates
to the defendant’s response to the
solicitors for the Law Society on 6 April 2018, which stated that he did not
draft or settle
Ms Ramos’ affidavit. The ACAT found that he had breached
rule 43.2 and his common law duty to inform and assist the inquiry.
ACAT did not accept the submission that the statement was made knowing it to be
false or with reckless indifference to
its truth or falsity, it did find that
the response lacked candour: [192], [239]. Charge 7 was found to meet the
definition of professional
misconduct: [351].
14 alleged that the defendant had breached s 222(1) of the LP Act by failing to
deposit trust money received on account
of legal costs into a trust account.
Section 222(1) of the LP Act provides that as soon as practicable after
receiving trust money,
a law practice must deposit the money in a general trust
account of the practice kept in the ACT. The definition of ‘trust
money” in the Dictionary to the LP Act includes money received by the
practice on account of legal costs in advance of providing
the services.
ACAT found that this breach was established. The defendant had, without
providing any disclosure of costs to Ms O or
Ms Ramos, sent an invoice for $6115
for services described as “Representation of Ms O in the Federal Circuit
The ACAT found that the invoice sought payment of trust money and,
hence, that the failure to pay that money into a trust account
breached s 222:
ACAT Decision [146]-[151], [242]. Taken together, charges 14, 15 and 17 were
characterised as involving professional
misconduct: ACAT Decision
15 alleged that the defendant had misappropriated trust monies in breach of the
common law by causing trust monies
to be deposited to an office account. This
was in relation to the amount of $6115 associated with the earlier charge. It
the appropriation of monies to which he was not presently entitled. The
ACAT found that the charge was established in relation to
that part of the $6115
not attributable to work already done: ACAT Decision [146]-[151], [247]. Taken
together, charges 14, 15 and
17 were characterised as involving professional
misconduct: ACAT Decision [346].
16 alleged breach of s 269 of the LP Act by failing to give the required costs
disclosures to Ms O and Ms Ramos.
The ACAT found that to be proved: ACAT
Decision [146], [249]. The ACAT characterised this as unsatisfactory
professional conduct:
ACAT Decision [345].
17 alleged breach of r 5 of the Solicitors Rules by failing to comply with an
order of the court requiring the defendant
to repay costs to his client.
amount in question was the $6115 which was the subject of charges 14 and 15. On
7 September 2017, Judge Neville ordered
the defendant to repay, within 14
days, any costs that his client had already paid him: ACAT Decision [172]. The
defendant did not
do so, thereby failing to comply with this order: ACAT
Decision [178]. The ACAT found that charge was proved: ACAT Decision
[252]-[253].
Taken together, charges 14, 15 and 17 were characterised as
involving professional misconduct: ACAT Decision [346].
18 alleged that the defendant had breached r 4.1.3 by failing to deliver legal
services competently and diligently
in circumstances where he knew, or should
have known, that the application for an extension of time in the AXY17
proceeding had no
reasonable prospects of success. In those proceedings in the
Federal Circuit Court, Judge Neville had found that the application
the defendant on behalf of his client had no reasonable prospects of success and
made costs and other consequential orders
on that basis. The ACAT found that
this charge was proved on the basis of a concession made by the defendant in his
closing submissions
to the ACAT that the application to the Federal Circuit
Court was misconceived: ACAT Decision [254]-[257]. This, along with other
occasions when the defendant had failed to act in his client’s best
interests and deliver legal services competently and diligently,
characterised as professional misconduct: ACAT Decision [343].
19 alleged a breach of rr 4.1.2, 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 by the making of allegations of
serious improper conduct against
a judge of the Federal Circuit Court in a
letter to the Chief Judge of that court, without particularising, justifying or
substantiating
the allegations: ACAT Decision [258].
ACAT found that the content of the letter (described in the ACAT Decision at
[199]‑[210]) was not merely impermissibly
offensive and discourteous, but
that the defendant had made unsubstantiated allegations of the most serious kind
against Judge Neville
in an improper attempt to damage his standing and
reputation at the Federal Circuit Court, and to procure his removal from hearing
cases in which the defendant may appear: ACAT Decision [265]. The ACAT found
that the content of the letter provided no evidence
capable of substantiating
the allegations. The ACAT found that the charge was proved: ACAT Decision [268]
and continued (at [269]):
find that the respondent’s conduct, and his lack of insight demonstrated
by his evidence in an affidavit filed shortly before
the hearing deposing that
he did not regret writing to the Chief Justice in the terms that he did because
it “correctly reflected
[his] feelings and...perceptions about the
conduct” of Judge Neville, shows that he is not a fit and proper person to
(Footnote omitted.)
ACAT characterised this conduct as professional misconduct: ACAT Decision
95․ Application
number OR 14/2020 arose from a complaint raised by the Law Society following the
receipt of correspondence from
the Registrar of the Federal Circuit Court in
relation to the defendant's conduct in two proceedings in the Federal Circuit
identified as the "CFMMEU proceeding" and the "Singh proceeding".
1 related to the CFMMEU proceeding and involved alleged breaches of rr 4.1.1,
4.1.3 and/or 5 by filing a defence
in proceedings which he knew or ought to have
known exposed his client to a risk of default judgment and which resulted in
that outcome.
The proceedings were brought by the CFMMEU, an industrial union,
against the defendant’s client, alleging sham contracting
arrangements. A
defence was ultimately filed which failed to plead to many of the allegations in
the Statement of Claim and included
legally incoherent or irrelevant claims. The
ACAT found that there had been a breach of rr 4.1.1 and 4.1.3: ACAT Decision
[270]-[278],
[291]. This, along with other failures to reach or maintain a
reasonable standard of competence and diligence in court proceedings,
characterised by the ACAT as professional misconduct: ACAT Decision [343].
2 related to the Singh proceeding, which involved the Migration Review Tribunal
and a plaintiff identified as “Mr
Singh”. The defendant attended the
hearing with Mr Singh. The defendant failed to complete a Notice of Appointment
as Mr Singh’s
agent. The delegate’s decision to refuse Mr
Singh’s visa application was affirmed on 23 September 2015. The
Review Tribunal notified an earlier agent of Mr Singh the same day. In
March 2017, the defendant filed an application for an extension
of time in which
to seek review of the Migration Review Tribunal’s decision. He deposed
that the applicant had been notified
of its decision on 27 March 2017.
2 alleged that he had breached rr 4.1.1, 4.1.3 and/or 5 by failing to file a
Notice of Appointment in the proceedings.
The defendant admitted that he had
failed to do so. The ACAT found that a breach of 4.1.1 was proved: ACAT Decision
[280]-[281],
[294]. The ACAT characterised this conduct as unsatisfactory
professional conduct and noted that it was “a relatively minor
isolated instance”: ACAT Decision [341].
3 also related to the Singh proceeding. It was alleged that the defendant had
breached rr 5 and 19.1 by making a
misleading statement in an affidavit. That
statement was misleading insofar as it conveyed the impression that
responsibility for
the 18-month delay in Mr Singh receiving notice of the
decision to refuse his visa application lay with the Migration Review Tribunal,
when the true position was that he had not been notified of the decision on the
day that it was made because he had failed to file
a Notice of Appointment. The
ACAT found that the defendant had breached r 19.1 and his common law duty of
honesty and candour to
the court: ACAT Decision [281]-[287], [297]. This, along
with other occasions when the defendant had recklessly misled the court
proceedings, was characterised as professional misconduct: ACAT Decision
100․ Application
number OR 15/2020 arose from a complaint raised by the Law Society following the
receipt of correspondence
from an Acting Assistant Secretary of the Department
of Home Affairs in relation to the defendant's conduct in proceedings in the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal and the Federal Circuit Court, identified as the
"AAT proceeding" and the "BNJ17 proceeding".
proceedings involved three charges. Charge 1 related to conduct of the defendant
in the AAT proceeding before Member
Short (the Tribunal Member). Charges 2 and 3
related to conduct in the BNJ17 proceeding in the Federal Circuit Court, arising
the refusal of a protection visa to an applicant referred to as
102․ Charge
1 alleged that the defendant had breached rr 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 4.1.3 and/or 5 by his
conduct during the AAT proceeding
in talking over the Tribunal Member, directing
his client not to answer questions asked by the Tribunal Member, pressing the
Member to recuse himself, leaving the hearing with his client before
the Tribunal Member had concluded the hearing, and accusing
the Tribunal Member
of disgraceful conduct. The bizarre conduct of the defendant is described by the
ACAT by setting out portions
of the transcript of those proceedings: ACAT
Decision [298]-[306].
legal representative of the defendant before the ACAT conceded that the
defendant’s conduct was grossly discourteous
and without a proper basis
and, as such, the defendant failed to act in the best interests of his client
and failed to deliver legal
services competently and diligently.
ACAT referred to the defendant’s affidavit relied upon in the ACAT
proceedings, which the ACAT described as making
it “apparent that the
[defendant] saw nothing wrong with his conduct”. The affidavit included,
as an annexure, a letter
written to the Attorney‑General complaining about
the Tribunal Member: ACAT Decision [323]. The ACAT found the allegation of
breach of rr 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 4.1.3 and 5 proved: ACAT Decision [324]. The ACAT
By his reliance on the abovementioned correspondence, we consider the respondent
has demonstrated a complete absence of insight in
relation to his failure to
comply with acceptable standards of professional conduct and a lack of
understanding of basic ethical
rules governing [practice] as an advocate before
a court or tribunal.
ACAT characterised this conduct as professional misconduct, saying (at [342]):
The respondent’s conduct was grossly offensive, incompetent, and
inexcusable. It was clearly prejudicial to the administration
of justice,
resulting as it did in the respondent’s client effectively being denied a
real and meaningful opportunity to have
his case heard and determined on its
merits. It was conduct that in our view is likely, to a material degree, to
bring the profession
into disrepute. It demonstrates, clearly in our view, that
the respondent is not a fit and proper person to practise law. His lack
insight into the gravity of his departure from required standards of
professional conduct when appearing as an advocate, after
having ample
opportunity to reflect on his conduct, confirms our opinion that he is not fit
to [practice] law.
106․ Charges
2 and 3 relate to the BNJ17 proceeding. That was an application for an extension
of time in which to file an application
for judicial review. The grounds of the
application included allegations that a migration agent had acted for the
applicant, not
made her aware of the hearing date, not disclosed the outcome of
the application, and not advised her about the option of having
the application
reinstated. After it was pointed out that no migration agent had acted, an
amended application was filed substituting,
without explanation, the word
“friend” in the place of “migration agent”. At the
hearing of the application,
no evidence was called by the defendant to support
the grounds in the application, and it was dismissed. The defendant was ordered
to pay the Minister’s costs and repay to BNJ17 any costs paid to the
defendant in connection with the proceedings. An order
was also made preventing
the defendant from recovering any costs he had incurred in commencing and
continuing the proceedings.
107․ Charge
2 alleged that the defendant had breached rr 4.1.1, 4.1.3 and/or 5 by providing
legal services which had no reasonable
prospects of success. The legal
representative of the defendant before ACAT conceded that the defendant had
failed to conduct the
proceeding in a manner reflecting a satisfactory degree of
competence. The ACAT agreed and found breaches of rr 4.1.1 and 4.1.3 to
proved: ACAT Decision [327]. This, along with other failures to reach or
maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence,
met the definition
of professional misconduct: ACAT Decision [343].
108․ Charge
3 alleged a breach of rr 19.1 and/or 19.2 and the defendant’s common law
duty of honesty and candour to the
court by filing an application in the BNJ17
proceeding knowing that the application contained false information or with
indifference as to the truth or falsity of the contents. That related
to the assertion in the grounds about the involvement of a
migration agent. The
ACAT noted the elaborate nature of the allegations and the absence of evidence
to explain the subsequent references
to a friend being involved. The ACAT
concluded (at [331]):
What is clear, however, is that the respondent failed to make even the most
basic enquiries to confirm that there was a proper basis
to make the allegations
made the statements with reckless
indifference as to their truth or falsity.
ACAT found that there had been a breach of rr 19.1 and 19.2 and the
defendant’s common law duty of honesty and
candour to the court by
recklessly misleading the Federal Circuit Court in failing to correct the
misleading statements as soon as
possible: ACAT Decision [332]. The
defendant’s conduct in recklessly misleading the court at various times
was characterised
as professional misconduct: ACAT Decision [344].
Summary of ACAT’s findings
findings of the ACAT may be summarised as follows. Where a number of charges are
found to have been proved and taken
together to amount to professional
misconduct, that is illustrated in the following
Subject matter
Characterisation
Charge 2 in OR 14/2020
Failure to file notice of appointment
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
Charge 1 in OR 15/2020
Conduct at the hearing of AAT in September 2016
Professional misconduct
Charge 18 in OR 13/2020
Charge 2 in OR 15/2020
Charge 2 in OR 12/2020
Charge 1 in OR 14/2020
Failure to act in best interests of clients and failure to deliver legal
services competently and diligently between March and October
2017 in AXY17,
BNJ17, C7, and CFMMEU proceedings
Professional misconduct
Charges 2 and 3 in OR 13/2020
Charge 3 in OR 14/2020
Charge 3 in OR 15/2020
Charge 3 in OR 12/2020
Recklessly misleading the Federal Circuit Court between March and July 2017
in AXY17, Singh and BNJ17 proceedings, and failing to
correct an earlier
misleading statement made carelessly in C7 proceedings.
Professional misconduct
Charge 16 in OR 13/2020
Failure to comply with costs disclosure obligations
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
Charges 14, 15 and 17 in OR 13/2020
Failure to comply with s 222 of the LP Act
Professional misconduct
Charge 19 in OR 13/2020
Making unsubstantiated allegations of serious improper conduct against a
judicial officer
Professional misconduct
Charges 4-13 in OR 13/2020
Making statements to the Law Society which he knew to be false and failing
to provide full and accurate account of his involvement
in the matter
Professional misconduct
ACAT Appeal decision
internal appeal to the ACAT Appeal Tribunal, pursuant to s 79 of the ACAT Act,
was treated as a rehearing. In contrast
to the position before the ACAT at first
instance, the defendant was no longer legally represented. The Appeal Tribunal
(at [35]-[40])
said the following in relation to the defendant’s grounds
of appeal and his approach to the appeal more generally:
practitioner’s written submissions amounted to lengthy and repetitive
narratives alleging literally hundreds of errors of
fact and law. The
practitioner challenged every finding of guilt and seemingly every material
paragraph of the original tribunal’s
reasons for decision. Most
allegations were repeated assertions of jurisdictional error. Many were
assertions of “no evidence”
to support a finding of fact
(notwithstanding the practitioner admitting most facts in the original
proceedings), a “failure
to take into account a relevant
consideration”, “taking into account an irrelevant
consideration” and the like.
The practitioner made repeated claims that
the Council’s applications were “an abuse of power” and
brought for
“an improper purpose”.
ratio of the original tribunal’s decision is that the practitioner cannot
be trusted in respects that are essential to the
practice of law; has no insight
into, or understanding of, the seriousness of his misconduct; and has no insight
into, or understanding
of, the importance of honesty and candour in his conduct
as a legal practitioner.
his submissions on the appeal, written and oral, the practitioner repeatedly
demonstrated that the original tribunal’s conclusions
correct. It was bewildering to read the practitioner’s submissions on
appeal that were so lacking in honesty
and candour – written in response
to multiple findings that the practitioner breached his common law duty of
honesty and candour.
Appeal Tribunal addressed grounds asserting:
(a) that the LP Act “has no jurisdiction” because it did not govern
conduct in a federal court: ACAT Appeal [41]-[67];
(b) that the decision of the Law Society to cancel his practising certificate
was unlawful: ACAT Appeal [68]-[82];
(c) that the decision of the Law Society to refer the matter to ACAT was
unlawful: ACAT Appeal [83]-[86];
(d) that the decision of the ACAT at first instance was unlawful: ACAT Appeal
(e) that there was non-compliance with the rule in
Browne v Dunn
Appeal [98]-[121];
(f) that both members of the ACAT at first instance were biased: ACAT Appeal
[122]-[128];
(g) that there had been unreasonable delay on the part of the Law Society in
making the applications, and then on the part of the
ACAT at first instance in
making its decision: ACAT Appeal [129]-[133];
(h) that the applications for disciplinary action were an abuse of process: ACAT
Appeal [134]-[136]; and
(i) that the defendant had been wrongly denied a separate hearing on the
question of penalty: ACAT Appeal [137]-[140].
defendant’s contentions were not accepted. The Appeal Tribunal then
reviewed each of the findings made by the
ACAT in detail and rejected each of
the challenges to the conclusions reached on each of the charges that were
established.
Appeal Tribunal was satisfied that there was no error of fact or law made by the
ACAT at first instance in its recommendation
under s 425(3) of the LP Act and,
as a consequence, the orders of the original tribunal were confirmed.
Test to be applied
115․ Referring
to the decision in
, the High Court in
A Solicitor v Council of
the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
216 CLR 253
said at [15]:
Where an order for removal from the roll is contemplated, the ultimate issue is
whether the practitioner is shown not to be a fit
and proper person to be a
legal practitioner of the Supreme Court upon whose roll the practitioner’s
name presently appears.
(Footnote omitted)
formulation was picked up in
at [16] and
The same issue arises when exercising statutory jurisdiction under s 431 as
distinct from the inherent jurisdiction of
Southern Law Society v Westbrook
[1910] HCA 31
(1910) 10 CLR 609
at 612, Griffith CJ
referred with approval to the formulation articulated in
In re Weare, a
Solicitor; In re The Solicitors Act, 1888
[1893] UKLawRpKQB 130
[1893] 2 QB 439
To my mind the question which the Court in cases like this ought always to put
to itself is this, Is the Court, having regard to
the circumstances brought
before it, any longer justified in holding out the solicitor in question as a
fit and proper person to
be entrusted with the important duties and grave
responsibilities which belong to a solicitor?
formulation was adopted in
at [4]. It serves to emphasise not
only the institutional role of lawyers for the operation of the courts but also
the significance
of their inclusion on the roll as part of the regulatory scheme
for the protection of their clients and the clients of lawyers generally.
the present case, the defendant has been found to have breached norms of conduct
relevant to a lawyer in his position.
Each of the norms the subject of the
charges that were established represents important aspects of the practise of
a lawyer’s duty of honesty and candour to a court is a fundamental feature
of the practice of law. Its significance cannot
be overstated. It is one of the
fundamental pillars upon which the proper administration of justice depends.
Isaacs J explained this
Incorporated Law Institute of New South
Wales v Meagher
[1909] HCA 87
(1909) 9 CLR 655
at 681 as follows:
The errors to which human tribunals are inevitably exposed, even when aided by
all the ability, all the candour, and all the loyalty
of those who assist them,
whether as advocates, solicitors, or witnesses, are proverbially great. But, if
added to the imperfections
inherent in our nature, there be deliberate
misleading, or reckless laxity of attention to necessary principles of honesty
part of those the Courts trust to prepare the essential materials for
doing justice, these tribunals are likely to become mere instruments
oppression, and the creator of greater evils than those they are appointed to
Spigelman CJ said in
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
52 NSWLR 279
, dealings with courts are only one of the areas
in which the honesty and integrity of a lawyer is of significance. The
relationship
between lawyer and client, and between one lawyer and another, are
also areas in which confidence in the honesty and integrity of
lawyers is a
central concern.
122․ However,
just focusing upon the centrality of honesty and candour of lawyers in dealing
with courts, this is significant
in a number of ways. Pragmatically, our system
of justice can only function and get through the work that is required if
as officers of the court, can be relied upon for their candour and
honesty. But the obligation of candour and honesty is also fundamental
core values of the judicial system, the fair and impartial determination of
disputes, and to societal confidence in its institutions.
Any erosion of the
obligations of lawyers to be honest and candid in their dealings with courts
carries with it an unacceptable risk
of both eroding the institutions
administering justice as well as the social acceptance of the authority of those
institutions.
123․ Second
when it comes to dealings between a lawyer and the Law Society, it has to be
recognised that, so far as solicitors are concerned,
the Law Society is central
to the scheme of regulation and, hence, the advancement of the public interest
in the maintenance of standards
within the legal profession. One of the burdens
associated with the privileges of being an officer of the court is the need for
and disclosure when dealing with a regulatory body such as the Law
Society. That is reflected in the terms of the Solicitors Rules:
see r 43.1 set
out above. It is inherent in the role of a lawyer, as an officer of the court,
that the lawyer is able to deal honestly
with the regulatory body established by
law to regulate the conduct of lawyers. That extends to honesty and openness in
circumstances
where full disclosure may not be in the professional or financial
interests of the lawyer in question. It involves subordination
self-interest of the lawyer to the legal system to which they have been admitted
dealing properly with trust money is a strictly regulated area of legal practice
because of the potential for misfeasance by lawyers
in dealing with other
people’s money. The reliability and integrity of lawyers in the handling
of trust funds has been recognised
as of fundamental importance to the
determination of whether a person is fit and proper to be entrusted with the
responsibilities
of being a lawyer:
at [120]-[123] and the cases
cited therein;
Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v
[2017] ACTSCFC 2
Law Society of New South Wales v
(NSW Court of Appeal, unreported, 27 July 1978) at 10.
125․ Fourth
the requirement for competence and diligence is necessarily of fundamental
importance both to the operation of the courts and the
well-being of a
lawyer’s clients. It is reflected in the Solicitors Rules: see r 4.1.3 set
out above. Whilst a person may lack
competence and diligence due to a lack of
training or experience, a person may also lack competence and diligence due to
personality characteristics which make them unsuitable for the
practice of law.
determining whether to remove a lawyer from the local roll, it is necessary to
consider whether the unfitness to practice
law is temporary or of indefinite
duration. That is because, in relation to deficiencies identified as being
temporary, the public
interest may be able to be protected by lesser measures,
such as a temporary suspension from practice:
Stanoevski v The Council of the
Law Society of New South Wales
[2008] NSWCA 93
removal from the roll is to occur, that is not for the purpose of punishing the
practitioner but in order to protect
the public and the institutions that the
practitioner is required to serve. That protection is not just protection
against further
default by the practitioner in question. It also involves
protecting the public against similar defaults by other practitioners and
significant because it publicly marks the seriousness of the conduct of the
Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Submissions of the Law Society
Law Society submitted that the findings of the ACAT indicated that the defendant
lacks character qualities which are
essential for fitness to practise law:
honesty, candour and trustworthiness. It points to the observation by the Appeal
that the defendant did not even understand these concepts, let alone
their importance: ACAT Appeal [393].
Law Society points to the defendant’s conduct involving:
(a) dishonesty;
(b) misappropriation of client money;
(c) being unable to comply with court orders requiring him to repay client
(d) being unable to prepare a defence which does not expose his client to
default judgment; and
(e) being unable to provide other services in a manner which will best protect
his clients’ interests and comply with mandatory
costs disclosure
obligations.
Law Society submitted that the repeated and serious misconduct of the defendant
strongly indicated that he was permanently
unfit to practise law. It submitted
that he cannot be trusted by courts, tribunals, other lawyers, or clients to act
with candour
and fulfil the most rudimentary requirements of legal practice.
Further, he cannot be trusted by the Law Society to provide truthful
information
in relation to the investigation of his conduct.
also submitted that the defendant does not have any genuine insight into his
conduct and, as a result, no real remorse
for his conduct. He continues to
assert that he has done nothing wrong. It submitted that in order to protect the
public from further
default by the defendant and in order to mark for the
profession generally the seriousness of his misconduct, the court should
that he was not a fit and proper person to be entrusted with the
important duties and responsibilities which belong to a solicitor.
Submissions by defendant
pointed out earlier, the bulk of the defendant’s submissions (which
totalled 2256 paragraphs of written submissions
and substantial oral
submissions) related to matters that he was not able to agitate on the present
application – contests
over the factual conclusions reached by the ACAT,
and administrative law challenges to the ACAT Decision and the decision to
his practising certificate. He engaged with the discretionary question as
to whether or not an order should be made removing him
from the roll in only a
limited way.
far as his attitude to the findings of the ACAT were concerned, he continued to
assert on multiple occasions that he
had done nothing wrong and yet, on other
occasions, articulated regret for his conduct. A portion of the transcript in
which captures this mixed position is as follows:
So obviously I regret what’s happened and I do regret how this matter has
transpired in the ACAT. I wasn’t trying to
mislead the ACAT or lead the
ACAT up the garden path, and so I do have some remorse in this but I still
adhere to my view that I’ve
done nothing wrong in the matter of [Mr D] or
anything else.
far as his personal circumstances were concerned, he pointed to his age,
submitting that “[i]t is very difficult
for a sixty-five-year-old male to
start a new career”, and to the financial impact that the ACAT proceedings
had already had
upon him. Although there was no evidence of this, he asserted
that the proceedings to date had cost him “well over $200,000”,
for seven years he had been subject of actions by the Law Society, that he had
suffered a heart attack, and that there had been
significant strain on his
relationship with his partner.
submitted that many of the clients for whom he had acted were persons seeking
asylum, and said, “I bust my gut
to do what’s best for my
clients”. He submitted that some of those for whom he had acted had been
deported (“back
to very risky countries”) in the period since the
cancellation of his practising certificate.
submitted that he had been justly punished up until now, and that the court
should not make an order removing him from
Consideration and decision
findings of the ACAT as to the conduct of the defendant in the period prior to
the cancellation of his practising certificate
in June 2018, are significant
findings of professional misconduct. Of most significance are:
(a) the aggregation of findings that he knowingly or recklessly misled courts or
failed to correct incorrect statements made to a
(b) the aggregation of findings demonstrating a lack of professional competence.
significant that he has demonstrated an inability to recognise the fact that he
has fallen below the standards required
of a lawyer. This absence of insight
comes notwithstanding an exhaustive process involving complaints to the Law
Society, the initiation
of proceedings in the ACAT, a hearing and adverse
determination by the ACAT, a hearing and adverse determination by the Appeal
of the ACAT, and a hearing and adverse determination in the Supreme
Court of the application for leave to appeal from the decision
of the Appeal
Tribunal of the ACAT. Some admissions were made during the period when the
defendant was legally represented in proceedings
before the ACAT, and
submissions were made which appeared to reflect some insight into the inadequacy
of his own conduct. However,
that representation ceased following the ACAT
Decision and the approach taken to the proceedings in the Appeal Tribunal and in
Supreme Court illustrates that, in fact, the defendant has no insight into
the inadequacies of his own conduct. In this Court, he
expressly submitted that
he did “nothing wrong” and has persisted with factual and legal
contentions previously rejected
by the ACAT, the Appeal Tribunal and the Supreme
Court on the application for leave to appeal. His assertion that he does
how this matter has transpired” and does “have some
remorse” cannot be accepted as demonstrating any real appreciation
departures from appropriate standards of conduct.
139․ Insofar
as the ACAT found that he had fallen below an appropriate standard of
competence, the defendant similarly remained
generally lacking insight. This was
illustrated by an exchange with the Court in the present proceedings relating to
the content
of his written submissions which impliedly asserted that there was
nothing wrong with him, as a legal practitioner, commencing proceedings
no prospect of success because it would have the collateral benefit of delaying
the deportation process and applicants who
are liable to deportation would be
grateful for another two or three years of residence in Australia. It was
suggested to him that
this amounted to an abuse of process of the courts. He
refused to accept this, seeking to justify the conduct on the basis of the
consequences of deportation for his clients. He further justified commencement
of such proceedings on the basis that they did, in
fact, have reasonable
prospects of success, saying, “The fact that the court says they
don’t have prospects of success,
doesn’t mean that they don’t
have prospects of success”, and that the reasons why cases he had run were
not successful
“had nothing to do with the merits of the case”.
Unfortunately, these exchanges tended to illustrate that he had very
understanding of his duty as a lawyer or of the institutional framework in which
he was required to operate. This pointed
quite strongly towards his unfitness to
be on the roll of legal practitioners. That such views were expressed many years
practising certificate was cancelled, and after having gone through
the long and difficult process in ACAT, points strongly to the
indefinite nature
of his unfitness to practise.
unfortunate position for the defendant is that the course of proven misconduct
provides a solid foundation for a decision
to remove him from the roll of
practitioners. His conduct in response to the disciplinary proceedings, and his
conduct of the proceedings
before this Court, illustrates that he continues to
have no significant appreciation of the extent of his departures from
appropriate
standards of conduct. The combination of persistent failures to meet
the standards required of a legal practitioner and the absence
of insight into
those failures compels the conclusion that he is not fit to remain on the roll.
Notwithstanding the passage of time
since, as a result of the cancellation of
his practising certificate, he has ceased to practise as a lawyer, our
conclusion is that
he remains a person who is indefinitely unfit to practise as
a lawyer and it is appropriate that he be removed from the roll of legal
practitioners. We do not accept that any lesser response by the Court would
adequately meet the need for the Court to protect the
public and the
administration of justice by ensuring that only those who are fit and proper
persons are able to maintain the privileges
associated with being an officer of
orders of the Court are:
(1) The following evidence is not admitted:
(a) Affidavit of Hugh Russell Ford dated 9 April 2024:
(i) paragraphs 28 to 37 and exhibit HRF1 pages 311 to 325;
(ii) paragraphs 63 to 95 and exhibit HRF1 pages 87 to 120, 121 to 178 and 183 to
(iii) paragraphs 96 to 124 and exhibit HRF1 pages 187 to 206;
(iv) paragraphs 125 to 141 and exhibit HRF1 pages 265 to 288;
(v) paragraphs 173 to 193 and exhibit HRF1 pages 244 to 251;
(vi) paragraphs 194 to 224 and exhibit HRF1 pages 252 to 253;
(vii) paragraphs 225 to 244 and exhibit HRF1 pages 254 to 264;
(viii) paragraphs 245 to 255;
(ix) paragraph 263 to 278 and exhibit HRF1 pages 290 to 297; and
(x) paragraphs 279 to 283 and exhibit HRF1 pages 301 to 309.
(b) Affidavit of Hugh Russell Ford dated 26 June 2024:
(i) paragraphs 68 to 94 and exhibit RUS1 pages 36 to 46; and
(ii) paragraphs 95 to 100 and exhibit RUS1 pages 47 to 49.
(c) Affidavit of Hugh Russell Ford dated 27 June 2024 (the affidavit of
69 paragraphs): the whole of the affidavit and exhibit RD1.
(2) The application in proceeding dated 30 May 2024 is dismissed.
(3) The name of Hugh Russell Ford be removed from the roll of people admitted to
the legal profession maintained by the Supreme Court
pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2006
(4) Unless the parties notify the court within 14 days that consent orders are
proposed in relation to costs:
(a) The plaintiff is to file and serve written submissions limited to not more
than four pages and any evidence in relation to costs
31 January 2025.
(b) The defendant is to file and serve written submissions limited to not more
than four pages and any evidence in relation to costs
by 14 February
(c) The plaintiff is to file and serve any written submissions in reply limited
to not more than two pages by 28 February 2025.
(d) Unless the court otherwise orders, the question of costs will be dealt with
on the papers without an oral hearing.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and forty-one [141] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Date: 19 December 2024
RTF format (430 KB)
Signed PDF/A format