Pastrello v Saeedi [2025] ACTCA 18 (4 June 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Pastrello v Saeedi
[2025] ACTCA 18
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
(1) The application lodged on 7 May 2025 is dismissed.
(2) Costs of the application are reserved.
Catchwords:
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
application to expedite hearing of appeal – interests of justice –
where expediting appeal would displace hearing of already allocated appeal
– application dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Court Procedures Rules
(ACT), rr 1311, 1401(4),
Cases Cited:
Hird v Chief Executive Officer of the Australian Sports Anti-Doping
[2014] FCA 1090
Luisa Sonia Pastrello (First Appellant)
Eddy Louis Pastrello (Second Appellant)
Kamyar Saeedi (in his capacity as executor of the estate of the late
Lorenzo Pastrello (First Respondent)
Carl Lorenzo Pastrello (Second Respondent)
Christian Ivan Pastrello (Third Respondent)
Massimo Max Eddy Pastrello (Fourth Respondent)
Representation:
G Blank (First and Second Appellant)
M Mascitti (First Respondent)
W Sharwood (Second, Third and Fourth Respondent)
Thomson Geer (First and Second Appellant)
Kamy Saeedi Law (First Respondent)
KJB Law (Second, Third and Fourth Respondent)
File Number:
AC 3 of 2025
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: ACT Supreme Court
Before: Mossop J
Date of Decision: 12 February 2025
Case Title: Saeedi v Pastrello
[2025] ACTSC 26
TEMPORE REMARKS
Introduction
is an application for expedition of the hearing of an appeal.
trial judge gave his decision on 12 February 2025 and a Notice of Appeal was
filed on 11 March 2025.
primary proceedings concerned the validity of a will executed by the late
Lorenzo Pastrello (Mr Pastrello) on 18 December 2020.
Mr Pastrello died on 4
August 2021. There is a contest as to whether a grant of probate should be made
in accordance with the disputed
will, which divided Mr Pastrello’s assets
amongst his children and grandchildren (the respondents’ position), or
alternatively
whether probate ought be granted in accordance with an earlier
will executed in 1988 which made provision for Mr Pastrello’s
only (the appellants’ position).
appeal raises 4 primary grounds, but in effect there are 24 separate grounds of
application for expedition is made by the second, third and fourth respondents
to the appeal, that is, the parties who were successful
at trial. The
application identifies prejudice to the parties as the primary ground upon which
the application for expedition is
based. To avoid confusion I shall hereafter
refer to the applicants/respondents as “the applicants” and the
respondents/appellants
as “the respondents”.
affidavit of Massimo Pastrello, affirmed on 7 May 2025, is read in support of
this application, with the applicants also relying
upon earlier affidavits of
Massimo Pastrello, Kamyar Saeedi and Tamara Goodwin filed in these appeal
proceedings in the context of
the respondent’s application for a stay. The
effect of the stay proceedings was that a stay of the decision of the trial
was granted until further order.
appeal proceedings are currently listed in the appeal callover on 10 September
2025 for consideration for inclusion in the Court
of Appeal sittings in November
2025. The applicants seek the inclusion of the appeal in the appeal sittings
scheduled to take place
in the week commencing 4 August 2025. As the matter
presently stands the earliest date upon which the appeal could be listed is 3
November 2025 with the appeal sittings scheduled to continue over a two-week
period from that date. The effect of an order for expedition
would thus be to
bring forward the hearing of the appeal by some three months.
present position is that a date for the hearing of the appeal has not been set.
Court Procedures Rules
(ACT) (the CPR)
provides a mechanism for changing the date for the hearing of an appeal but in
circumstances where a date has already
of the CPR provides
for the expedition of a trial and sets out the evidentiary requirements in
support of an application for expedition
in that context. As this is an
application for expedition of an appeal hearing in circumstances where the
appeal hearing date is
yet to be set, I have proceeded on the basis that the
applicants rely upon the general power of the court under r 1401(4)(c) of the
CPR to make directions, including the setting of a timetable for the conduct of
the hearing or any steps in the proceeding.
is a matter of relevance that the dates for appeal hearings in August 2025 have
been allocated to existing matters and there is
no residual availability in that
court list. As such, an order for expedition in this case would necessarily
require the removal
from the list of a matter already allocated a hearing date.
Whilst the court has a broad discretion, a decision to remove a matter
set down for hearing, with the inevitable inconvenience to the parties in that
matter, is not an action to be taken lightly.
application is opposed by the respondents and I have the benefit of a written
outline of their submissions. I am also assisted
by the chronology prepared by
the applicants, identifying critical dates pertaining to the history of the
The applicants’
argument for expedition
grounds for expedition identified in the application are:
(a) significant prejudice to the parties as a consequence of delay;
(b) consistency with the practice direction as to the timing of hearings; and
(c) interests of justice considerations.
for the applicants expanded on those grounds in oral submissions. He pointed in
particular to the following matters:
(a) The size and complexity of the estate with property interests extending
across the ACT and NSW (I understood this to be identified
as a basis for
expedition given the limitations arising from the management of the extensive
estate by an interim administrator as
opposed to the executor);
(b) The existence of three related proceedings in the NSW Supreme Court, each
dealing with issues either bearing on the estate, or
on some or all of the
beneficiaries;
(c) The continued management of the estate assets via an interim administrator
carried some limitations that would be alleviated
by the transfer of those
functions to the executor – an event that cannot take place until the
appeal is determined (counsel
for the applicants emphasised that no criticism
was made of the conduct of the administration by the interim administrator, but
the concern was directed to the limitation on her functions and on her
knowledge of the estate relative to the appointed executor);
(d) The need to make decisions of significance in respect of estate assets,
including pending decisions in respect of the development
consent for the quarry
located at the Sutton property, and the preference for those decisions to be
taken by an executor with an
intimate knowledge of the estate assets;
(e) The risk of deterioration in a number of the estates’ property assets
whereby the lack of ongoing maintenance carries the
risk of erosion of property
(f) The substantial legal costs associated with the prolonged interim
administration, estimated to total approximately $280,000.00,
without any
allowance for counsel’s fees; and
(g) The advantages flowing to the estate from Mr Saeedi’s intimate
knowledge of the financial affairs of the late Mr Pastrello.
applicants submitted that these matters taken together supported the argument
that it was in the interests of justice for the
hearing of the appeal to be
The respondents’
argument opposing expedition
respondents’ primary submission was that there was nothing arising from
the material before the Court to indicate that a
three-month acceleration in the
hearing of the appeal would assist any of the parties other than in financial
Complexity and
limitations of interim administration
respondents acknowledged that the estate is very complex and substantial. In
terms of any particular limitations arising from
the management of the estate by
an interim administrator, as opposed to the nominated executor, neither of the
parties addressed
any specific points of difference in the powers of the interim
administrator. It was at least implied from the administrator’s
correspondence dated 3 June 2025, which was Exhibit 1 on the application, that
there would, for example, be a need for the interim
administrator to approach
the Court for power to enter into the necessary documents to enable progress of
the works at the Sutton
quarry. The respondents noted that, other than the
affidavit of Massimo Pastrello affirmed on 7 May 2025, the affidavit evidence
that is before me formed part of the evidence before McWilliam J upon hearing of
the stay application, and orders for a stay were
made in circumstances where
those orders had the effect of perpetuating the interim
administration.
The related
proceedings
first of the related proceedings concerns a claim brought by the administrator
of a company, Gratory Pty Ltd, owned by the late
Mr Pastrello. The claim is
brought against a former business associate of Mr Pastrello who is alleged to
have defrauded the company
of in excess of $4 million dollars. The claim is also
brought against the estate on the basis of allegations of fiduciary breaches
the late Mr Pastrello. The criminal proceedings against the former business
associate are yet to be determined and it is submitted
that no urgency attaches
to those civil proceedings.
second proceedings are also brought by the same company, Gratory Pty Ltd and
involve a range of allegations against,
, the estate, including
an allegation of misappropriation of funds. As those proceedings are brought and
maintained by the receiver
of Gratory Pty Ltd it is submitted that they do not
involve the need for any strategic decisions by the estate at this time.
last of the identified proceedings are dormant pending determination of this
The need to
make significant financial decisions
primary concern raised by the applicants was that of the Sutton quarry and the
impending expiry of a current development consent
in the absence of some
physical work being undertaken at the property. In the course of submissions
counsel for the applicants conceded
that it was not the case that no action
could be taken by the interim administrator but that the process would be able
to be managed
more efficiently through the executor. The respondents, with
reference to Exhibit 1, highlighted that the administrator was actively
steps, including steps in relation to the Sutton quarry and the issues to be
addressed in association with the development
consent were clearly in her
contemplation.
the course of submissions, it was acknowledged by both parties that the time
frames were such that it was most unlikely, even with
an expedited appeal
hearing, that the executor would be in a position to take any particular steps
in relation to the Sutton quarry
prior to the expiry of the current development
consent in September.
deterioration in value of assets
respondents relied upon the affidavit of Ms Goodwin in support of the contention
that whilst there is work to be done at a number
of the properties, there were
also limited cash funds available to address those works.
was submitted that the properties were either tenanted and subject to management
or they were in need of substantial repairs for
which funds were not presently
available. As a consequence the respondents contended that there is no
particular urgency regarding
the management of the property assets.
Substantial and
ongoing legal costs
was no contention raised before me about the quantum of costs to date that are
referred to in the affidavit of Ms Goodwin affirmed
on 26 March 2025. Those
costs are clearly substantial, and continuing.
respondents noted that the executor is a legal practitioner who is empowered in
accordance with the terms of the will to charge
for the provision of his
services as executor. There is no evidence before me as to the prospective
charges to be raised by the executor,
if any, and how they might compare with
the fees incurred as a result of the provision of services by the interim
administrator.
Consideration
determination of this application for expedition involves an exercise of the
Court’s discretion, in circumstances where
the effect of allowing
expedition necessarily displaces an appeal that has already been set down in the
August sittings.
the exercise of discretion, it is necessary to have regard to the facts of the
case and the matters of particular relevance arising
from the evidence before me
(a) Although the estate is large and complex and requires ongoing significant
management, there is no suggestion that it is currently
being mismanaged;
rather, that the management of the assets may well be facilitated by the
transfer of responsibilities to the executor;
(b) The administration is incurring significant legal costs, but the fees that
may be rendered by the executor are not in evidence;
(c) There are no pending significant financial or strategic decisions that are
beyond the power of the administrator or are otherwise
demonstrated to be
thwarted where expedition is not granted;
(d) Although there are related legal proceedings, none have been demonstrated to
be significantly negatively impacted by a delay
of 3 months in the hearing of
the appeal; and
(e) Although a delay of 3 months in the hearing of the appeal may have some
negative impact on the value of the assets of the estate
as a consequence of
issues related to maintenance and upkeep, the cash funds presently available to
the estate are unlikely to enable
any works to commence in a timely manner
regardless of the delay.
Hird v Chief Executive Officer of the Australian Sports Anti-Doping
[2014] FCA 1090
, Kenny J observed;
The factors falling for consideration in the exercise of the Court’s
discretion will depend, at least in part, on the particular
factors may include whether, if the hearing did not take place at the earliest
convenient time or prior to a particular
date, the appellant would suffer some
significant practical disadvantage, or a party would suffer some irreparable
loss or especially
significant hardship, such as the loss of livelihood,
business or home. Other factors include a serious detriment to good public
administration or to the interests of others not party to the appeal.
accept that it is frustrating for the applicants that, having succeeded before
the trial judge, they are prevented from pursuing
the further administration of
the estate as a consequence of this appeal.
am not satisfied that the position of the applicants is such that it is in the
interests of justice to allow expedition of the appeal
therefore make the following orders:
(1) The application lodged on 7 May 2025 is dismissed.
(2) Costs of the application are reserved.
I certify that the preceding thirty [30] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of his Honour Acting Justice
RTF format (230 KB)
Signed PDF/A format