BD and Canberra Health Services [2020] ACTOFOI 29 (17 December 2020)
and Canberra Health Services
December 2020)
and reasons for
decision of Senior Assistant Ombudsman, Louise Macleod
Application
AFOI-RR/20/10049
[2020] ACTOFOI 29
Canberra Health Services
Information Act 2016
(ACT) – deciding access – refuse to
deal with the application – application involves an abuse of process
unreasonable request for personal information about a person
am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman for the purposes of
Freedom of Information Act 2016
s 82(2)(c) of the FOI Act, I
the decision of the Canberra Health Services
), dated 3 September 2020.
of Ombudsman review and relevant law
FOI Act gives every person a right of access to government information. This
right is subject to other provisions of the FOI Act,
including grounds on which
access may be refused.
27 July 2020, BD applied to CHS for access
all specialist staff doctor employees of Canberra Health Services (either
fulltime or part time), with a rehabilitation program/plan
or subsequent
alteration, or graduated return to work program/plan signed by the relevant
parties between 1/7/18 and 1/7/20.
request to be provided please:
various verbatim written clauses regarding applications/submissions/requests for
leave (annual, TESL long service) including any
time period in advance
applications are required or suggested to be made that are written in the stated
rehabilitation program/plan
or subsequent alteration, or graduated return to
work program/plan.
specify the number of fulltime or part time specialist doctors employed by
Canberra Health Services that each different clause
identified applies to
regarding submission/requesting these types of leave in advance.
also specify the number of fulltime or part time staff specialist doctors
employed by Canberra Health Services that have no
clause detailing the time in
advance to submit/request a leave submission/request/application.
total number of rehabilitation programs/plans, or graduated return to work
programs/plans signed by the relevant parties to examine
is expected to be less
than 20, with all programs readily identifiable by the ACT Health Injury
Management Unit, and ACT Health People
and Culture.
Secondly, the programs/plans, and
statistics are required to be gathered as part of compliance previously with
Comcare, and under
the self-insured requirements using the SRC.
this FOI request personal information is not requested or required to be
provided such as names or specialty or the fulltime
or part time staff
specialist doctors employed by Canberra Health Services with the rehabilitation
program, rehabilitation program
alteration, or graduated return to work
additional component to the FOI request is for the equivalent (if present)
various verbatim written clauses regarding ‘upgrade’
of work that
are written in the stated rehabilitation program/plan or subsequent alteration,
or graduated return to work program/plan
for all specialist staff doctor
employees of Canberra Health Services (either fulltime or part time).
43(1)(c) permits an agency to refuse to deal with an access application if the
application involves an abuse of process. Section
43(4)(b) defines the phrase
‘abuse of process’ as, among other things:
unreasonable request for personal information about a person
13 August 2020, CHS wrote to the applicant advising of their intention to refuse
to deal with the application on the basis that
it constituted an abuse of
process because it was an unreasonable request for personal information.
3 September 2020, CHS decided to refuse to deal with the access application on
this basis.
11 September 2020, BD applied, under s 74 of the FOI Act, for the ACT Ombudsman
to review CHS’ decision.
23 November 2020, I provided my preliminary views about CHS’ decision to
the parties in my draft consideration.
30 November 2020, CHS responded to my draft consideration, advising their
acceptance of my preliminary view that the original decision
was incorrect.
applicant did not provide further submissions in response to my draft
consideration.
issue in this Ombudsman review is whether CHS’ decision to refuse to deal
with the access application was correct.
making my decision I have had regard to:
original access application
decision notice
FOI Act, in particular ss 7, 35, 43 and the Dictionary
contentions of the parties
decision notice
is my decision that the public interest would not be served by unreasonably
requesting the personal information of other CHS
made submissions after being notified of this review, contending
information [the applicant] is seeking is personal information of individuals
that is protected under the
Human Rights Act
collation of this information would require staff members to determine which
staff specialist doctors have a Rehabilitation Program/Plan
or Return to Work
Program/Plan. Then staff would have to go through the individualised plans to
determine which ones held the type
of information specified, and finally create
a de-identified document where the staff members’ identity may still be
Therefore, I believe it would be unreasonable to go through individual
Programs/Plans of agency staff to determine if they held this
information. This
would breach the Directorates responsibility under the IP Act and contain
information in records that are not accessible
under the FOI Act.
application for Ombudsman review
wish to document as stated in the FOI request, amended FOI request, and
clarifying emails below that I have never requested any
personal identifying
information, or Health Records of any CHS doctor, only the relevant upgrade
clauses for graduated return to
work at CHS.
have provided written consent form, to provide the documents with my personal
health information, or documents considered to be
personal health
do not request any personally identifiable information for any other doctor, and
clearly this would not be identified in the request
despite this being the
reason used to decline the FOI request.
submissions are discussed in more detail
Considerations
have considered both parties’ submissions.
Dictionary of the FOI Act defines ‘personal information’ as:
information
or an opinion about a person... whether true or not, about an individual whose
identity is apparent, or can reasonably
be ascertained, from the information or
consider CHS’ decision is incorrect. The application specifically asks for
personal information ‘such as names or specialty’
and health records
to be excluded. Once information has been de-identified by removal of names and
other personal information, I
do not consider that identity is apparent, or can
reasonably be ascertained, even though the information relates to a person. That
is because the Dictionary definition requires the identity of the person to be
ascertainable.
application could not, therefore, be decided to constitute an abuse of process
on the basis that it unreasonably requested personal
information about any
these reasons, under s 82(2)(c) of the FOI Act, I decide to
the decision of
Canberra Health Services dated 3 September 2020.
must deal with the access application in accordance with the FOI Act because it
is not an abuse of process under s 43(4)(b).
Senior Assistant
17 December
RTF format (815 KB)
Signed PDF/A format