Moto Garage Industries Pty Ltd v Hassen [2018] ACTIC 3 (25 September 2018)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Moto Garage Industries Pty Ltd v Hassen
[2018] ACTIC 3
Hearing Date:
Magistrate Theakston
See paragraph 31
Catchwords:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – Leave to reject claim –Surveillance of
employee by Insurer – Subrogation – Whether
offence committed under
Workplace Privacy Act 2011
EVIDENCE – Admissibility of evidence – Civil proceedings
– Surveillance – Equity and good conscience –
Improperly or
illegally obtained evidence
Legislation Cited:
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT) ss 22 (1), 51
Evidence Act 2011
Legislation Act 2001
Workers Compensation Act 1951
Workplace Privacy Act 2011
Regulations Cited:
Workers Compensation Regulations 2002
(ACT) reg 56 (4) –
Bills Cited:
Workplace Privacy Bill 2010
Cases Cited:
Bunning v Cross
[1978] HCA 22
DPP v Kypri
[2011] VSCA 257
Klein v Bryant
[1998] ACTSC 89
Moto Garage Industries Pty Ltd (Applicant)
Brett Hassen (Respondent)
Representation:
Mr S Whybrow (Applicant)
Mr A Muller (Respondent)
Moray & Agnew Lawyers (Applicant)
Slater & Gordon Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number:
WC 123 of 2018
MAGISTRATE THEAKSTON:
1. It has been a practice of insurers to, from time to time,
arrange for the surveillance of claimants for the purpose of checking
legitimacy of their claims. In 2011, legislation was enacted in the ACT
regulating the surveillance of employees by their employers.
This matter
involves the intersection of those two concerns.
2. Moto Garage Industries
Pty Ltd, through QBE Insurance (Australia) Limited exercising its subrogation
rights, has applied to the
court for leave to reject Mr Brett Hassen’s
claim. That leave is required by
Workers Compensation Act 1951
(ACT) if 12 months has passed since the claim was initially made. The
application is made on the basis that Mr Hassen is no longer
incapacitated for
3. On 25 September 2018 and following an objection, I ruled that
surveillance product be admitted into evidence. That product included
media and observations by a witness, which were collected or made using a video
camera. These are my reasons.
4. The objection raised the following three principal
Moto Garage breach
Workplace Privacy Act 2011
(b) Did QBE Insurance breach
Workplace Privacy Act
(c) If there was a breach of
Workplace Privacy Act
, should the
evidence be admitted?
Agreed facts
5. The following facts were either agreed or not challenged,
and I make findings accordingly:
(a) Mr Hassen commenced
employment with Moto Garage in 2009 and at all material times was a
‘worker’ of Moto Garage, within
the meaning of the
Compensation Act
. Mr Hassen was also a director of Moto Garage at all material
(b) Moto Garage employed other workers from time to time.
(c) In 2015, Mr Hassen sustained an injury to his right shoulder in the course
of his employment, which resulted in surgery and an
incapacity to work.
(d) On the day of the injury, Moto Garage held a policy of workers compensation
insurance with QBE Insurance, as required by the
Workers Compensation Act
(e) In late 2015, QBE Insurance accepted Mr Hassen’s insurance claim in
respect of the injury. That claim remains accepted
and payments continue to be
made by QBE Insurance.
(f) In December 2017 and March, May and August 2018, QBE Insurance arranged for
surveillance of Mr Hassen at his workplace.
(g) No notice was provided to Mr Hassen or Moto Garage prior to the
surveillance.
(h) No application was made to this court for a ‘covert surveillance
authority’ within the meaning of the
Workplace Privacy Act
(i) The surveillance was performed by Mr Paul Martin of Verifact Investigations.
The surveillance involved the recording of video
images using a camera, and real
time observations, including viewing Mr Hassen through the camera. The camera
had a zoom facility.
(j) Mr Hassen was observed at, and in the driveway of, his workshop and at other
locations where he took possession of motorcycles.
He was observed to push
motorcycles up a ramp into his work van, ride a motorcycle and carry various
Did Moto Garage breach
Workplace Privacy
Workplace Privacy Act
creates a number of
offences. Relevantly subsection (1) creates the following offence:
employer commits an offence if the employer—
(a) is required to notify a worker of surveillance under
(b) the employer fails to comply with a requirement under
relation to the surveillance.
Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units.
7. This offence is ambulatory in nature, as described in by
Nettle JA in DPP v Kypri
[2011] VSCA 257
, in that the elements of the
offence are informed by the requirements of another section, namely
Notice of surveillance
(1) An employer may only conduct surveillance of a worker in a workplace
(a) the employer gives written notice to the worker under this section;
Note For how documents may be given, see the
Legislation Act
(b) the surveillance is conducted in accordance with the notice.
(2) However, an employer need not give written notice to a worker for
surveillance using an optical surveillance device in a workplace
workplace is not a usual workplace of the worker.
(3) The notice must be given—
(a) at least 14 days before the surveillance starts; or
(b) if the worker agrees to a period of less than 14 days for giving the
notice—within the agreed lesser period; or
(c) if a new worker starts work with an employer that already conducts
surveillance or will start conducting surveillance in less
than 14 days after
the new worker starts work—before the new worker starts work.
(4) The notice must state—
(a) the kind of surveillance device to be used for the surveillance;
(b) how the surveillance will be conducted; and
(c) who will regularly or ordinarily be the subject of the surveillance;
(d) when the surveillance will start; and
(e) whether the surveillance will be continuous or intermittent; and
(f) whether the surveillance will be for a stated period or ongoing;
(g) the purpose for which the employer may use and disclose surveillance
records of the surveillance; and
(h) that the worker may consult with the employer about the conduct of the
surveillance under
section 14.
(5) A notice may be in the form of a policy of the employer or
8. The expressions ‘worker’,
‘employer’, ‘workplace’, ‘conducts
surveillance’, ‘optical
surveillance device’,
‘surveillance’ and ‘surveillance device’ are defined at
to mean (emphasis added):
means an individual who carries out work in relation to a business or
undertaking, whether for reward or otherwise, under
an arrangement with the
the business or undertaking.
(a) includes—
(i) a person who engages the
to carry out work in the person's
or undertaking
(ii) if the person who engages the
is a corporation—a
of the corporation; but
(b) does not include a person (the "householder")
who engages someone else to perform domestic duties at the premises where the
householder
" means a place where work is, has been, or is to be,
carried out by or for someone
a business or undertaking.
surveillance
if the person—
surveillance
personally; or
(b) causes someone else to
surveillance
optical surveillance device
(a) means a device capable of being used to record visually or observe an
activity; but
(b) does not include spectacles, contact lenses or a similar device used by a
person with impaired sight to overcome that impairment.
surveillance
surveillance
surveillance
surveillance device
surveillance device
surveillance device
or a tracking device;
9. Applying the above definitions, the cameras used by Mr
Martin were optical surveillance devices, both when used to record footage
when used to simply view Mr Hassen. The cameras are therefore also surveillance
devices. Accordingly, the use of the cameras
amounts to surveillance. It is
similarly axiomatic that Mr Hassen was a worker and Moto Garage was his employer
for the purpose
Workplace Privacy Act
. The work premises and other
places where Mr Hassen performed duties associated with his employment fell
within the term ‘workplace’.
However, in the absence of evidence
that the other places were usual workplaces for Mr Hassen, it has not been
established on the
balance of probabilities that they are not excluded by the
exception at
10. Accordingly,
imposed a requirement that any
use of a camera, as caused by Mr Hassen’s employer, to record or view Mr
Hassen while at the
work premises, needed to be done following and in accordance
with a notice give to Mr Hassen. As indicated above no such notice
11. Without listing all of the elements for the offence at
but nevertheless applying the default fault element for conduct as required by s
22(1) of the Criminal Code 2002 (ACT), it is arguable
that if it was proved that
the above surveillance was intentionally caused by Mr Hassen’s employer,
then the offence may be
established.
12. It is common ground that Moto
Garage, Mr Hassen’s employer, was simply not aware of the surveillance.
Consequently, it
is not established that Moto Garage had the requisite intention
to cause the surveillance. This is so, notwithstanding how intention
established for corporations under s 51 of the Criminal Code. Accordingly, I
find that it has not been established on the
balance of probabilities that Moto
Garage breached
Workplace Privacy Act
13. I note out of
completeness that Moto Garage may have been found to have breached the
, had there been reliable evidence establishing that Moto Garage had,
in some way, caused QBE Insurance to arrange the surveillance,
whether or not
such surveillance occurred in the workplace. While
requirements for surveillance in the workplace,
prohibits surveillance
outside of the workplace.
Did QBE Insurance breach
Workplace Privacy
14. The issue therefore moves to the enquiry about whether the
term ‘employer’ as used within
Workplace Privacy
includes QBE Insurance in the circumstances of this case. The parties did
not draw my attention to any authorities that may assist
with determining this
15. It was submitted on behalf of Mr Hassen that the
Workplace Privacy
was intended to prevent conduct of the type that has occurred in this case.
In support of that contention, reference was made to
parts of the Explanatory
Statement to the
Workplace Privacy Bill 2010
, which described the need to ensure
that employers inform and consult with employees on any surveillance that takes
place in the
workplace; and which recognised a balance between employees’
rights to privacy and business owners’ rights to take reasonable
protect their business and monitor their employees.
16. However, the
statement also noted that the Bill arose out of a concern that the surveillance
by employers of employees was unregulated
in the Territory and security cameras
were being installed within workplaces without the knowledge of employees.
17. It is apparent that the Act regulates the interaction between employers
and employees. It does not purport to regulate an employer’s
surveillance more generally, or an employee’s right to privacy more
generally. It is therefore not clear that the
Workplace Privacy Act
intended to prevent conduct of the type that has occurred in this
18. It was further submitted on behalf of Mr Hassen that by exercising
its subrogation rights, QBE Insurance was able to take steps
standing in the
shoes of the employer and therefore its actions in arranging the surveillance
was an activity caused by Mr Hassen’s
19. The insurance
contract between QBE Insurance and Moto Garage included the following provisions
of subrogation:
Insurer shall in respect of anything indemnified under this Policy, including
the bringing, defending, enforcing, or settling
of legal proceedings for the
benefit of the Insurer, be entitled to use the name of the Employer. The
Employer shall give all necessary
information and assistance, and forward all
documents to enable the Insurer to settle or resist any claim as the Insurer may
Insurer shall be entitled to use the name of the Employer in proceedings to
enforce, for the benefit of the Insurer, any order
made for costs or otherwise,
and shall have the right of subrogation, in respect of all rights which the
Employer may have against
a person or persons who may be responsible to the
Employer or otherwise in respect of any claim for any accident or disease
by this Policy, and the Employer shall as and when required execute any
necessary documents for the purpose of vesting such rights
20. While it is clear that QBE Insurance had the right to
bring, for its own benefit, the application in Moto Garage’s name,
existence of that right does not mean that every step taken by QBE Insurance in
relation to the claim, was done by exercising
that right. QBE Insurance
retained the capacity to take steps for its own purposes independent of the
right of subrogation, for
examples steps in relation to its relationship with
Moto Garage. Consistent with this, the instructions on behalf of QBE Insurance
to Verifact Investigations of 7 May 2018, makes no mention of QBE Insurance
giving those instructions pursuant to a subrogation right
nor makes any mention
of the current proceedings. Considering the relationship between QBE Insurance
and Moto Garage more broadly,
I do not accept that merely because QBE Insurance
had a right of subrogation, that conduct it engaged in can be attributed to Moto
Garage for all purposes, in particular offences; or that QBE Insurance assumes
all rights, responsibilities and duties of Moto Garage
as an employer. Put
another way, by commencing proceedings in Moto Garage’s name in April
2018, QBE Insurance did not assume
the responsibilities or duties of Moto Garage
that existed before taking that step, and did not automatically assume all
responsibilities
of Moto Garage that may arise after taking that step.
accept the submission made on behalf of Moto Garage, that a private agreement
cannot effect the interpretation of legislation,
in particular an offence
provision. However, a private agreement may of course lead to conduct or
circumstances that establish an
element of an offence.
22. As referenced
above, the term ‘employer’ is defined and relates to the person who
engages the worker to carry out
work in the person’s business.
Legislation Act 2001
(ACT) require me to prefer an
interpretation of the offence provisions that would best achieve the purpose of
Workplace Privacy Act
, and those provisions should be read in the context of
the Act as a whole.
23. Taking into account the purposes of the Act
described above, and noting the various arrangements provided within the Act, it
my view that the term ‘employer’ does not extend to QBE Insurance
either before or after QBE Insurance exercised its
right to commence these
proceedings. This is because, on its face, the definition of
‘employer’ would not include a
separate entity such as QBE
Insurance, and because the Act focuses on the interaction between employers and
employees, as those expressions
are ordinarily used, and not on the actions of
third parties, conducted without the knowledge of the employer. The purpose of
Act would therefore be best achieved by adopting the narrower
construction.
24. Accordingly, I find that it has not been established on the
balance of probabilities that QBE Insurance breached
If there was a breach of
Workplace Privacy Act
should the evidence be admitted?
25. Due to the above findings, it is not necessary for me to
exercise a discretion about whether or not to admit the evidence due
to it being
improperly or unlawfully obtained. However, out of completeness I note the
26. The test for the admissibility of evidence during an
arbitration before this court and under the
Workers Compensation Act
is provided
by reg 56(4) and (5) of the Workers Compensation Regulations 2002 (ACT). Those
provisions read:
Magistrates Court or a committee may inform itself about anything in the way it
considers appropriate.
(5) The Magistrates Court or a committee must act according to equity, good
conscience and the substantial merits of the matter being
arbitrated, without
regard to technicalities and legal form.
27. Equity and good conscience must be informed by the
established principles, although not necessarily the mechanics, of the law
relating to the rules of evidence.
Section 138
Evidence Act 2011
deals with circumstances where evidence is improperly or illegally obtained.
The test applied in such circumstances is the
balancing of two competing public
interests, namely the desirability of admitting the evidence, and the
desirability of not admitting
evidence that has been obtained in the way in
which the evidence was obtained. The former interest relates to the
desirability of
a party being able to put before the court relevant and cogent
evidence to assist the court in doing justice between the parties.
interest relates to the undesirable consequences that may follow curial approval
or encouragement of improper or illegal
conduct that occurring during the
acquisition of the evidence: see Bunning v Cross
[1978] HCA 22
at and Klein v
[1998] ACTSC 89.
Section 138(3)
provides a number of
considerations for the purpose of this balancing exercise. They are:
probative value of the evidence; and
(b) the importance of the evidence in the proceeding; and
(c) the nature of the relevant offence, cause of action or defence and the
nature of the subject matter of the proceeding; and
(d) the gravity of the impropriety or contravention; and
(e) whether the impropriety or contravention was deliberate or reckless;
(f) whether the impropriety or contravention was contrary to or inconsistent
with a right of a person recognised by the International
Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights; and
(g) whether any other proceeding (whether or not in a court) has been or is
likely to be taken in relation to the impropriety or contravention;
(h) the difficulty (if any) of obtaining the evidence without impropriety or
contravention of an Australian law.
29. For the purposes of the sixth consideration, Article 17 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights provides
relevantly:
one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy,
family, home or correspondence, nor to unlawful
attacks on his honour and
reputation.
has the right to the protection of the law against such interference or
30. Were I required to conduct the balancing exercise in this
matter, I would be minded to admit the evidence. This is due to the
significance nature of the evidence and the minor nature of the putative
contravention. The evidence would be of considerable value
to the court when
deciding the merits of the matter, and Moto Garage would be unlikely to obtain
equivalent evidence by alternative
means. Any putative contravention would have
been very much at the lower end of objective seriousness. The surveillance was
from locations open to the public and was not directed at any
personal, private or confidential activities of Mr Hassen or anyone
else. There
is no suggestion that any putative contravention was deliberate or
31. I make the following rulings:
1. The digital video disks
containing video images associated with the Verifact Investigations surveillance
reports of 27 December
2017, 14 March 2018, 11 May 2018 and 4 September 2018 be
admitted into evidence.
2. The observations by Mr Paul Martin of Mr Brett
Hassen, made through a camera, be admitted into evidence.
certify that the preceding thirty-one [31] numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Judgment of his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Sam Lynch
Date: 2 October 2018
Related Materials
RTF format (219 KB)
Signed PDF/A format