Re an Application by L for Admission as a Legal Practitioner [2015] ACTSCFC 1 (26 February 2015)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Re an Application by L for Admission as a Legal Practitioner
[2015] ACTSCFC 1
Hearing Date(s):
Murrell CJ, Refshauge and Burns JJ
L be admitted as a lawyer of this Court on the following
conditions:
(a) that he consult Dr Victoria Carr within 14 days of 26 February 2015 and
thereafter every three months for the next twelve months
or more frequently if
Dr Carr recommends it;
(b) that he authorise Dr Carr to report to the Law Society of the Australian
Capital Territory on his progress and any risk of relapse
identified to her;
(c) that he not apply within the next twelve months for admission as a lawyer to
any other jurisdiction without giving the relevant
admitting authority a copy of
these conditions; and
(d) that he give a copy of these conditions to any employer for whom his
admission as a lawyer is a requirement or desirable qualification
employment undertaken by him in the next twelve months.
L’s name be entered on the Roll of Practitioners of this
Principal Judgment
Catchwords:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – QUALIFICATIONS AND
– Legal practitioner – Fit and proper person to be
admitted – Suitability matters – Disclosure of criminal
– History of problems with alcohol – Admission to practice subject
to conditions
Legislation Cited:
Australian Capital Territory (SelfGovernment) Act 1988
Legal Profession Act 2006
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT)), rr 3065,
Cases Cited:
A Solicitor v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
216 CLR 253
Board of Examiners v XY
[2006] VSCA 190
In Re Bridgeman
[1934] St R Qd 1
In Re Davis
[1947] HCA 53
(1947) 75 CLR 409
In the Matter of an Application for
Admission as a Legal Practitioner
(1997) 195 LSJS 482
Prothonotary of
the Supreme Court of New South Wales v P
[2003] NSWCA 320
Application for Admission as a Legal Practitioner
[2014] ACTSCFC 4
Application for Admission as a Legal Practitioner
[2004] SASC 426
(2004) 90 SASR
[1979] VicRp 40
[1979] VR 381
[1878] VicLawRp 244
(1878) 4 VLR (L)
[1997] 1 Qd R 533
[1976] VicRp 38
Victorian Lawyers RPA Ltd v X
[2001] VSC 429
of Examiners
[2005] VSC 250
Zeims v the Prothonotary
Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
L (Applicant)
Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory (Respondent)
Representation:
Mr G Stretton SC (Applicant)
Mr M Phelps (Respondent)
Self Represented (Applicant)
Phelps Reid (Respondent)
File Number(s):
1. Being over the age of 18 years
Profession Act 2006
(ACT)) and having attained the approved academic
qualifications
(s 21(1)(a)
Legal Profession Act
and r 3065 of the
Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT)), and having satisfactorily completed the approved
practical legal training requirements
(s 21(1)(b)
Legal Profession Act
and r 3606 of the
Court Procedures Rules
), the Applicant, L, applied for
admission as a legal practitioner.
Legal Profession
, an applicant may not be admitted unless he or she is "a fit and proper
person to be admitted to the legal profession." That requires
an applicant to
disclose all matters described as "suitability matters" under
that may be relevant to a determination of the fitness and propriety of the
applicant for admission.
3. L made disclosure of a number of matters that
were of concern to the Court. As a result, on 12 December 2014 the Court
the application to a date to be fixed (see Re An Application for
Admission as a Legal Practitioner
[2014] ACTSCFC 4
, (the earlier decision)).
The application returned to court for a further hearing on 3 February 2015
when Mr G Stretton SC appeared
for the applicant and Mr M Phelps
for the Law Society.
4. The issue which had concerned the Court was the
difficulty that the Applicant clearly had in managing his consumption of
leading to him being arrested and detained for being intoxicated in
public twice in 2010, twice in 2011 and once in 2013. In addition,
convicted of the offence of driving with a high range prescribed concentration
of alcohol in January 2011, and for the same
offence in February 2013.
5. As set out in the earlier decision, the Applicant had sought professional
assistance for his alcohol misuse from a clinical psychologist,
Dr Victoria
Carr, who provided comprehensive reports annexed to L's affidavit and in support
of his Application for Admission. L
had attended for six sessions with
Dr Carr, commencing on 22 March 2013. Notwithstanding this assurance, it
is to be noted that
the most recent of the incidents where he was intoxicated in
public occurred after he had completed the six sessions with
6. As pointed out by Mr Stretton SC, it was important to
put that incident in context. The Applicant explained in his affidavit:
I committed to a course of abstinence from alcohol, which I successfully
maintained for six months after the drink-driving offence
in early 2013. After
this period of abstinence, I re-introduced alcohol carefully and moderately and
was guided by the insights
learned from my sessions with Dr Carr, my growing
maturity, and my resolute commitment to my studies during the period. I
outstanding results in all of my courses in 2013 and this was no small
achievement given the way in which the year began with the
drink-driving
incident. During September, I decided to reward myself and attend a
friend’s birthday party in the City. I
had not been out with my friends
since before the drink-driving offence of 2013. I had made prior arrangements
that night to go
became separated. As a result, and given we had consumed a large quantity
alcohol over the evening, we were unable to contact each other to carry through
on the plans we had made. I was also tired from
the early mornings and long
hours I had been devoting to my studies, and so I eventually fell asleep on a
bench at around midnight.
But around 1.00 am I was awoken by police and
directed to move on, however, I had no place to go given I was twenty-six
from Murrumbateman [where he was then residing] and a taxi would have
cost over $100 which I simply could not afford. I would have
taken this action,
and have departed the City, at a much earlier juncture if I had somewhere to
stay in Canberra. The police telephoned
my mother to see if she could pick me
up but she did not answer her phone because it was on silent mode and she did
not hear it.
The police tried to contact several of my friends on my behalf,
and at my suggestion, but this was equally to no avail. On this
police conveyed me to the watch house for my own
protection.
7. As was submitted, this incident, although involving an
excessive consumption of alcohol leading to an unsatisfactory outcome, was
different from, in particular, the drink driving offences, which not only showed
poor judgment but also criminality.
8. Having read the material provided by
the Applicant, initially the Full Court said in the earlier decision:
provisional view it is appropriate to delay his Application for Admission for a
further 12 months to enable him to demonstrate
that the changes he has made
are enduring, that this problematic period in his life is now a matter of
history and that the strategies
he has put in place together with his
professional advice are effective.
9. At the further hearing, L gave sworn evidence before us. He
explained that he had a troubled youth. His parents’ divorce
affected him
greatly and led to a difficult relationship with both of them. He lived with his
grandparents, who gave him stability,
until his uncle’s mental illness
forced him to leave their home and find shared accommodation. His co-tenants
were rarely
at home, which left him with a rather solitary life.
2009, he began a relationship with a fellow student; it blossomed and they
became engaged to be married. The relationship
broke down, however, by about
late 2010, but it did not finally end until March or April 2011. Although he
ended the relationship,
L found that very difficult and it affected him greatly.
It was a great disappointment to him.
11. Following that, he put enormous
energies into his studies for the next two years and achieved good academic
grades, but by August
2012 he was burnt out and took leave from study. He
returned to study in 2013 and achieved excellent academic results, including
high distinctions and a 74 per cent average. He completed his degree
in the first half of 2014 and his Graduate Diploma in Legal
Practice in the
second half of that year. He supported his application with a number of
references from academic staff who all attested
that he was an exceptional
student, "one of the brightest and most diligent students it is been my pleasure
to work with," as one
referee commented.
12. He frankly acknowledged the
problems he had encountered and the "reckless foolishness of his behaviour"
between 2010 and 2013.
He expressed great concern at his offending but referred
to the steps he had taken to address the problem. As noted above, he sought
counselling from a Clinical Psychologist. Dr Carr assisted him to address
the source of the problematic behaviour and encouraged
him to use the discipline
which had been so successful with his studies to moderate his alcohol
consumption.
13. By May 2013 she was able to report that he had restructured
his work and study responsibilities into a more sustainable pattern
minimised the chance of burnout and the likelihood of "binge drinking episodes".
In a further report in November 2014, Dr Carr
reported that he had been
able to reflect insightfully on his more recent incident, which enabled him to
develop better strategies
for such future contingencies.
14. Dr Carr
attested that L takes his responsibilities to the legal profession very
seriously and is determined not to jeopardise
his career or bring the profession
into disrepute. L had agreed with Dr Carr to return for further
counselling should he feel that
his ability to cope or to manage stress was
deteriorating. Dr Carr opined that L was not experiencing any
psychological disorders
at the time of her examination, was not demonstrating
any depression or anxiety symptomatology and that his behaviour did not meet
criteria for any substance use disorder. He was able to speak openly about how
he had, for some time, managed to balance his
health, work and general
15. The deponents of the affidavits L filed as to whether he was
a fit and proper person to be admitted to the legal profession were
all aware of
the matters he disclosed in his affidavit, two of the three having read it. The
affidavit was a very detailed account
of the matters disclosed. All of the
deponents, nevertheless, considered that L was a person of honesty and integrity
and that he
was of good fame and character. L's affidavit in support of
his Application for Admission annexed a number of other references from
staff, former school staff who had known him and a colleague. They were
uniformly supportive.
16. Under the
Legal Profession Act
Legal Practitioners Admission Board is required to report to the court as to
whether an applicant is eligible for admission
and is a fit and proper person to
be admitted and whether the application is in accordance with the admission
rules. The Court was
informed that the Board had sought an additional report
from Dr Carr, a copy of which was attached to L's affidavit, and that
members of the Board had interviewed him.
17. The Board provided a
Compliance Certificate certifying to the matters required to be certified under
Legal Profession Act
, which includes the assertion that L is
a fit and proper person to be admitted to the legal profession. The Board plays
an important
part in the governance of the legal profession and its views
derived from the accumulated experience of its members deserves respect
consideration. The significant place of such a Board is described by Stawell CJ
[1878] VicLawRp 244
(1878) 4 VLR (L) 509
at 511. It is an approach that has been since
followed. See Re Warren
[1976] VicRp 38
[1976] VR 406
at 409; Re Miller
[1979] VicRp 40
[1979] VR 381
384; Victorian Lawyers RPA Ltd v X
[2001] VSC 429
Board of Examiners
[2005] VSC 250
18. Nevertheless, as Doyle CJ
pointed out in In the Matter of an Application for Admission as a Legal
Practitioner
(1997) 195 LSJS 482
remains the function of the Court to decide for itself whether the statutory
requirement for admission are satisfied”.
19. The ultimate issue in this case is whether L has satisfied
the Court of his good character and fitness for admission. As Doyle
also in the South Australian decision, at 489:
By admitting a person as a
practitioner of the Court, this Court holds out that person to the public as
someone upon whom the public
can rely. The public must and does rely upon the
integrity of solicitors, as well as upon their technical skills. The public has
no choice. In addition, as I have already said, the courts themselves rely upon
the integrity of members of the legal profession.
They rely upon that integrity
not just when practitioners appear before the courts as advocates. The courts
also rely upon members
of the profession, when they deal with clients, to
support and to uphold the integrity of the legal processes. A practitioner who
lacks respect for the courts and for their orders is likely to damage the
integrity of the system of justice, by communicating that
lack of respect to
Another matter to take into account is the importance of the reputation of the
profession. None of us are perfect. But a profession
cannot survive unless the
public regards its members as trustworthy and honourable people. The Court has
to consider the impact
upon the public of the knowledge that a member of the
profession has committed offences. What I have just said is based upon what
said by King CJ in
In re Vadasz
(1988) 146 LSJS 455
, in a judgment with
which the other members of the Court concurred, and upon what was said by this
In re Harrison
(1992) 168 LSJS 84.
20. To the same effect, see Re Application for Admission as a
Legal Practitioner
[2004] SASC 426
(2004) 90 SASR 551
, at 555-6; [28].
21. There can be
no doubt that personal misconduct is relevant to the question of fitness for
admission to the legal profession, even
though it may not directly impinge on
the practice of the profession (see In Re Davis
[1947] HCA 53
(1947) 75 CLR 409
425). They are different, but personal misconduct is still relevant (see Zeims
v the Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New
South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
22. Thus it is necessary for the Court to consider the conduct,
or course of conduct, in question, and the light that it may throw
fitness of L to be admitted to the legal profession, in the context of the
impact on the public confidence in that profession
if a person with L's
antecedence is admitted. It is also necessary to have regard to the purposes of
the process of admission as
Legal Profession Act
the interests of the administration of justice and for the protection of
consumers of legal services, to provide a system under
which only applicants who
have appropriate academic qualifications and practical legal training and who
are otherwise fit and proper
persons, people to be admitted are qualified for
admission to the legal profession in the ACT;
23. It must be said that there are two important matters often
seen in the context of contested Applications for Admission, namely,
candour evidenced by non-disclosure of suitability matters or incidents, or
incidents, including offences, of dishonesty.
Neither of these are present in
this case. That is not decisive, however the presence of either or both of
these matters make the
successful persuasion of the court to admit the applicant
a more difficult task for the applicant. Nevertheless, misuse of drugs
serious matter which is to be taken seriously by the courts, as pointed out by
Young CJ, with whom Meagher and Tobias JJA agreed,
in Prothonotary of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales v P
[2003] NSWCA 320
. This must
include the serious misuse of alcohol, which is also a drug.
provisional view of the Court was that the matters disclosed by L were not such
as to debar him from admission, so long as
it could be assured that he had been
able to successfully manage his propensity to misuse alcohol. It seemed,
provisionally, that
a delay of about a year was appropriate to assess that. On
the hearing, however, the Court was taken to a more detailed analysis
chronology and the steps taken by L, including the success he has had. It also
had the opportunity to hear from him personally.
25. The Law Society of
Australian Capital Territory appeared and did not oppose the application. Like
the Legal Practitioners Admission
Board, the Law Society is an important part of
the proper regulation of the profession. As with the Board, the view of the Law
cannot be determinative, but its view is also deserving of high respect
and consideration.
26. It was further pointed out that there will be severe
financial consequences for L if the delay that has been suggested is implemented
and that his present state of reform and ability to manage his alcohol abuse and
avoid consequent breaches of the law may mean such
a delay is a disproportionate
response. This is supported by the possibility of putting in place some
mechanism to regulate L's
membership of the profession to prevent any repetition
of likely relapse.
27. Two possibilities were canvassed. One is
conditional admission. This was available in South Australia and considered in
South Australian case. The other is to accept an undertaking from L which,
of course, is a solemn promise to the Court, breach of
which is contempt. This
was the course taken in Prothonotary of Supreme Court of New South Wales v P.
28. The Court set out matters that could be included as conditions to
admission or as undertakings, these were:
1. That the Applicant not consume
alcohol for a period of 12 months;
2. That the Applicant consult Dr Victoria
Carr within 14 days of his admission and thereafter:
a. Every 3 months for
the next 12 months, or
b. More frequently if Dr Carr recommends.
the Applicant authorise Dr Carr to report to the Law Society of the ACT on the
Applicant’s progress and any risk of
relapse identified by her.
the Applicant not apply for admission to any other jurisdiction without giving
the relevant admitting authority a copy of
conditions/undertakings.
5. That the Applicant give a copy of these
conditions/undertakings to any employer for whom his admission is a requirement
or a desirable
qualification.
29. The Court invited submissions on:
whether the court has power to impose conditions on an admission; and
if so, whether these conditions were appropriate.
Both L and the Law
Society made submissions. Both submitted that the Court had power to impose
conditions on admission. In Re Bridgeman
[1934] St R Qd 1
at 9 it was
said that the court has a power to admit a practitioner conditionally or
unconditionally. This decision was followed
on that point in
[1997] 1 Qd R 533
30. The Court was referred
to two other decisions, but neither seemed to provide authority for the
propositions asserted that the
court has power to impose conditions on
admission, see Re B at 378 and Board of Examiners v XY
[2006] VSCA 190
31. I note that the
Legal Profession Act
, by regulating the admission of
persons to the legal profession, has not abolished, in so far as it can in the
Australian Capital Territory (SelfGovernment) Act 1988
(Cth), the inherent jurisdiction of the court which has its source in the
Charter of Justice. This is in contrast with the position
in New South Wales as
explained in A Solicitor v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
216 CLR 253
32. In those circumstances, the Court is satisfied
that it has power to impose conditions on admission.
33. The next question is
as to the conditions. Neither L nor the Law Society opposed conditions 2, 3, 4
or 5. Both submitted that
condition 1 was not necessary and may be "unduly
restrictive". L submitted that condition 1 was contrary to the recommendation
Dr Carr and where condition 2 required continued consultation with her,
the condition was "inconsistent and inappropriate". The
Law Society pointed to
the comments in Dr Carr's report of 4 November 2014 that moderate
controlled use of alcohol is more sustainable
for L than total abstinence and
enforced period of total abstinence may be detrimental to the Applicant's
ability to control his use of alcohol into the future.
The Applicant has
demonstrated an ability to restrain himself to moderate drinking. His last
serious alcohol-related offence having
occurred two years
34. The real vice to which condition 1 was directed is, of
course, were L to consume alcohol to excess. That would clearly be a violation
of condition 1 but if too restrictive could be limited to excessive drinking.
The real difficulty is in defining "excess" so that
L, Dr Carr and his
employer would know when the condition had been breached.
35. In any event,
the supervision of L to protect from drinking alcohol to excess, would probably
not be any more effective under
an amended condition 1 than is provided for in
conditions 2 and 5.
36. Having regard to all the circumstances, the Court is
satisfied that it would be appropriate to admit L, conditionally upon conditions
in accordance with those numbered 2, 3, 4 and 5 as set out above.
Court then proceeded to admit L as a lawyer of the Court subject to
conditions].
certify that the preceding thirty-seven [37] numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Judgment of their Honours Chief
Justice Murrell, Refshauge
and Burns JJ.
Date: 14 April 2015
RTF format (261 KB)
Signed PDF/A format