Nutt and Environment Protection Authority [2008] ACTAAT 23 (1 October 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: NUTT AND
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY
[2008] ACTAAT 23
(1 OCTOBER 2008)
Catchwords:
Water Resources Act 2007
– fee payable for licence
to take water for agricultural purposes – reduction of fee under
competition equalisation scheme
– jurisdiction of Tribunal to review
decision as to amount of payment under scheme.
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1989, ss 24, 43
Environment
Protection Act 1997
Legislation Act 2001
Resources Act 1998 (repealed)
Water Resources Act 2007
Mr M H Peedom, President
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/53
GENERAL DIVISION )
JOHN ADRIAN NUTT
ENVIRONMENT
DISMISSAL OF APPLICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 43(5) OF THE
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL ACT 1989
Mr M H Peedom, President
appears to the Tribunal that the decision in respect of which the application
has been made to the Tribunal for review is not reviewable
by the Tribunal.
to section 43(5) of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1989, the Tribunal
dismisses the application without proceeding
to review the decision.
...................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/53
GENERAL DIVISION )
JOHN ADRIAN NUTT
ENVIRONMENT
REASONS FOR DECISION
1 October 2008 Mr M H Peedom, President
From 20 April 2000 the applicant was continuously the holder of a water
allocation for agricultural irrigation in respect of land
of which he is a
lessee at 18 Kallaroo Road, Pialligo (
“the property”
allocation was issued under the Water Resources Act 1998 (repealed)
“the repealed Act”
) and specified 94ML per annum as the
volume of water allocated.
2. The repealed Act was repealed by the
Water Resources Act 2007
) with effect from 1 August 2007. Pursuant to
section 110
of the WRA the applicant’s water allocation continued in force
and, after the commencement of the WRA, he was initially issued
with a licence
which was expressed to be under
section 28(1)
of the WRA.
Section 28(1)
it an offence to take water from a place without a licence. Authority for the
issue of a licence is, in fact, contained in
of the WRA. The
licence, which was undated, specified the date of its grant as 10 December 1999.
It was expressed to licence the
taking of 72ML of water by pumping it from the
Molonglo River for the purpose of agricultural irrigation until 31 December
The licence was amended on 7 September 2008 to increase the licensed
volume of water to 74ML pursuant to
of the WRA. The amended licence was
made subject to general conditions and a number of additional specific
conditions.
3. During each of the calendar years 2000 to 2006 the applicant had been
sent a form of ‘Application for Competition Equalisation
Payment’ in
respect of the water taken in accordance with the licences issued to him during
that period. He completed each
form and submitted it to the respondent. It
appears that in rendering the applicant a tax invoice for payment of each annual
fee there was deducted from the amount otherwise payable an amount equal
to the competition equalisation payment (
) applied for
by the applicant and approved for payment to him.
4. The Tribunal was informed that a competition equalisation scheme which
involved the payment of part of the fees payable by eligible
licensees under the
WRA was introduced as a budget initiative included in the 1999-2000 Budget Paper
No. 3 – Budget Overview.
The Budget Paper included the following
explanation of the scheme:
To assist rural irrigators competing with business in NSW, a competition
equalisation payment scheme has been adopted which will reduce
abstraction charge to the equivalent of NSW charges.
5. Despite the reference in the Budget Paper to the adoption of a scheme,
the Tribunal was informed by the current manager of Water
Resources, Department
of Environment and Recreation, that the ACT Government had no record of such a
scheme or of its adoption apart
from the form of application for payment
completed and submitted by the applicant and the guidelines contained in that
6. The form of application included the following statements:
Under the Water Resources Act 1998, persons who held a licence to take
water were required to pay the water abstraction charge of
$0.25 per kilolitre
on licensed use except where that use related to groundwater taken from a lease
which was dated before 11 December
1998. Under the
Water Resources Act 2007
which took effect from 1 August 2007, persons who hold a licence to take water
are required to pay the water abstraction charge
of $0.25 per kilolitre on all
licensed use. For agricultural irrigators in direct competition with irrigators
in NSW a competition
equalisation payment (CEP) can be claimed which reduces the
charge to that charged in NSW. To be eligible for the CEP the water
normally be on a rural lease and fall into one of the categories resulting in a
net charge of 0.216 cents per kilolitre
to agricultural irrigators.
If you consider that you may be eligible for the CEP and wish to apply for
it you should complete this application form and provide
it to Water Resources
at the address below.
7. Notes attached to the form stated:
Before Water Resources approves the Competition Equalisation Payment to
any applicant, Water Resources must first be satisfied that:
fell within one or more of the categories listed on this application
attempt to produce the relevant agricultural produce was made;
The produce
was intended for sale and profit;
The amount of
water claimed to be used within one or more of the categories listed was in fact
The lease to
which the application relates is a rural lease or the production of the
agricultural produce is a permitted use on the
In addition to the information provided by this application
form, information already held by Water Resources particularly that held
relation to the relevant licence, may be used for these purposes. Additional
information may also be sought from the applicant.
Eligibility for the Competition Equalisation Payment is limited to the
production of agricultural produce. It does not include water
used in the
processing or sale of agricultural produce (including retail nurseries) or for
the irrigation of parks, sports grounds,
golf courses, and equestrian
facilities.
8. On 8 April 2008 the applicant submitted a CEP application form specifying
lucerne, vines and olives as the forms of agricultural
use in respect of which
he sought a CEP for the whole of the licence fee payable by him. By letter
dated 16 May 2008 the respondent
advised the applicant that he had only provided
sufficient evidence to justify a payment for water use in respect of the 10% of
water use which he attributed to the growing of lucerne. He was sent an
invoice for an administration fee payable under the WRA
(which he does not
challenge) and for 90% of the total water usage fee, there having been deducted
the 10% component of the fee attributable
to the growing of lucerne.
9. The application for review of decision lodged by the applicant with the
Tribunal identified the refusal of the respondent to approve
90% of the CEP
application as the decision which he wished the Tribunal to review. He
contended that such a decision involved the
imposition of a condition on his
licence pursuant to
of the WRA or the amendment of an existing
condition of his licence pursuant to
of the WRA. Alternatively, he
submitted that the respondent had amended the conditions of a water access
entitlement granted to
him pursuant to
of the WRA.
10. Decisions made pursuant to
made reviewable by the Tribunal by paragraphs (a), (d) and (n), respectively, of
of the WRA.
The legislation
of the WRA provides for the grant to applicants of a water access
entitlement of an amount of surface or groundwater stated in the
entitlement. A
water access entitlement can be made subject to conditions, examples of which
include the purpose of use of the water,
the area in which it may be used and
the place from which it may be taken (see
of the WRA).
of the WRA provides:
24 Water access entitlement—amendment
(1) The authority may amend a water access entitlement, including by
imposing a condition on, or amending an existing condition of,
entitlement.
(2) However, the authority may amend an entitlement only if—
(a) the authority has given the holder of the entitlement written notice
of the proposed amendment; and
(b) the notice states that written comments on the proposal may be made to
the authority before the end of a stated period of at least
14 days after the
day the notice is given to the holder; and
(c) the authority has considered any comments made before the end of the
stated period.
(3) Subsection (2) does not apply if the holder applied for, or agreed in
writing to, the proposed amendment.
(4) The amendment of an entitlement takes effect on—
(a) the date on which notice of the amendment is given to the holder;
(b) if a later date is stated in the notice—that date.
(5) A condition imposed or amended by the authority must not be
inconsistent with any condition prescribed by regulation that applies
entitlement.
(6) This section does not apply to an amendment made under
13. Subject to a number of exceptions which do not apply in the
circumstances of this case, it is an offence to take water from a
place without
(section 28).
A licence is only able to be granted to a person who is
the holder of a water access entitlement or other specified entitlement
exempt from a requirement to have such an entitlement and other specified
requirements are satisfied
(section 30).
provides for the imposition of conditions on a licence as
31 Licence to take water—conditions
(1) A licence to take water is subject to any condition—
(a) prescribed by regulation; or
(b) imposed on the licence by the authority.
Examples of conditions to which licence may be subject
1 that records must be kept
that a water meter must be installed, operated and maintained
3 that information about compliance with licence conditions must be given
the authority
4 that monitoring and testing must be done after water is taken
5 that places from which water is taken must be marked in a stated
water may only be taken at a stated rate (which may be different for different
days of the year) 7 that not more than a stated
maximum amount of water may be
water must not be taken from a waterway at a time when there is no or little
flow in the waterway
9 that the authority must be allowed to conduct regular routine
inspections
Note 1 The licence is also subject to any condition that applies to a
water access entitlement on which the licence is based (see
Note 2 An example is part of the Act, is not exhaustive and may extend,
but does not limit, the meaning of the provision in which
it appears (see
Legislation Act
(2) A condition imposed by the authority must not be inconsistent with
any condition prescribed by regulation that applies to the
Section 55(1)
55 Licences—amendment
(1) The authority may amend a licence, including by imposing a condition
on, or amending an existing condition of, the licence.
The amendment of a licence is subject to the same requirements as those which
are imposed by
section 24(2)
to (5) of the WRA in respect of a water access
entitlement (see
section 55(2)
to (5) WRA).
16. The Tribunal does not have general review powers. Its jurisdiction to
review a decision of a government agency is dependent
upon jurisdiction being
conferred on it by an enactment and the making of a decision pursuant to the
enactment which confers jurisdiction
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act 1989).
17. It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that the CEP scheme
operated administratively and independently of the WRA with
funds allocated for
the purpose by the Appropriation Act for each relevant year. Accordingly, any
decision made under the CEP scheme
did not involve the making of a decision
under the WRA and any such decision was not made reviewable by section 94 of the
18. On behalf of the applicant it was submitted that the refusal of the
respondent to approve a CEP in relation to the whole of the
applicant’s
licence fee involved the imposition by implication, if not expressed, of a
condition of the applicant’s licence
or an amendment of the conditions
subject to which it and/or his water access entitlement were held. Section 106
of the WRA, it
was noted, conferred a discretion on the respondent to cancel or
suspend a water access entitlement or licence for non-payment of
the applicable
fee. In that event, it was argued, the refusal to approve payment of the whole
of the CEP involved the imposition
or variation of a condition subject to which
the entitlement and licence were held.
19. In support of the applicant’s submission reliance was placed upon
the requirement of
section 139
Legislation Act 2001
for a purposive
approach to interpretation as justifying a broad characterisation of a
“decision” for the purpose of
the WRA and section 24 of the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act and judicial authority that supported the
taking of a liberal view
of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Reliance was
also placed by the applicant on the requirement of
Environment
Protection Act 1997
that the respondent exercise its functions under the WRA in
accordance with the objects of that Act which include achieving effective
integration of environmental, economic and social considerations in
decision-making processes.
20. The issue which the applicant, by his appeal, seeks to have the Tribunal
address relates to the quantum of the fees charged for
the water which he draws
under licence from the Molonglo River. Section 107 of the WRA confers the power
to determine fees for the
WRA on the Minister. In pursuance of that power the
Minister made a determination dated 31 July 2007 entitled ‘Water Resources
(Fees) Determination 2007 (No. 1)’. The determination does not specify a
fee for the purpose of section 24 of the WRA. It
imposes an administration fee
for a licence issued under section 30 of the WRA which is unaffected by any CEP.
It also imposes a
fee under section 30 of $0.25 per kilolitre in respect of the
volume of water licensed to be taken by the applicant from the Molonglo
21. To the extent to which the decision in question has any impact upon the
applicant it is in relation to the fee payable by him
for the usage of water
under his licence. It has no impact upon his water access entitlement. No
suggestion was made that the respondent
purported to amend the applicant’s
entitlement in accordance with section 24(2) of the WRA. There is no basis for
that the decision has the effect of amending the applicant’s
water access entitlement by imposing a condition on it or by amending
existing condition of it or otherwise. Accordingly, the conclusion to be
reached is that the decision was not made under section
24 of the WRA.
22. In relation to the applicant’s licence, any fee applicable to it
does not become payable pursuant to the exercise of any
statutory power by the
respondent. The fee is made payable in consequence of a determination made by
the Minister pursuant to section
107 of the WRA. It does not involve the
imposition of a condition imposed by the respondent pursuant to section 31 of
Nor is the fee made payable in consequence of the Minister’s
determination capable of amendment by the respondent pursuant
to section 55 of
the WRA. In the absence of any suggestion of a delegation of the power of the
Minister under section 107 to the
respondent, it would be beyond the power of
the respondent to interfere with the exercise of that power.
23. I do not accept the application’s submission that, because section
106 of the WRA authorised suspension or cancellation
of a licence for
non-payment of a fee payable in relation to it, the fee levied by the respondent
involved the imposition of a condition
on the licence. Part 6 of the WRA makes
the contravention of a condition of a licence a disciplinary offence subject,
inter alia,
to disciplinary action including the suspension or cancellation of
the licence. Section 106 of the WRA authorises the respondent
to suspend or
cancel a licence for non-payment of a licence fee. Section 106 of the WRA would
be otiose if non-payment of a licence
fee was to be regarded as a condition of a
24. Furthermore, the power under section 107 together with the
regulation-making power in section 109 of the WRA authorise the making
comprehensive regulations by the Executive in relation to fees including their
payment, collection and recovery, waiver, postponement
or refund (completely or
partly) and anything else relating to fees (see section 58
Legislation Act
Any purported exercise of these powers by the respondent would be beyond its
power and invalid. It would, therefore, be beyond
the power of the Tribunal to
make a decision which relieved the applicant of his obligation to pay the
licence fee determined by
the Minister pursuant to
section 107
of the WRA.
25. It seems to me, in any event, based upon the information made available
to the Tribunal, that neither the CEP that was approved
for payment to the
applicant nor the amount that was not approved, involved the making of a
decision under any provision of the WRA.
The scheme pursuant to which the
decision sought to be reviewed was made, if it had a statutory basis, was not
one that has any
identifiable right of review as required by section 24 of the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act.
26. The decision sought to be reviewed by the applicant is not reviewable by
the Tribunal. The application for review of decision
should therefore be
PUBLICATION DETAILS
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by Member's
________________________________________________________________________
JOHN ADRIAN NUTT
RESPONDENT:
ENVIRONMENT
PROTECTION AUTHORITY
PARTIES JOINED:
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
MS J MUSSETT
PARTIES JOINED:
SOLICITORS: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
ACT GOVERNMENT
PARTIES JOINED:
OTHER: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
PARTIES JOINED:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
MR M H PEEDOM, PRESIDENT
DATE/S OF HEARING:
SEPTEMBER 2008
DATE OF DECISION:
______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (86.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format