Woodburn v NE [2023] ACTCC 2 (22 November 2023)
CHILDRENS COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Woodburn v NE
[2023] ACTCC 2
Hearing Date:
7-10, 15 November 2023
Decision Date:
Special Magistrate Christensen
No case submission rejected.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
compounding offence – particulars – test on a no case submission
– circumstantial evidence
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld) s 133
Criminal Code 2006
(ACT) ss 18, 56, 133, 716
Legislation Act 2001
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Cases Cited:
Bakes v Alexander
[2022] ACTMC 10
Case Stated by DPP (No 2 of
[1993] SASC 4152
(1993) 70 A Crim R 323
CDPP v Bradley
[2009] ACTCA
DPP (NSW) v Elskaf
[2012] NSWSC 21
Garay v The Queen (No 3)
[2023] ACTCA 2
George (a pseudonym) v R
[2021] NSWCCA
Hamilton v DPP
[2020] NSWSC 1745
May v O’Sullivan
[1955] HCA 38
Monaghan v Calatzis
[2021] ACTSC
Murphy v Helmling
[2022] ACTMC 1
R v Beowulf (No 2)
[2010] ACTSC 35
R v Masina (No 3)
[2008] HCA 39
(Criminal Court of Appeal of New South Wales, 7 July 1997)
Robert Watt
[2019] ACTMC 3
Saunders Civilbuild Pty Ltd v SafeWork New South Wales
[2023] NSWCCA
Texts Cited:
Leader-Elliott,
The Commonwealth Criminal Code – A Guide for
Practitioners
(March 2002)
Parliamentary Counsel’s Committee,
Parliament of Australia,
Model Criminal Code
Edition, 28
Michael Ward,
Criminal Law and Practice
(Volume II,
M Woodburn (Informant)
NE (Young Person)
Representation:
J Melloy (Informant)
T Taylor (Young Person)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Hugo Law (Young Person)
File Number:
CH 1468 of 2023
SPECIAL MAGISTRATE
CHRISTENSEN
REASONS FOR DECISION:
Introduction
is charged pursuant to s 716 of the
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT) (Criminal
Code) – an offence titled ‘Compounding of offence’.
is alleged that between 8 and 13 May 2022, NE offered to provide a benefit to
JV, and that he did so with the intention that JV
would withhold information or
provide false or misleading information in relation to the commission of an
way of particulars provided in advance of the hearing, the prosecution
particularised that the offence the intention related to
was an offence by an
adult person of committing an act of indecency upon a person under 16, namely
prosecution alleged that NE contacted JV over a social media platform, Snapchat,
and offered to give her $500 to make a statement
to ‘help out’ the
adult person, who was charged with the act of indecency, and to say ‘nah,
it didn’t happen...to
get him out’.
matter has proceeded to date to hearing over 6 days on 7, 8, 9, 10, 15 and 16
November 2023. The prosecution called three witnesses,
as well as adduced
documentary evidence.
716(1) of the Criminal Code
Compounding of offence
(1) A person commits an offence if—
(a) the person—
(i) provides a benefit to someone else; or
(ii) causes a benefit to be provided to someone else; or
(iii) offers to provide, or promises to provide, a benefit to someone else;
(iv) causes an offer of the provision of a benefit, or a promise of the
provision of a benefit, to be made to someone else; and
(b) the person does so with the intention that the other person or a third
person will—
(i) conceal the commission of an offence; or
(ii) not start, or discontinue or delay, a prosecution for an offence; or
(iii) withhold information, or provide false or misleading information, in
relation to the commission of an offence; or
(iv) obstruct or hinder the investigation of an offence by law enforcement
prosecution submits that the elements to be proved beyond reasonable doubt are
(a) NE made an offer to someone else;
(b) NE intended to make the offer;
(c) The offer was to provide a benefit to someone else;
(d) NE was reckless that the offer was to provide a benefit to someone else; and
(e) At the time of making the offer, NE intended that the other person would
withhold information, or provide false or misleading
information, in relation to
the commission of an offence.
Application
is made at the close of the prosecution case of there being no case to answer.
It is submitted on behalf of NE that there
is no evidence to establish element
(e) as described above.
No Case Submission: Law
preliminary matter to consider is the law that is to be applied on a no case
submission at the summary level. There is a surprising
absence of clarity by way
of reported decisions on this in the ACT. Perhaps though that is simply
reflective of it being uncontroversial
and that the law in this regard is
considered well-settled.
prosecution submitted, and I observe that one decision of the ACT Magistrates
Court has provided (see
Bakes v Alexander
[2022] ACTMC 10)
that the key
features of the test are as set out by Murrell CJ in
R v Beowulf (No 2)
[2019] ATSC 82 at [8] – [15] (
Beowulf (No 2))
. I am cautious to
apply the test in these terms as it is apparent that there has historically been
a distinction as to the test to
be applied when sitting as a magistrate or a
judge-alone, to when a no case decision has been made when a jury is the trier
as was the case in
Beowulf (No 2).
I accept though, as was
submitted by the parties, it may ultimately be a distinction of no real
difference.
said that, there is a distinction in that such an application in the Supreme
Court engages with the application of
Crimes Act 1900
(Crimes Act). No legislative equivalent applies in the Magistrate’s, or
the Childrens’ Court, that I could identify,
Magistrates Court Act 1930
(ACT) suggests a procedure for the hearing of
an indictable offence dealt with summarily that requires any evidence in the
case to be heard before the court decides the information.
regard to what appears to be established practice that a no case submission can
be made and determined by a summary court,
I will proceed to do so in the
absence of a submission to the contrary. And the test that will be applied will
be by reference to
the test provided by the common law, focused on authorities
that have considered the applicable test when the trier is one of both
law in a summary jurisdiction.
Authorities
that provide what that is in the ACT are, as already indicated, sparse. This is
particularly so as to the test that an
ACT Magistrate is to apply, as opposed to
an ACT judge sitting alone for which there are a number of authorities: see, eg,
Garay v The Queen (No 3)
[2023] ACTCA 2
[2010] ACTSC 35.
am hesitant to apply such authorities to the issue here due to the distinction
may provide. Rather, I have found useful the
authority of
DPP (NSW) v Elskaf
[2012] NSWSC 21
decision that the defence submitted and I rely on, and one which provides at
The legal principles applicable by the Magistrate at
the conclusion of the evidence called by the prosecution in a summary proceeding
are well known, but is worthwhile restating them in a succinct way:
(a) at the end of the prosecution evidence, it is open to a defendant to make a
"no case" submission, which is determined by the
Court as a matter of law: Cox v
(1994) 12 WAR 12
at 14; Amalgamated Television Services Pty Ltd v Marsden
[2001] NSWCA 32
122 A Crim R 166
per Ipp AJA (Powell and Giles JJA
(b) the standard of proof to be applied in a no case submission is proof beyond
a reasonable doubt: R v Murphy
(1985) 4 NSWLR 42
(c) the question to be determined is whether on the evidence, the defendant
could be lawfully convicted of the offence charged: May
v O'Sullivan
at 658; R v Serratore
[1999] NSWCCA 377
(1999) 48 NSWLR 101
per Dunford J (Greg James J agreeing);
(d) the determination of a no case submission is based upon all of the
prosecution's evidence, if accepted, and
(i) taken at its highest and strongest: DPP v Lee
[2006] NSWSC 270
Wunderwald at [28];
(ii) even if it is tenuous, inherently weak or vague: Doney v The Queen
171 CLR 207
(iii) unless the evidence is inherently incredible: Haw Tua Tau v Public
[1982] 1 AC 136
at 151; and
(iv) unless the evidence is manifestly self-contradictory or the product of a
disorderly mind: R v Bilick
(1984) 36 SASR 321
at 337; Cox at 15; Marsden at
(e) a no case submission should not be rejected even if the prosecution case is
a weak one, because the finding that there is a prima
facie case, calls upon the
defendant to make answer to that case. There is no reason why a weakness in the
prosecution case may not
be eked out by something in the case for the defence:
Zanetti v Hill
[1962] HCA 62
108 CLR 433
at 442-443 per Kitto J; Wunderwald at
(f) a no case submission is to be kept distinct from any subsequent decision
involving a question of fact, namely whether to accept
the evidence of the
prosecution witnesses or any of them, beyond a reasonable doubt. This
distinction is no empty formality: DPP
v Lee at [32].
observe that
has been applied in at least one decision of the ACT
Magistrates Court:
Murphy v Helmling
[2022] ACTMC 1.
And the test as
being with reference to whether there is a prima facie case to answer, as
provided by
May v O’Sullivan
[1955] HCA 38
been applied:
Robert Watt v KC
[2019] ACTMC 3
and see also Ward,
Criminal Law and Practice,
1996, Volume II at [2035] and [1065].
assessment that is involved with a no case submission where there is a
circumstantial prosecution case is also of relevance to
consider here. The
authorities make clear that for the purposes of this assessment, the trier of
law is required to take into account
all inferences most favourable to the
prosecution which could reasonably be drawn from the primary facts, with this
not involving
a decision whether any possible hypotheses consistent with
innocence are reasonably open. The enquiry at this stage is ‘whether
reasonable mind could reach a conclusion of guilty beyond reasonable doubt and
therefore exclude any competing hypotheses as not
reasonably open on the
evidence’: per King CJ in
Case Stated by DPP (No 2 of 1993)
[1993] SASC 4152
70 A Crim R 323
at 327, applying what was said by Jordan CJ in
[1922] HCA 4
at 255-6. This authority has been applied in the
CDPP v Bradley
[2009] ACTCA 5
, a reference appeal concerned with
the consideration that occurs pursuant to
Despite the apparent focus of that appeal, I cannot identify any reason why I
ought not approach the determination of the prosecution’s
circumstantial
evidence at the no case stage with that principle in mind. I also observe that
to do so is consistent with what has
been said in some of the authorities relied
then to the evidence that relates to the particular element the subject of the
no case submission.
the outset, it is relevant to observe that no submission is made at this stage
that the evidence is incapable of establishing
NE is the person making the
communications. I emphasise that whether this is proved beyond reasonable doubt
is not conceded, but
for present circumstances, it will be assumed that it can
be established that NE made the communications.
also observe that the prosecution particulars, as provided to the defence in
advance of the hearing, were that the communication
was over the social media
platform, Snapchat. Those particulars did not reference any other
communications as relied upon for the
purposes of the offer being made. The
prosecution opening set out reliance on additional communications, this being a
call that KW
was said to receive over WhatsApp. It is not certain that the
prosecution can rely on these additional particulars in the circumstances
this matter, but, for present consideration, the court’s determination
will take into account all of the evidence that the
prosecution submit is
relevant and admissible as to this element.
Preliminary Legal
Issue as to Element (e)
preliminary issue is how this element is to be understood and interpreted.
element does not require in terms that proof of knowledge of the commission of
an offence was committed by the other person. But
it does require that NE has an
intention at the time of making the offer in relation to the commission of an
offence. The prosecution
submitted that intention for the purposes of this
element has the meaning as provided in s 18(2) of the
Criminal Code
is, it is an intention in relation to a result, and that intention in this
context means that –
A person has intention in relation to a
result if the person means to bring it about or is aware that it will happen in
the ordinary
course of events.
found this submission difficult to reconcile with the prosecution submission
that the element is one of ulterior intention, if what
is meant by that is that
it is an element of an intention to achieve an objective which is not a physical
element of any offence.
At least one view, as I understand it, is that an
ulterior intention is not defined with reference to the
Criminal Code
but rather with reference to ordinary usage and common law: Leader-Elliott,
The Commonwealth Criminal Code – A Guide for Practitioners
2002) p 61.
of how the element is labelled, the pertinent issue though becomes whether
NE’s knowledge is relevant in considering
this element. When I say
knowledge, I am not importing the meaning of knowledge as defined in s 19 for
the purposes of a fault element
Criminal Code
. But rather, to
establish that NE meant to bring about the conduct of KW in relation to an
offence, it necessitates that he had a
level of knowledge of there being an
offence. That is, NE’s intention at the time of making the offer is in
relation to the
commission of an offence. It is not an intention that is
occurring in a vacuum, absence of knowledge of any apparent wrongdoing by
other person. The notion that ‘knowledge or belief is often relevant to
intention’ appears uncontroversial:
[2008] HCA 39
He Kaw Teh v The Queen
[1985] HCA 43
(1985) 157 CLR 523
follows that the determination in respect to this element necessitates a
determination as to what NE’s knowledge or belief
was as to there being an
Statutory Construction and Material Particular
before I move to the evidence in relation to the alleged knowledge or belief, it
is necessary to pause and observe another
issue that arose in relation to this
element. That is, what is meant by ‘an offence’ in s
716(1)(b)(iii).
not insignificant period of time during the hearing was spent ventilating the
meaning of this element with reference to whether
the prosecution must prove
that the communication was in relation to a ‘specific offence’, or
rather whether it was sufficient
that it was in commission to ‘an
offence’, being ‘any offence’. Inextricably linked in this
exercise of statutory
interpretation was whether the prosecution having named an
offence in the consent to prosecute, that of an offence of act of indecency
child under 16 (the named offence), and to have referred to the named offence in
the particulars provided in advance of the
hearing, meant that it was a material
particular such that it had to be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
parties provided helpful submissions in this regard. It ultimately though
becomes what was a very interesting intellectual exercise
that does not require
resolution to determine the issue at this stage. Given though the attention paid
to it during the hearing,
it is relevant for this court to make some
observations as to how this element ought to be interpreted, acknowledging of
course that
there are limitations to the significance of a view formed by a
court, presided over by a Special Magistrate, sitting on the north
side of Lake
Burley Griffin.
seems to me that an offence contrary to s 716 does not necessarily require that
the prosecution prove that the intention relates
to a specified offence. The
Explanatory Statement for the provision, relied upon by both parties in support
of their respective submissions,
interchangeably uses language of ‘an
offence’ or ‘the offence’, but does not otherwise reflect an
legislative purpose in this regard. There is otherwise seemingly no
judicial consideration of the provision, in particular the ACT
provision, or
consideration that is not related to charges brought in a context of private
prosecutions by vexatious litigants, that
is available to assist. I observe that
the equivalent provision in the
Crimes Act 1914
more express in the statutory language as to a requirement that there is a
specified offence than the ACT provision is. I also
observe that the legislative
history to the offence, as set out at [7.5.4] of the
Model Criminal Code
Report, Chapter 7, p 141, suggests an apparent deliberate
departure in the ACT from an offence provision limited in scope as to the
of offence that can be said to be compounded. This report includes a
recommendation of reference to the Griffith Code version
of the provision. I
observe that the Queensland equivalent, s 133 of the
Criminal Code Act
(Qld), is directed towards indictable offences and is inclusive of an
aspect of the historical purpose of the provision as to benefits
agreement to discontinue a prosecution. The ACT provision, contrary to at least
the jurisdictions mentioned, has no such
express limitation or purpose. It
refers only to ‘of’ or ‘an’ offence, and with reference
Legislation Act 2001
(ACT), that would seemingly
incorporate both indictable and summary offences.
prosecution submission of an analogous circumstance where a person was making an
offer on behalf of someone else without knowledge
of the specific offence the
person was said to have committed was, I conclude, persuasive. I accept that
such a circumstance as contemplated
has been within the scope of the behaviour
intended to be captured by the ACT form of the provision. It would follow from
it is not, as a matter of statutory construction, essential that an
offence be necessarily specified or proved in the sense that
it amounts to an
aspect of an element of the charge that the prosecution has the legal burden of
proving (s 56 of the
Criminal Code
). The provision contemplates that the
intention at the time of the offer may be in relation to, in essence, ‘any
difficulty though for the prosecution is that this was not how this case was
approached. The prosecution clearly particularised
the case with reference to
the named offence. This was despite there being evidence that the adult person
was initially charged with
both a sexual offence and a drug related offence. The
prosecution made an election, and, consequently, the defence made forensic
choices based on the prosecution’s approach. No application to amend the
particulars was made.
numerous authorities were considered during the course of ventilation of this
issue in the hearing, I found three authorities
particularly relevant and
persuasive as to my conclusion.
R v Masina (No 3)
[2020] ACTSC 154
Mossop J considered at [261] what
has been said in decisions of the Queensland Court of Appeal and Supreme Court,
and applied subsequently
elsewhere, that there may be cases where a
specification as to a day, although not an element of the offence, is
to the integrity of the criminal process’.
a 1997 unreported decision of the NSW Court of Criminal
), it was said, relevantly, by then Gleeson CJ that –
As a general rule, what the Crown needs to establish in order to
obtain a conviction are the essential facts alleged in the indictment,
the Crown fails to establish an inessential fact, or a particular which has been
provided before the trial, or which emerged
from the evidence of Crown
witnesses, that is not fatal. However, that generalisation may, in any given
case, need to be qualified....in
some circumstances the requirements of
procedural or substantive fairness may restrict the capacity of the Crown to
depart from particulars.
principle from
has been applied numerous times, including more
recently in the context of there being occasions when ‘essential
are, in addition to elements, matters that the prosecution must
prove beyond reasonable doubt: see, eg,
Hamilton v DPP
[2020] NSWSC 1745
Saunders Civilbuild Pty Ltd v SafeWork New South Wales
George (a pseudonym) v R
[2021] NSWCCA 321.
both of the decisions referred to above were concerned with a situation whether
an alleged date was a material particular, I
do not find that to detract from
the principles as provided as they relate to the issue before this court.
Monaghan v Calatzis
[2021] ACTSC 4
, McWilliam AJ, as her Honour then
was, considered the consequences where particulars as provided at closing
differed to those as
provided in the charge. Her Honour considered a number of
authorities informative as to the issue before this court and said in relation
to the issue that arose there, that ‘the subject matter of the element is
fundamental to establishing the element itself’
(at [46]). Her Honour also
considered that the apparent change in particulars, where it was found to be a
material particular, was
such that procedural fairness was denied in the
circumstances of that matter and that the parties there were like ‘ships
in the night’ (at [51]). The progression of the present matter has
not resulted in ships passing in the night as the issue
here is raised prior to
the conclusion of the hearing, but the manner in which the prosecution has
approached this case was directed
towards only one compass point upon which the
defence, reasonably given the particulars and evidence, navigated towards. The
here, if the particulars of the prosecution are not regarded as elevated
beyond mere particulars, would be an outcome not dissimilar
to what her Honour
concluded in
Monaghan v Calatzis
the appellant the ability to know the case ultimately put against him, he [the
appellant] lost the opportunity to tailor
his instructions, plea and defence to
so, were it necessary to decide, I would have concluded that a s 716(1) does not
necessarily require proof beyond reasonable doubt
of a specified offence. But
that in the circumstances of this matter, the prosecution is bound by the way in
which they have approached
the case, and therefore, the prosecution would be
required to prove – if not a part of element (e), at least as an
fact’ – beyond reasonable doubt that the knowledge
or belief of NE was in relation to the commission of an act of indecency
child under 16.
then to the evidence as it relates to the no case submission. That is, the
evidence that relates to the knowledge or belief
of NE of the named offence, or
at the very least, an offence. The prosecution relies on a number of strands,
with this evidence,
at its highest, being as follows
as to the events of the allegedly compounded offence.
allegedly compounded offence occurred at about 3am at the Westfield Belconnen.
The evidence is that NE was present when the adult
person drove away with NN for
a period of 13 minutes. KW said that she believed they said good luck to NN
before NN left with the
adult person. During the time that NN and the adult
person were away, NE was present for two phone calls that were received by the
group left behind. The words said during these calls included that NN giving the
‘hand job’ was taking too long, and
KW was asked if she wanted to
‘give him a head job or a hand job’. KW declined and said for the
adult person to bring
NN back to the group and he returned with NN.
relationship between the adult and the young person
NE then left with the adult person, a person that NE is close to, with the
prosecution submitting that the court would infer
that there would have been
discussion as to what happened.
Communication
in the WhatsApp call
contents of the WhatsApp call included –
(a) NE asking KW whether she was ‘going to say anything about what
happened’ or what she was ‘choosing to say if
[she] was going to go
to court, if [she] was going to make a statement, anything like that’;
(b) NE asked KW if she made the statement and if she ‘could lie about it
and try and make, I guess the whole of the court and
cops believe that it
wasn’t true’;
(c) NE said that he wanted to talk about the ‘[NN] situation’ and
that ‘I just want to like clear things up, and
I don’t want to get
[the adult person] in trouble. I’ll give you anything if you can like
make a statement and make
people believe that it was all bullshit’;
(d) after KW said to NE that if she was to make a statement, she didn’t
know what she was going to say, NE said to her ‘okay,
just make them
believe that that’s not what happened. I’ll give you anything
– money, drugs, whatever you want’;
(e) KW said that NE was asking her to say ‘that all of it was bullshit and
that none of it actually happened, and [NN] was
just lying about it’.
of the Snapchat message
snapchat messages include a request to meet up ‘to have a chat so you can
explain what happened with Ali’. The messages
further have NE saying,
‘like you know what happened’ and ‘so once you go in and help
him and say nah it didn’t
happen and stuff then from there, we can get him
of the adult person’s arrest
final strand relied upon by the prosecution was that at the time of these
communications, the adult person was in police custody,
having been arrested.
This arrest occurred at about 3.15pm on Monday 9 May 2022, and the
communications occurred, taking the evidence
at its highest, from 10.40am on
Tuesday 10 May 2022.
Application of Evidence to Element
Considering
this evidence at its highest and strongest, as I must do, I accept that this
evidence establishes that NE was aware that
there was something that happened
between the adult person and NN. And it can be concluded that the evidence
establishes, with reference
to the phone calls that NE was present for, that the
something that happened involved sexual conduct.
to whether the evidence establishes that the sexual conduct was with a child
under 16, that is, that there was knowledge or belief
of an offence or the named
offence, I observe –
(a) Even if it can be inferred that there was a conversation between the adult
person and NE in the car immediately after the conduct,
which the prosecution
submits is one of the relevant strands, it is entirely speculative, to the point
of not capable of being established,
that this conversation extended to a
disclosure that the sexual activity was with a child. The prosecution led no
evidence from
the adult person as to what, if any, conversations he had with NE
(b) There is no evidence that NE knew that NN was under the age of 16, such that
he himself could have appreciated that the adult
person’s conduct was
unlawful. I conclude this even taking into account the CCTV footage (Exhibit
P5) that shows JV and her
group. There is nothing in that evidence that
determines that NN was definitively, or even might be, under the age of 16. I
considered the prosecution’s submission that the prosecution does not
have to establish the elements of the allegedly compounded
offence. But, for
present purposes, there must be evidence of a knowledge or belief of at least an
offence. There is no evidence
that NE knew, or believed, that any sexual
conduct that occurred was with a child; and
(c) That the adult person was arrested does not assist the prosecution case per
se, in that there is no evidence that NE was aware
of the reason for that
arrest. Having said that, the messages do include sufficient evidence from
which it can be inferred that
NE had knowledge of the adult person’s
arrest, and that the arrest related to something that happened when JV was
That is, an inference is available that NE had knowledge that the
adult person’s arrest related to the events of the relevant
then leaves, as the available evidence as to NE’s knowledge or belief of
the sexual conduct that happened being an offence,
the communications
themselves. The Snapchat messages in isolation do not support the inference the
prosecution seeks. However, the
WhatsApp conversation is such that it can be
concluded that what the sexual conduct involved was of sufficient concern to NE
he wanted JV to say that it did not happen.
this stage of the hearing, the court’s consideration is whether on the
evidence, NE could be lawfully convicted of the offence
charged. It is a
question of law distinct from a question of fact decision with reference to
whether the prosecution have proved
the element beyond reasonable doubt. Even
where the prosecution case is a weak one, and even if it is tenuous, inherently
vague, but is not inherently incredible, a prima facie case is to be
considered established and the no case submission is to be rejected.
current purposes, the evidence at its highest with reference to the
communications in the WhatsApp call, establishes that NE had
knowledge and belief such that a prima facie case is established. This knowledge
and belief are, for present purposes,
sufficiently established to relate to an
offence an act of indecency on a child under 16.
those reasons, I find there is a case to
I certify that the preceding forty-eight [48] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of a revision from a transcript of the oral reason
for decision of her
Honour Special Magistrate Christensen delivered in court.
Associate: Susie Kim
Date: 12 January 2024
RTF format (219 KB)
Signed PDF/A format