MOLONGLO GROUP (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD v COMMISSIONER FOR ACT REVENUE (Administrative Review) [2025] ACAT 63 (24 September 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
MOLONGLO GROUP (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD v
COMMISSIONER FOR ACT REVENUE (Administrative Review)
[2025] ACAT 63
Catchwords: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW –
lease variation charge
– statutory interpretation – principles –
Planning and
Development Act 2007
(repealed),
, s 277A – proper interpretation
of the definition of ‘improvement’ – proper interpretation of
not be taken into account’ – proper interpretation of
‘proposed improvement’ - what may and may not be taken
into account
- whether hypothetical improvements may be taken into account within the
comparables sales and hypothetical development
methods of valuation
Legislation cited:
Explanatory Statement to the Planning and
Development (Lease Variation Charges) Amendment Bill
clauses 2, 16,
39,40,42,118-123, 124
Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991
Legislation Act 2001
Planning Act 2023
Planning and Development Act 2007 (repealed) ss 7, 15, 46, 113, 276C, 276D,
277, 277A, 277C, 278, Division 9.63, Dictionary
Planning and Development (Lease Variation Charges) Amendment Act 2011
Planning and Development (Lease Variation Charges) Amendment Bill 2011
– clauses 2, 277A,278
Rates Act 2006 s 6
Subordinate
Legislation cited:
Commencement Notice CN2021-2 – Planning and
Development (Plan Variation No 377) Commencement Notice 2021
Commercial Zones Development Code
Estate Development Code
Land (Planning and Environment) Regulations – regs 12,13
Notifiable Instrument NI2021-65 Planning and Development (Plan Variation No
377) Approval 2021
Planning and Development Regulation 2008
(No 2 of 2008) – regs 175(1),
(2) and 177
The Multi Unit Housing Development Code
The Fyshwick Precinct Code
Cases cited
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
Revenue (NT)
[2009] HCA 41
Certain Lloyd’s Underwriters Subscribing to Contract No IH00AAQS v
[2012] HCA 56
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club
1997] HCA 2
City Hill Pty Limited v ACT Planning and Land Authority and ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal
[2015] ACTSC 40
Croc’s Franchising Pty Ltd v Alamdo Holdings Pty Ltd
Johnston v Valuer-General of New South Wales
[2024] NSWLEC 90
Lacey v Attorney-General (Qld)
[2011] HCA 10
Macedonian Orthodox Church Incorporated v ACT Planning & Land
[2015] ACTCA 32
Maurici v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2003] HCA 8
Pafburn Pty Limited v The Owners – Strata Plan No 84764
Patman v Fletcher’s Fotographics Pty Ltd
(1984) IR 471
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
[2019] HCA 35
Spencer v Commonwealth
[1907] HCA 82
SNS Pty Ltd v Roads and Maritime Services
[2018] NSWLEC 7
Tenstat Valuer General; Woolworths Limited v Valuer General
NSWLEC 1361
Trust Company of Australia Ltd v Valuer-General
[2007] NSWCA 181
Valuer-General Victoria v WTSI Properties 490 SKR Pty Ltd
Village No 22 Pty Ltd CAN 620 656 260 v ACT Planning and Land Authority
[2021] ACAT 43
Woolworths Limited v Valuer General
[2012] NSWLEC 1361
Texts/Papers cited:
Final Report on the Review of the Change of Use
Charges System in the ACT (29 November 2010)
Acting Presidential Member G Curtin SC
Senior Member D Parker
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE
TRIBUNAL ) AT 69/2024
MOLONGLO GROUP (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD (ACN
First Applicant
LOLITA (ACT) NO 1 PTY LIMITED (ACN
106 428 835)
Second Applicant
LOLITA (ACT) NO 2 PTY LIMITED
(ACN 106 428 844)
Third Applicant
COMMISSIONER FOR ACT REVENUE
Acting Presidential Member G Curtin SC
Senior Member D Parker
The Tribunal orders that:
respondent’s confirmation dated 1 July 2024 of the Notice of Assessment,
Lease Variation Charge, dated 7 March 2024 is set
lieu thereof, the lease variation charge for Development Application
no.2023414149 is determined to be $26,480,938.
to apply in relation to costs.
..................
....................
Presidential Member G Curtin SC
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
main issue in this case is the proper interpretation of ss 277 and 277A of the
Planning and Development Act 2007
), the substance of
which is now replicated in ss 332 and 333 of the present
Planning Act
provisions govern the calculation of the charge payable to the Territory when a
nominal rent Crown lease is varied.
this case the Commissioner contends that the charge should be a little over
$100m. The applicants contend the charge should be
the reasons that follow both contentions should be rejected. In our view the
charge should be $26,480,938.
land the subject of this case (the
Molonglo land
) is approximately 14 ha
in area, is the subject of one Crown lease and was purchased by the second and
third applicants in 2007.
first applicant is a company associated with the second and third applicants and
has, between the three corporations, administrative
responsibility for the
Molonglo land. For the purposes of these reasons, it is convenient to refer to
the three applicants collectively
wishes to develop the Molonglo land.
Purpose clause in the Crown lease for the Molonglo land presently provides for
limited uses, including, most relevantly, that
the gross floor area (
permitted for buildings is limited to 20,170 m
and that construction
of multi-unit dwellings is
September 2022, Molonglo lodged a development application (
approval of an Estate Development Plan (
) for the Molonglo
EDP was approved subject to conditions (the
approved EDP
). That is, the
proposal and plans put forward for consideration by Molonglo (albeit after
discussions with various authorities in
the consultation phase of an EDP
application process
) were approved,
but subject to some conditions.
approval was given on 19 December 2022 and was the subject of several later
reconsiderations and subsequent approvals. Unless
otherwise necessary, we shall
simply refer to the initial and subsequent approvals collectively as the
EDP geographically delineated an “estate”, being the land the
subject of the EDP approval, and various of the approved
plans show the estate
boundary. The estate in this approval included both the Molonglo land and a
small amount of adjoining Territory
approved EDP provided for the creation of 36 new CZ3 - Services Zone blocks,
some demolition, and the construction of various
utility services, roads,
footpaths, earthworks, tree removal, landscaping, public open spaces, publicly
accessible open spaces and
other associated works (the
condition of the EDP approval for DA 86 was that a variation of the Purpose
clause in the Crown lease would need to be obtained
to permit the development
approved in the EDP approval.
2023, and as required by the EDP approval, Molonglo lodged a development
application (
) primarily, although not only, to vary the Crown lease
by varying the Purpose clause. That application was approved on 5 June
lease variation has not yet been effected pending the outcome of this
approved lease variation substantially expands the Purpose clause of the lease.
Further uses would now be permitted. Most relevantly
for this case, the approval
would allow an increase of GFA from 20,170 m
to a little under
(excluding residential uses) and would permit multi-unit
housing of up to 700 dwellings. Those latter two uses are the uses which
overwhelmingly affect the value of the land, and we will therefore only mention
them hereafter.
approval of DA 19 was a “chargeable variation” under the
The approval of DA 19 triggered an obligation under the
lease variation charge (
), calculated by
and 277A in the
sections referred to below are references to sections of the
otherwise specified.
276D said that the LVC is taken to be worked out on the day the development
approval of the chargeable variation is approved.
In this case that date is 5
provided the formula for the calculation of the LVC. Put simply, it said
that market valuations were to be made of the value of the
lease immediately
before and immediately after the lease variation.
said that the before value was then to be subtracted from the after value,
and the result discounted by 25%, to arrive at the LVC.
277A modified the valuation exercise provided for in
277A(1) said that in working out the before and after values an improvement (as
defined) in relation to the land “must
not be taken into
277A(3) defined “improvement”.
central dispute in this case is whether some or all the costs of the EDP works
are caught by the definition of “improvement”
in 277A(3).
of the EDP works are to be carried out on the Molonglo land. Some are to be
carried out on the Territory land which is
the estate boundary.
Those two categories of works were referred to in the case by the experts as the
onsite works
(being on the site of the estate). Other EDP works were to
be carried out on Territory land which is
the estate boundary
(these were referred to by the experts as the
offsite works
shall describe these works in greater detail later in these reasons, but the
evidence was that if all the EDP works (the
full EDP works
undertaken, the Molonglo land would then be in a subdividable state. That is,
the land would be in a physical state which would
allow for a successful
subdivision application, although another development application would need to
be lodged and approved for
a formal subdivision to take place.
applicants retained a quantity surveying firm (Turner & Townsend) to cost
the full EDP works. Those costings were provided
to one of Molonglo’s two
valuers, Ms Narelle Byrne.
receipt of the Turner & Townsend costings, Ms Byrne sought revised costings
of the full EDP works from Molonglo. She sought
costings of only those parts of
the full EDP works which, if undertaken, would make the Molonglo land (in Ms
Byrne’s opinion)
as comparable as possible to the basket of comparable
sales Ms Byrne desired to use for her comparable sales
costings were provided.
revised costings (undertaken by Mr Sephton Wolmarans of Rider Levett Bucknall)
were provided to Ms Byrne and have been the costings
put forward by Molonglo for
the purposes of this case.
quantum is disputed by the Commissioner although not in relation to any item of
work or the quantities measure by Mr Wolmarans.
the dictionary of the case, and in these reasons, these works costed by Mr
Wolmarans were referred to as the
. It should not be overlooked
that these works were not the full works provided for in the EDP approval. If
the EDP works (being less
than the full EDP works) were undertaken, the Molonglo
land would be in an
subdividable state. We shall sometimes refer
in these reasons to the outcome of the EDP works costed by Mr Wolmarans as the
(almost) subdivision
EDP works were costed by Molonglo at a little under $70m, a sum which included
the offsite works costed at approximately $15m.
The respondent costed the EDP
works at approximately $51m (including the offsite works).
necessary to quantify those costings more precisely we shall use those
approximate figures in these reasons for ease of expression.
his initial decision as to the amount of the LVC the respondent (the
Commissioner
) assessed the before value of the Molonglo Crown lease at a
little over $22m, the after value at just under $72m, the difference
under $50m and, after applying the statutory discount of 25%, assessed the LVC
at $36,993,750.
applicants sought a reconsideration of that assessment pursuant to s
After reconsideration the
Commissioner confirmed the assessment referred to
applicants then commenced proceedings in the Tribunal to review the
reconsideration determination, it being a reviewable decision.
these Tribunal proceedings the parties agreed that the before value of the
Molonglo land should be $21,408,000. There is no reason
not to accept that
agreement. For that reason, we shall only refer to the after value hereafter
although much of what we say in relation
to the interpretation of
277A applies to the valuation of the before value.
the purposes of this case an electronic and hard copy Application Book was
prepared which contained the evidence and the parties’
submissions. The Application Book of a little over 11,000 pages was tendered and
became Exhibit A.
References to the
relevant pages of the Application Book are noted in these reasons as AB#.
these reasons we have provided references to some of the evidence tendered or
submissions made. We have done this for the assistance
of the parties to aid
their understanding of our reasons, but it should be understood that we had
regard to all of the evidence and
submissions.
The two sections in dispute
at the date of approval of the lease variation
variation charges—
chargeable variations
(1) The commissioner for revenue works out the lease variation charge for a
chargeable variation of a nominal rent lease as follows:
LVC = (V 1 – V 2) x 75%
(2) In this section:
means the lease variation charge payable for the
chargeable variation of the lease.
(a) for a variation other than a consolidation or subdivision, means the
capital sum that the lease might be expected to realise if—
(i) the lease were varied as proposed; and
(ii) the lease were genuinely offered for sale immediately after the
variation on the reasonable terms and conditions that a genuine
seller would
require; and
(iii) the rent payable throughout the term of the lease or, for a variation
that involves the surrender of a lease and issue of a
new lease, the new lease,
were a nominal rent; or
(a) for a variation other than a consolidation or subdivision, means the
capital sum that the lease might be expected to realise if—
(i) the lease were not varied during the remainder of its term; and
(ii) the lease were genuinely offered for sale immediately before the
variation on the reasonable terms and conditions that a genuine
seller would
require; and
(iii) the rent payable throughout the term of the lease, or lease to be
surrendered, were a nominal rent; or
(3) If the amount worked out as V1 is equal to or less than the amount worked
out as V2, no lease variation charge is payable.
was no issue in relation to the interpretation or application of (a)(i) and
(iii) in the definition of the after value (V1).
The contest was in relation to
(a)(ii), the capital sum the lease might be expected to realise if genuinely
offered for sale immediately
after the lease variation.
277A Lease variation charge under
—improvements
(1) In working out
section 277
, an improvement
in relation to the land comprised in the lease must not be taken into
Note Power to make a regulation in relation to a matter includes power to
make provision in relation to a clas of a matter (see
Legislation Act
(2) However, an existing improvement by way of clearing, filling, grading,
draining, levelling or excavating the land may be taken
into account.
(3) In this section:
improvement
, in relation to land, means an existing or proposed
improvement and includes any of the following:
(a) a building or structure on or under the land;
(b) an alteration or demolition of an existing building or structure on or
under the land;
(c) the remediation of the land;
(d) earthworks, planting or other work that affects the landscape of the
(e) anything mentioned in paragraphs (a) to (d) that is
(i) as a condition of a development approval; or
(ii) by a statutory approval obtained or required for a development proposal;
(iii) under an agreement between the Territory or a territory entity
(A) the lessee; or
(B) if the lessee is not the applicant for the development approval—the
(f) anything mentioned in paragraphs (a) to (d) proposed in a development
application in relation to a chargeable variation of a nominal
rent lease to be
carried out on land outside of the land under the lease. remediation—see
Environment Protection Act 1997
, dictionary.
The issues in dispute and the structure of these
issues in dispute between the parties included the following:
(a) Did s 277A qualify s 277, or was s 277A inconsistent with s 277 and
therefore should be read down.
(b) What were “proposed improvements” in s 277A(3).
(c) Did the definition of “improvement “ in s 277A(3) contain two
categories of matters, namely existing and proposed
improvements (which also had
to fall within s 277A(3)(a)-(f)), or did the definition contain three categories
of matters, being existing
improvements, proposed improvements, and matters set
out in s 277A(3)(a)-(f) (which might not otherwise be existing or proposed
improvements).
(d) Whether, to be caught by sub-s 277A(3)(e), the “anything” had to
be described in detail in the conditions of the
development approval.
(e) Were the EDP works “required” by a “condition of a
development approval”, or were they “required”
by a statutory
approval obtained or required for a development proposal per s 277A(3)(e).
(f) Whether, to be caught by sub-s 277A(3)(e)(iii), an agreement had to have
been entered into rather than existing in draft form.
(g) Whether, to be caught by sub-s 277A(3)(f):
“anything” had to be in the development application for the lease
variation, as distinct from being in the development
application for an EDP;
the word “proposed” mean put forward by an applicant as distinct
from being required by a planning authority.
(h) The meaning to be given to the words “development approval”,
“development proposal” and “development
application”
used in ss 277 and 277A.
(i) Were the EDP works caught by one or more sub-sections of s 277A.
(j) Assuming some or all of the EDP works were caught by s 277A, could some or
all of those works (and the costs associated therewith)
nevertheless be used in
a reasoning process such as that employed by:
Byrne in her comparable sales method;
Michael Dyson in his hypothetical development method.
(k) What is the reasonable cost of the EDP works.
(l) What is the after value of the Molonglo land for the purposes of s 277.
have structured our reasons to answer those and the other questions which arise
as follows.
first set out the principles of interpretation we have applied. We then set out
the legislative history which preceded the introduction
of ss 277 and 277A.
then set out the factual and planning background to this dispute, followed by a
brief explanation of the EDP works.
then briefly describe the parties’ competing contentions before turning to
our decisions on the issues in dispute.
Principles of statutory interpretation
principles of statutory interpretation both under statute and at law were not in
dispute. They were comprehensively set out in
the parties’ written
submissions by reference to the relevant sections of the
Legislation Act
and the common law.
relevant statute is the
Legislation Act
and the central
provisions of that statute are
short, those provisions provide that “working out the meaning of an
Act” means resolving an ambiguous or obscure provision,
confirming or
displacing the apparent meaning of an Act, finding the meaning of the Act when
its apparent meaning leads to a result
that is manifestly absurd or is
unreasonable or finding the meaning of the Act in any other case.
139(1) says that the interpretation that best achieves the purpose of an Act is
to be preferred to any other interpretation.
Section 139(2) says that s 139(1)
applies whether or not the Act’s purpose is expressly stated in the Act.
It follows, by necessary
implication, that the
Legislation Act
the purpose of the Act to be ascertained from material external to the Act
was no dispute that provisions of an Act must be read in the context of the Act
as a whole and that extrinsic material may be
considered.
common law principles were not in dispute. They are set out in the authorities
cited by the parties which included, although were
not limited to,
Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
[1997] HCA 2
Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue (NT)
[2009] HCA 41
Lacey v Attorney-General (Qld)
[2011] HCA 10
Certain Lloyd's
Underwriters Subscribing to Contract No IH00AAQS v Cross
[2012] HCA 56
Pafburn Pty Limited v The Owners
– Strata Plan No 84764
have also considered
[2019] HCA 35in
which the High Court neatly explained what “context” was to be
considered, and how context and purpose interacted with
the literal meaning of
words used in an Act.
that case Kiefel CJ and Keane J, with whom Nettle and Gordon JJ agreed, said the
following at 520-522:
[32] The method to be applied in construing a statute to ascertain the
intended meaning of the words used is well settled. It commences
consideration of the words of the provision itself, but it does not end there.
A literal approach to construction, which requires the courts to obey the
ordinary meaning or usage of the words of a provision, even
if the result is
improbable, has long been eschewed by this Court. It is now accepted that even
words having an apparently clear
ordinary or grammatical meaning may be ascribed
a different legal meaning after the process of construction is complete. This is
because consideration of the context for the provision may point to factors that
tend against the ordinary usage of the words of
the provision.
Consideration of the context for the provision is undertaken at the
first stage of the process of construction
. Context is to be understood in
its widest sense. It includes surrounding statutory provisions, what may be
drawn from other aspects
of the statute and the statute as a whole. It extends
to the mischief which it may be seen that the statute is intended to remedy.
“Mischief” is an old expression. It may be understood to refer to
a state of affairs which to date the law has not addressed.
It is in that sense
a defect in the law which is now sought to be remedied. The mischief may point
most clearly to what it is that
the statute seeks to achieve
[34] This is not to suggest that a very general purpose of a statute will
necessarily provide much context for a particular provision
or that the words of
the provision should be lost sight of in the process of construction. These
considerations were emphasised in
the decisions of this Court upon which the
Court of Criminal Appeal placed some weight.
[35] The joint judgment in Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
Territory Revenue rejected an approach which paid no regard
to the words of the
provision and sought to apply the general purpose of the statute, to raise
revenue, to derive a very different
meaning from that which could be drawn from
the terms of the provision. The general purpose said nothing meaningful about
the provision,
the text of which clearly enough conveyed its intended operation.
Similarly, in Saeed v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
the court below
was held to have failed to consider the actual terms of the section. A general
purpose of the statute, to address
shortcomings identified in an earlier
decision of this Court, was not as useful as the intention revealed by the terms
of the statute
itself. In Baini v The Queen, it was necessary to reiterate that
the question of whether there had been a “substantial miscarriage
justice” within the meaning of the relevant provision required
consideration of the text of the provision, not resort to
paraphrases of the
statutory language in extrinsic materials, other cases and different
legislation.
These cases serve to remind that the text of a statute is important,
for it contains the words being construed, and that a very general
purpose may
not detract from the meaning of those words. As always with statutory
construction, much depends upon the terms of the
particular statute and what may
be drawn from the context for and purpose of the provision
[37] None of these cases suggest a return to a literal approach to
construction. They do not suggest that the text should not be read
and by reference to the mischief to which the provision is directed. They do not
deny the possibility, adverted to in
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club
Ltd, that in a particular case, “if the apparently plain words of a
provision are
read in the light of the mischief which the statute was designed
to overcome and of the objects of the legislation, they may wear
different appearance”. When a literal meaning of words in a statute does
not conform to the evident purpose or policy
of the particular provision, it is
entirely appropriate for the courts to depart from the literal meaning. A
construction which promotes
the purpose of a statute is to be preferred.
substance, Bell and Gageler JJ made the same observations. At 545 [124], their
Honours said:
The principles of interpretation were not in issue on the hearing of the
appeals. In assigning legal meaning to the words of a provision,
starts with consideration of the ordinary and grammatical meaning of the words
taking into account both context and legislative
purpose. Consideration of
context in its widest sense and the purpose of the statute informs the
interpretative task throughout.
That consideration, and the consequences of
giving a provision its literal, grammatical meaning, may lead the court to adopt
a construction
that departs from the ordinary meaning of the words. ...
(Citations omitted.)
is important to note two things. First, that if there be any conflict between
the common law principles and the
Legislation Act
, the latter
the most relevant context to consider (in addition to the wording of the Act and
the provisions) is the context existing at
and before the insertion of s 277A
may include the legislative history. That history may illuminate the mischief
which was sought to be addressed. In this case
that mischief is of
importance.
Legislative history of the lease variation charge
Australian Capital Territory (the
) is the only Australian
) was applied where a
lease was varied and the variation had the effect of increasing the value of the
lease (most often by increasing
the purposes permitted by the terms of the
authors of the Final Report on the Review of the Change of Use Charges System in
the ACT dated 29 November 2010 (the
Final Report
), a report to which we
will shortly come, said the following about the purpose of the CUC:
A fundamental principle of the leasehold system is the unearned increment in
the bundle of rights belongs to the community and thus
remains with the
community. The Change of Use Charge (CUC) introduced in 1971 ensures that a
proportion of any windfall gain accruing
to a lessee from a variation to their
lease is returned to the community as originally intended.
methods of calculating the CUC were put in place over the years (more fully
described in the Final Report at pp 5 ff).
details of all earlier methodologies used to calculate the CUC is not necessary
to traverse, but a useful start may be made at
1991 until 1996, the CUC was determined on the assumption that the land to be
valued was unimproved. This was done pursuant to
(Planning and Environment) Act 1991
and regs 12 and 13 of the Land (Planning
and Environment) Regulations.
184 simply said that the Executive would not execute a variation of a lease
unless all rent had been paid and, where a variation
of the lease would increase
the market value of the lease, the lessee had paid the Executive an amount
determined by the Executive
in respect of the increase in the value of the lease
that would result from the variation.
12 provided that the “added value” was the amount by which the value
of the lease immediately after the variation
would exceed the value of the lease
immediately before the variation, it being assumed that there were no
improvements on the land.
13 said that the amount payable was the amount equal to the added value,
remissions could be granted (per reg 15 and at
certain rates set out in Schedule
3 under particular circumstances) and in determining the added value of a lease,
no reduction would
be allowed for where the variation of the lease was
conditional upon the applicant financing or undertaking works on the land
in the lease or on any unleased Territory Land.
position changed in 1997.
from 24 June 1997, s184A was inserted into the
Land (Planning and
Environment) Act 1991
and the abovementioned regulations were omitted and
written submissions the Commissioner submitted that the CUC calculated under
was calculated on the basis that the land to be valued was improved. We
note that the Final Report said at
that that was the way the statute
operated at the time (and until 2011) and we read the provisions the same
Variation of nominal rent lease—change of use charge
(1) The Executive shall not execute a variation of a nominal rent lease
unless the lessee has paid the Territory any change of use
charge determined by
the Minister under subsection (2), subject to any remission or increase under
section 184C.
(2) The Minister shall determine the change of use charge for a
variation of a nominal rent lease in accordance with the formula—
CUC = (V1 – V2) x 75%
is the change of use charge payable for the variation
of the lease;
is the capital sum that the lease might be
expected to realise if—
(a) the lease were to be varied as proposed;
(b) the lease were offered for sale in good faith immediately after the
variation on such reasonable terms and conditions as a genuine
seller would
require; and
(c) the rent payable throughout the term of the lease were a nominal
is the capital sum that the lease might be
expected to realise if—
(a) the lease were not to be varied during the remainder of its term;
(b) the lease were offered for sale in good faith immediately before the
variation on such reasonable terms and conditions as a genuine
seller would
require; and
(c) the rent payable throughout the term of the lease were a nominal
(3) Where the capital value assessed as “
under subsection (2) is equal to or less than the capital value assessed as
” under that subsection, no change of use
charge is payable under subsection (1).
(4) Insofar as this section applies, by virtue of
section 184
surrender of a lease and the grant of a new lease—
(a) the reference in paragraph (c) of the definition of
” in subsection (2) to the term of the lease is
to be read as a reference to the term of the new lease; and
(b) the reference in paragraph (c) of the definition of
” in subsection (2) to the term of the lease is
to be read as a reference to the term of the lease to be surrendered.
(5) A variation of a lease has no effect if the change of use charge payable
under subsection (1) for the variation is not paid.
is substantially in the same form as the subsequent s 277 of the PDA,
although in the
Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991
there was no
equivalent to the
184C of the
Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991
said that the
Minister could, on application by a lessee, remit a change of use charge under
for the variation of a nominal rent lease in circumstances prescribed by
the regulations, and that the Minister could make regulations
regulation was made, being the
Land (Planning and Environment) Regulation 1992
It provided for remissions in reg 20 which said:
circumstances—Act, s 184C (1)
(1) For the Act, section 184C (1), prescribed circumstances are that it is
necessary or desirable to—
(a) promote development of an area; or
(b) change the purposes for which land or buildings, or parts of land or
buildings, in an area may be used; or
(c) promote the construction of housing meeting good design or construction
criteria; or
(d) promote the construction of attached houses, apartments or 2 or more
detached houses on a single lot; or
(e) promote the construction of housing accessible to, or adaptable for,
frail or disabled people; or
(f) provide land for the exclusive use of community organisations; or
(g) assist occupiers of premises affected, or likely to be affected, by the
operation of the
Smoking (Prohibition in Enclosed Public Places) Act 2003
(Smoking prohibited in enclosed public places) to provide additional
facilities at the premises.
Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991
was repealed and
replaced by the
. Most provisions, of the
, including the
ones mentioned hereunder, commenced on 31 March 2008. Sections 277 and 277A of
the PDA, which are the subject of the
case before us, were not in the original
PDA. The original s 277 was in substantially the same form as it is in the case
but there was no equivalent to s 277A.
original form of s 277 in the
, located in Division 9.6.3, was
relevantly as follows:
277 Working out change of use
(1) The planning and land authority works out the change of use charge for a
variation of a lease as follows:
CUC = (V1 – V2) x 75%
(2) In this
means the change of use charge payable for the variation of
(a) for a variation other than a consolidation or subdivision, means the
capital sum that the lease might be expected to realise if—
(i) the lease were varied as proposed; and
(ii) the lease were genuinely offered for sale immediately after the
variation on the reasonable terms and conditions that a genuine
seller would
require; and
(iii) the rent payable throughout the term of the lease or, for a variation
that involves the surrender of a lease and issue of a
new lease, the new lease,
were a nominal rent; or
(b) for a variation that is a consolidation or subdivision, ...
(a) for a variation other than a consolidation or subdivision, means the
capital sum that the lease might be expected to realise if—
(i) the lease were not varied during the remainder of its term; and
(ii) the lease were genuinely offered for sale immediately before the
variation on the reasonable terms and conditions that a genuine
seller would
require; and
(iii) the rent payable throughout the term of the lease, or
be surrendered, were a nominal rent; or
(b) for a variation that is a consolidation or subdivision, ...
(3) If the capital value assessed as
to or less than the capital value assessed as
change of use charge is payable.
278 provided for remissions and is different to s 278 as it applied in June
2003. Section 278(1) said that the planning and
land authority must remit all or
part of a change of use charge for a variation of a lease under section 276 as
prescribed by regulation.
Sub-section (2) said that regulations may prescribe
the amount to be remitted under sub-section (1).
Regulations
and (2) of the
Planning and Development Regulation
(2008) gave effect to
s 278. (Note that this Regulation internally refers to its
“sections” when it intends to refer
to “regulations”. We
shall use the term “regulation” to avoid possible confusion with
terms of the statute.)
Remission of change of use charges
generally—Act, s 278 (1) and (2)
(1) The planning and land authority must remit all or part of a CUC for a
variation of a lease:
(a) if the variation of the lease is necessary and desirable to—
(i) promote development in an area; or
(ii) change the purposes for which land or buildings, or parts of land or
buildings, in an area may be used; or
(iii) promote the construction of well designed or constructed housing;
(iv) promote the construction of attached houses, apartments or 2 or more
detached houses on a single lease; or
(v) promote the construction of housing that is suitable for frail or
disabled people; or
(vi) provide land for the exclusive use of a community organisation;
(vii) assist occupiers of premises affected by the
Smoking (Prohibition in
Enclosed Public Places) Act 2003
(Smoking prohibited in enclosed public
places) to provide additional facilities at the premises;
(b) in a circumstance, or for a period, stated in a policy direction.
(2) The amount of the change of use charge to be remitted is—
(a) if a policy direction applies to the variation—the amount worked
out in accordance with the policy direction; or
(b) in any other case—the amount (if any) that the planning and land
authority decides is appropriate in the circumstances.
“policy direction” referred to in regulation 175(2) was a policy
direction made under reg 177 which said that the
Minister could make a policy
direction for reg 175 (1) (b) or (2) (a) and that such
policy direction was a disallowable instrument.
was the mechanism referred to in the Final Report at paragraph 2.5.4 under which
developers were able to offset (a proportion
or percentage of) the increase in
land value arising from a successful lease variation application against onsite
and offsite user
costs. We shall return to paragraph the Final Report
leaving s 277 as it then was (before the introduction of s 277A) it is worth
noting that s 277 was the subject of some judicial
consideration in
Macedonian Orthodox Church Incorporated v ACT Planning & Land
[2015] ACTCA 32
that case the Church was the Crown lessee of land in Narrabundah. The lease was
a concessional lease. The Church desired to “deconcessionalise”
lease (which was approved) and subdivide the land to create two new leases. On
one lease the Church desired to erect Church related
improvements, and on the
other it sought approval for the erection of multi-unit dwellings. Those
approvals were granted.
Commissioner assessed the CUC, and the Church contended that the cost of
undertaking the development should be deducted from the
after value on the basis
that the varied lease mandated that the development be done. This argument was
rejected. The case is not
directly on point in relation to the issue before us,
but the Court of Appeal did make some remarks on the then s 277 which are of
some assistance in the case before us.
at [107] the Court said:
We are satisfied that the “after value” assessed for CUC purposes
is the value of the new lease or leases to the extent
that it reflects the
effect of the lease variation on the scope for using the leased land. The after
value should in general not
account for the lessee’s particular plans for
the new lease as distinct from the general possibilities open to any holder of
the lease by reason of the change that has been made by varying the original
lease or replacing it with a new lease or new leases.
Of course, the after value
would need to account for the lessee’s particular plans if those plans had
been incorporated in
the new lease or leases.
passage supports an interpretation of ss 277 and 277A (that are before us) to
the effect that a varied lease is to be varied
on the basis of the lease’s
highest and best use and not on the applicant’s particular plans (unless
incorporated within
the lease).
relation to matters to be taken into account in the valuation process the Court
said at [24]:
It is agreed that certain matters external to the leases are properly taken
into account in valuing each lease; these include “public
affect the value of the land, ... including restrictions imposed by planning
laws and instruments made thereunder”
(Valuer-General v New South Wales
[2012] NSWCA 355
(2012) 192 LGERA 105
, applying Royal Sydney Golf Club v
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1955] HCA 13
(1995) 91 CLR 610
at 624). In the ACT this
would include the Territory Plan as well as zoning rules and requirements and
certain other instruments
made under or for the purposes of the Plan, and
possibly other restrictions such as tree preservation orders or heritage
passage supports an interpretation of ss 277 and 277A (that are before us) that
the value of a lease is to take into account
restrictions imposed by
“public laws” including any applicable planning instruments.
(that is, leading up until 2009) there had been concerns raised with the
Government about the CUC, and its various iterations.
result was that in its 2009-10 Budget, the Territory Government committed to
re-examine and codify the CUC.
Des Nicholls from the School of Management, Marketing and International Business
at the College of Business and Economics
at the Australian National University
and Dr Stephen Anthony, Director of Budget and Forecasting at Macroeconomics
(self-described
as an investment advisory and portfolio allocation strategy
business offering high end advisory, modelling and forecasting services)
engaged by the government to review the CUC system. The project was overseen by
a Steering Committee comprising senior officials
from Treasury, ACT Planning and
Land Authority (
) and the Department of Land and Property
consulted with a number of stakeholders and produced a number of papers in 2009
29 November 2010, Messrs Nicholls and Anthony issued their Final Report.
the case before us the Commissioner placed significant reliance on the contents
of the Final Report, it being part of the extrinsic
materials which could be
considered.
Most particularly,
the Commissioner drew our attention to general statements in the Final Report
ss 277 and 277A.
Final Report said that the CUC had originally been known as
“betterment”. The authors described the concept of betterment
Betterment is defined as a benefit conferred by the public on some
identifiable beneficiaries. If it is not recovered, the benefit
‘unearned’ windfall conferred by the public to private
beneficiaries. A windfall is unearned in the sense
that in the current context
it is a creation of the ACT Government’s ability to assign value (in the
form of rights and privileges)
through lease conditions, to parcels of land
across the Territory. Leaseholders may receive a benefit without having to make
improvement to their property. Because this value is ‘gifted’ to
the leaseholder, rather than earned, it is socially
efficient and equitable that
government retains a significant proportion of that windfall and uses it for the
benefit of the community.
authors also noted that if the Government chose to retain the entire windfall,
it may contribute to reducing incentive for property
development. The task, the
authors said, was to find the right balance between the two, competing
objectives.
2.5.4 of the Final Report addressed the then offsetting of onsite and offsite
capital costs against the CUC. It said:
The current CUC system in the ACT incorporates the following parts:
betterment levy, which relates to an increase in a property value as a result of
a lease variation;
capital costs required to prepare the land for redevelopment; and
costs required for the redevelopment to proceed. There are two kinds:
works/infrastructure that would be required irrespective of the type of
development; and
development
specific infrastructure required as a direct result of the particular
development proposal.
third dot point quoted about referred to two kinds of offsite works which were
explained in a footnote which said:
The distinction between different kinds of offsite works is important because
is infrastructure which the Government may choose to pay for or
is purely development driven and consideration needs
to be given to the attribution of benefits and costs. Offsite works in the first
category will usually represent an opportunity to improve public infrastructure
in circumstances where the new development represents
only an incremental
increase in infrastructure usage. Were the Government to wish to extract a
proportion of costs for new offsite
infrastructure, this raises questions about
contributions from other private property owners already established in the same
and using the public infrastructure.
(Emphasis added.)
Final Report continued:
Under the current system all these user costs, as well as improvements, are
taken into consideration in the determination of the CUC.
Developers are able to
offset (a proportion of) the increase in land value from a successful lease
variation application against
onsite and offsite user costs
. However, the
original concept of the payment of a betterment was to charge for additional
developmental rights; it was not intended
to compensate developers for
expenditure, both onsite and offsite, required to undertake the redevelopment.
Over time, however, these
offsets have become a component of the current CUC
(Emphasis added.)
first sentence of the quote immediately above was also footnoted. That footnote
Infrastructure costs may be reflected in the ‘before’ value (e.g.
demolition costs), or deducted from the ‘after’
value (e.g.
construction of the footpath and landscaping in front of the block), or deducted
directly from the CUC payable (e.g.
the cost of a school fence requested by the
Department of Education). In all cases the CUC payable has been impacted by
these costs.
Final Report continued:
It is important to recognise that a CUC is not an infrastructure or
development charge, but a payment for a lease variation which
increased rights to be associated with the lease.
The CUC and user charge are fundamentally different and as such should be
separated in their determination and charging.
Under the current
system, as a result of developers being able to offset both onsite and offsite
costs against CUC, the actual revenue
from the betterment component is
significantly reduced.
A considerable amount of the discussion with industry during the course of
this study has revolved around the treatment of user charges
relating to onsite
and offsite costs relating to Brownfield development/redevelopment sites.
considering these issues it was noted that the ACT Government has the right to
remit all or part of a CUC for the variation of
a lease under certain
circumstances which are broadly based. Indeed sections 175-177 of the Regulation
relate to the remission of
CUC (see Attachment 1).
In the case of onsite costs, including demolition costs, it was argued by a
number of stakeholders that such costs should be included
in the determination
of the CUC where this was necessary to make a redevelopment economically viable.
It is difficult to justify
this approach in general, as such costs should be
reflected in the price paid for the property for redevelopment, or
alternatively,
would be passed on to the end user of the redeveloped property,
or shared between the two parties.
With respect to offsite costs, our understanding is that the majority of
these are mandatory costs imposed by the Government as part
of the DA process.
Such costs include intersections and road upgrades, for example. The requirement
from the developer to undertake
these offsite works as part of a
development/redevelopment appears to have worked well. This approach satisfies
the requirement of
timeliness and efficiency from the point of view of project
As in the case of onsite costs however, these mandatory offsite costs
should not be included as part of the CUC. Infrastructure costs
considered separately from the determination of the CUC and each reported
(Emphasis added.)
circumstances being addressed in those passages included ones in which
developers were required to construct what we shall call
public infrastructure
(roads, footpaths etc) or infrastructure which was “development
driven”, and who would pay for
such infrastructure. At that time,
developers sought and were able to offset at least some of those costs from
Final Report suggested that the CUC and “user charges” (being
mandatory onsite and offsite works) were fundamentally
different, and,
accordingly, should be separated in their determination and charging. Separation
of the two different charges would,
in the opinion of the authors, go some way
to ensuring that the CUC would not be (at least in part) an infrastructure or
development
authors recommended that a formal process should be developed and overseen by
appropriate government agencies to identify, verify
“and where appropriate
fund mandatory offsite infrastructure
requirements”.
The authors
emphasised that:
... mandatory infrastructure costs should be dealt with separately from the
authors of the Final Report recommended that the LVC be codified for most land
in the Territory.
with “Improvements, onsite and offsite costs revisited” at section
4.2.5. In that section the authors said:
A noteworthy reform associated with the introduction of codification is the
treatment of onsite and offsite works which will be treated
separately from the
calculation of LVC.
The proposed codification system will be based on variations to permitted
uses that would result in changes in land values (by means
of an index value
determined from the market value of land averaged over three years
excluding improvements and those onsite and offsite user costs which are
allowable under the current CUC system
. This is in line with the principles
for the codified framework stated in Section 4.1 above.
By taking this
approach some
these costs, such as demolition costs, would be
reflected in either the offset or premium paid for the land to be redeveloped or
would be passed on to the end users/owners of the land through increased
purchase prices/rents payable. This is in contrast to the
current system where,
by allowing these costs to be accounted for in the determination of V 1 and V2,
the community is effectively
paying for much of the user charges/costs
approach also has the potential to distort development decisions in supporting
demolition of improvements.
As with the current CUC system and as stated earlier, the ACT Government
would still retain the right to fully or partially waive
the determined CUC in
certain cases (in accord with Sections 175-177 of the Regulation or Disallowable
Instrument). This right, as
at present, would be in the form of a
regulation.
While mandatory offsite works will need to be calculated separately from
the LVC charge
, in response to the feedback received from industry
since the release of the Discussion Paper,
we are recommending to Government
that consideration be given to an efficient process to manage the incidence of
benefits and costs
of offsite infrastructure
Whilst there should be no
justification for the Government to pay for offsite infrastructure upgrades that
arise as a result of the
operational needs of a particular development, we agree
that developers should be compensated for the mandated offsite works, especially
if the benefits are realised by the wider community. In such circumstances, the
proposed approach allows the developers to be paid
the full value of mandated
works, whereas under the current system, they are only allowed to deduct a
percentage of these costs.
(Emphasis added.)
that passage the authors drew a distinction between offsite infrastructure
upgrades that arose because of the operational needs
of a particular development
(which they considered the Government should not pay for) and mandated offsite
work which the Government
should pay for (especially if the benefits are
realised by the wider community).
Final Report continued at p 30:
Separating out the value of mandatory offsite works under the new
arrangements is consistent with the principles of codification identified
previously (in particular, timeliness, growth, transparency and simplicity). The
consultant recognises that if a development is to
be undertaken in a timely
fashion, both the scope and funding for mandatory offsite costs will need to be
established upfront in
a transparent fashion.
For the future administration of offsite costs, we suggest that an
appropriate structure and process be established to give due consideration
the reasonableness and scope of these works, who will pay the mandated costs and
how they will be funded.
Our understanding is that under the current system many DAs requiring
mandatory offsite works have had the cost of these works included
as part of the
overall construction costs; that is they are not separately identified and
Under the new LVC system, where mandatory offsite works are to be undertaken
by the developer, these works should be separately identified
and costed prior
to approval by the relevant government agency.
far as we are aware, the structure or process mentioned in that passage to give
due consideration to the reasonableness and scope
of offsite works, who will pay
the mandated costs and how they will be funded has been established. All that
existed (after the amendments
made because of the Final Report) was a
discretionary power exercisable by the Minister to remit a percentage of an LVC
of the circumstances leading to an LVC were codified as recommended by the Final
Report. However, the authors noted that there
would be circumstances in which
codification would not apply. They said, at section 4.2.6, that in such
circumstances valuers would
be required, and that valuations would be based on
land values only. The authors said:
Valuations would be based on land values only excluding any structural
improvements, or any onsite and offsite costs requirements.
statement was repeated at section 4.5 (and the final paragraph in section 5.2)
with the addition that:
As stated earlier infrastructure costs should be considered separately from
the quantification of the LVC.
distinction between certain types of offsite costs was further mentioned at
section 7.7 wherein the authors commented on industry
that the authors supported the principle that demolition and onsite and offsite
costs should not be taken
into account in determining the CUC, the authors also
recognised the (presumably construction and financial) efficiencies associated
with developers undertaking (as in constructing) the mandatory offsite works and
agreed that that practice should continue.
authors went on to say that the codified values they suggested had been
determined from land market values. They then said:
The Report has concluded that
improvements, onsite costs (including
demolition costs) and non-mandatory offsite costs should not be subsidised by
the community
. They are costs which should be the responsibility of the
developer and should be reflected in the price paid for the land to be
developed, the developer’s profit, the price paid by the end user(s) for
the developed property, or some combination of all
three of these. This overall
approach is consistent with the original intention of the betterment levy and
accords with some earlier
versions of the CUC such as Method B discussed in
Section 2.1.2.
(Emphasis added.)
important point to note is that when the authors referred to offsite costs not
being subsidised by the community in the quote
above, their comment was limited
non-mandatory
offsite costs.
at section 8.5 (dealing with industry feedback to the draft report) the authors
The approach proposed in this report is for the schedule of codified values
to be based on the market value of land, excluding improvements, onsite and
offsite costs
. The reason for this, as already stated, is that
should be determined to reflect the increase in the value of the lease as a
result of the increase in the bundle of rights
associated with the lease. It
should not reflect the value of improvements, demolition and other onsite and
offsite costs
(Emphasis added.)
result of the Final Report, and after consideration by the then Government and
debate by the Legislative Assembly, was the introduction
Planning and
Development (Lease Variation Charges) Amendment Bill 2011
(the LVC Bill)
into the Legislative Assembly on 5 May 2011.
LVC Bill proposed replacing the then Division 9.6.3 (which contained ss 277 and
278 as we have set out above) with a new Division
LVC Bill proposed some terminology changes to s 277 (to refer to a LVC rather
than a CUC) but no substantive changes. It introduced
the new s 277A and a new s
278 (amongst other changes).
the LVC Bill (which was later amended), cl 277A was in the following form:
277A Lease variation charge under s 277—improvements
(1) In working
under section 277,
an improvement in relation to the land comprised in the lease must not be taken
into account.
Note Power to make a regulation in relation to a matter includes power
to make provision in relation to a class of a matter (see
Legislation Act
(2) However, an improvement may be taken into account if—
prescribed by regulation; and
—it is an improvement by way of clearing,
filling, grading, draining, levelling or excavating the land.
(3) A regulation may prescribe the percentage value of an improvement
mentioned in subsection (2) that may be taken into account.
(4) In this section:
improvement
, in relation to land, means an existing or proposed
improvement and includes any of the following:
(a) a building or structure on or under the land;
(b) an alteration or demolition of an existing building or structure on or
under the land;
(c) the remediation of the land;
(d) earthworks, planting or other work that affects the landscape of the
(e) anything prescribed by regulation;
(f) anything mentioned in paragraphs (a) to (e) that is
(i) as a condition of a development approval; or
(ii) by a statutory approval obtained or required for a development proposal;
(iii) under an agreement between the Territory or a territory entity
(A) the lessee; or
(B) if the lessee is not the applicant for the development approval—the
remediation
Environment Protection Act 1997
dictionary.
short, cl 277A said that improvements must not be taken into account unless
prescribed by regulation or unless it was an improvement
by way of clearing,
filling, grading, draining, levelling or excavating the land. It then defined
(for the first time) what an “improvement”
was for the purposes of
that clause.
LVC Bill seemed to give effect to the recommendations in the Final Report that,
ordinarily, improvements (as defined) should not
be taken into account,
including what appear to have been regarded as mandatory works referred to in
clause 277A(4)(f).
were the subject of clause 278 which said that the Commissioner for Revenue must
remit all or part of a lease variation
charge for a chargeable variation of a
nominal rent lease as prescribed by regulation, and that a regulation may
prescribe the amount
to be remitted.
Explanatory Statement to the LVC Bill noted, at cl 2, that lease variations were
a “development” that required development
approval. It then made
frequent references to passages of the Final Report and said, at cl 16, that
there were two main categories
of lease variations for the purpose of the
first category was prescribed chargeable variations (the subject of the
codification) which at the time consisted of variations
to increase the
permitted number of dwellings on residential leases and variations to increase
the maximum amount of gross floor
area permitted for a non-residential purpose
(as well as variations to subdivide or consolidate leases).
second category were those for which it was said that it was not practical to
set a codified charge. Examples given, at cl 32,
were lease variations to change
the uses authorised under a lease.
to the exclusion of offsite and onsite costs, the Explanatory Statement said:
Exclusion of off-site and on-site costs.
Final Report recommended that calculations of the LVC not include any on-site
physical improvements on the relevant land such
as new or modified housing,
demolition and remediation (ss 2.5.4, 4.2.5
). The Final Report also
recommended that the LVC not take account of any off-site improvements, for
example, completion of infrastructure
works (roads etc) adjacent or near the
land. This is because the LVC is intended to be a charge for obtaining
additional rights under
the lease to which these costs are not relevant.
Final Report (pp 16, 17) noted that:
“Under the current system all these user [on-site, off-site] costs, as
well as improvements, are taken into consideration in
the determination of the
CUC. Developers are able to offset (a proportion of) the increase in land value
from a successful lease
variation application against onsite and offsite user
costs. However, the original concept of the payment of a betterment was to
charge for additional developmental rights; it was not intended to compensate
developers for expenditure, both onsite and offsite,
required to undertake the
redevelopment. Over time, however, these offsets have become a component of the
current CUC system. It
is important to recognise that a CUC is not an
infrastructure or development charge, but a payment for a lease variation which
in increased rights to be associated with the lease. The CUC and user
charge are fundamentally different and as such should be separated
determination and charging. Under the current system, as a result of developers
being able to offset both onsite and offsite
costs against CUC, the actual
revenue from the betterment component is significantly reduced.”
with the recommendations of the Final Report, the Bill makes it clear that
improvements (on-site, off-site improvements)
must not be taken
account in calculating the LVC
LVCs will not be set by the LVC Determination. These will still be determined
under the existing formula of s277 which involves
estimating the current value
of the relevant lease and the likely value the lease would gain should the
proposed lease variation
proceed. For such LVCs, new ss277A (clause 10) makes it
explicitly clear that building, modifications, demolition, remediation,
done on the relevant land cannot be taken into account in assessing
(Emphasis added.)
118-123 of the Explanatory Statement addressed the proposed cl 277A but throw no
light on the issues before us.
124 does provide some further context to what became s 277A(3)(e), namely that:
For the purposes of working out what constitutes an improvement, it is
immaterial if the possible improvement was completed or is
proposed to be
completed as a condition of a development approval or other statutory approval
or agreement between a Territory entity
and the lessee (new
s277A(4)(b)).
relevance of cl 277A(4)(f)(iii) was that where a developer performed work as
required by the Territory, it was frequently undertaken
under the provisions of
a holding lease and deed of agreement between the developer and the
cl 277A(4) did not include what became s 277A(3)(f), which was:
(f) anything mentioned in paragraphs (a) to (d) proposed in a development
application in relation to a chargeable variation of a nominal
rent lease to be
carried out on land
outside of the land under the lease
(Emphasis added.)
the Bill was before the Legislative Assembly various amendments were proposed.
Some were rejected. Some were accepted.
proposed amendment to omit the proposed new s 277A(1)-(3), and replace it with a
section which said that in working out V1 and V2
under s 277 an improvement in
relation to the land
be taken into account was rejected.
proposed amendment to vary the proposed new s 278 to make it mandatory to remit
the cost of doing work on land outside of the lease
if required by a condition
of a development approval was likewise rejected.
proposed amendment to replace the proposed new s 277A(2) with a section allowing
an existing improvement by way of clearing, filling,
grading, draining,
levelling or excavating the land to be taken into account was allowed.
from 1 July 2011 the old Division 9.6.3 was entirely replaced by a new Division
9.6.3 by the
Planning and Development (Lease Variation Charges) Amendment Act
2011 Amending Act
Importantly,
reg 175 (which had previously provided for remissions) was then omitted from the
Planning and Development Regulation 2008
new Division 9.6.3 contained an identical s 277 to the previous version
(although with some changes in terminology and the addition
of sub-s (4)). The
CUC then became the LVC.
significant change was the addition of s 277A (which had not existed in any form
in the previously applicable legislation) and
was in the form set out earlier in
these reasons.
Subsequently,
was replaced by the
Planning Act 2023
, the relevant parts
of which commenced operation on 27 November 2023.
the approval to vary the lease was granted on 5 June 2023, the
applies to the chargeable variation rather than the
Factual, planning and lease variation charge
February 2007, the second and third applicants became tenants in common of
Blocks 11 and 12 of
, Fyshwick, being the Molonglo land.
that time the Molonglo land was zoned IZ1 – General Industry.
30 April 2021, and because of an application by Molonglo, the Molonglo land was
rezoned CZ3 - Services Zone by way of a variation
to the Territory
general planning regime under the
was as follows.
provided that there must be a Territory Plan that applies to the Territory.
The Territory Plan is a notifiable instrument and was
first notified on 13
February 2008.
Territory Plan was concerned with, inter alia, “development”.
“Development”
was defined in
which said:
(1) In this Act:
development
, in relation to land, means the following:
(a) building, altering or demolishing a building or structure on the
(b) carrying out earthworks or other construction work on or under the
(c) carrying out work that would affect the landscape of the land;
(d) using the land, or a building or structure on the land;
(e) subdividing or consolidating the land;
(f) varying a lease relating to the land (other than a variation that reduces
the rent payable to a nominal rent);
land was defined in s 8 to include changing the use of land.
“development application” was defined in the Dictionary to the
... an application in relation to a development proposal made under chapter 7
(Development approvals).
“development proposal” was defined as:
... a proposal for development, whether in a development application
(Emphasis added.)
we read those definitions, a development proposal was that which a developer
proposed to do (as in put forward for consideration),
whether as set out in a
development application or “otherwise” (meaning in other documents
associated with the development
application form itself or in subsequent
communications between the applicant and the planning authority).
“development approval” was defined as:
... development approval under chapter 7 (Development approvals).
7 contained s 113 which said that a person who had a development proposal may
apply to the planning and land authority for
approval to undertake the
development proposed.
if a developer desired to develop land in a particular way, including
constructing buildings or structures on or under the land,
or changing the use
of the land, what it desired would be a “development proposal”. The
developer would then apply for
approval of that proposal by lodging a
“development application”. An approval of that development
application under Chapter
7 was then the “development approval”.
These statements may seem a little trite, but they assume some significance for
the proper application of s 277A(3)(e) and (f) to the facts of this case and in
which all three defined terms are used.
50 required developments to be assessed in accordance with the requirements of
the Territory Plan.
Territory Plan included, in part 16, the Estate Development Code (the
). The Code applied to all proposals in the Territory for the
subdivision of land.
It provided
additional planning, design and environmental controls to support the objectives
of each relevant zone and was used by
ACTPLA to assess development applications
for estate development plans.
Code required the preparation and approval of an EDP if an applicant desired to
subdivide land. The Code stated that:
Estate development plans (EDPs) set out the proposed subdivision pattern and
infrastructure works for an estate. EDPs must be submitted
as development
applications for approval by ACTPLA. Development approval of the EDP is required
before design acceptance can be obtained
from TAMS, works can commence and
leases issued for the subdivided blocks.
EDP application (DA 86) was subject to the Code because it sought to create 36
blocks for an eventual
subdivision.
to the town planning evidence, a substantial part of the Code related to the
design of public/handback assets to a standard
set down by the Territory through
agencies and utility entities. Other parts of the Code dealt with estate layout,
public realm and
environment protection.
formally, s 94 set out the requirements for an EDP. Section 94 said:
is an estate development plan?
(1) An estate development plan, for an estate, sets out the proposed
development of the estate, and the creation of blocks in
estate, in a
way that is consistent with—
(a) if the estate is in a future urban area—the concept plan for the
area where the estate is; and
(b) any other code that applies to the estate.
Note A development application for the development of an estate must be
accompanied by an estate development plan (see s 139 (2) (s)).
development plan must identify—
(a) the block boundaries for individual blocks proposed for inside the
estate and the boundaries proposed for the whole estate; and
(b) if the estate is in a future urban area—the zones proposed for the
estate and any existing zones that are to continue to
(c) if the estate is not in a future urban area—the existing zones in
the estate.
(3) An estate development plan may include the following for the
(a) design and construction requirements for roads;
(b) design and construction requirements for infrastructure works and
landscaping;
(c) particular areas for particular detailed purposes;
(d) a tree management plan;
(e) design and construction requirements for reticulated services;
(f) design and construction requirements for works on proposed public
(g) a provision, which is consistent with the territory plan, that is
proposed to apply to the ongoing development of a block in the
ongoing provision
(i) relates to the subject matter addressed by an existing mandatory rule or
criteria applying to the block; and
(ii) does not permit the development of the block in a way that would not be
permitted by the existing mandatory rule or criteria.
(4) In this section:
mandatory rule
, in relation to a code, means a rule that is
described in the code as being mandatory.
follows from those provisions that an application for an EDP and an application
for a lease variation were both applications to
develop land under the
to the Molonglo land, that land (being on one Crown lease) is presently
sufficiently serviced to the boundary of the lease
in terms of utilities for its
existing uses.
Molonglo land has some current usage. Various utilities (water, power etc),
roads and footpaths extend from the boundary of the
land to the various
buildings on the land.
4 August 2022, Molonglo lodged development application DA202240586 (
) seeking approval of an
Molonglo was putting forward for consideration in that development application
was a development proposal (as defined in the
), and the application
was a development application (as defined in the
86 described the proposal as follows:
Proposal for an estate development plan for to
create 36 blocks,
four public roads, and associated relocation of existing utilities
infrastructure, construction of new utilities
infrastructure, and earthworks.
This application also seeks approval for tree removal and demolition of fences
and buildings.
Crown lease did not permit the use of the Molonglo land for that development,
but DA 86 was able to be lodged under s 137AA in
anticipation of a development
application for a change of
DA 86 application also said that it would be supported by a separate, concurrent
development application for a variation of the
Crown lease. The DA 86
application said:
Our EDP DA will be supported by a separate, concurrent Lease Variation DA to
obtain the development rights for the site’s redevelopment,
supportive offsite works, such as road upgrades and active travel
infrastructure.
DA 86 application said that the EDP was an essential approval allowing Molonglo
to construct the infrastructure required to support
the proposed development. It
The EDP is an essential approval which allows us to construct the
infrastructure required to support the proposed development and
better connections to the site. Additionally, without all the related EDP
approvals, we cannot add new uses to the site.
follows, and we find, that DA 86 was inextricably linked with the subsequent DA
19, the development application for the lease variation.
To develop the land as
it proposed, Molonglo needed the approval of both applications.
Notice of Decision dated 19 December 2022, ACTPLA approved the “proposal
for an” EDP subject to various conditions
EDP approval
summary, the Notice of Decision approved:
(a) the creation of 36 new ‘CZ3 – Services Zone’ blocks,
across Blocks 11 and 12, and Blocks 12 and 13 Section
47 Fyshwick (unleased
(b) earthworks, footpaths, landscaping, publicly accessible open spaces, public
open spaces, roads, tree removal and utility services;
(c) demolition and other associated works; and
(d) offsite works.
were several subsequent variations to the approved EDP (as described by Mr
Blencowe at AB 1622 – 1628 and 7479 and which
explains why the
“approved” plans in evidence bear the date 1 May 2023 or later). As
far as we can determine, the precise
details of those particular variations are
not relevant to the interpretation issues in this case other than the variation
to Condition
3. We will come to Condition 3 shortly.
is pertinent to note at this time that a significant proportion of the works
approved in the EDP approval were works put forward
for consideration, or
proposed by, Molonglo in its application. They were not proposed by ACTPLA and
then imposed on Molonglo by
the conditions of the EDP approval.
works proposed by Molonglo were described in the
application
and the plans
submitted “for approval” attached to the
application.
Not all of the
plans submitted as part of that application (at least as listed in the EDP DA
Submission Document Index
appear to have been in the evidence.
relevant works were, of course, governed by and required to comply with the
requirements of the Code and other aspects of the
Territory Plan. It was
presumably because of the requirements of the Code, other relevant aspects of
the Territory Plan or other
planning instruments, that Molonglo put forward for
consideration that which was in the DA 86 application.
3 of the original EDP approval said that the approval for the EDP did not take
effect until the Crown lease for the Molonglo
land was varied to permit the
approved development. Condition 3 said:
3. APPROVAL DOES NOT TO TAKE EFFECT
This approval does not take effect until the provisions of the Crown lease
for Blocks 11 and 12 Section 38 Division of Fyshwick is
varied to permit the
approved development.
: The proposed development is not currently permitted by the
; a variation to permit additional uses not currently
listed on the Crown Lease purpose clause for blocks 11 & 12 Section 38
is required for this approval to take effect.
: As per condition 7 below, for residential use including
multi-unit dwellings to be included in the purpose clauses, further
information
to address EPA requirements and site suitability are also
: Direct sale (part block 11 Section 47) & consolidation may
form part of the lease variation application process.
3 also demonstrated the inextricable link between DA 86 and the subsequent DA
3 of the EDP approval was varied a number of times. Its final form (22 September
2023) was as follows:
APPROVAL DOES NOT TO TAKE EFFECT
With the exception of civil works (incl works necessary for: utility
services, roads, footpaths, earthworks, tree removal, landscaping,
public open
spaces, publicly accessible open spaces) as outlined in this decision, this
approval does not take effect until –
a) the provisions of the Crown lease for Blocks 11 and 12 Section 38 Division
of Fyshwick is varied to permit the approved development;
: The proposed development is not currently permitted by the
purpose clause. The Lease Variation
DA202341419
in relation to
these blocks was approved subject to a condition that the lessee surrender the
existing Crown lease over these blocks
in favour of a new Crown lease over the
consolidated block which includes the approved additional uses. This process has
finalised and is required for this approval to take effect.
: Condition 7 as amended in the Notice of Decision on
Reconsideration dated 2 February 2023 applies to ‘all’ consequential
leases with residential use on site not just to the those in direct sale parcel.
As per Condition 7, for residential use including
multi-unit dwellings to be
included in the purpose clauses in consequential leases, further information to
address Environment Protection
Authority (EPA) requirements and site suitability
are also required. Refer to EPA advice under PART B ENTITY ADVICE below
b) the crown lease over part Block 11 Section 47 Division of Fyshwick (new
block identifiers 12 & 13 Section 47 Fyshwick &
currently, the subject
of a direct sale application), is granted and the lease is consolidated with the
new Crown lease over Blocks
11 and 12 Section 38 Division of Fyshwick;
Note: A new development application for the consolidation of the direct sale
parcel/s may be required.
c) prior to any subdivision or consolidation of Blocks 11 and 12 Section 38
Division of Fyshwick, the lessee:
i. surrenders the new Crown Lease over the consolidated block (i.e.
consolidation of Blocks 11 & 12 Section 38 Fyshwick with part
Section 47 Fyshwick) in favour of a “Core Area” Crown Lease
incorporating the existing subleases with all other
development areas
surrendered into a Holding Lease for the purpose of subdivision and urban
development in accordance with a Deed
of Agreement and associated approved Dairy
Road EDP, on terms and conditions as agreed to by the Territory to allow for the
development
and delivery of the onsite and offsite works
ii. prior to the registration of the new Crown Lease over the consolidated
block (i.e., consolidation of Blocks 11 & 12 Section
38 Fyshwick with part
Block 11 Section 47 Fyshwick), enters into a separate Deed of Agreement with the
Territory and provides an
associated General Performance Bond to the
satisfaction of the Territory which will be held by the Authority as security
works required to be undertaken by the Developer.
(Emphasis added.)
4 of the EDP approval said that the approval would end if the Crown lease was
not varied within 24 months of the date of
the date of the decision. This was
later varied to a period of 36
14 March 2023, Molonglo submitted a development application for a lease
variation, being DA202341419 (
) in order to satisfy Condition 3 of
the EDP approval.
relevantly, DA 19 sought to expand the Purpose clause of the Crown lease to
allow for additional purposes, most relevantly an
increase of GFA to 191,844
and to allow for multi-unit housing of up to 700 dwellings.
proposed change of use was a “development” as defined in ss 7 and 8.
DA 19 was a development application (as defined
) and was a
development application for a chargeable variation of a nominal rent lease under
19 was approved by a Notice of Decision dated 5 June 2023. This amounted to the
approval of a development application for a chargeable
variation (the
chargeable variation
was a “s 277 chargeable variation” (as defined in s 276) because it
was not a chargeable variation prescribed by regulation
(otherwise it would have
been a section “276E chargeable variation”).
276B provided that no chargeable variation of a Crown lease could be executed
unless the LVC was paid to the Territory or
a deferral arrangement had been
entered into.
276C provided that the LVC for a s 277 chargeable variation was the charge (if
any) worked out under s 277.
276D provided that on approval of a development application for a chargeable
variation, the Commissioner was required to give
a notice of assessment of the
LVC to the lessee.
the LVC in mind, Molonglo submitted with its DA 19 application a valuation by
Colliers Valuation and Advisory Services of the
before and after values of the
land as at 13 February 2023.
Collier’s valuation annexed an Appendix D which was a costing of the full
EDP works by Turner & Townsend amounting
To value the after value,
Collier’s used the hypothetical development method.
5 June 2023, ACTPLA approved the lease
then followed various communications between Molonglo and ACTPLA concerning
variations to the lease variation approval and questions
regarding the Turner
& Townsend costings.
23 October 2023, Molonglo provided a peer review report of the Turner &
Townsend costings prepared by Mr Wolmarans.
21 November 2023, the ACT Valuation Office (
) provided a review of
the LVC assessment to the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development
Directorate.
Included in that
assessment were before and after valuations of the Molonglo land. Both those
valuations used the comparable sales
agreement between the parties were that the valuations and costings we have
mentioned above were not to be treated as expert evidence
but as matters of
historical fact only. We have treated them accordingly.
7 March 2024, the Commissioner provided a Notice of Assessment to Molonglo
(based on the ACTVO valuations) in which the before
value was assessed at a
little over $22m, the after value at just under $72m, the difference at just
under $50m and, after discounting
by 25%, assessed the LVC at
$36,993,750.
sought a reconsideration of that assessment pursuant to s
After reconsideration the
Commissioner confirmed the assessment referred to
That decision was a
reviewable decision.
applicants then commenced proceedings in the Tribunal to review the
reconsideration
determination.
The land and the EDP works
is now useful to describe the land and the EDP work in a little more
mentioned earlier, the Molonglo land is presently sufficiently serviced to its
boundary in terms of water supply, sewerage, power,
roads, footpaths and the
like for the current usage on the land. To create 36 blocks out of the one,
existing, Molonglo block (the
Molonglo land), additional work is necessary to
construct water supply, sewerage, power, roads, footpaths and the like to the
of the 36 blocks proposed in the EDP approval.
estate boundary depicted in the EDP included the Molonglo land together with
some Territory land
owned by Molonglo, namely Block 11, Section 47,
Fyshwick (Molonglo called this the
Adjacent Unleased land
was proposed that Molonglo would later acquire part of the Adjacent Unleased
land (now known as Blocks 12 and 13, Section 47, Fyshwick
Direct Grant
)), although, as we understand it, no formal agreement is yet in place
for this to occur.
submissions said that the EDP required Molonglo to acquire the Direct Grant
Land, remediate the contamination on
it, construct a public road on it, and then
hand the road back to the
We think what was
meant was that Molonglo was required to remediate the Adjacent Unleased land,
construct a public road on it, and
then acquire the Direct Grant Land.
be the more accurate, our reading of the EDP approval is that that approval did
Molonglo to acquire the Direct Grant Land nor to do the works
referred to above on it. That is, there is no words of obligation in
approval which oblige Molonglo to do those things. We not taken to any part of
the EDP approval which purported to have this
effect, although it is clear from
the documents that those things were
contemplated.
The only point we
are making is that it was not the EDP approval which
things to occur.
Direct Grant Land is not part of the LVC assessment the subject of this case
(and its acquisition is a separate process), but
it is within the estate
boundary, and the works planned to be carried out on it by Molonglo were part of
the EDP works.
has been referred to in the case as the offsite works are works referred to in
the EDP which are located outside the boundaries
of the estate
It is sufficient to
briefly describe those offsite works as being the construction of an on-ramp
onto and off-ramp off the Monaro
Highway (where it intersects Dairy Road), a
Dairy Road site access, bus stop and roundabout, certain active travel paths and
buffer rising sewer main. There was a plan headed “Off-Site
Works Plan” no. 7426-13-400 submitted as part of the DA 86
application.
The approved
version of that plan was in
onsite works were works to be done inside the estate boundary and included
regrading of land, the construction of roads and streets,
on-street and
additional parking, bus stop, active travel, local and community routes,
engineering and services utilities, waste
management and environmental
management, including sediment ponds, on-site wetland, stormwater swales and
flow check bundling together
with the work on the Direct Grant
onsite works, as we have said, included works which were not on the Molonglo
land, but which were within the estate boundary.
The importance of that fact is
twofold. First, Ms Byrne incorrectly took into account the onsite works which
were on Territory land.
Second, s 277A(3)(f) purports to exclude works required
on land outside the land “under the lease”, and therefore excludes
the onsite works that were to be done on Territory land.
The parties’ contentions
parties’ oral and written submissions on the proper interpretation of ss
277 and 277A were detailed and lengthy. We first
summarise what was not in
dispute and then summarise the parties’ respective cases. Our summary will
not do justice to the
parties’ submissions but should suffice to convey a
general understanding of their respective positions.
Common ground
were six areas of agreement between the parties. We also agree with those
matters subject to one qualification to the first
the after value of the lease was to be valued under s 277 on the basis that the
land would be put to its highest and best use
i.e. the most valuable use of the
land objectively ascertained by reference to the hypothetical buyer which is
physically possible,
legally permissible and financially feasible.
agree with that agreed position. It is consistent with
[107] and with
Valuer-General Victoria v WSTI Properties 490 SKR Pty Ltd
[2025] HCA 23
) in which the Court said at [37]:
"Market value" involves the conventional concept of a hypothetical prudent
seller who would require from the hypothetical prudent
buyer "the fair price of
the land" if the hypothetical prudent buyer was purchasing the land "for the
most advantageous purpose for
which it was adapted". The most advantageous
purpose for which land is "adapted" is the "highest and best use" of the land.
terminology, "adapted" or "highest and best use" of land means the
most valuable use of the land, objectively ascertained by reference
hypothetical buyer, which is "physically possible, legally permissible and
financially feasible".
qualification is to what the parties submitted was the highest and best use of
the Molonglo land.
parties submitted that the highest and best use of the land (assuming the lease
were varied) was what would result from the construction
of the full EDP works,
namely the (almost) subdivision. In our view that is not correct.
highest and best use of the Molonglo land is the highest and best use that can
be made of the purposes set out in the Purpose
clause of the proposed varied
lease. That is, using the land for 192,000 m
of GFA and 700
multi-unit dwellings. This focus on the lease (and not the approved EDP) is
implicitly recognised in s 277(1)(a)(i)
which says that the after value is to be
valued as if the “lease were varied as proposed”.
accept Ms Byrne’s evidence that the highest and best use of the land is
using the land for 192,000 m
of GFA and 700 multi-unit
The highest and best
use was not, and was not limited to, the (almost) subdivision which would be the
result of undertaking the full
like the full EDP works, or a substantial proportion of those works, would have
been necessary to achieve that highest and
best use because the 192,000
of GFA and 700 multi-unit dwellings would require infrastructure
of that approximate scale in order to provide sufficient services
uses, but the highest and best use was not the (almost) subdivision.
were, on the evidence, a number of different ways to realise the development of
of GFA and 700 multi-unit dwellings. The expert town
planner, Mr van der Walt, whose evidence was led by Molonglo, which was
uncontested
and which we accept,
It is emphasised that various proponents, each with a unique development
vision, product outcome and delivery model, could realise
different development
rights for Blocks 11 and 12 Section 38 Fyshwick, under the Crown lease as varied
by DA202341419. In fact, there
would be countless approaches to development of
the land, commensurate to varied and diverse motivations and aspirations for
an estate outcome (e.g., focus on more high-end larger residential
apartments as opposed to smaller, more compact units; maximising
commercial use, tourist facility and commercial accommodation among other
his report Mr van der Walt set out the general parameters of four such
development schemes, being generally described as optimised
Territory Plan
compliance; optimised development yield; optimised construction cost and
difficulty; and optimised gross realisation
potential. Each involved, amongst
other things, the construction of 700 multi-unit dwellings. No scheme was
limited to the subdivision
of the Molonglo land and nothing more.
different schemes would differ as to the precise facilitative works required,
but each scheme would require “core facilitative
works”. Mr van der
Walt said that whilst the costed EDP works were particular to the EDP approval,
they contained many of the
“facilitative works” which would be
required under any development scheme to arrive at 192,000 m
and 700 multi-unit
“[F]acilitative
works” were:
... the associated development works required to support the use of the land
(for uses and activities permitted by the Crown Lease)
and may include works
relating to:
mitigation infrastructure management;
contamination
earthworks;
protection;
parklands and
public communal open space;
pathways and accessways;
infrastructure and water sensitive urban design measures;
management;
service infrastructure; and
management and like.
simply, roads, water, power, sewage, stormwater and the other works referred to
would be necessary to be done for the 192,000
of GFA and 700
multi-unit dwellings to be realised. In Mr van der Walt’s opinion, which
we accept, the EDP works in this case
could accommodate those purposes. That is,
if constructed, those EDP works would allow for the construction of 192,000
of GFA and 700 multi-unit dwellings.
the EDP works were a means to an end, not the end in terms of highest and best
use. The EDP plan was not the only way to achieve
the purposes stated in the
lease. Mr van der Walt said, and we accept,
... there would be countless approaches to development of the land,
commensurate to varied and diverse motivations and aspirations
for realising an
estate outcome ...
Byrne made the same point. We accept Ms Byre’s evidence wherein she
WITNESS BYRNE: I don't agree with you in terms of where the land is at and
the rights of the land as at the date of valuation. So
subdivision is not
permitted as at the date of valuation. It is a future intention of the site
which has been encapsulated in the
EDP. But in terms of what rights someone
would be purchasing as at that date of valuation, it is not 35 subdivided sites.
Crown lease.
SENIOR MEMBER: So how can the highest and best use differ from the
WITNESS BYRNE: I don't consider subdivision necessarily to reflect
subdivision is a way in which the rights may be packaged,
but the highest and
use, in my mind, is 700 residential dwellings and commercial and
industrial style uses on the land
(Emphasis added)
another way, Ms Byrne’s point was that the approved EDP was just one way
of eventually realising the highest and best use
of 192,000 m
and 700 multi-unit dwellings. There were other ways to achieve that end result
including, for example, differently designed
second area of agreement was that the after value is to be ascertained
immediately
after the variation (meaning the date of the development
application approval).
applicable public laws, such as those imposed by any prescribed planning
schemes, ordinances, codes, statutes or otherwise,
must be considered when
assessing value. In this case that would include the Territory Plan, the Code
the Fyshwick Precinct Code,
the Multi Unit Housing Development Code and the
Commercial Zones Development
the word “improvement” where it appears in s 277A(3) in the phrase
“... means an existing or improvement
...” means the commonly
understood meaning of that word, namely: “things done to land which
increase the value of the
or any human
operation that has the effect of enhancing the value of land when compared to
its natural state;
or any human
operations on land that have the effect of enhancing its value for its highest
and best use.
the words “genuine seller” in s 277 means a person who is at
arm’s length from the buyer and genuinely interested
in purchasing the
land, or that the sale is a bona fide market transaction.
the words “must not” in s 277A(1) indicate a mandatory
Molonglo’s interpretation of ss 277 and 277A
case was that the proper interpretation of ss 277 and 277A was to ask what a
hypothetical purchaser would have had
to offer a hypothetical vendor immediately
after the variation to induce it to sell the lease on genuine terms on the
relevant date
on the assumption that the only existing improvements on the site
were by way of clearing, grading, draining, leveling and excavation,
otherwise having regard to all the advantages and disadvantages that would flow
to the hypothetical purchaser acquiring the lease.
submitted that s 277 was the principal provision, and s 277A was ancillary or
subordinate to it. Section 277 sought a market
valuation, and s 277A could not
be inconsistent with that requirement. The sections needed to be read
harmoniously. Put simply, Molonglo
submitted that any part of s 277A which
required some departure from a normal market valuation would be inconsistent
with s 277 and
thus should be read down.
to s 277A itself, and the definition of “improvement”, Molonglo
submitted that the definition only contained two categories
of matters, namely
existing and proposed improvements, but subject to the condition that those
existing or proposed improvements
also met the description of one of the matters
in s 277A(3)(a)-(f). That is, the matters set out in s 277A(3)(a)-(f) operated
qualify what would ordinarily be thought of as being existing or proposed
improvements.
submitted Molonglo, improvements which may be hypothesised as being necessary to
achieve the highest and best use of the Molonglo
land were not caught by s 277A
and could be considered in the valuation exercise.
submitted this fitted neatly with s 277 which sought a market valuation.
Molonglo’s valuers, Ms Byrne and Mr Flannery,
both gave evidence to the
effect that a genuine buyer would want to know, and would factor in, the costs
of the EDP works when considering
what price to pay for the Molonglo land. As Ms
Byrne put it:
A key component of my instructions relates to whether the approved EDP should
be taken into account in the assessment of the ‘After
Value’. It is
my opinion that the EDP
be taken into account as an assessment of
market value based on the Crown Lease alone.
[Not having]
regard to the
EDP, would be misleading and result in an assessed ‘After Value’ not
consistent with the definition of
market value. This is because a potential
purchaser, having regard only to the Crown Lease could assume that as no
off-site or on-site
works are specified within the lease, that no works are
(Emphasis original.)
as Molonglo submitted:
Critically, however, both valuers agree that reasonable purchasers would take
into account the significant costs associated with the
infrastructure works that
are required to unlock the additional rights created by the varied lease when
determining what they would
be willing to pay for that varied lease. This is the
most significant issue in this case.
submitted that improvements are generally attached to the land, the value of
land includes the value of the improvements,
and thus not taking into account
improvements (in s 277A(1)) meant not taking into account the
the improvements. But, Molonglo submitted, ss 277 and 277A did not prevent
taking into account the
of improvements in making adjustments for
the purposes of the comparable sales method used by Ms Byrne and Mr
submitted that the word “proposed” in ss 277 and 277A (in the
chapeau to the definition of “improvement”)
meant something that was
put forward by the applicant, or what the applicant intended (or proposed)
to do. It did not include improvements
that a hypothetical, genuine buyer might
have in contemplation to achieve the highest and best use of the land.
if an applicant such as Molonglo happened to propose improvements which were the
same as improvements that would be hypothesised
as being necessary to achieve
the highest and best use of land, then those improvements could be taken into
to s 277A(3)(e), Molonglo submitted that this sub-section only operated if any
of the items mentioned within it required anything
mentioned in sub-section
(3)(a)-(d) in a detailed way. That is, did a condition of a development approval
(for example) require a
particular building or structure on or under the
submitted that the approved EDP, whilst it was a development approval for the
purposes of the sub-section, did not require
any of the matters described in
sub-section (3)(a)-(d) (save for works in relation to a perimeter fence) because
it did not require
any particular building, structure etc. It simply required
Molonglo to go away and sort out a series of buildings, structures etc
several other Territory authorities. The approval did not say that Molonglo had
to do X, or had to do Y.
another way, the EDP approval did not require the construction of anything
because at the point when the EDP had been approved,
those things referred to in
the conditions of approval had not been ascertained.
to s 277A(3)(e)(iii), Molonglo submitted that whilst there was in existence a
Draft Deed which referred to works to be undertaken
by Molonglo, the Draft Deed
had not been executed. Molonglo submitted that the subsection could only refer
to executed agreements.
to s 277A(3)(f), Molonglo submitted that the EDP was approved on 10 December
2022, and the development application for the lease
variation was not lodged
until four months later, on 10 March 2023. Molonglo submitted that a lease
variation does not take place
until the LVC is paid or a deferral arrangement is
entered into and cited s 276B. Thus, submitted Molonglo, the lease variation had
not taken place (and may never take place) and accordingly the EDP did not
relate to a chargeable variation as required by the sub-section.
The Commissioner’s interpretation of ss 277 and
Commissioner submitted that there was no inconsistency or disharmony between ss
277 and 277A. All that s 277A did was to modify
the operation of s 277. This was
clear, the submission went, from the opening words of s 277A which said that
“[i]n working
out V1 and V2 under section 277 ...”.
As to s 277A itself, and the definition of “improvement”, Molonglo
submitted that the definition contained three categories
of matters, namely
existing improvements, proposed improvements and, to the extent they were not
otherwise caught by those terms,
the matters described in s 277A(3)(a)-(f). Or,
in the Commissioner’s words:
... so that the defined term ‘improvement’ includes existing or
proposed improvements,
, each of the matters in s
277A(3)(a)-(f).
(Emphasis added.)
oral closing submissions the Commissioner seemed to be retreat from this
position, at least in part. He at first disagreed that
s 277(3)(a)-(f) added a
category of matters,
said s 277(3)(a)-(f) both clarified and extended the
any event, putting aside the way in which the submission was expressed, the
Commissioner was clear in submitting that s 277(3)(e)-(f)
captured the EDP works
if they were not already caught by the terms ‘existing improvements’
or ‘proposed improvements’.
were not clear what the Commissioner’s final position was in relation to
the meaning of the word “proposed”.
We thought at the beginning of
the case that the Commissioner took the same position as Molonglo, namely that
was restricted to whatever was put forward for
consideration by the applicant.
in final submissions the Commissioner appeared to take a different position, at
least where that word appeared in in s 277A(3)(f).
In relation to
“proposed” in that sub-section, the Commissioner submitted that the
word extended beyond what was put
forward for consideration by an applicant, but
also included a condition sought to be imposed by the planning authority.
other submissions, the Commissioner said that some improvements that could be
hypothesised as being necessary for the highest and
best use of the land could
be considered in valuing the after
but not hypothesised
works that fall within sub-s
(3)(a)-(f).
The Commissioner
said that some improvements that could be hypothesised for a highest and best
use analysis could be considered,
but others could
another point the Commissioner submitted that s 277A prevented both the costs
and value of improvements being taken into
was not put this way, but the substance of the Commissioner’s case, as
best we understood it, was that when valuing the after
value no account could be
taken of (or no consideration could be given to) existing improvements, any
improvements proposed by an
applicant for approval, and any improvements which
might be hypothesised as being necessary to achieve the highest and best use of
land if those improvements fell within s
277A(3)(a)-(f).
Overview as to how the provisions work
do not accept either party’s interpretation of ss 277 and 277A.
is most important are the words of the sections, with the sections taken as a
whole and read in the context of the
. We will discuss the words of
the two sections shortly but will first provide the following overview.
our opinion ss 277 and 277A, on their proper interpretation, require that in
working out the after value, the cost of or value
added by any of the following
three things must not be taken into account: existing improvements, other than
those referred to in
s 277A(2); improvements proposed by an applicant, and;
anything (presumably existing) which falls within sub-s (3)(e) or (f).
words “must not be taken into account” in s 277A mean that the land
to be valued should not be taken, at the time
of valuation, to be benefitted or
burdened by any of the matters just referred to.
is, the land is to be valued as if:
(a) any existing improvements other than those referred to in s 277A(2) were not
(b) any improvements that the applicant proposed to put on the land were in fact
not to be put on the land;
(c) anything mentioned in s
277A(3)(a)-(d)
that is required
as a condition of a development approval, or by a statutory approval obtained or
required for a development proposal,
or under an agreement between the Territory
or a territory entity and the lessee or the applicant for approval, were not in
required; and
(d) anything mentioned in s 277A(3)(a)-(d) proposed in a development application
which has some direct or indirect connection with
a chargeable variation, and
which is to be carried out on land outside of the land under the lease, was not
to be carried out.
sections do not prevent the use of the hypothetical development method to value
the after value and, within that method, consideration
being given to the cost
of and value added by any improvements that may be hypothesised as being
necessary for a development which
would realise the highest and best use of the
the sections do not prevent the use of the comparable sales method to value the
after value and, within that method, consideration
being given to the cost of or
value added by any improvements that may be hypothesised as being necessary in
order to make adjustments
to the land being valued so as to make that land as
comparable as possible to a basket of relevant comparable sales.
do not consider that the Legislative Assembly intended that ss 277 and 277A
would prevent the hypothetical development or the comparable
sales method being
available to be used to value land which is required to be valued under ss 277
do not agree with the Commissioner’s submission that the sections require
the hypothetical development method to be used
in a modified way i.e. in a way
that values land on the basis that value added by the addition of improvements
may be taken into
account, but the not the cost of those improvements.
modify the hypothetical development method in that way would result in fictional
land valuations in most if not all cases, a result
we regard as being
unreasonable or absurd per
Legislation Act
agree with Molonglo that, within the comparable sales method, the sections allow
for the cost of hypothetical improvements on the
land to be valued being taken
into account if that is necessary to allow the land to be brought to a state of
comparability with
a basket of relevant comparable sales.
our view, our interpretation achieves the purpose of the provisions which was to
value, and only value, the extra rights granted
by a chargeable variation and
without deducting (as had happened previously) the costs incurred by developers
which would fall within
s 277A(3)(e) or (f).
Section 277A modifies section 277
agree with the Commissioner that s 277A modifies s 277, and there is, contrary
to Molonglo’s submissions, no disharmony or
inconsistency involved.
our view the opening words of s 277A, namely that “(i)n working out V1 and
V2 under section 277 ...” are plain in their
meaning. They impose a
modification as to how the before and after values in s 277 are to be worked
is consistent with the Explanatory Statement which expressly said that s 277A
modified s 277.
our opinion s 277A does not detract from what Molonglo submitted was s
277’s requirement for a market valuation. What must
be remembered is that
ss 277 and 277A are not concerned with valuing land as it is, they are concerned
with valuing the extra rights
granted under a varied lease. That is done by
ignoring the matters set out in s 277A.
submission was, in substance, premised on the basis that more than the extra
rights were to be valued, namely, the
extra rights less the cost of certain
improvements.
result of s 277A modifying s 277 in the way we have described is somewhat
analogous to the exercise of valuing the unimproved
value of land for the
purposes of the
Rates Act 2004
says that the
unimproved value of a parcel of land is the capital amount that might be
expected to have been offered on a date for
the parcel assuming that the
only improvements on or to the parcel were the improvements (if any) by way of
clearing, filling, grading,
draining, levelling or excavating.
assumption in
is in substantially the same terms as
s 277A(2) which also allows for those improvements to be taken into
277, as modified by s 277A, may, by way of analogy, be thought of as valuing
leased land in a similar way under the
, but with two valuations
being required: being one immediately before and one immediately after the
addition, whatever may be the after value, developers could not, as they had
been allowed to do previously, deduct from the increased
value of the rights
granted the costs of works imposed on them by the approving authorities or the
costs of works a developer proposed
to do on land outside the land under the
The meaning of “must not be taken into
277A says that in working out V1 and V2 under s 277, an improvement (as defined)
in relation to the land comprised in the
lease “must not be taken into
ordinary meaning of “take into account” is along the lines of
“to consider” or “to allow for”.
word “must” used in relation to a function indicates that the
function is required to be exercised i.e. has a mandatory
“must not be taken into account” means that in working out the after
value, the land to be valued is not to
be taken, at the time of valuation, as
being benefitted or burdened by any of the matters in s 277A(3).
The definition of “improvements”
mentioned earlier, the parties agreed that the word “improvements”
in the phrase “... existing or proposed improvements
277A(3) means things done to land which increase the value of land, or any human
operation that has the effect of
enhancing the value of land when compared to
its natural state, or any human operation on land that have the effect of
its value for its highest and best use.
agree with that interpretation.
course, the improvements expressly mentioned in s 277A(2), namely any clearing,
filling, grading, draining, levelling or excavating
the land, may be taken into
times Molonglo contended that the cost of improvements could be taken into
account, but not the value added to the land by those
improvements. At times the
Commissioner contended that the value added to the land by improvements could be
taken into account, but
not their cost.
our view, when improvements are not to be taken into account, that means that
both the costs of and value added to the land by
improvements is to be ignored.
That interpretations seems clear to us given that the sections simply use the
word “improvements”
and not “the cost of improvements”
or the “value added to the land by improvements” or
“Existing” improvements
was no difficulty with the meaning of “existing improvements”.
Self-evidently that expression refers to improvements
which exist at the
relevant point in time. In this case that is 5 June 2023.
“Proposed improvements”
submitted that the word “proposed” in ss 277 and 277A (in the
chapeau to the definition of “improvement”)
meant something that was
put forward for consideration by the relevant applicant, or what the
applicant intended (or proposed) to
do. It did not include improvements that a
hypothetical, genuine buyer might have in contemplation to achieve the highest
use of the land.
understood the Commissioner’s interpretation to be the
agree with that interpretation although not for all the reasons put forward by
ordinary meaning of the word “proposed” is to put forward for
consideration or something along those lines.
word “proposed” is not defined in the
but is found 156
times within it. Where it appears in other provisions in the
readily apparent that that word has its ordinary meaning. Ordinarily, the words
should bear the same meaning throughout a statute
unless there be some context
which suggests otherwise. In this case we see no warrant for departing from the
ordinary meaning of
that word where it appears in ss 277 and 277A.
Commissioner took an expanded position in relation to proposed in sub-s(3)(f) in
final oral submissions. The Commissioner submitted
that “proposed”
in that sub-section included accepting a condition put forward by the approving
The Commissioner
directed our attention to correspondence between Molonglo and the approving
the Territory the EDP process consists of a consultation phase followed by the
EDP Development Application.
During the consultation phase various entities assess the EDP submission and
provide comments to ACTPL. ACTPL then provides the applicant
with a whole of
government response “outlining required EDP modifications in line with
requirements”.
applicant is then “responsible for modifications to the EDP to fully meet
Territory requirements or negotiate agreed changes
with all relevant
this way, suggestions made by the planning authorities to applicants end up in
an applicant’s proposal for which it seeks
approval, namely the
“plans, drawings and other documentation approved and endorsed as forming
part of this
we see it, those documents would contain that which Molonglo was putting forward
for approval, albeit after discussions with the
approving authority and other
authorities in the consultation phase of the EDP application process. Even
assuming something was included
in Molonglo’s application because an
approving authority requested it, the fact remains that Molonglo ended up
proposing such
things because it needed to do so (to comply with the Code and
other planning instruments) in order to secure approval.
far as we can determine, the costed EDP works were all works which had been
approved pursuant to the EDP approval and therefore
had been proposed by
improvements” do not include improvements hypothesised as part of a
hypothetical development methodology or
hypothesised to make adjustments under
the comparable sales method because they are not put forward for the
consideration of the
planning authorities.
“And includes any of the following”
our view the better reading of the text of the definition, in the context of the
extrinsic materials, is that by the words “and
includes the
following” the intention was that the matters described in sub-s
(3)(a)-(f) had to either be in existence or be
proposed by a lessee/applicant,
and are additional to what might otherwise be regarded as improvements as that
term is traditionally
understood, albeit there may be some overlap.
example, some buildings, demolitions, remediations and earthworks may not be
improvements but might be regarded as worsements.
Their inclusion in sub-s
(3)(a)-(d) was to avoid any doubt that they must not be taken into account. In
this case one example would
be the need to demolish certain public
infrastructure located on the land, namely what Mr Wolmarans categorised under
his heading
Removal of Utilities (being the Icon Water sewer rising main, a TCCS
stormwater main, and Icon Water sewer pumpstation, EVO Energy
powerlines). They
do not service the Molonglo land, but need to be relocated to allow the EDP to
proceed. They do not add value to
the land as Ms Byrne pointed out, but the
effect of s 277A is to ensure that the cost of their removal is not taken into
(other than if necessary for the comparable sales method). That is, when
valuing the land, the land is not to be taken to be burdened
worsements.
Sub-sections
(3)(e) and (f) are similar. Their purpose was to exclude what developers had
previously been allowed to deduct (at least
in part) from CUCs. Works on land
outside the land under the lease (sub-s (3)(f)) would not ordinarily be regarded
as improvements
to the land being valued, which is another indication that the
sub-s (3)(a)-(f) matters were to be added to what would ordinarily
be regarded
as existing or proposed improvements.
course, there is a degree of overlap between what would ordinarily be regarded
as existing or proposed improvements and some of
the matters within sub-s
(3)(a)-(e) (such as buildings for example), but that is not an obstacle to the
construction we have given.
are two other possible interpretations.
first is that the matters in sub-s (3)(a)-(f) are neither existing nor proposed,
which is an interpretation the Commissioner contended
for. If that were the
interpretation s 277A(3) would include all hypothesised improvements that fell
within sub-s (3)(a)-(f) and
would therefore rule out in a case such as this the
use of the hypothetical development and comparable sales methodologies to value
the after value. That interpretation is also somewhat awkward because what falls
within sub-s (3)(e) and (f) could only be existing
or proposed given the
language used.
second is that for something to fall within sub-s (3) it had to be two things:
it had to be one of the things that met fell within
sub-s (3)(a)-(f); and it had
to be either existing or proposed. This was an interpretation contended for by
Molonglo. The effect
of this interpretation was to reverse the order of the
language of the sub-section. That is, to read sub-s (3)(a)-(f) first, and
subsequently to read the chapeau to the sub-section. Doing so would have the
effect of narrowing the traditional interpretation
of “improvement”
that we have referred to earlier, and we see no support for that interpretation
in the text or context.
There was certainly no reference to such an
interpretation in any of the extrinsic materials, and ordinarily statutory
(including sub-sections) are read in the order in which they
We see no warrant for,
in effect, reading the subsection in reverse.
words “and includes any of the following” indicate to us that the
matters which followed (if they were themselves
existing or proposed) were to be
included with existing and proposed improvements as matters which “must
not be taken into
they were additions to (traditional) existing and proposed improvements is
indicated by the conjunctive “and” together
with the word
“includes” (which ordinarily means something like comprised or
contain as part of a whole, or to make part
of a whole or set).
interpretation of “and includes the following” is consistent with
the extrinsic material which clearly reveals that
the purpose of the provisions
was to exclude from the calculation of the LVC matters which had previously been
allowed. These included,
for example, mandatory offsite costs imposed on an
applicant by development or other statutory approvals. In the Final Report it
With respect to offsite costs, our understanding is that the majority of
these are mandatory costs imposed by the Government as part
of the DA process.
Such costs include intersections and road upgrades, for example. The requirement
from the developer to undertake
these offsite works as part of a
development/redevelopment appears to have worked well. This approach satisfies
the requirement of
timeliness and efficiency from the point of view of project
As in the case of onsite costs however, these mandatory offsite costs should
not be included as part of the CUC. Infrastructure costs
should be considered
separately from the determination of the CUC and each reported separately.
Section 277A(3)(e)
sub-section said that any buildings or structures on or under the land, any
alterations or demolition of any existing building
or structure on or under the
land, any remediation of the land, and any earthwork, planting or other work
that affects the landscape
of the land that was
by a development
approval, or
by a statutory approval obtained or required for a
development proposal, or was required by an agreement between the
Territory/Territory
entity and a lessee/applicant must not be taken into
accepted, correctly in our view, that the EDP approval was a “development
approval” for the purposes of sub-s
(3)(e)(i). The application for the
EDP, the DA 86 application, was a development application (as defined)
containing a development
proposal (as defined). Approval of DA 86 was given
under Chapter 7 of the
and thus, it was a development approval as
also seems to us that the EDP approval would fall within the meaning of
“statutory approval obtained for a development proposal”
was issued pursuant to the provisions of the
and was an approval of
the proposal put forward for consideration by Molonglo in its DA 86
application.
next question is what if any buildings, structures, alterations, demolition,
remediation, earthwork, planting or other work that
affected the landscape was
“required” as a “condition” of a development
word “required” is not defined in the
ordinary meaning is along the lines of officially compulsory, or otherwise
considered essential, or made necessary by.
flavour of the word in this context is that the source of the obligation to do
the work is a condition in the development approval.
That is, somewhere in the
development approval one must find words which impose the obligation on the
applicant to do the specified
submitted, correctly in our view, that the terms of the EDP approval did not
require, make necessary or make officially compulsory
the EDP works. The EDP
approval did, in some regard, impose conditions as to how those works might have
to be achieved, or how their
design may have to meet other requirements (such as
approvals from Icon Water and EVO Energy), but that is not the sense of
in the first line of sub-s (3)(e). The sense of that word
applied to the matters in sub-s (3)(a)-(d) is that the approving authority
required a particular building to be built, for example, when no such building
was proposed in the development application.
we said at [175] above, the EDP works were all works (or substantially all
works) which Molonglo put forward in its development
application for
ACTPLA’s approval. ACTPLA did not receive an application for approval of
specified works, and then, by its
EDP approval, impose obligations on Molonglo
to undertake the EDP works (assuming those works fell within sub-s (3)(a)-(d)).
EDP approval did impose some generalised requirements that the approved
works were required to comply with the requirements of various
other agencies,
but the works themselves were not
by the EDP, they had simply
by the EDP.
reading of the EDP is consistent with Molonglo’s submission that what had
to be in the EDP would have been required by
the provisions of the Territory
Plan, the Code and other planning instruments such as the Fyshwick Precinct
Code, Multi Unit Housing
Development Code and Commercial Zones Development Code.
It is those planning instruments which in substance required the EDP works,
the EDP approval.
That is, the
Territory Plan and other applicable planning instruments set out the various
planning requirements which governed development
of the Molonglo land. It was
those planning instruments that required certain works for an EDP if a developer
wanted an EDP approved.
completeness we note that an argument put forward in
effect that a development approval obliged an applicant to undertake the subject
works was rejected (at 78]). No party contended
otherwise in this case.
made another submission on the meaning of “required”. It submitted
that that approval did not require the EDP
works because the approval simply
said that Molonglo had to go away and sort out a series of things with a number
of other Territory
authorities. It didn’t say Molonglo had to do X, or had
end result of that submission is correct in our view, although we prefer our
reasoning to that contained within the submission.
relation to sub-section (3)(e)(iii), Molonglo submitted that the sub-section
must refer to executed agreements and not draft agreements.
We agree. Neither
the word “draft” nor any of its synonyms appear in the sub-section.
Further, there may be any number
of drafts of an agreement which may have been
the subject of negotiation, and they would probably be in conflict. If the
intended to capture draft agreements it does not say how any such
conflict could be resolved. Those are all indications the sub-section
refers to binding and enforceable agreements.
our opinion, the EDP works were not required as a condition by any of the
matters set out in sub-s (3)(e)(i)-(iii).
Section 277A(3)(f)
sub-section said that any buildings or structures on or under the land, any
alterations or demolition of any existing building
or structure on or under the
land, any remediation of the land, and any earthwork, planting or other work
that affects the landscape
of the land proposed in a development application in
relation to a chargeable variation of a nominal rent lease to be carried out
land outside of the land
under the lease
must not be taken into
sub-section requires that the buildings etc had to be “proposed in a
development application” to be carried out on
land outside of the land
under the lease, and that the development application had to relate to a
chargeable variation (a variation
of a lease).
Commissioner submitted that all the offsite works were caught by the
sub-section.
Commissioner submitted, and we accept, that any relevant proposal (for a
building etc) need not appear in the development application
but could be contained
in documents lodged with the application, in subsequent correspondence or other
documents lodged with ACTPLA
and which had the effect of adding to, refining, or
otherwise affecting what the planning authority was being asked to approve. This
is consistent with the definition of “development proposal” in the
which was defined as “a proposal for development, whether in a
development application
or otherwise
” (emphasis added).
also accords with common sense in that there is frequently subsequent
correspondence between an applicant and an approving authority
in relation to
development applications, and that subsequent correspondence can add to, delete
from, alter or refine what was originally
Commissioner took us to a document which preceded the development application by
offsite works (being outside the
boundary of the EDP).
the better starting point is to identify that which Molonglo ultimately was
putting forward for approval. In this case that
would commence with the
application and the plans attached to the Letter of Authorisation dated 12
August 2022. Amongst those plans
was the Off-Site Works Plan 7426-13-400 (for
work outside the EDP boundary)
and other documents included with the application which referred to the Direct
Grant Land.
submitted that these works were not proposed by it but were imposed on it.
Molonglo submitted that it did not propose the
off-site works, that the off-site
works were “included as a
condition”.
do not accept Molonglo’s submission.
development application included the plan headed “Off-Site Works
Plan” no. 7426-13-400 which was marked “FOR
drew out attention to correspondence from Molonglo to the Environment, Planning
and Sustainable Development Directorate dated
1 March 2022 in which Molonglo
referred to offsite works and suggested they be dealt with in a separate
development application.
Molonglo submitted that there was an insistence that the works be dealt with in
the same development application and that subsequently
they were imposed on
Molonglo by a condition of approval.
submission said that Condition 6 of the EDP approval imposed this condition to
do the offsite works. Condition 6 was headed “OFFSITE
condition, on our reading, did not
those offsite works to be
done. If anything, it was the Code and other planning instruments which required
that work to be done if
an EDP was to be approved.
6, on our reading, certainly required details of those works to be submitted,
and that the details had to address various
matters, but they were details about
the “offsite works
to be undertaken by the
proponent” (emphasis added).
our view the offsite works, together with the works within the Estate Boundary
but outside the lease, were proposed by Molonglo
in a development application,
namely DA 86 (which included all associated documents and correspondence).
next question is whether that development application related to the variation
of the lease.
words “in relation to” found in the subsection are normally given a
wide meaning as was acknowledged by Molonglo.
In other statutory contexts those
words or their synonyms have been said to require no more than a direct or
indirect relationship
between two subject matters. In the
we consider
them to have the same operation because of the context in which they
submitted that the “anything” in sub-s (3)(f) had to be found in the
very development application which sought
the variation of the lease. We do not
that was the intention, then the word “for” (or “deals
with” as suggested by Molonglo) would have been
used instead of “in
relation to”. The latter words are well recognised and appear in many
statutes. There is no textual
or contextual warrant for giving those words the
narrow interpretation proposed by Molonglo.
would also seem illogical to make that distinction. That is, we ask
rhetorically, why would the Legislative Assembly wish to include
or exclude the
same works on the same land simply because they were proposed in one development
application for land rather than
another development application for the same
an interpretation would also have the obvious effect that developers would
thenceforth sidestep the sub-section by putting any
offsite works into a
separate development application.
Development
applications relate to identified land. So do chargeable variations. If the same
land is the subject of both, then for
the purposes of calculating the LVC the
Legislative Assembly intended to exclude from being taken into account anything
(3)(a)-(d)) that an applicant proposed to undertake on land outside
the land under lease and which related to the change in the use
of the land (the
chargeable variation). Here that relationship was clear.
may happen that a development application seeks approval of a development which
is already permitted under an existing lease, and
then the lessee applies for a
variation of the lease to increase the permitted uses (but intends to continue
with the original development
application). That may be an example of where
sub-s (3)(f) does not apply because although the original development
application relates
to the same land, it does not relate to the proposed change
our view there was a direct relationship between the offsite (and other) works
proposed by Molonglo in DA 86 with the chargeable
variation which arises out of
the approval of DA 19. As we have mentioned earlier, the two applications were
expressly interconnected.
As Molonglo said in a letter to Ms Byrne dated 8 April
The Lease Variation DA was specifically lodged in accordance with Condition
3(a) of the Estate Development Plan DA.
Byrne, incorrectly in our view, said that the EDP required certain works. She
An EDP was subsequently prepared and the EDP Notice of Decision of Approval
(EDP NoD) on 19 December 2022 includes requirements that
public roads, road
reserves (including water gardens), services and other aspects must be handed
Services (TCCS) as a condition of
development. These are compulsory works within the land boundary.
do not read anything in the EDP requiring these works or a handback. In
correspondence
identified Condition 8 as imposing that requirement, but we do not read
Condition 8 that way.
emails demonstrate that the planning authority was also unaware of such a
requirement, although it was anticipated that those
things would occur through a
negotiated process.
offsite works were proposed by Molonglo because it desired to obtain an approved
Estate Development Plan. It was the planning
instruments which required the
roads (and other infrastructure) to be included and to meet various requirements
if Molonglo was to
receive an approved EDP.
EDP application proposed these works. Under the heading “Fully Describe
Your Proposal” it said:
for an estate development plan for to create 36
four public roads
associated relocation of existing
utilities infrastructure, construction of new utilities infrastructure
earthworks. This application also seeks approval for tree removal and demolition
of fences and buildings.
(Emphasis added.)
EDP approval said that the delegate approved, subject to conditions:
the proposal for an Estate Development Plan
(Dairy Road Estate
Development Plan)
that includes
the creation
of 36 new CZ3 - Services Zone block
, footpaths, earthworks, tree removal,
landscaping, public open spaces, publicly accessible open spaces; including
demolition and
other associated works;
accordance with the plans, drawings and other
documentation
and endorsed as forming part of this approval.
(Emphasis added.)
are satisfied that the offsite works (together with other works outside the land
under the lease but inside the Estate Boundary)
were proposed in
Molonglo’s DA 86 application, that they were matters mentioned in sub-s
(3)(a)-(d), and that DA 86 related
to DA 19 (the chargeable
variation).
Valuing the after value
relation to the value to be given to the lease if it was genuinely offered for
sale immediately after the variation on the reasonable
terms and conditions that
a genuine seller would require, the parties and we agree that the wording is no
different, in substance,
to the well-known formulation set out in
Spencer v Commonwealth
parties submitted that in assessing market value the valuation should be
approached on the basis that the land would be used
for its highest and best
use. This is consistent with [107] of
quoted earlier in these
reasons and what fell from the High Court in
Valuer-General Victoria v WSTI
Properties 490 SKR Pty Ltd
[2025] HCA 23.
the High Court was considering particular Victorian legislation, the Court said
at [36] that the conventional concept of
"market value" inhered in the
definitions under consideration. The Court then said at [37]:
"Market value" involves the conventional concept of a hypothetical prudent
seller who would require from the hypothetical prudent
buyer "the fair price of
the land" if the hypothetical prudent buyer was purchasing the land "for the
most advantageous purpose for
which it was adapted". The most advantageous
purpose for which land is "adapted" is the "highest and best use" of the land.
terminology, "adapted" or
"highest and best use" of land means the
most valuable use of the land, objectively ascertained by reference to the
hypothetical buyer,
which is "physically possible, legally permissible and
financially feasible
... And both alternative valuations are to be conducted based on the orthodox
concept of market value, which carries with it the conventional
understanding
the market pays for land at its highest and best use, properly
the theoretical maximum development potential of
the land which might be legally permissible and physically possible, but
most valuable objectively ascertained development potential which is legally
permissible, physically possible and financially
the value must be based on the highest and best use allowed for by the varied
lease, and that would be the most valuable
objectively ascertained development
potential which is legally permissible, physically possible and financially
highest and best under the proposed varied Crown lease in this case is to
construct 192,000 m
of GFA and 700 multi-unit dwellings. The highest
and best use is not the lesser use of an (almost) subdivision contemplated by
approved EDP.
those matters in mind, we accept Ms Byrne’s direct comparison method does
not offend ss 277 and 277A, and we accept
that her comparable sales are the
indirectly relevant comparables to use.
we accept that some of the EDP works were necessary to make the Molonglo land as
comparable as possible, we do not accept the
quantification of those costs as
put forward by Molonglo which Ms Byrne used to arrive at an after value, but
these are easily adjustable
do not accept Mr Flannery’s or Mr Dyson’s evidence for the reasons
set out below.
addition, and against the event that we are wrong in not accepting Mr
Dyson’s evidence, we would have preferred Ms Byrne’s
sales methodology over Mr Dyson’s hypothetical development methodology in
comparable sales method is usually the preferred valuation method. As explained
Maurici v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2003] HCA 8
The traditional, and usually unexceptionable method is to seek out relatively
contemporaneous sales of comparable properties between
parties at arm’s
length, unaffected by special circumstances, such as, for example, a strong
desire by a purchaser to buy an
adjoining property, and to use those sales as a
yardstick for the valuation of the relevant land.
is usually preferred by the courts, although not always
It is also preferred by the
ACT’s Revenue Office whose Guidelines
The direct comparison method is the preferred approach for LVC valuation
matters. A hypothetical development method is regarded as
a check method only
and may be considered if it reflects a scale of development appropriate for the
subject property and the assumptions
appear reasonable.
Parker AC said in
Tenstat v Valuer
; Woolworths Limited v Valuer
[2012] NSWLEC 1361:
35. It is well established that, if comparable sales are available, the
direct comparison of sales evidence approach is the conventional
valuation (Graham Trilby Pty Ltd v Valuer General
[2009] NSW LEC 1087
41(Trilby); Redeam Pty Ltd v South Australian Land Commission
(1977) 40 LGRA 151
at 156; Riverbank Pty Ltd v Commonwealth (1974) 48 AJLR 483 at 484; Marroun v
Roads and Maritime Services [2012] NSWLEC 196 at 196
(Marroun)).
36. The process of undertaking a valuation using comparable evidence
comprises several steps, including the:
(a) accumulation;
(b) analysis;
(c) adjustment; and
(d) application
of potentially genuinely comparable sales (Trust Company Limited v Minister
Administering the
Crown Lands Act 1989
[2012] NSWLEC 73 (Trust
Marroun, 197).
Gwynvill Properties Pty Ltd v Commissioner for Main Roads
at 326 Cripps J said (in an oft cited passage):
The hypothetical development method is normally suspect because it
depends on a number of assumptions and a number of estimates, eg.
building, estimated gross rentals obtainable, probably outgoings and, most
significantly, the rate percentum of return which
could be expected and the
profit and risk factor expressed in percentage terms. It has been said that
because many estimates and
assumptions must be made, the hypothetical
development method ought not be used where some use can be made of
a comparable sale.
Byrne made this very point when she
WITNESS BYRNE: So you would need to take into account every cost that is
required to be incurred by a developer in order to make those
parcels saleable,
and we do not have all of that information as it stands. A separate DA would
need to be run for subdivision. There
would be different development costs to
extend services to each of those boundaries. That information is not before us.
thing is that a hypothetical development approach requires the valuer
to assess one particular plan of development for the land,
which in this case
has been Molonglo Group's future plans for the site. It requires the valuer to
presuppose one particular development
approach as opposed to looking at what -
how the broader market would view the property and what a typical hypothetical
would pay. The other thing is that with a hypothetical development
approach, you have many, many inputs that can have a significant
impact on the
accuracy of the valuation. If one valuer assumes the development will take three
years to reach its conclusion, another
assumes seven years, another assumes ten
years, you will have a very different outcome. If you assume different costs of
construction,
different costs related to planning, interest, bank and finance
costs, there would be in excess of 30 different inputs where each
valuer makes an assessment of something, it will trigger a difference between
what the residual land value would be. And
you're presupposing one particular,
one - the purchaser's specific scenario rather than the market. There's a number
of reasons why
the hypothetical development approach is not the preferred
approach for valuations for lease variation charge.
course, as Refshauge J said in
at [96]-[104], the hypothetical
development method is a valid method of valuation. The question in any case is
which is the preferred
our view the comparable sales relied on by Ms Byrne were reasonably comparable
and sufficient in volume to form a proper basis
for comparison. Her adjustments
brought the Molonglo land to a state reasonably comparable to the serviced land
sales she used. There
were some differences in not insubstantial ways, but Ms
Byrne employed a process of reasoning which established their utility. Her
reasoning process was logical and convincing.
was said in
at [18], sales which are to be treated as comparable
sales need to be truly comparable, may not be unduly selective, must be relevant
and sufficient in volume. In our view Ms Byrne’s comparables pass those
tests in this case.
The valuation evidence
General comments
Byrne and Mr Flannery were called by Molonglo. Mr Dyson was called by the
Commissioner.
valuers impressed us as honest witnesses attempting to assist us to the best of
their abilities. Ultimately, for reasons to which
we will come, we accept Ms
Byrne’s methodology (in terms of adjusting for EDP works undertaken on the
land under the lease,
but not accepting the figures upon which she relied) over
Mr Flannery’s. Ms Byrne’s logic and process of reasoning was
more exposed, was the more persuasive and we are able to make adjustments to her
end result which we are unable to do with Mr
Flannery’s end result.
do not accept Mr Dyson’s opinions for several reasons. Most importantly,
he did not seek to value the highest and best use
of the land. That is, he did
not use the most valuable objectively ascertained development potential for the
Molonglo land which
was legally permissible, physically possible and financially
feasible. Mr Dyson’s hypothesised development to achieve the highest
best use of the land was the (almost) subdivision which would result from
undertaking the EDP works. In our opinion, and that
of Ms Byrne, the highest and
best use would be to construct 700 dwellings and 192,000 m
addition, and in relation to Mr Dyson’s Assessments 1-5, Mr Dyson (as he
was instructed) did not deduct the full costs of
the hypothetical development
which that methodology requires. We do not accept the Commissioner’s
submission that ss 277 and
277A required that those costs not be deducted.
also preferred Ms Byrne’s evidence over Mr Dyson’s because of Ms
Byrne’s greater experience of and familiarity
with the Canberra market
compared to that of Mr Dyson. Amongst other experience, Ms Byrne has had
significant experience undertaking
complex valuations including undertaking
reserve pricing valuations for the Territory’s Suburban Land Agency (the
), and lease variation charge valuations, and her work is now
primarily focused on land within the Territory.
three valuers noted that there was no directly relevant comparable sales
evidence in relation to the Molonglo land, it being such
a large, rugged,
semi-rural block with uneven topography, and requiring clearing and servicing
works to bring typical services to
the land. As Ms Byrne put
Ideally the subject would be compared to other similar rugged, semi-rural
blocks with uneven topography, requiring clearing and servicing
works to bring
typical services to the land. In the absence of sales evidence of that type, the
best available market evidence is
of the serviced land sales ...
was some disagreement between the valuers as to some of the comparables used (Mr
Dyson used the comparable sales method as a
check method for his Assessment 6),
but there was no disagreement that there simply were no comparable sales of land
near 14 ha in
area and having the characteristics described by Ms Byrne
Flannery described the Molonglo land as “somewhat unique”, a
description which, if anything, was a little understated.
Mr Dyson’s opinion the land in issue was so different to the comparables
used by Ms Byrne and Mr Flannery that the comparable
sales method was unreliable
other than as a check method. Although there were greater differences than would
otherwise be desirable,
we do not consider that the comparable sales method was
not able to be used in this case.
practical problem, as described by Ms Byrne,
In a perfect world, when assessing the market value of a development site,
there would be 3-4 examples of similar sized blocks, in
a comparable location
typically within the greater ACT region, with the same zoning, with a Crown
Lease Purpose Clause near identical
to the subject site, with readily available
information on the rate per residential unit (for example) that a purchaser is
to pay in a hypothetical sale under the existing market conditions. In
reality in the ACT, large development site sales happen relatively
infrequently
and the sites are often far from homogenous due to different (City versus Town
Centre, suburban or even semi-rural)
locations, changes over time to market
conditions, some properties having a requirement for affordable housing and/or
requirements
to provide public carparks, differing maximum dwelling yield
Notwithstanding
the problems inherent in using the comparable sales method in this case given
the size of the adjustments that have
to be made, there is little doubt that the
extra rights granted by the lease variation had value.
sometimes must do the best they can with the available evidence when assessing
damages. So must we do the best we can with
the available evidence to arrive at
a value for the increased rights. When we say the “available
evidence” that does
not mean that the parties were deficient in the
evidence they tendered. It is simply a recognition that the Molonglo site is
and there are no directly relevant comparable sales with which to compare
parties’ valuers adopted different approaches to valuing the after value.
It is useful now examine their evidence.
doing so it is apt to remember that
Legislation Act
that “working out the meaning of an Act” means, amongst other
things, finding the meaning of ss 277 and 277A when
their apparent meaning leads
to a result that is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.
Byrne used the comparable sales method as her only valuation method.
substance, Ms Byrne’s evidence was that the onsite and offsite costs
should be factored into the assessment of the after
value in two ways.
she said that in the real world any reasonable purchaser would factor in the
costs of the EDP work into its calculation of
market value.
she used the costs of the EDP work as an adjustment to be made in order to be
able to compare the Molonglo land with what
she judged to be the most comparable
sales that were available (and which she called “serviced land
sales”). These serviced
land sales were, in basic terms, land which Ms
Byrne described as being “shovel ready” for development i.e. with
services (roads, power, water etc) to the boundary of those sites.
as she said in her report:
... my understanding of serviced land is that it is land on which all
infrastructural works, including those relating to roads, walls,
utility services have been completed. It is often described as ‘shovel
ready’ (although there are varying
degrees of this), where there are
adequate services available to the site to support the proposed development (but
not a situation
where services are extended throughout the site to the location
of each future building for example).
Molonglo land was not shovel ready in the sense that there were not adequate
services to the boundaries of the 36 sites which
were proposed in the EDP, or
there were not sufficient facilitative works (using Mr van der Walt’s
expression) to support 700
multi-unit dwellings and 192,000 m
Byrne used the EDP works costed by Mr Wolmarans to hypothetically bring the
Molonglo site up to a comparable standard (in terms
of services like roads,
power water etc) to the serviced land sales sites she used for comparison.
Byrne used what she regarded as the most comparable sales available, made an
adjustment to hypothetically bring the Molonglo land
up to a state of
comparability with those serviced land sales by using Mr Wolmarans’
costings for the onsite works, made other
adjustments for scale, location and
the like, and arrived at three rates: one rate for the 700 multi-unit dwellings;
one for the
restaurant/shop use; and one for other uses. She then multiplied
those rates against the number of dwellings and the amount of GFA.
those figures Ms Byrne arrived at an after value of approximately $30m. She then
deducted $15m for the cost of the offsite
works to arrive at an after value of
approximately $16m.
Ms Byrne had been provided with costings of the full EDP work undertaken by
Turner & Townsend (a quantity surveying
firm whose costings were not
tendered). But those costings, in Ms Byrne’s opinion, included matters
which went beyond what
was required (as best she could determine) to make the
Molonglo site the most comparable it could be to her serviced land sales.
was for that reason that on 6 May 2024 Ms Byrne requested Molonglo to provide to
her revised costings of the EDP works (from Molonglo’s
quantity surveyor)
so that the only costs included were those ensuring availability of all typical
services to the Molonglo site.
In her request Ms Byrne asked that in the revised
costings the:
... costs included are limited to ensuring availability of all typical
services to the Subject Property (being Block 11 & 12 Section
38 as a whole)
rather than to the future subdivided sites – as this is the standard we
would apply to the comparable market
result was Mr Wolmarans report dated 12 December 2024 (
Mr Wolmarans’
2024 report
) which contained the costings used by Ms Byrne in her report
dated 13 December 2024 (
Ms Byrne’s 2024 report
). Included in those
costing were works on land other than Molonglo land.
Ms Byrne’s 2024 report, and in her oral evidence, Ms Byrne made the point
that the costed EDP works (as costed by Mr Wolmarans)
did not include all work
which would be necessary to make the 36 proposed blocks saleable as subdivided
or subdividable blocks.
Byrne explained that undertaking the full works required by the EDP would take
the Molonglo site to a subdividable state, at least
in a physical sense.
Ms Byrne used the costings of the EDP works, those works contained many of the
“facilitative works” which would
be required under any development
scheme to arrive at 192,000 m
of GFA and 700 multi-unit dwellings
according to the uncontested evidence of Mr van der
Byrne’s serviced land sales were a collection of sales which had adequate
utilities, roads and footpaths and the like (which
we will simply call utilities
for ease of expression) to the boundary of each site sufficient to support
whatever development was
proposed on that site. With the Molonglo site, there
were no utilities to the boundary of each (or most) of the proposed 36
was an impossible exercise to attempt to make that adjustment the other way,
that is, by quantifying the value of those services
to the boundary of the
serviced land sales and then deducting that value from the market value of those
sites. An attempt to explore
that option was explored during the hearing of the
matter with the result being that some of the relevant services were
unquantifiable.
For example, rhetorically speaking, how does one value a public
road on the boundary of a serviced land sale which then proceeds
past many other
properties.
only other alternative if one was to use the comparable sales method was to make
an adjustment to bring Molonglo up to the standard
of the comparable sites so
far as servicing by utilities was concerned. Mathematically, it is the same as
deducting the value of
those services from the serviced land sales values if
that were possible to do.
end result was that Ms Byrne used the onsite works costings to hypothetically
bring the Molonglo site up to a comparable standard
to the serviced land sales
so that, after other typical adjustments valuers make in the comparable sales
method, she could then make
a judgment as to the value of the Molonglo site in
its current state i.e. immediately after the variation, compared to the most
basket of sales she could find.
Byrne explained her method as
So the intention is that the sales are, as much as is possible, directly
comparable to each other. You’ve still got differences
for location; is it
going to be a premium site; is it going to be an average site; is the block a
regular shape or is it irregular;
is it an island site or does it have four
adjoining neighbours? There are still differences that have to be taken into
account, but
in as many respects as is possible, they can be compared to each
Byrne said that if the full EDP works were done, (and costed on that basis) the
Molonglo site would have been (at least in physical
form) brought up to a
subdividable state. If that were done, she said, the land would be valued
differently. She explained the difference
in her oral evidence as
So the rights here being valued is the bulk sum of 700 dwellings and the GFA.
On a subdivided basis, it is the right to sell 35 lots
with smaller parcels of
dwellings or smaller amounts of GFA, which could be released in any manner that
a purchaser - or that the
owner of the land intended. Whereas at this point
we're talking about the pool of hypothetical purchasers prepared to purchase the
Crown lease including these rights on an overall basis with significant risk and
a significant envisaged timeframe in which to exercise
those rights. So a lot
greater risk in purchasing 700 units and all the GFA than in considering, you
know, the sale of individual
parcels at a later date after extra works have been
our view Ms Byrne’s first rationale for taking into account the (revised)
EDP costs (what a reasonable purchaser would consider
in the real world) is not
appropriate because it explicitly or implicitly offends s 277A. It would result
in all of the costs of
the EDP works to be taken into account, even when it was
work to be undertaken on Territory land, because a purchaser would have
to all costs it had to pay if it purchased the land. That is why he final
deduction of the offsite works costs is not allowable,
it is prohibited by s
277A(3)(f).
in our view her second rationale does not offend ss 277 and 277A because it
involved using only those hypothetical improvements
(within the comparable sales
method) which would make the Molonglo site as comparable as possible to the
basket of comparable sales.
Those hypothetical improvements, were, in this case,
only those works to be carried out on the Molonglo land.
our view, as we have previously set out, using hypothetical improvements for the
purpose of making adjustments to make the subject
site as comparable as possible
to the basket of comparable sales is allowable.
Byrne, as far as she was able, excluded the costs of any EDP works other than
those necessary to make the Molonglo land as comparable
as possible to her
serviced land sales. She excluded matters such as staging or escalation costs
because she did not think those
matters were appropriate to take into account.
That was because those things were developer dependent in the sense that they
vary between developers depending on each particular developer’s
plans. In that way those things would not be reflective of
market value at the
date required by ss 277 and
Ms Byrne explained:
And it was my approach to create a situation where the subject site could be
compared to the sales, but consciously without incorporating
a whole range of
developer costs that were only related to a future subdivision which wasn't what
I was valuing as at this date.
Ms Byrne had valued the before value at approximately $24m, and the parties
agreed that the before value was $21,408,000, the
Commissioner submitted that Ms
Byrne’s after value of $16m was manifestly absurd given it was about $5m
less than the before
value despite the fact that extra rights had been
our view the result of Ms Byrne’s calculations was absurd, but not because
of her general methodology. Rather, the absurd
result was reached for three
different reasons. First, the EDP costs she used were overstated. Second, she
incorrectly included the
onsite costs in their totality when some of those works
were for work on land
outside the land under the lease.
incorrectly deducted the costs of the offsite works. When those matters are
corrected, and using Ms Byrne’s methodology,
the after value is greater
than the before value and arrives at what we consider to be the correct after
Byrne’s logic was to determine what the Molonglo land lacked in terms of
utility servicing compared to her serviced land
sales, and to make an adjustment
for that lack in her analysis. Therefore, the costs to be taken into account
would be the costs
of works on the Molonglo land alone, not the costs of works
on the Territory land which was within the estate boundary, and not the
Thereafter,
when only those costs on the Molonglo land are taken into account so as to make
the Molonglo land as comparable as possible
to Ms Byrne’s serviced land
sales, Ms Byrne was able to arrive at a value of the Molonglo land using those
comparables. After
that point, in examining the state of the Molonglo land for
the purpose of valuation, and as required by s 277A, the land was to
on the basis that it was not benefitted or burdened by any of the matters
referred to in s 277A(3).
Commissioner said that Ms Byrne’s evidence should not be accepted because
Mr Dyson gave evidence to the effect that if Ms
Byrne allowed for the costed EDP
works (that is, assumed that those works were done and the costs taken into
account), then the land
would be (hypothetically) in a subdividable state and
therefore should be valued on the basis of 35 individual blocks (Ms Byrne valued
the land as one block).
disagree. First, the land was required to be valued as one block, not on the
basis there were 35 or 36 individually saleable blocks.
Second, Ms Byrne did not
proceed on the basis that the EDP work was done, but that the Molonglo land
would require $54m to be spent
on it to make the land as comparable as possible
to her basket of comparable
She then made
adjustments for location and like matters including, most importantly, for
scale. It was the adjustment for scale that
brought the Molonglo land back to
one 14 ha site, an adjustment not made by Mr Dyson.
accept Ms Byrne’s methodology in relation to adjusting for EDP works on
the land under the lease in order to make the Molonglo
land as comparable as
possible to her serviced land sales, but not her calculations.
Mr Flannery
Flannery used the comparable sales method as his primary valuation method,
although his comparables were not identical to Ms Byrne’s
comparables. Mr
Flannery used the hypothetical development method as a check method.
Flannery said that in valuing the after value he had regard to the various
factors he believed a potential purchaser would have
had regard to in assessing
the appropriate value of the Molonglo
Flannery assumed in his report, correctly in our view, that the highest and best
use of the Molonglo land included the development
rights for 700 multi-unit
dwellings and 192,000 m
Later, in his oral
evidence, he seemed to say that Molonglo’s EDP proposal amounted to the
highest and best use.
general terms we do not accept Mr Flannery’s evidence. Although he was an
honest witness, he often did not answer questions
directly and often provided
lengthy, non-responsive answers. His evidence was often filled with
uncertainties such as “
the EDP is the best example of a
highest and best use” (emphasis
His reasoning process
was also not as exposed for examination as that of Ms Byrne.
is not to say that Mr Flannery was other than honest, just that his evidence was
not as logical, not as exposed for examination
and not as convincing as that of
Flannery referred to ss 277 and 277A, but did not explain how he thought those
sections operated in terms of his valuation methodology,
and said that in
relation to the after value a prudent purchaser would have had regard
(a) Development potential of the site as outlined in the varied Purpose
(b) Costs associated with achieving the After Value potential of the
(c) Expected timeframes of development, including staging of any development
to meet market demand. For this reason, I have assumed
a staged take up of
development rights.
(d) Likely timing of any future development opportunities. It is my strong
view that the additional uses (residential or commercial)
development rights
would not be fully utilised for many years.
(e) Requirement to remediate adjoining land as part of direct sale
(f) The existence of existing utilities and infrastructure that are situated
on the land but do not service the land.
Flannery examined what he regarded as the most comparable sales available. He
said if he assumed the Molonglo land was “fully
serviced and
developable” then, compared to those comparables, the after value would be
approximately $153m.
said, however, that the Molonglo land was not fully serviced and developable,
and he therefore made adjustments for:
The development of the residential component site to occur over a 10 year
The siting, scale and density of the residential component
permissible.
The development of the commercial (non residential) GFA over a 15 year
The quantum and permitted uses of the commercial component.
Allowance for the cost of the essential infrastructure based on the
quantity surveyor’s cost estimates and timing of such infrastructure.
allowing for staged development and selling, Mr Flannery calculated the present
day values of those future sales in several tables
in his report and took into
account Mr Wolmaran’s costings, although he added a further 5% contingency
He provided
different tables depending on whether the costs of works on land outside the
land under the lease were or were not to
be taken into
do not consider it appropriate to take staging into account in this case. Whilst
there is logic behind Mr Flannery’s reasoning,
we accept Ms Byrne’s
evidence that that is a matter which would be developer dependent and thus
should be ignored. For example,
Ms Byrne said (and which we
If one valuer assumes the development will take three years to reach its
conclusion, another assumes seven years, another assumes
ten years, you will
have a very different outcome.
Flannery’s approach was that a prudent purchaser would take into account
all of Mr Wolmaran’s costings of the onsite
and offsite EDP works, with
the resultant after value being $22,350,000.
Flannery said he used a hypothetical development method as a check method. We
have some difficulty understanding his evidence in
this regard, but it appears
he used a hypothetical subdivision of the Molonglo land as the highest and best
use of the Molonglo land,
and, on the costs side, used the costed EDP costs.
our opinion, a hypothetical subdivision is not the highest and best use of the
land. The highest and best use of the land under
the lease is the use for the
purposes stated in the proposed varied lease, namely 700 multi-unit dwellings
and 192,000 m
Mr Flannery’s after value was not wildly different from Ms Byrne’s,
we do not accept his valuation because his
reasoning process, as we read his
report, did not grapple with s 277 and 277A, his calculations did not set out
how he accounted
for some or all of the EDP costs in the same exposed and
precise fashion that Ms Byrne did, his reasoning process was somewhat opaque
his evidence was not as convincing as that of Ms Byrne.
example, at AB 332, Mr Flannery said that in his valuation approach he had
regard to various factors that he believed a potential
purchaser would have
regard to in assessing the appropriate value of the Dairy Road. He set out some
of those factors at the bottom
of the page. Those factors included the
requirement to remediate adjoining land (which is excluded by s 277A(3)(f)) and
the existence
of existing utilities and infrastructure situated on the land (but
do not service the land). These are excluded by s 277A(3) because
within sub-s (3)(f) being works proposed to be done outside the land under the
lease and under proposed improvements, being
the demolition of the identified
existing public infrastructure.
those matters aside, Mr Flannery did not, unlike Ms Byrne, set out in any
exposed way precisely what costs and which amounts
he did take into account.
Thus, we are unable to adjust his after value (even were we to accept it) given
what we have said about
what costs should and should not be allowed for.
are also of the opinion that Ms Byrne’s basket of comparable sales is,
taken as a whole, more comparable than Mr Flannery’s
comparables.
Dyson used the hypothetical development method as his primary method of valuing
the after value and used the comparable sales method
as his check method for his
Assessment 6.
Mr Dyson was instructed to make six after value valuations
without taking
into account
certain costs in Assessments 1-5. The assessments he was
instructed to make, and the costs he was instructed not to take into account
each assessment, were described as follows:
(a) Assessment 1 – the Onsite Works, the Offsite Works, the Direct
Grant Remediation costs, the Removal of Utilities, the EVO
Substitutions, and
the Residential Development Earthworks;
(b) Assessment 2 – the Onsite Works, the Offsite Works, the Removal of
Utilities, the EVO Substations, and the Residential Development
(omitting Direct Grant Remediation costs);
(c) Assessment 3 – the Offsite Works, the Direct Grant Remediation
costs, the Removal of Utilities, the Residential Development
Earthworks and, in
respect of the Onsite Works, you cannot take into account the following
1.(i) alteration or demolition of existing buildings or structures;
2.(ii) remediation of existing contamination;
3.(iii) earthworks and landscaping;
(d) Assessment 4 – the Onsite Works, the Direct Grant Remediation
costs, the Removal of Utilities, the EVO Substations, and
the Residential
Development Earthworks (omitting Offsite Works);
(e) Assessment 5 – the Offsite Works (omitting all but Offsite Works).
was instructed to assume that by not “taking costs of works into
account” he was being asked to assume that “these
unnecessary to prepare the land for redevelopment for its highest and best
was asked to make a sixth assessment (Assessment 6). This differed from
Assessments 1-5 in that he was instructed he could take
into account the Onsite
Works, the Offsite Works, the Direct Grant Remediation costs, the Removal of
Utilities, the EVO Substations,
and the Residential Development Earthworks.
1 (undertaken on the basis that none of the costs of the EDP works were taken
into account) was the Commissioner’s
primary position. Assessment 6 took
into account all of the costs of the costed EDP works (but using costings
prepared by the Commissioner’s
quantity surveyor, Mr
relation to the after value, Mr Dyson was of the opinion that there were no
comparable sales which were “directly comparable”
to the Molonglo
land. So much may be accepted, but in his report he did not explain why he could
not use the best comparables available.
He did explain this in his oral
evidence, but there was much he explained in his oral evidence which was not in
his report. This
was counter to his repeated claims to have been transparent in
his report.
on the comparable sales method, Mr Dyson said that he did not feel he could use
that method as his primary method because he
would have to make a large
subjective adjustment which, in his opinion, made that method
unreliable.
He said that as a
check method the comparable sales method was “a little bit” more
unreliable.
is not to say that Mr Dyson was other than honest. But it made his evidence less
convincing compared to that of Ms Byrne whose
reasoning process was fully
exposed for examination in her reports.
example of the lack of exposure of his reasoning process is the process by which
he calculated this gross realisation figure. The
totality of his reasoning was
contained in a table of comparable
and four short
paragraphs of his report taking up less than half a
Those paragraphs did
nothing more than recite various facts from his comparables, but nowhere in his
report did he explain how he
got to his end figures for the value of each of the
35 lots (set out in his table at AB 705) which the EDP subdivision would have
the event, Mr Dyson used the hypothetical development method as his primary
valuation method, with a comparable sales method used
as a check method for his
Assessment 6.
traditional hypothetical development methodology is to estimate the gross
realisation on sale of the hypothetical development
when completed, subtract the
costs of that development and the developer’s profit, leaving the balance
as the value of the
land. The gross realisation sum Mr Dyson arrived at for the
Molonglo land was the same for each of his six assessments, namely approximately
arrive at that figure, he examined a basket of comparables to determine what the
35 lots of the (almost) subdivision would likely
his Assessment 1, the Commissioner’s primary case, Mr Dyson deducted
various non-EDP works costs such as GST, selling expenses,
profit and risk,
rates and taxes, interest on costs, interest on land and acquisition costs and
arrived at a gross realisation value
(net of the costs just mentioned) of
approximately $156m.
deducting his before value of $20.2m Mr Dyson arrived at what he called an
“uplift” (or increase in value) of $135.4m.
After applying the 25%
discount set out in s 277 the LVC was accordingly calculated at
$101,550,000.
submitted that Mr Dyson’s calculation of uplift in Assessment 1 was
absurd. Mr Dyson himself did not consider that
figure represented “the
Added Value of the Uplift” because it did not take into account the costs
of the work to be done
in order to achieve the gross realisation
The same applied to
his Assessments 2-5 to varying degrees.
do not accept any of Mr Dyson’s assessments.
in our opinion Mr Dyson did not value the correct hypothetical development which
would realise the highest and best use of
the land, namely the construction of
700 multi-unit dwellings and 192,000 m
of GFA. Instead, Mr Dyson
valued the Molonglo land on the basis that the highest and best use was the
(almost) subdivision described
in the EDP approval.
made what appeared to us to be two inconsistent submissions. It submitted that
the highest and best use was the “utilisation
of all 700 multi-unit
residential dwellings and 191,844 m
of commercial
and also submitted
that Molonglo’s (almost) subdivision “was a good representation of
highest and best use of the”
Commissioner submitted that the highest and best use was a subdivision. The
Commissioner submitted:
But the lease doesn't prohibit subdivision or force the applicants to develop
all 700 units and the GFA themselves. That's not what
they're going to do and
that's not what the highest and best use is. A hypothetical purchaser of the
lease, acting reasonably and
prudently, would realise that that's not the smart
way to go, and the smart way, and indeed, the highest and best use that could
made of the land would be to subdivide it.
And a hypothetical purchaser, acting prudently, would work out that the best
thing would not be to try and develop all 700 dwellings
and GFA rights but to
sell the individual lots with a mix of development rights, townhouses,
apartments, restaurants, shops, commercial
and the like, up to 35 different
purchasers to thereby significantly reduce their risk.
do not accept this submission, and do not accept Molonglo’s submission
that the (almost) subdivision was a good representation
of highest and best
utilisation of 700 multi-unit residential dwellings and 191,844 m
GFA. Clearly the (almost) subdivision proposed in the EDP (which did not appear
in the proposed varied lease) did not include
the construction of 700 dwellings
and 192,000 m2 of GFA.
Bryne, whose evidence we accept, said that the highest and best use of the land
per the proposed varied lease was the 700 multi-unit
residential dwellings and
She accepted that some of the EDP works would have been necessary (as did Mr van
der Walt) to achieve that highest and best use,
but the (almost) subdivision was
not what she regarded as the highest and best use. She
WITNESS BYRNE: I don’t actually consider the EDP works reflect the
highest and best use. To me the highest and best us of the
land are the uses
that will be applied on the land.
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER: After you’ve spent the money on the EDP
WITNESS BYRNE: Yes. The highest and best use in my mind relates to the
intended uses on the land rather than particular activities
Dyson seemed to agree when he described the highest and best use as the
“total GFA and
Mr Flannery
seemed to embrace both positions at different times and did not distinguish
between the use of the land (as in highest
and best use) and the manner in which
that use may be realised. As Mr van der Walt (the town planner) said, there were
multiple ways
to realise the rights to develop the land for 700 dwellings and
submitted that all three valuers considered that Molonglo’s approved EDP
proposal was a good representation of the
highest and best use. That submission
is not accurate. Neither Ms Byrne nor Mr Dyson accepted that proposition and the
references provided did not support the submission. Mr Flannery
seemed to agree with that proposition, but in not in any convincing
the result, the highest and best use was the development of 700 multi-unit
residential dwellings and 191,844 m
of GFA. The EDP approval
contained works necessary to achieve that use and was one method to arrive at
that end result, but it was
not, of and in itself, the highest and best use of
the Molonglo land. We do not accept the Commissioner’s submission that the
highest and best use was the (almost) subdivision described in Molonglo’s
EDP approval.
as Ms Byrne said and which we accept, in the hypothetical development method all
the costs of construction must be taken into
If the highest and
best use is the construction of 700 multi-unit dwellings and 192,000
of GFA then all of those construction costs are required to be
taken into account in each of his six
assessments.
If the highest
and best use of the Molonglo land was the (almost) subdivision proposed in the
EDP, then Mr Dyson’s Assessment
6 would approach acceptability (putting
aside our other reasons for not accepting Mr Dyson’s opinions), although
there were,
on Ms Byrne’s evidence, some further costs to be incurred in
order for a full subdivision to be realised. But the proposed
subdivision was
not the highest and best use of the land under the proposed lease
the absence of the full costs of construction being taken into account the
hypothetical development method will not produce a genuine
market value. In that
sense, purporting to apply a hypothetical development method without taking into
account the estimated costs
of that development is an attempt to apply a false
equation and will produce absurd results in most if not all cases.
Commissioner submitted that this was allowable because ss 277 and 277A created
valuations which were what the Commissioner called
statutory fictions, or which
resulted in valuations which did not represent a realistic
do not agree that these were the purposes intended for nor the results of the
proper interpretation of ss 277 and 277A.
respect, it is implausible to imagine that the purpose of the statute was to
create fictional or unrealistic assessments of the
value of increased rights
such as those in Mr Dyson’s Assessments 1-5. That is no criticism of Mr
Dyson because he was asked
to undertake those Assessments in that way, and it is
no criticism of those instructing Mr Dyson because the difficulty in
interpreting
ss 277 and 277A is grossly inversely proportional to their brevity
and the simplicity of their language. It was appropriate for the
Commissioner’s legal advisors to put forward Mr Dyson’s Assessments
1-5 given the difficulty in interpreting ss 277 and
Nevertheless,
the result of Mr Dyson’s Assessments 1-5 are manifestly absurd or
unreasonable and nowhere in the Final Report
or other extrinsic materials is
there any reference to fictional valuations or the like. The purpose of the
legislation was to arrive
at genuine market values for the increase in rights
granted under a lease variation, and without developers being able to deduct
from the LVC the costs of the things like those described in sub-s (3)(e) and
(f) and which they had previously been allowed to deduct,
at least in part.
Mr Dyson’s Assessment 1 results in a development which is not economically
feasible (which runs counter to the highest
and best use being developments
which are physically possible, legally permissible and
financially
) if the costs of construction (of the hypothetical development)
were, as Molonglo submitted, in the order of $70m. On that assumption,
developer would make a loss of approximately $20m.
Commissioner accepted that
conclusion,
but submitted
that this consequence for the Molonglo site wouldn’t necessarily apply to
other sites, and so this manifestly
absurd result could be ignored taking into
account the discretionary power to make remissions under s 278.
do not agree. It is difficult to conceive of any circumstances in which the
hypothetical development method will not produce an
absurd result when the full
costs of construction are not taken into account.
as the highest and best use concerns developments which are financially
feasible, not taking the full costs of a development
into account when using the
hypothetical development method would prevent any analysis as to whether what
was proposed was in fact
financially feasible.
Legislation Act
says that working out the meaning of an Act
means, amongst other things, finding the meaning of the Act when its apparent
leads to a result that is manifestly absurd or is unreasonable. We think
it is open to us to assume that the Legislative Assembly
does not intend
legislation to produce absurd results, although, we accept, that that may be the
unintended result on rare occasions.
in the Legislative Debate a number of detailed remission provisions were
but were not
adopted. All that was enacted was the Ministerial discretion to remit under s
278. The Final Report said that the objectives
underlying the proposed system
included simplicity, transparency, timeliness, certainty and
universality.
In our view a
scheme (for which the Commissioner contends) which taxes construction costs (see
below), then leaving it to a developer
to negotiate for the exercise of a
minister’s discretion to remit some of the resultant LVC, would not meet
those objectives.
Amongst other things, there is no statutory guidance as to
what material should be placed before the Minister, what considerations
Minister should apply, no reasons are required to be given by the Minister for
his/her decision, the negotiations are not public
and there are no rights of
review of the Minister’s decision.
the other hand, on our interpretation of the legislation, all those objectives
are met. What is not to be taken into account is
clear. Two well recognised
valuation methods can be used. Any valuation disputes may be resolved in the
usual way either by the Commissioner
(who must provide reasons) or on merits
review in ACAT (which is open to the public) after which reasons are given and
appeal exist.
we do not agree it was correct for Mr Dyson to assume, as he was instructed to
assume, that some or all of the necessary construction
costs which would need to
be spent to produce the hypothetical development were not
“necessary” to prepare the land for
redevelopment for its highest
and best use.
277 and 277A do not include any concept that the works defined in s 277A(3) are
unnecessary to prepare the land for redevelopment
for its highest and best use.
Rather, the sections assume that works are indeed necessary to achieve a highest
and best use, but
say that in valuing the after value some of those works are
not to be taken into account. Not taking into account certain improvements
effect ignoring) is not the same as saying improvements are unnecessary to
produce a particular development. For example, saying
no improvements are
necessary to realise the highest and best use automatically means that no costs
of construction may be considered,
and it was this flaw which rendered Mr
Dyson’s Assessments 1-5 unusable.
by not deducting the costs of construction in Assessment 1, the effect is to
inflate the after value by the amount of those
costs. The result would be that a
developer would pay 75% of the construction costs as an LVC, and then have to
pay 100% of the construction
costs when construction took place. In substance, a
developer would end up paying 175% of construction costs if it developed the
way of putting it was, as Molonglo submitted, the LVC would then be a charge or
tax of 75% on construction costs of the hypothetical
development. The
Commissioner agreed that this would be the effect of his interpretation of the
our view this end result is manifestly absurd or unreasonable per
Legislation Act
and is contrary to the purpose of the provisions. As the
Final Report said:
The CUC is not a tax, but a charge for an asset ...
It is important to recognise that a CUC is not an infrastructure or
development charge, but a payment for a lease variation which
increased rights to be associated with the lease.
Underpinning the proposed codification scheme are 10 core principles, which
will be applied to the whole LVC system and not just those
transactions subject
to codification.
Exclusivity
– the system should only assess land values and not improvements, onsite
or offsite costs.
the methodology behind Mr Dyson’s Assessments 1-5 was not a true
hypothetical development method. It was called that,
but it was in fact
different because it excluded all construction costs. A true hypothetical
development method deducts all costs
to arrive at a value of land.
accept Ms Byrne’s evidence that it is impossible to undertake a (true)
hypothetical development analysis without taking into
account improvements on
In substance, Mr
Dyson agreed with this conclusion because he said that his Assessment 1 did not
reflect the value of the “uplift”,
was not “a market value
under valuation terms”,
and that only his Assessment 6 represented the true “uplift” because
it deducted the full costed EDP costs (as costed
by Mr Tucker).
there is a further problem with the acceptance of Mr Dyson’s assessments
at least as far as the Commissioner’s
submissions were concerned. The
Commissioner submitted that Mr Dyson assessed his gross realisation value on the
basis that the works
required to produce that result were not taken into account
by Mr Dyson in the sense that such works were unnecessary or pretending
that works were not required or not
It was submitted that
Mr Dyson had put from his mind, made no consideration or allowance for, the
works necessary, he pretended the
land didn’t need any works proposed in
do not agree. Mr Dyson’s evidence was to the opposite effect. In his
report he said that his Assessment 1 assumed that all
the services and costs had
been expended and the completed lots were ready to be
In cross-examination he
said that his gross realisation figure was calculated on the basis that all the
EDP works had been done and
It was only because he
assumed that those works had been done that the land would, on Mr Dyson’s
analysis, had a value of some
this way, Mr Dyson’s Assessment 1, and Assessments 2-5 in varying degrees,
took into account the full value added by the
hypothesised improvements, but did
not allow any costs (Assessment 1) or did not allow for varying degrees of costs
(Assessments
2-5). This seemed contrary to the Commissioner’s position
that both costs and value of improvements could not be taken into
not explained this way, it seems to us that the Commissioner incorrectly equated
the after value of the land (valued immediately
after the variation) with the
value of the land assessed on the assumption that hypothesised highest and best
use improvements were
present on the land. That is not the effect of ss 277 and
277A in our view.
the other notable feature of Mr Dyson’s gross realisation figure was that
it was the sum of the gross realisation of
all the 35 individual sites (which
would be the result of a subdivision in accordance with the EDP
However, what is
to be valued is one Crown lease, not 35 proposed individual Crown leases. In our
opinion the market for smaller
individual sites would likely be different to the
market value of one, 14 ha Crown lease.
approach led to a failure to adjust for the scale of the Molonglo land as Ms
Byrne opined.
Maurici v Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
[2003] HCA 8
the High Court
said the following at [18]:
As Waddell J said in Sher v Commissioner for Main Roads, sales of properties
of a different character are likely to attract a different
class of buyer and
are unlikely to provide a reliable indication of value.
Dyson used a comparable sales method as a check for his hypothetical development
method. However, he did not place much weight
on it because he regarded it as
unreliable and his reasoning process was somewhat opaque. We place no weight on
that method in Assessment
6 and prefer Ms Byrne’s methodology in relation
to adjusting for EDP works on the Molonglo land.
were also some problems with some of his comparables. For example, he did not
use any comparable sites which had commercial
zoning (as the Molonglo land
One site he used, at
Cotter Rd, Weston Creek, was not comparable at all in our view given the factors
identified by Ms Byrne.
those reasons we do not accept any of Mr Dyson’s assessments. Most
fundamentally, he did not value the correct highest and
best use development,
either on the revenue or the costs side.
The quantity surveyors’ evidence and our
parties each adduced evidence from a qualified and experienced quantity
surveyor. Molonglo adduced evidence from Mr Sephton Wolmarans,
Commissioner adduced evidence from Mr Ian Tucker.
Wolmarans had peer reviewed the original costings of the full EDP works
undertaken by Turner & Townsend. Mr Wolmarans then
produced costings of the
revised EDP works as requested by Ms Byrne. He measured the quantities required
from first principles,
applied various rates and allowances to arrive at costings for the revised EDP
works both as a total and broken down into separate
elements. The results were
set out in his report dated 12 December 2024 upon which Ms Byrne relied in her
2024 report. Mr Wolmarans’
costing of the EDP works was just under
Tucker was provided with Mr Wolmarans’ 12 December 2024 report. He
inspected Mr Wolmarans measurements and some of the documents
on which Mr
Wolmarans relied. He satisfied himself that Mr Wolmarans’ measurements of
the quantities were reasonable, he then
applied various rates and allowances
(which differed from those used by Mr Wolmarans) and arrived at costings for the
revised EDP
works both as a total and broken down into separate elements. The
results were set out in his report dated 4 April 2025. Mr Tucker’s
of the EDP works was just over $51m.
Wolmarans was provided a copy of Mr Tucker’s report and produced a report
in reply dated 2 May 2025.
we have said above in relation to Ms Byrne’s evidence, it was appropriate
for her to make an allowance for such of the EDP
works as would take place on
the Molonglo land.
her third table at AB 156 Ms Byrne said the onsite works were costed (by Mr
Wolmarans) at a little over $54m. That was correct,
but those onsite works
included work on Territory land, namely what Mr Wolmarans called Stages 2B1 and
2B2. In total, on Mr Wolmarans
figures, those works were costed at a little over
relation to the differences in opinion between Messrs Wolmarans and Tucker, we
prefer Mr Wolmarans evidence in relation to the
rates various trades would
charge for the work. However, we prefer Mr Tucker’s evidence in relation
to the margins and adjustments
which would then be applied to those rates.
prefer Mr Wolmaran’s rates because in his reply report he provided some
reasonably contemporaneous and objective evidence
which corroborated some of his
rates. Admittedly that evidence was limited, but it was more corroborative
evidence than was produced
by Mr Tucker who produced no objective corroborative
evidence other than for his reliance on Rawlinsons.
addition, Mr Wolmarans is based locally and is the more likely to be familiar
with the rates that local trades will charge.
quantity surveyors said they relied on their internal databases, but other than
those bald statements no information was given
as to the content of the
it comes to the various margins and adjustments however, we prefer Mr
Tucker’s evidence because his experience was the
greater in private as
opposed to government work, was the greater in Australia, and was the greater in
terms of his on-the-ground
experience in projects most akin to the EDP
is not to say that Mr Wolmarans was not experienced. He was. Our point is that a
lot of his experience was in South Africa where
he started his career as a
junior quantity surveyor working on government projects. Thereafter, he gained
experience in all aspects
of the quantity surveying profession from initial
feasibility through to project closeout. He came to Australia in 2019 when he
his present firm as a senior quantity surveyor before rising to become a
partner in 2024.
his times at his present firm Mr Wolmarans has worked on a wide range of
projects with particular expertise in health infrastructure,
government fit-out,
and data centres. About 70% of his work was government related and his
experience in relation to subdivisional
infrastructure works (such as were
required by the EDP) was limited to his much smaller data centre projects. That
did not make his
opinions of no value, but we prefer the greater experience of
Mr Tucker in projects more akin to those involved in the EDP works.
Tucker has had about 36 years’ experience, working almost exclusively for
private clients, and became a partner of his present
firm in 2005.
terms of subdivisional / civil works of the nature of the EDP works, Mr Tucker
has had personal experience with such projects as
the BORAL SEL Eastern Precinct
Development, the BORAL SEL Western Precinct Development, the BORAL SEL Stage 3
& 5B Bridges /
Southern Access Way Project, the Delfin Lend Lease Calderwood
Urban Project (Wollongong) (of about 50 ha in size), the Maitland Sub-Divisional
Works (Stage 1, 2 & 3), the Enfield Demolition, Infrastructure and Site
Remediation Works and the Morisset Sub-Divisional Works.
Tucker’s experience has not been limited to quantity surveying. He has had
much experience in contract administration in
which a building contract is on
foot and financial reporting is important. In that role, we infer, someone such
as Mr Tucker would
see what works actually cost. He has also been involved as a
superintendent under a building contract and independent certifier roles,
of which involved him in the delivery phases of projects. That experience would
no doubt assist him in quantity surveying. As
... I’ve worked on subdivisional works as a superintendent, so I
understand every aspect of the off-site works, because we had
a project where we
had off-site works, and the complexity around not only the roads authorities,
but, you know, the traffic management.
Also with the infrastructure coming into
the site - yes, it was smaller in scale, but constructing roads, bringing
infrastructure
in, bulk earthworks, all of those things were very very
is true that Mr Tucker had no experience in civil works in the Canberra market,
although he has had some Canberra experience in
other areas, but we do not see
that as of much weight given his experience elsewhere. No doubt there are some
local variations but,
on the evidence, they are not large. As Mr Tucker said in
cross-examination, the actual physical work is the same.
terms of his Canberra experience, Mr Tucker said that he’d been travelling
to Canberra for about the last 10 years. One of
his premium clients is a
financial institution that owns quite a few assets in the Canberra region,
mostly consisting of government
buildings, and over this period of time
he’s been involved with a significant amount of work to most of those
assets. He’s
acted as the building consultant or superintendent, he has
engaged with local builders and local project managers. Admittedly these
not civil infrastructure works, but neither had Mr Wolmarans much experience
with civil infrastructure works, certainly not
of the scale and complexity
involved in the EDP works.
Wolmarans’ relatively lesser experience with private infrastructure
projects is reflected in his use of what was called a
Monte Carlo assessment for
risk, which amounted to 29% (Mr Tucker used 15% on more traditional grounds).
The short point is that
on the evidence Monte Carlo risk assessments are used in
government but almost never in private works. The use of this method of
assessment was not appropriate and undermined the reliability we could place on
Mr Wolmarans’ evidence.
other point to note is that Mr Wolmarans did not perform the Monte Carlo
assessment himself. That was done by Turner & Townsend
whose report was
tendered not as an expert report but as a matter of historical
Therefore, there was no
expert evidence before us in which the Monte Carlo assessment was made.
reliance on what is used for government projects and almost never for private
projects undermined the reliance we could place
on Mr Wolmarans’ other
estimates for margins and adjustments.
those reasons we accept Mr Wolmarans’ evidence on rates, but Mr
Tucker’s evidence on margins and adjustments.
Wolmarans’ costed revised EDP works on the Molonglo land (and before any
margins or adjustments) were:
Stage 1A – EDP Works
Stage 1B – EDP Works $2,950,250
Stage 2A $2,377,698
Stage 3 – EDP Works $1,892,206
Removal of Utilities $483,907
EVO Substations $3,502,818
Residential Development Earthworks $1,665,593
Total $16,746,755
Tucker’s rate for head contractor preliminaries and supervision was 13%,
his rate for head contractor overheads and margin
was 8%, his lump sum amount
for traffic management was $2.1m, his lump sum for EVO Energy Design was
$62,246, his rate for design
consultant’s costs was 10% and his rate for
risk or contingencies was 15%.
Messrs Wolmarans and Tucker applied their rates in the order they appear above
on a cumulative basis. That is, using Mr Tucker’s
figures, the rate of 13%
was applied to the total cost of $16,746,755 which resulted in a figure of
$18,933,833. His next rate of
8% was then applied to this new total of
$18,933,833 and so on.
Wolmarans applied a rate of 0.1% for the EVO Energy Design Cost. We could find
no evidence to support that rate. Mr Tucker used
a lump sum of $62,246. Its
source was not identified but there was a letter from EVO Energy to Molonglo
dated 7 August 2023 which
contained that exact amount as an “initial
allowance” to commence work on early connection stages, planning,
coordination,
and management of future
As there was evidence
for Mr Tucker’s figure but not Mr Wolmarans, we have used Mr
Tucker’s figure.
end result is that we accept the sum of $28,588,982 as being the reasonable cost
of the revised EDP works on the Molonglo land.
should note that the parties were requested to provide further oral submissions
on two issues. The first was what onsite works
in the costings was to be carried
out on Territory land rather than the Molonglo land. The agreed position was
that all of the onsite
works other than Stages 2B1 and 2B2 was to be carried out
on the Molonglo land.
second issue was whether what Mr Wolmarans called the Removal of Utilities work
was required by an approval or was proposed by
Molonglo. In the event we do not
need to decide this issue. We are satisfied that that work was on the Molonglo
land and was necessary
for Ms Byrne to take into account in the way we have
earlier described.
The calculation of the LVC
accept Ms Byrne’s assessment of the after value
before adjustments
to bring the Molonglo land up to a similar level as the serviced land sales set
out in the first table at AB 156, namely $85,304,900.
that total Ms Byrne deducted $54,316,009 being the costs of the onsite EDP works
as costed by Mr Wolmarans. The result was a
figure of $30,988,891 for what she
called the:
... calculated deduction to the market derived rate for each component on a
‘shovel ready’ component basis, the market
value of the subject
property on an ‘After Value’ basis, having regard for its condition
was this figure which was Ms Byrne’s after value for the Molonglo land per
s 277. The difference between that figure and
her assessed before value
($23,875,000) was $7,113,891. This latter figure was what she described in her
cross-examination as the
“uplift of $7 million in the after value compared
to the before value”
a result of the increased rights proposed to be granted under the lease
variation approved in DA 19.
Byrne then deducted the costs of the offsite works.
proper figure for Ms Byrne to deduct for the EDP works on the Molonglo land was
$28,588,982. That results in a figure of $56,715,918
as the after value.
the agreed before value of $21,408,000, the result (of V1 – V2) is
$35,307,918.
five percent of that last figure, and the amount of the LVC, is
$26,480,938.
completeness, had we accepted the totality of Mr Wolmarans’ evidence on
costings for works on the Molonglo land
($38,530,494
Byrne’s after value would have been
$46,774,406.
Less the agreed
before value figure of $21,408,000, the difference would have been $25,366,406.
Accordingly, the LVC would have been
$19,024,804.
we accepted the totality of Mr Tucker’s evidence on costings for works on
the Molonglo land ($23,175,643) Ms Byrne’s
after value would have been
$62,129,257. Less the agreed before value figure of $21,408,000, the difference
would have been $40,721,257.
Accordingly, the LVC would have been $30,540,
accept Ms Byrne’s assessment of the after value before adjustments to
bring the Molonglo land up to a similar level as the
serviced land sales set out
in the first table at AB 156, namely $85,304,900.
accept the reasonable costs which would be incurred to bring the Molonglo land
up to a standard so that it was as comparable as
possible with Ms Byrne’s
basket of comparable sales was $28,588,982.
find that the after value was $56,715,918.
accept the parties’ agreement that the before value was $21,408,000.
find that the LVC should be $26,480,938.
22 August 2025 we made the following Orders:
(a) The respondent’s confirmation dated 1 July 2024 of the Notice of
Assessment, Lease Variation Charge, dated 7 March 2024
is set aside.
(b) In lieu thereof, the lease variation charge for Development Application no.
202341419 is determined to be $26,480,938.
(c) Liberty to apply in relation to costs.
......................................
Acting Presidential Member G Curtin SC
Date(s) of hearing:
12-16 May, 16-20, 23-24 June, 2-4 July, 21 August 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr P Walker SC with Mr J Bird
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr A Berger KC with Mr N Oram and Ms J Cunliffe
Solicitors for the Respondent:
ACT Government Solicitor
AB 1621 at [93]
AB 1616 at [79]-[80]; AB
One of the valuers, Mr Dyson,
could only see 35 blocks on the plan and assumed the 36
for the proposed new roads. It makes no difference in the case whether there
were 35 or 36 blocks
AB 287 at [3.1.3]; T
800.1-802.44
Being those in Mr
Wolmarans’ report dated 12 December 2024 and annexed to Ms Byrne’s
report as Annexure E, at AB 195
ff. A physical description of some of the works
excluded from the Turner & Townsend costings was given by Ms Byrne at T
824.46-827.1
Notice of Assessment dated 7
March 2024, AB 914
By application dated 11 June
Most but not all documents in
the Application Book were tendered. What was and was not tendered is noted in
the transcript
Although the relevant
approval in this case, DA 19, approved the “consolidation” of Blocks
11 and 12 together with a
variation of the purpose clause, the application was
not for a “consolidation” as defined in the
because s 234
defines “consolidation” to mean the surrender of two or more
, and the grant of a new
or leases. It follows that
the relevant sub-sections of s 277 to apply are those referring to chargeable
lease variations which are
neither a consolidation nor a subdivision
Inserted by the
and Development (Lease Variation Charges) Amendment Act 2011
There was no dispute that
the Final Report could be considered
Beginning at
We think the reference to
“(new s277A(4)(b))” is a typographical error, and the reference
should be to cl 277A(4)(f)
s 614(3)(b)
Planning Act 2023
Notifiable Instrument NI2021-65 − Planning and
Development (Plan Variation No 377) Approval 2021 and Commencement Notice
− Planning and Development (Plan Variation No 377) Commencement
Notice 2021
Compliance with the Estate
Development Code is mandatory: see
Village No 22 Pty Ltd ACN 620 656 260 v
ACT Planning and Land Authority & Anor
[2021] ACAT 43
Although a further
development application would need to be lodged to achieve that objective
AB 926 (the date appearing
in the Index at AB 903 and confirmed by the Commissioner’s solicitors at
AB 11132 at [4])
“A person may apply
for approval of a development proposal for a prohibited development in
anticipation of a variation to the
territory plan (the anticipated variation)
that would have the effect of allowing the proposed development.”
AB 934, 4997-5050. See the
statement of Mr Blencowe at AB 1621 at [93]
Notice of Decision on
Reconsideration dated 2 February 2023
Turner & Townsend
Feasibility Cost Plan 4 October 2022
Notice of Assessment dated 7
March 2024, AB 7
By application dated 11 June
The estate boundary is the
dotted red line in the plan at AB 6706
Dated 23 December 2024 at
AB 385 [3.1] – 388
[3.12], 7367
Clayton Utz letter of
instruction at AB 485 at [2.9]
A plan depicting those works
is at AB 6680, a general description is at AB620 in Molonglo’s town
planning expert report
T 711.14 – 712.26;
717.45-718.10
AB 620 at [63]
AB 621 at [64]-[65]
T 848.26 ff
AB 620 at [60]
Trust Company of
Australia Ltd v Valuer-General
[2007] NSWCA 181
AB 130 with a typographical
error corrected
AB 39 at [84]
T 1719.35-.40
AB 10756 at [23]
T 1768.7-.17
T 174714-.16
T 1772.35-.41
Any buildings or structures
on or under the land, any alterations or demolition of any existing building or
structure on or under
the land, any remediation of the land, and any earthwork,
planting or other work that affects the landscape of the land
See at clauses 116 and
Section 146(2)
Legislation Act 2001
T 1767.7-.34
Fletcher’s Fotographics Pty Ltd
(1984) 6 IR 471
per Priestley JA at
Croc’s Franchising Pty Ltd v Alamdo Holdings Pty Ltd
per Basten JA at [213]
Section 2.5.4
AB 22 [9(b)]
Which appears to be a form
capable of being completed and submitted online – see AB 926 and the
passage under the heading “Before
Letter dated 25 May 2022
from Molonglo to the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development
Directorate at AB 4197
AB 962, 973
T 1725.20-.24
AB 5002. The approved
version of that plan was at AB 6708
AB 4170-4171
It’s final form (T
1726.30-.35) was at AB 5898
Condition 8 is at AB
Summarised at AB
We observe that s 277 only
refers to the reasonable terms and conditions that a genuine seller would
require and makes no reference
to a genuine purchaser. If anything, the omission
of any reference to a genuine purchaser supports our construction of s 277A,
we do not rely on that fact. It seems more probable to us that meaning
of (a)(ii) in the definition of the after value is a reference
to a market price
involving both a genuine seller and genuine buyer
For example,
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue
(2003) 212 CLR 111
City Hill Pty Limited v ACT Planning and Land
Authority and ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal
[2015] ACTSC 40
Commonwealth v Arklay
[1952] HCA 76
(1952) 87 CLR 159
AB 11108; T 888.22
Followed in
SNS Pty Ltd v Roads and Maritime Services
[2018] NSWLEC 7
(Pain J) and
Johnston v Valuer-General of New
South Wales
[2024] NSWLEC 90 (Pritchard
T 844.32-845.8
AB 10929; T
795.38-796.21
T 736.38-.46; 780.15-.24;
797.24-.38 87
AB 621 at [64]-[65]
T 781.4-.46;
AB 332 at [5.8]
Mr Dyson could only see
35 sites on the EDP and assumed the 36
was for the roads. However,
it makes no difference in the case whether there were 35 or 36 sites for the
uses permitted under the
varied lease
T 956.1-.42
AB 707 at [92]
AB 11034 at [13]
AB 11034 at [14]
T 1781.23-.39
T 711.14 – 712.26;
T 704.31-.37
We understood the
Commissioner to agree with this methodology at T 1781.5
The Commissioner’s
Extrinsic Materials Bundle at p 476-480
Final Report at p 26
T 1747.45-.46; AB 10765
At p 49, footnote 37
Proposition 8 on p 26
T 744.6-.22
T 1752.35-.41;
1769.26-1771.13
T 1771.10-.13
AB 703 at [79]
T 1018.28-.1019.1;
1021.27-39; 1072.36-1073.7; 1073.22-.38; T 1123.46 - 1124.17
T 1747.14-.16
T 852.39 ff
Meaning he did not rely
on the measured quantities calculated by Turner & Townsend
T 1807.30 1808.25
T 836.15; 841.33
AB 499: the total of the
costs on that page, less the offsite works and Stages 2B1 and 2B2
$85,304,900 less
$45,157,510
RTF format (1.32 MB)
Signed PDF/A format