BK and Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate [2021] ACTOFOI 12 (23 September 2021)
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
(23 September 2021)
Decision and reasons for decision of Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
Symone Andersen
Application Number
AFOI-RR/21/10016
Decision Reference
[2021] ACTOFOI 12
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Decision Date
Freedom of Information Act 2016
(ACT) – deciding access
– whether disclosure of information is contrary to the public interest
– Cabinet information
– Promote open discussion of public affairs
and enhance the government’s accountability – Contribute to positive
and informed debate on important issues and matters of public interest –
Reveal the reason for a government decision and any
background or contextual
information that informed the decision – An individual’s right to
1. I am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman for the purposes of
Freedom of Information Act 2016
of the FOI Act, I
the decision of
the Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (
my decision that the applicant should be given access to
the information at issue.
Background of Ombudsman review
3. On 31 January 2021, the applicant applied to EPSDD for access to
information related to the ACT Government’s
Managing Buildings
project. On 16 February 2021, the parties agreed to reduce the scope
of the access application to:
1. From the formation of the Unit Title Reform Consultative Group in
consultation submissions (excluding personal identifying details of
individuals)
Records and
reports of consultations with the industry and community consultative
2. Reports containing overall recommendations of the reform project
3. Any documents discussing ‘tenant rights of attendance at general
meetings or election of tenant representatives’, to
the extent that this
covers any documents not already included in the other points.
4. EPSDD identified 24 documents in scope. On 9 April 2021, EPSDD decided the
access application by giving the applicant access to
5 documents in full, 5
documents in part and refusing access to 14 documents. In making its decision,
EPSDD relied on ss 6, 17, 45,
50 and Schedule 1 and 2 of the FOI Act.
5. On 28 April 2021, the applicant applied to the ACT Ombudsman for review of
EPSDD’s decision under s 73 of the FOI Act.
6. On 11 August 2021, I provided the parties with my draft consideration.
This set out my preliminary view and invited the parties
to make additional
submissions before I made my final decision. My preliminary view was that
EPSDD’s decision should be set
aside and substituted and that the
applicant should be given access to the information at issue.
7. On 11 August 2021, the applicant responded to my draft consideration
accepting the view I set out in it.
8. On 7 September 2021, EPSDD responded to my draft consideration. EPSDD
accepted much of the reasoning in my draft consideration.
However, it maintains
that documents 9, 11 and 13 contain information that is taken to be contrary to
the public interest under Schedule
1, s 1.6(1)(a). EPSDD also alternatively
submitted that information in these documents may be taken to be contrary to the
interest under Schedule 1, s 1.6(1)(d).
Information at issue
9. The information at issue in this review is information that EPSDD refused
access to, except documents 21, 22 and 23, which the
applicant accepts are
entirely comprised of information that is taken to be contrary to the public
interest information.
10. The issue to be decided is whether giving the applicant access to the
information at issue would be contrary to the public interest.
11. In making my decision, I had regard to:
applicant’s original access application and application for Ombudsman
submissions, including its response to my draft consideration
the FOI Act,
particularly ss 7, 9, 17, 50 and 72 and Schedule 1 and 2
processing file
an unedited copy
of the information at issue, and
Rights Act 2006
(ACT) (Human Rights Act)
Relevant law
12. Every person enjoys an enforceable right of access to government
information.
However, the FOI Act
creates an exception to this right by allowing for refusal of access to
information that is ‘contrary
to the public interest
information’.
13. Contrary to the public interest information is defined in s 16 of the FOI
information—
(a) that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
schedule 1; or
(b) the disclosure of which would be contrary to the public interest under
the test set out in section 17
14. Section 17 sets out the test to be used in balancing public interest
factors favouring disclosure and non-disclosure respectively.
This balancing
test must be used to determine whether disclosure would be contrary to the
public interest.
15. The party seeking to prevent disclosure of information bears the onus of
establishing that information is contrary to the public
information.
16. Schedule 1 of the FOI Act sets out categories of information that are
taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose,
while Schedule 2 of the
FOI Act sets out public interest factors to be balanced when determining whether
disclosure is in the public
The contentions of the parties
17. EPSDD’s decision notice said:
Access to some of the information is refused under Schedule 1.6(1)(a) as
information submitted to Cabinet for its consideration, or
brought into
existence for this purpose, and is taken to be contrary to the public interest.
18. On the other hand, the applicant’s review application contends:
The decision-maker has identified that documents 2-3, 5, 7-9 and 11-23 are
subject to the s 1.6(1)(a) Cabinet information exemption.
Documents 21-23 are
obviously covered by the exemption. The remaining documents... must have been
included as attachments to Documents
21-23, or to a future Cabinet submission
that does not as yet exist. I note, however, that the decision notice does not
state whether
the decision-maker considered the application of the purely
factual information exception, or whether an edited document containing
purely factual information could be provided. Section 6.9 of FOI Guideline 4
– Considering the Public Interest provides
guidance as to how decision
makers are to apply the exemption, including among other things the purely
factual information exception
and the definition of “information submitted
to Cabinet”, and recommends that decision-makers provide a clear
explanation
as to why s 1.6 applies to the documents. In this case, the
decision-maker provided no explanation beyond stating that the information
submitted to Cabinet or brought into existence for Cabinet consideration, and
that the corruption/commission of an offence exemption
does not apply.
Considerations
19. I carefully considered an unredacted copy of the information at issue
together with the information provided by the applicant
20. The FOI Act contains an exception to Schedule 1, if information
identifies corruption or the commission of an offence by a public
official. I am
satisfied this exception is not relevant in this matter.
Schedule 1, s 1.6(1)(a)
21. The first question is whether some of the information was incorrectly
determined to be contrary to the public interest under Schedule
1, s 1.6(1)(a),
which is set out below:
(1) Information—
(a) that has been submitted, or that a Minister proposes to submit, to
Cabinet, for its consideration and that was brought into existence
22. I observed that the information at issue includes information relating to
the Strata Reform Consultative Group (SRCG) meetings
and data collection results
from the SRCG members. Documents 2-3, 5, 7-9, 11-20 appear to record minutes and
agendas of meetings
of the SRCG.
23. Accordingly, in my draft consideration, I stated that the information
seems to have been brought into existence for a purpose
independent of Cabinet.
In forming this view, I noted that agendas and minutes are typical features of
meetings of this nature. Further,
I expressed the view that the records would
have been made irrespective of whether information would later form part of a
submission.
24. In response to my draft consideration, EPSDD submitted:
The SRCG was established to provide advice to Government on proposed reforms
of strata laws in connection with mixed-use developments
and other related
matters. The remit of the group included the development of specific legislative
reform measures for Cabinet consideration,
which necessarily required the
contemplation and discussion of reform options, policy direction, regulatory
impact and analysis.
I understand that... documents 9, 11 and 13 of the SRCG
capture, in part:
specific policy
discussion of the group that informed, and were reflected in, the terms of the
draft bill prepared by EPSDD; and
group’s explicit consideration, discussion and analysis of the terms of
the draft Bill prepared by EPSDD, which in turn
shaped its final terms.
It was the performance of this role (documented in the above
minutes) that resulted in a final Bill for Cabinet’s consideration,
the SRCG having significant input and decision-making capacity in regards the
Bill’s specific measures/provisions. In
our view, without the Government
imperative to develop this legislation and to do so informed by the discussion,
debate and views
of the SRCG members, much of the group’s meetings and
ensuing discussions would not have occurred.
25. I am not persuaded by this submission because it does not grasp the
distinction between information compiled in the development
of policy and
information compiled specifically for submission to Cabinet.
26. In making this decision, I referred to the ACT Government’s Cabinet
Handbook, which says:
Cabinet documents are strictly confidential and are the property of the ACT.
Confidentiality is protected in the following ways...
documents (including drafts) should contain the Dissemination Limiting Marker
(Sensitive: Cabinet)...
Jon Stanhope and Environment,
Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
, the Ombudsman commented
The presence of the DLM cannot be relied upon on its own but does support the
view the document was created for
28. The DLM is not absent from documents 9, 11 and 13 by mistake. It is
absent because they are not Cabinet Submissions and they are
not confidential.
This goes to the heart of the matter, as the information was recorded for the
administration of SRCG meetings.
Any subsequent consideration of matters raised
in those meetings by Cabinet does not retrospectively alter this because the FOI
refers to the purpose for information being brought into existence.
Schedule 1, s 1.6(1)(d)
29. EPSDD’s response to my draft consideration raised the argument that
the information it initially took to be contrary to
the public interest under
Schedule 1, s 1.6(1)(a) was in fact contrary to the public interest under
Schedule 1, s 1.6(1)(d).
30. Schedule 1, s 1.6(1)(d) applies to information ‘the disclosure of
which would reveal any deliberation of Cabinet’.
31. The issue with EPSDD’s submission vis-à-vis this provision,
is that it mistakes the nature of a Cabinet deliberation
and the reason that the
FOI Act protects such deliberations from disclosure.
Alistair Coe and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate
the information at
issue was an attachment to a Cabinet submission. In that review, the Ombudsman
accepted the information at issue
had been created for a deliberative purpose of
Cabinet. However, the information was a standalone document summarising the
and results of consultation activities. The Ombudsman considered that
while Cabinet could be informed by the results of consultation
processes, and
may have deliberated on options arising from it, the information itself did not
disclose a deliberation or decision
of Cabinet.
Jon Stanhope and ACT Health
Directorate
the Ombudsman
referred to this distinction in deciding that the ACT’s Capital Asset
Development Plan did not disclose a deliberation
of Cabinet even if matters
therein had been deliberated on by Cabinet. The Ombudsman referred, in that
decision, to the Queensland
Information Commissioner’s comments in
Ryman and Department of Main Roads
, which are instructive in this matter
... A document whose creation preceded ‘active discussion and
debate’ in Cabinet... cannot logically constitute a record
of what was
actively discussed and debated in Cabinet on the occasion of the
document’s consideration by
34. In this matter, EPSDD’s own submission is that the meeting minutes
and agendas were not themselves Cabinet submissions,
but, like the Capital Asset
Development Plan in
Jon Stanhope and ACT Health Directorate
contained information matching information considered by Cabinet at some later
35. Accordingly, I am not persuaded by the submission that the information at
issue is taken to be contrary to the public interest
under Schedule 1, s
36. Having decided that Schedule 1, s 1.6 is not applicable with respect to
the information at issue, I consider that the applicant
should be given access
to it. However, a small amount of the information at issue was refused on the
basis of Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(ii)
which protects an individual’s right to
disclosure below.
Public interest test
37. To determine whether access should have been refused to information
deleted in accordance with Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(ii) of the
FOI Act prescribes
the following five steps:
identify any
factor favouring disclosure that applies in relation to the information (a
relevant factor favouring disclosure), including
any factor mentioned in
Schedule 2, section 2.1
identify any
factor favouring disclosure that applies in relation to the information (a
relevant factor favouring non-disclosure),
including any factor mentioned in
Schedule 2, s 2.1
balance any
relevant factor or factors favouring disclosure against any relevant factor or
factors favouring non-disclosure
decide whether,
on balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public
interest, and
balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public interest,
allow access to the information
Irrelevant factors
38. I do not consider that any of the irrelevant factors listed under s 17(2)
arose in the making of this decision.
Factors favouring disclosure
39. EPSDD’s decision letter found three factors favouring disclosure to
be relevant: Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(i), 2.1(a)(ii) and
2.1(a)(viii).
Promote open discussion of public affairs and enhance the
government’s accountability
40. A reasonable expectation that information could promote open discussion
of public affairs and enhance the government’s accountability
disclosure under the FOI Act.
41. EPSDD found this factor applicable. I agree and am satisfied that
disclosing this information at issue will promote this public
interest factor to
a moderate degree. Housing policy is a matter of considerable public interest in
the Australian Capital Territory
(the Territory) and open discussion and
enhanced government accountability is likely to be supported by access to
information of
the kind that is in issue here.
Contribute to positive and informed debate on important issues and matters
of public interest
42. A reasonable expectation that information could contribute to positive
and informed debate on important issues and matters of
public interest favours
disclosure under the FOI Act.
43. EPSDD found that disclosure of the information at issue could reasonably
be expected to promote this public interest factor. I
agree. Providing
contextual information regarding the government’s decision-making
processes around strata and building policies
could help inform people who wish
to take a position on related issues. In making this finding, I am satisfied
that strata policy
and potential reforms are matters of public interest in the
Territory. I expect the information at issue could promote this public
factor to a moderate degree.
Reveal the reason for a government decision and any background or
contextual information that informed the decision
44. A reasonable expectation that information could reveal the reason for a
government decision and any background or contextual information
that informed
the decision favours disclosure under the FOI
45. EPSDD found that disclosure of the information at issue could reasonably
be expected to promote this public interest factor. I
agree. The information
reveals much about who has input into strata reform and what the input is. This
reveals context and reasoning
behind government decisions. The information at
issue could reasonably be expected to promote this factor to a considerable
as a result.
Pro-disclosure bias
46. The FOI Act also requires the adoption of a pro-disclosure bias when
administering the Act. The bias reflects the importance of
public access to
government information for the proper working of representative democracy. This
concept is promoted through the
objects of the FOI Act.
47. For these reasons, I am satisfied that disclosure of the information at
issue could reasonably be expected to promote the objects
of the FOI Act and the
two relevant factors favouring disclosure in this review.
Factors favouring nondisclosure
48. EPSDD’s decision letter found one factor favouring non-disclosure
relevant: Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(ii). I discuss the applicability
on this factor
An individual’s right to privacy
49. A reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice a person’s
right to privacy under the Human Rights Act favours
non-disclosure under the FOI
50. EPSDD’s original decision found that some personal information in
document 17 could reasonably be expected to prejudice
an individual’s
right to privacy under the Human Rights Act to an extent that would outweigh the
factors favouring disclosure.
51. The Human Rights Act provides that:
Everyone has the right—
(a) not to have his or her privacy, family, home or correspondence interfered
with unlawfully or arbitrarily...
52. In my draft consideration, I stated that I do not agree with
EPSDD’s conclusion that disclosing the names and job titles
of individuals
listed in document 17 could prejudice any individuals’ right to privacy
under the Human Rights Act. The function
of the panel is apparently a public one
and as such I consider that the individuals involved are participating in public
life, rather
than suffering from intrusion into their private spheres. EPSDD did
not make any additional submissions on this point. I maintain
the view that
Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(ii) is inapplicable in this review.
Balancing the factors
53. Taking into account all the relevant public interest factors, and having
formed the view that no factor favouring non-disclosure
is applicable, I decided
the public interest weighs in favour of disclosure.
54. My decision is to
EPSDD’s decision to refuse
access to the information under
s 35(1)(c) of the FOI Act. I
my decision that the applicant should be given access to the
information at issue.
Symone Andersen
Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
September 2021
Section 7 of the FOI
Section 35(1)(c) of the
Section 72 of the FOI
Jon Stanhope and
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
[2021] ACTOFOI
Alistair Coe and
Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
[2019] ACTOFOI
Stanhope and ACT Health Directorate
[2020] ACTOFOI 22
Ryman and Department of
[1996] QICmr 21
(1996) 3 QAR 416
Re Hudson as agent for
Fencray Pty Ltd and Department of the Premier, Economic and Trade Development
[1993] QICmr 4
(1993) 1 QAR 123
Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(i) of the
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(ii) of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(viii) of the FOI Act.
RTF format (849 KB)
Signed PDF/A format