Police v Rowland (a pseudonym); Police v Nowell (a pseudonym) [2024] ACTCC 4 (26 April 2024)
CHILDRENS COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Police v Rowland (a pseudonym); Police v Nowell (a pseudonym)
[2024] ACTCC 4
Hearing Dates:
13 March 2024 – 15
Decision Date:
Magistrate Temby
See [125] – [132]
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– Judgment – young offenders – ride
motor vehicle without consent – theft – robbery – joint
– the meaning of ‘intention to permanently deprive’
Legislation Cited:
Criminal Code 2002
ss 45A, 306, 308, 309, 310,
Theft Act 1968
(UK), ss 6, 12
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Cases Cited:
Meissner v R
[1995] HCA 41
[2020] QCA 13
R v Mazaydeh (No 1)
[2014] ACTSC 279
R v Dardovska
[2003] VSCA 4
Reg v Lloyd
[1985] EWCA Crim 1
[1985] 1 QB 829
R v Fernandez
[1996] 1 Cr App Rep 175
R v Mitchell
[2008] EWCA Crim 850
McGuiness v Police
[2016] SASC 133
[2014] SADC 177
Chris Raymond Hotchkis (Informant)
Kara Rowland (a pseudonym) (Defendant)
Kathie Nowell (a pseudonym) (Defendant)
Representation:
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
Zachary McBride (Defendant)
Paul Edmonds (Defendant)
File Numbers:
CH 1076/2023
CH 1499/2023
CH 1500/2023
CH 1501/2023
CH 1072/2023
CH 1502/2023
CH 1503/2023
CH 1503/2024
MAGISTRATE TEMBY:
Introduction
Young People, Kara Rowland and Kathie Nowell, are charged with several offences
arising from an incident on the rooftop of the
Canberra Centre car park, in
which a car was forcibly taken from its owner by Mr Lachlan Smith. Mr Smith
drove the car out the car
park, collecting the Young People along the way.
separate proceedings, Mr Smith pleaded guilty to an offence of aggravated
robbery for his role in the incident, however the Young
People have pleaded not
guilty to the charges brought against them. Each of the Young People are charged
(a) riding in a motor vehicle without consent, contrary to s 318(2) of the
Criminal Code 2002
(b) joint commission aggravated robbery, contrary to s 310 of the
(relying on s 45A of the Criminal Code 2002); and
(c) two back-up offences, being:
commission robbery, contrary to s 309 of the
Criminal Code 2002
on s 45A); and
commission theft, contrary to s 308 of the
Criminal Code 2002
(relying on
maximum penalties for all of the offences with which the Young People are
charged exceed the summary jurisdiction of the Magistrates
Court, however the
Young People gave their consent to the charges being determined summarily.
Principles and directions
are some preliminary matters which I must first address. The prosecution of
course bears the onus of proving the guilt of the
Young People. The Young People
do not have to prove that they did not commit the offences with which they were
charged. The standard
of proof the prosecution must meet is proof beyond
reasonable doubt and the Young People cannot be found guilty unless the evidence
which I accept satisfies me beyond reasonable doubt of their guilt. If I am
satisfied that there may be an explanation consistent
with the innocence of the
Young People, or I am unsure of where the truth lies, then I must find that the
charge has not been proved
to the standard of proof required by law.
burden of proof on the Prosecution does not mean that the Prosecution must prove
every fact in dispute beyond reasonable doubt,
only that it must prove the
elements of the charge beyond reasonable doubt.
Smith was the only person to give evidence at the hearing. I must determine
whether he is a reliable witness. That is, whether
I can rely on the evidence
that Mr Smith gave and so find the facts about which Mr Smith has given evidence
as proved. I can accept
part of Mr Smiths evidence and reject part of that
evidence or accept or reject it all. The law does not require me to give all
the same weight.
must determine the facts in accordance with the evidence, considering it
logically and rationally, without acting capriciously or
irrationally. I must
not let emotion enter into the decision-making process. I must bring an open and
unbiased mind to the evidence
but I may use my common sense and experience in
assessing the evidence. Both the prosecution and Young People are entitled to my
verdict free of partiality, prejudice, favour or ill-will.
may draw reasonable inferences from the facts that I find are established. I
must consider any possible inference to ensure that
it is a justifiable
inference, and I must not draw an inference from the direct evidence unless it
is a rational inference in all
the circumstances. It is permissible for the
court to rely on an inference, of which the court is satisfied should be drawn
reasonable doubt, as proof of an element of an offence.
must deliver my decision according to the evidence.
Magistrate may apply common sense and life experience in assessing evidence and
making findings. Finders of fact need to decide
how humans are likely to have
behaved and it is appropriate for the finder of fact to have regard to what they
perceived to be the
apparent logic of events.
Young People did not give evidence during the hearing. No inference, adverse to
them, can be drawn from their decision to exercise
their right to silence. Nor
can the absence of evidence from the defendant be used to fill in any gaps or
used as a makeweight for
any deficiency in the prosecution case.
note that the hearing proceeding by way of joint trial of the Young People. I
must consider the case against each of the Young People
separately when
considering my verdicts. I will return a separate verdict in respect of each of
the Young People. There is nothing
in law, or for that matter as a matter of
logic, which requires me to return the same verdict in respect of each young
will not determine whether the Young People are guilty without
considering them as individuals and giving each separate consideration.
not take into account, in deciding whether the prosecution has proved its case
against one young person, evidence that was
tendered only against the other
young person.
this was a case relying on circumstantial evidence, I remind myself that such a
case may be just as convincing and reliable as
a case based on direct evidence,
but it will depend on whether all of the evidence leads to an unavoidable
conclusion that the prosecution
has established the guilt of the Young People.
must approach a circumstantial case by considering and weighing, as a whole, all
the facts I find established by the evidence. I
must not consider any particular
fact in isolation and whether that fact proves the Young People’s guilt,
or whether there
is any explanation for that particular fact or circumstance
which is inconsistent with the Young People’s guilt.
correct approach is, first, to determine what facts I find established by the
evidence. Any particular fact to be taken into account
by me does not need to be
proved beyond reasonable doubt. I must then consider all of those facts together
as a whole and ask myself
whether I can conclude from those facts that the Young
People are guilty of the offence charged. I cannot be so satisfied on
circumstantial
evidence unless no other explanation than guilt is reasonably, or
rationally, compatible with the circumstances.
this respect I note that, for an explanation or inference to be reasonable, it
must rest on something more than mere conjecture.
The bare possibility of
innocence should not prevent me, as the trier of fact, from finding the Young
People guilty if the inference
of guilt is the only inference open to a
reasonable person following consideration of all the facts in evidence.
of the charges against the Young People must be considered separately. If I am
not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt in relation
to one of the charges, I must
consider what effect, if any, the doubts that I have about the evidence on that
charge have in relation
to the other charges.
Ride motor vehicle
without consent charge
Criminal Code 2002
provides that:
motor vehicle without consent
(1) A person commits an offence if the
(a) dishonestly takes a
motor vehicle belonging to someone else; and
(b) does not have consent to take
the vehicle from a person to whom it belongs.
Maximum penalty: 500 penalty units, imprisonment for 5 years or both.
Pt 2.3 (Circumstances where there is no
criminal responsibility) provides for defences that apply to offences under the
Code. These
include the defence of lawful authority (see s 43).
For the meaning
, see s 300.
(2) A person commits an offence if—
person dishonestly drives or rides in or on a motor vehicle belonging
to someone else; and
(b) the vehicle
was dishonestly taken by someone without the consent of a person to
whom it belongs.
Maximum penalty: 500 penalty units, imprisonment for 5 years or both.
elements of the “ride motor vehicle without consent” offence,
provided for by s 318(2) of the
Criminal Code 2002
, that the Prosecution
must establish are that:
(a) the young person rode in a motor vehicle;
(b) the motor vehicle belonged to someone else;
(c) the motor vehicle was taken by someone without the consent of the person to
whom it belonged;
(d) the young person was reckless with respect to the circumstance that the
motor vehicle belonged to someone else;
(e) the young person was reckless with respect to the circumstance that the
motor vehicle was taken by someone without the consent
of the person to whom it
(f) the young person’s riding in the vehicle was dishonest according to
the standards of ordinary people; and
(g) the young person knew that riding was dishonest according to the standards
of ordinary people.
of the Young People contested that these elements are made out on the evidence.
In fact, Miss Nowell noted that she had offered
to plead guilty to that charge
early in the proceedings if the other charges were withdrawn.
am satisfied that the evidence supports the concession made by the Young People.
following facts are admitted by the Young People:
(a) at or around 5.50pm on 24 July 2023, at the Canberra Centre rooftop car
park, Mr Smith approach the victim of the offending,
who was sitting in her
parked white Toyota Corolla, and opened the driver’s door;
(b) the victim owns that motor vehicle;
(c) when Mr Smith open the victim’s car door, he was holding a knife,
which the victim could see;
(d) Mr Smith told the victim to get out of the car;
(e) Mr Smith caused the victim to abandon her keys and get out of her car;
(f) as the victim ran away from her car, Mr Smith drove it away and out of the
Canberra Centre car park;
(g) the victim did not give consent for Mr Smith to threaten her or drive her
car out of the car park;
(h) after police seized the victim’s car, they conveyed it to the Exhibit
Management Centre for forensic processing. The victim
did not receive her car
back for some time;
(i) the victim has no relationship with Mr Smith or the Young People and has
never met the Young People; and
(j) the victim did not consent for the Young People to ride in her car.
evidence also shows that:
(a) the Young People were together with Mr Smith on the rooftop car park;
(b) Mr Smith took the victim’s motor vehicle without her consent;
(c) the Young People saw Mr Smith take the motor vehicle and knew both that he
had taken it without consent and that the motor vehicle
did not belong to Mr
Smith (that is, it belonged to someone else);
(d) the Young People waited for Mr Smith on the ramp of the car park;
(e) the Young People willingly got into the motor vehicle (that is, intended to
ride in it) when Mr Smith stopped next to the Young
People on the car park
(f) the Young People rode in the motor vehicle as Mr Smith drove it out of, and
away from, the car park; and
(g) in the circumstances, the Young People’s riding in the motor vehicle
was dishonest according to the standards of ordinary
people and the Young People
knew that riding in the car was dishonest according to the standards of ordinary
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that the Young People are each guilty of the offence of riding in
a motor vehicle without consent, contrary
to s 318(2) of the
Criminal Code
What is in dispute in relation to the remainder of the
common element that the Prosecution must establish, in order to succeed in
relation to each of the remaining charges (the joint
commission charges), is
that Mr Smith dishonestly appropriated property belonging to the victim with the
intention of permanently
depriving her of the property (her car). This is
(a) that intention is an element of the offence of theft, provided for in s 308
Criminal Code 2002
, which states:
A person commits an offence (
) if the person dishonestly
appropriates property belonging to someone else with the intention of
permanently depriving the other
person of the property.
(b) the commission of the offence of theft is an element of the offence of
robbery (s 309) and the commission of the offence of robbery
is an element of
the offence of aggravated robbery (s 310); and
(c) section 45A of the
Criminal Code
requires, in order for the Young
People to be taken to have committed one of the joint commission offences, that
an offence was committed
by Mr Smith (not just that there be an agreement to
commit an offence). That is, there must be something for which the Young People
are to be made jointly responsible.
is not in dispute that, in forcing the victim out of her car at knife point, and
taking her car, Mr Smith dishonestly appropriated
the victim’s car. What
is in dispute is whether he had an intention to permanently deprive the victim
of her car.
he did have that intention, there is dispute as to the scope of any agreement
between the Young People (or either of them) and
Mr Smith and, in particular,
with respect to the operation of s 45A of the
Criminal Code
(a) whether there was an agreement that Mr Smith would permanently deprive the
victim of her motor vehicle; and
(b) if not, whether the offences of aggravated robbery or, alternatively,
robbery or, alternatively, theft, were of the “same
offence(s) the parties agreed to; or
(c) whether the offence committed by Mr Smith was committed “in the course
of carrying out” the agreement he entered
into with the Young People (or
either of them).
Was there an agreement between Mr Smith and the Young People to commit an
offence and, if so, what was the scope of the parties’
is no direct evidence of an agreement between Mr Smith and the Young People,
however there is circumstantial evidence which
establishes that there was an
CCTV footage
CCTV footage captures a substantial part of the movements of Mr Smith and the
Young People between around 4.40pm and 5.50pm on
24 July 2023. Identification
was not in issue as the Young People accepted that they can been seen in the
at least 4.40pm, the three parties had met at the Canberra Centre in Civic. They
walked around the shopping centre for a while
before proceeding into a car park.
They walked around the car park for a considerable period, spending most of
their time on the
rooftop, both walking around the car park, including between
the cars parked there, and standing in a corner of the car park at the
the ramp leading to the rooftop level. Both Mr Smith and Miss Nowell touched the
driver’s door of a couple of the cars
they walked past.
Occasionally,
they walked down to the level below and then back up to the rooftop. They also
stood in or near the car park pay station.
Smith took the lead in terms of where the parties walked, with Miss Nowell
usually next to him or close behind. Miss Rowland often
trailed behind. Mr Smith
and Miss Nowell spoke to each other on a number of occasions, as did the two
Young People with each other.
There were also occasions when all three spoke
Smith followed a number of people in the car park but did not speak to any of
them. Ultimately, at around 5:50pm, Mr Smith followed
the victim to her car. The
Young People stood at the top of the car park ramp watching him. After the
victim had entered her car,
Mr Smith opened the driver’s door and, after a
brief period, the victim got out.
the victim ran away, Mr Smith got into the car and the Young People jumped up
and down in obvious excitement. They then moved quickly
down the car park ramp,
briefly stopped the car.
The Young People opened the left hand doors and got
into the car, with Miss Rowland in the front and Miss Nowell in the back. The
Young People closed their doors and Mr Smith then drove out of the car
Video from Miss Rowlands phone
Rowland recorded herself at 5.02pm saying words to the effect of:
We’re nicking a car and you’re not hopping in
”. This evidence was admitted only in the case against Miss
Statement of Constable Ballard
Ballard attended the car park on the night of the incident in the course of her
duties. She spoke to the victim.
victim said that, when she was in her car, a male (Mr Smith) approached her with
a knife, threatening her and demanding she hand
over the keys to her
Statement of Ms Hansen
Hansen’s car was parked on the rooftop carpark. She entered the car park
at around 5.00pm.
saw a male and two young people acting suspiciously. The description she gave of
one of the young people matched Miss Rowlands’
description. I am satisfied
that the people she observed were Mr Smith and the Young People.
Hansen observed Miss Nowell ducking between cars and observed Mr Smith walking
between numerous vehicles and attempting to open
their doors and boots. She
observed the Young People following him, laughing and giggling while they
watched him attempt to open
the car doors.
Statement of Ms
Cameron’s car was also parked on the rooftop car park.
Cameron entered the rooftop level of the car park at approximately 5.45pm. She
observed two females standing at the top of the
entrance ramp to that level of
the car park. She provided a description for one of the females which matched
Miss Rowland. Having
regard to the description and the CCTV footage (which did
not show any other females standing at the top of the entrance ramp to
park at that time), I am satisfied that the two females whom Ms Cameron saw were
the Young People.
Cameron heard Miss Rowland say words to the effect of “
he’s doing it now
afterwards, Ms Cameron heard another woman scream and saw a vehicle accelerate
quickly towards the entrance ramp. She could
no longer see the Young People by
that point.
Statement of Senior Constable Guy Griffin
the early hours of 28 July 2023, Senior Constable Griffin located a white Toyota
Corolla parked against some hedges, adjacent to
a turnaround point on Nimbin
Street in Narrabundah. The vehicle caught Senior Constable Griffin’s
attention because it was
parked with the driver’s door against the hedges
(making it hard for anyone to access the driver’s seat). It is not in
dispute that the car located by Senior Constable Griffin was the car taken by Mr
the front and rear registration plates (which were not for the same
registration) had been reported stolen.
Constable Griffin arranged for the car to be towed to the Exhibit Management
Reliability of evidence
evidence discussed above was admitted without challenge. I accept that the
witnesses provided reliable evidence and I accept the
evidence without
reservation.
Mr Smith’s evidence
Smith gave evidence at the hearing. Much of Mr Smith’s evidence is
unreliable, in circumstances where:
(a) the reason Mr Smith offered for why he had spent such a long time on the
rooftop of the car park, including the occasions where
he can be seen on the
CCTV footage walking between cars (and touching at least one) – being that
he was looking for a place
to smoke – is implausible;
(b) Mr Smith’s evidence that he had stayed so long on the rooftop car park
– because he was trying to build up the courage
to ask someone for a
cigarette – was inconsistent with his evidence that he was looking for a
place to smoke (which suggested
that he already had a cigarette) and was, in any
case, similarly implausible given the interest he showed in the cars at the car
park and the length of time he was at the car park; and
(c) the majority of the other answers he gave in evidence were that he did not
know the answer or he could not remember what had
happened. This suggests either
an absence of memory (caused, according to Mr Smith, by the fact that he had
taken drugs) or a deliberate
attempt to avoid answering questions he did not
want to answer. In either case, his evidence is unhelpful.
only parts of Mr Smith’s evidence which I accept (relevantly for present
purposes) are that:
(a) he did not drive to the rooftop car park and did not have a car there;
(b) he and the Young People were friends;
(c) he ended up driving the victim’s car to his house (whether he drove
directly there or somewhere else is unclear); and
(d) he pleaded guilty to a charge of aggravated robbery and his matter had been
committed to the Supreme Court for sentence.
There was an agreement
is clear that the Young People and Mr Smith had come to an agreement that Mr
Smith would take a car. It is the only rational explanation
circumstances that:
(a) the parties spent so long walking around and standing in the car park,
including talking together, when Mr Smith did not have
a car parked on the
rooftop car park;
(b) the parties walked around cars parked there, with Mr Smith and Miss Nowell
both touching the driver’s side door of cars
they walked past and, at
around 5.00pm, Mr Smith attempted to open the doors and boots of several
vehicles to the apparent amusement
of the Young People;
(c) at around that time, Miss Rowland recorded herself saying that they were
going to nick a car (relevant to the case against Miss
(d) the Young People watched as Mr Smith forcibly take the victim’s car.
At around that time, one of the Young People said
to the other, “
think he’s doing it now
”, indicating that they had knowledge of
the plan for Mr Smith to take the car from a person. This is confirmed by the
that the Young People jumped with excitement when he did so; and
(e) the Young People immediately then went half-way down the entrance ramp and
waited for Mr Smith to drive to them. Mr Smith drove
quickly to the meeting
point and the Young People got in the car, after which they left together. It is
apparent that they proceeded
in accordance with an agreed plan in this respect.
What was the scope of the agreement?
am satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that the parties had an agreement with
respect to the elements of section 318 of the
Criminal Code 2002
(a) Mr Smith dishonestly taking a motor vehicle belonging to someone else
(without their consent), relevant to the offence set out
in s 318(1);
(b) Mr Smith dishonestly driving in, and the Young People riding in, the vehicle
that had been dishonestly taken by Mr Smith, relevant
to the offence set out in
agreement was initially that this be done by taking an unlocked car. Miss
Rowland submitted that that was all the agreement extended
to and that a
reasonable hypothesis consistent with the innocence of the Young People is that
Mr Smith made the decision to take
the car from a person in the spur of the
moment. That is, that it is possible that he made the decision to take a car
from a person
of his own volition. For the reasons set out in paragraph [51]
above, particular paragraph [51d], I do not accept that the evidence
such a hypothesis. I am satisfied that, at some point, the agreement was that
the offences be carried out by Mr Smith taking
a vehicle from someone.
evidence does not allow me to make any findings about whether there was an
agreement with respect to:
(a) how Mr Smith would get someone to give him their car, although I am
satisfied that the Young People were aware that there was
a substantial risk
that Mr Smith would use a threat of force on the person he chose in order to
achieve that result;
(b) the period for which Mr Smith or the Young People would keep the car; or
(c) what Mr Smith or the Young People intended to do with the car after they had
finished driving or riding in it.
Accordingly,
the scope of the agreement did not extend to the commission of any of the joint
commission offences with which the Young
People have been
Did Mr Smith intend to permanently deprive the victim of
Mr Smith’s plea of guilty
Prosecution relies on the fact that Mr Smith pleaded guilty to the offence of
aggravated robbery as establishing that he accepts
all the elements of that
offence and, therefore, that he accepts that he had an intention to permanently
deprive the victim of her
car. The Young People submit that I need to decide for
myself whether Mr Smith had the requisite intention.
Smith’s evidence that he pleaded guilty to the offence of aggravated
robbery was admitted without objection. However, I am
of the view that the
evidence is not relevant and that I should not take Mr Smith’s plea into
account in determining whether
the Prosecution has proved its case against the
Young People.
Dawson J said in
Meissner v R
[1995] HCA 41
, the entry of a plea
of guilty constitutes an admission by the Defendant of all the elements of the
offence charged, but there are
a range of reasons why a person might plead
guilty that go beyond a belief in their guilt, such as “
to avoid worry,
inconvenience or expense, to avoid publicity; to protect his family or friends;
or in the hope of obtaining a more
lenient sentence than he would if convicted
after a plea of not guilty
”. Whatever the motivation behind the plea,
as Brennan, Toohey and McHugh JJ said in the same case: “
attaches so much importance to a plea of guilty in open court that no further
proof is required of the accused’s guilt
fact that Mr Smith accepts that the elements of the relevant offences are made
out in his proceedings is not proof of those elements
in these proceedings.
Ordinarily, such an admission is not admissible at the trial of a co-accused as
evidence of the truth of the
facts on which it was based or of the truth of the
facts that were implicit in the plea (
[2020] QCA 13
[156]; see also the cases cited at [96] – [113]). If evidence of a plea of
guilty is admitted into evidence, the court should
give a direction that the
plea is not to be taken into account in determining whether the Prosecution has
proved its case against
the accused (see the cases cited in
[114] – [143]). I give myself that direction.
Accordingly,
I must consider for myself whether Mr Smith had an intention to permanently
deprive the victim of her car.
What is required, for the
purposes of s 308 of the Criminal Code 2002, in order for a defendant to have an
intention to permanently
deprive another of property?
The literal meaning
most obvious way that the “intention to permanently deprive” element
will be satisfied is if a defendant means for
the owner of the property to
permanently lose it, for example because the defendant intends to retain
possession of the property.
note that it is the defendant’s intention at the time he or she
appropriated the relevant property that is relevant.
The extended
306(1) of the
Criminal Code 2002
extends the scope of this element beyond
its literal meaning, to circumstances where a defendant does not intend for the
the property to permanently lose it but, rather, intends to treat the
property as his or her own to dispose of regardless of the
rights of the owner.
s 306(1) does not require the defendant to have intended for the owner of the
property to permanently lose it, the circumstances
in which the property is
taken must still display a “quality of permanence”:
R v Mazaydeh
[2014] ACTSC 279
), per Murrell CJ at [10].
This phrase may be found in the Explanatory Statement to the
Criminal Code
(Theft, Fraud, Bribery and Related Offences) Amendment Bill 2003
introduced section 306. It states:
To satisfy subclauses 306(1) ...
the “disposal” ... of the property will need to have a quality of
permanence about it,
such as where a person melts down another’s antique
bracelet intending to give back the melted silver”.
examples of circumstances in which a defendant may be taken to have treated a
person’s property as their own to dispose
of regardless of the
owner’s rights, are where:
(a) a defendant borrows property, if the borrowing is for a period, and in
circumstances, making it equivalent to an outright taking
or disposal: s 306(2);
(b) a defendant has possession or control of property belonging to someone, and
the defendant parts with the property (for their
own purposes) under a condition
The common law and legislative origins of section 306 and their
development
Subsections
306(1) to (3) are based on section 6 of the
Theft Act 1968
(UK), which
was drafted to reflect the common law. In
R v Dardovska
[2003] VSCA 4
), Charles JA (with whom Phillips CJ and O’Bryan
AJA agreed) said at [24], in discussing similarly drafted legislation in
Before the 1968 legislation was enacted in the United
Kingdom, an "intention permanently to deprive" as an element in the crime of
larceny had troubled the courts on many occasions, particularly in circumstances
where the accused could only be shown to have had
what might be called a
conditional or reckless intention to appropriate. There were three situations in
which courts had found an
intention permanently to deprive in such
circumstances: first, where a person took property from the owner intending to
property only if the owner paid for it, referred to as the "ransom
principle"[6]; secondly, where the intention was to return the
property only
after it had undergone some fundamental change of character, the "essential
quality principle"[7]; and thirdly, where
a person pawned another's property
without his consent, hoping to be able to redeem the pledge, but without being
certain of his
ability to do so, the "pawning principle"[8]. The intention of
the House of Commons when passing
1968 was that s.6 of that Act was to be a "restatement of the law
with regard to those cases which might not literally amount to
a deprivation of
the ownership, which had been so regarded from time to time".
Reg v Lloyd
[1985] EWCA Crim 1
[1985] 1 QB 829
, Lord Lane CJ, delivering the judgment of the
court, said at 836: “
We would try to interpret the section in such a
way as to ensure that nothing is construed as an intention permanently to
which would not prior to the Act of 1968 have been so
”. However, in
, Charles JA noted at [26]
The courts have not ... consistently accepted that s.6 of the
Theft Act (or
Crimes Act 1958
) is limited precisely to the
previous common law extensions of an intention to permanently
an illustration of Charles JA’s statement, Auld LJ said in
[1996] 1 Cr App Rep 175
(quoted at [31] of
"In our view,
, which is expressed in
general terms, is not limited in its application to the illustrations given by
Lord Lane CJ in
. Nor, in saying that in most cases it would be
unnecessary to refer to the provision, did Lord Lane suggest that it should be
limited. The critical notion, stated expressly in the first limb and
incorporated by reference in the second, is whether a defendant
intended `to
treat the thing as his own to dispose of regardless of the other's rights'. The
second limb of sub-section (1), and
also sub-section (2) are merely specific
illustrations of the application of that notion ...”
this context, it is noteworthy that s 306(4) of the
Criminal Code 2002
states that s 306 “
does not limit the circumstances in which a person
can be taken to have the intention of permanently depriving someone else of
”. An equivalent to s 306(4) is not found in section 6 of the
Theft Act 1968
Accordingly,
while the circumstances described in Charles JA’s decision in
clearly fall within s 306, s 306(4) makes clear that s 306 is not limited to
these common law examples of circumstances where a defendant
may be found to
have intended to permanently deprive a person of their property.
The taking of a motor vehicle
the taking of a motor vehicle will amount to a theft obviously depends on the
intention of the person taking the vehicle.
Where the intention is to take the
car for a “joyride”, it is unlikely that defendant intends for the
owner of the vehicle
to permanently lose it.
it would be clear in most cases that the defendant intends to treat the vehicle
as his or her own regardless of the owner’s
rights for a time, the object
of taking the car is ordinarily to keep the car for a brief time (hours or
perhaps days) before abandoning
it. Neither the taking of the car, nor its
disposal, typically has the quality of permanence required to establish the
prescribed by s 306.
is why s 318 of the
Criminal Code 2002
was enacted. As the Explanatory
Statement to the
Criminal Code (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and Related Offences)
Amendment Bill 2003
provides, in relation to the interaction between
sections 308 and 318:
An important feature of these [s 318] offences
(which distinguishes them from theft) is that there is no requirement for the
perpetrator
to intend to permanently deprive the victim of the property. This
accords with the primary purpose of the offences, which is to target
take motor vehicles for “joy-riding” and not to dispossess the
owner. Of course, if the perpetrator intends
to keep the vehicle or subsequently
decides to do so, the theft offence will apply.
MCCOC’s reasons for
recommending the inclusion of a motor vehicle taking offence are set out in the
following passage from page
85 of it’s [sic] report:
The decision
to treat unauthorised use of cars as an offence despite the absence of intent to
permanently deprive can be justified
as a matter of public policy by the
prevalence of this type of behaviour and the interference with items which will
often be the
most valuable single item of property owned by the victim. However,
the temporary nature of the borrowing and the stigma associated
– especially in view of the fact that a conviction for theft results in
disqualification from a variety of jobs
- does not justify treating illegal use
of cars as theft. It should be a separate offence. Submissions accepted the need
as a separate offence.
things should be noted about the way that sections 308 and 318 were drafted,
reflecting the above purposes of those provisions.
The first is that sections
308 and 318 were enacted at the same time and should be interpreted in a way
that permits them to operate
harmoniously. The second, related to the first, is
that the way that the two sections were drafted makes clear that they were
in order to address different mischiefs:
(a) the wording of s 318 is directed at a specific kind of conduct (dishonestly
taking, driving or riding in a motor vehicle); and
(b) the wording of s 308 is drafted in a way that is intended to capture a wider
range of conduct but, by requiring an intention
to permanently deprive a person
of their property, requires something more than merely dishonestly taking a
person’s car without
their consent. An intention to take a car joyriding,
or to take a car for a limited period before abandoning it, would in many (if
not most) cases involve an intention that goes no further than what is required
to establish an offence under s 318.
my view, the proposition that dishonestly taking (or driving or riding in) a
vehicle is unlikely, without more, to amount to a
theft is supported by two of
the cases relied on by the parties,
R v Mitchell
[2008] EWCA Crim 850
McGuiness v Police
[2016] SASC 133
facts of this case involved an incident on 22 February 2005, when a Mrs Davis
was sitting in her husband’s car, a BMW, in
a country lane. She was set
upon by four men and thrown out of the car, which was then driven away by the
defendant. The defendant
abandoned the car a few kilometres away with its hazard
lights flashing.
least one of the men then took a different car, which they also abandoned before
taking a third car. They ultimately set the third
car on fire.
question was whether the defendant had intended to permanently deprive Mr or Mrs
Davis of ownership of Mr Davis’s car. That
question arose in the context
of an appeal from a decision of the first instance judge, who had ruled against
a no-case submission.
The judge stated that the abandonment of Mr Davis’s
vehicle might amount to a disposal for the purposes of s 6 of the
(UK) and that whether the defendants had the requisite intention was a
matter that should be left to a jury.
appeal, the court found at [25] that the first instance judge had erred. The
court stated that:
So far as the abandonment itself of the car was
concerned ... that of course operated as a factor in favour of the defence.
the fact that its hazard lights were left on emphasized that there was
no intention to avoid drawing attention to the car. So far
as the use of the
vehicle is concerned ... its use amounted to being driven just a few miles
before its abandonment.
[26] the court said, in relation to the prosecution’s submission that the
treatment of Mrs Davis showed an intention to treat
the car as the
defendant’s own, that:
Of course, everything about the taking
and use of the BMW, like any car taken away without the owner’s authority,
an intention to treat such a car regardless of the owner’s
rights. That is the test of conversion in the civil law. But not
conversion is a theft. Theft requires the additional intention of permanently
depriving the owner or the substituted intention
under s 6(1).
court said at [27], in relation to the car which had been set on fire,
... If it were the case that a car was taken for the purposes
of destroying it, that would be a case of theft, and where another’s
has been set on fire that may be some evidence on which an intention to
permanently deprive or a s 6(1) intention may be inferred
[27], the court commented that accepting the prosecution’s submission that
the taking of Mr Davis’s car amounted to
run the danger of turning every case of taking and driving away without
authority under s 12 of the
into a case of theft, whereas of course
the whole point of s 12 is to get round the problem that a car which is taken
away for a ride, only to be abandoned, is not easily found to be a
case of theft.
note that s 12 of the
Theft Act 1968
(UK) is in similar terms to s 318 of
Criminal Code 2002
[28], the court concluded that:
In our judgment the facts of this
case simply do not support a case to go before a jury of theft and therefore
robbery of the BMW.
The BMW was plainly taken for the purposes of a getaway.
There was nothing about its use or subsequent abandonment to suggest otherwise.
Indeed, its brief use and subsequent abandonment show very clearly what was the
obvious prima facie inference to be drawn from its
taking which was that the
occupants of the Subaru needed another conveyance that evening. We therefore
consider that the judge erred
in being beguiled by s 6 into leaving this count
of robbery to the jury.
is a decision of the Supreme Court of South Australia, on appeal from a
decision of the Magistrates Court of South Australia.
facts of this matter involved the defendant taking a car from the driveway of a
house in Roxy Downs in South Australia. At Pimba,
Downs, the defendant lost control of the vehicle and it left the road before
coming to rest on its
Ultimately,
the defendant was able to obtain the assistance of a member of the public to put
the car back onto its wheels. Police
found the defendant attempting to change
one of the car’s tyres, which had blown off its rim.
evidence established that, at the time the Defendant took the car, he intended
to drive it to Whyalla (over 300 kilometres from
Roxby Downs). However, there
was no evidence as to what the defendant intended to do with the car once he
arrived at his destination.
Doyle J noted that it is possible that the defendant
intended to abandon the car with an expectation that the car would be returned
to its owner (given that it was registered to its owner).
first instance, the only issue in dispute was the defendant’s intention in
relation to the car, specifically whether he had
an intention to deprive the
owner permanently of the vehicle or to make a serious encroachment on the
owner’s proprietary rights.
Those were the alternative intentions provided
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) for the
offence of theft.
note that, under
of that legislation, a person was taken to have
intended to make a serious encroachment on an owner’s proprietary rights
the person intended:
(a) to treat the property as his or her own to dispose of regardless of the
owner’s rights; or
(b) to deal with the property in a way that creates a substantial risk (of which
the person is aware) –
the owner will not get it back; or
when the owner gets it back, its value will be substantially impaired.
134(2)(a) of the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) is, of course,
in similar terms to s 306(1)(b) of the
Criminal Code 2002
appeal, this issue was narrowed further. At [20], Doyle J stated
... there was no basis on the evidence to conclude beyond
reasonable doubt that the appellant intended to retain possession of the
once in Whyalla, or otherwise deal with it in a manner that would result in the
owner being permanently deprived of the motor
Accordingly,
that left for consideration whether the defendant had an intention to make a
serious encroachment on the proprietary
rights of the owner of the vehicle,
having regard to the question whether the Defendant’s conduct established
that he intended
to treat the property as his own to dispose of regardless of
the owner’s rights. It was not suggested that the second limb
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) was in issue.
[39], Doyle J said:
Section 134(2)(a)
requires an intention by
the defendant to treat the property “as his or her own to dispose of
regardless of the owner’s
rights”. In giving work to do to each part
of this phrase, it seems to me that what it contemplated is a form of dealing or
use by the defendant that ignores, or is inconsistent with, the owner’s
rights over the property. In my view, this would extend
to use that involves
indifference as to the owner’s rights.
[41] to [45], Doyle J considered the decision of Lovell DCJ in
[2014] SADC 177
, which considered a case in which a motor vehicle was taken
from the owner’s garage and found five days later adjacent to the
in which the defendant was residing. The defendant had the keys to the vehicle
in his pocket. At [42], Doyle J quoted as
follows from [158] of Lovell
DCJ’s decision:
... At the time of his dealing there are
really only four possible alternatives the accused was facing. He could keep the
could sell it, he could give it away or he could abandon it. If the
first option was his intention, then he would be caught by
s 134(1)(c)(i)
[intention to permanently deprive the owner of the property]. If any of the
other three were his intention, he would be caught by
the narrower definition of
‘dispose of’ under
s 134(1)(c)(ii)
[intention to make a serious
encroachment on the owner’s proprietary rights]. The Information alleges
the alternatives in the
particulars of the charge of theft. I am not satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt that he had, at the time of dealing, an intention
permanently deprive the owner of the car. However, I am satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt that he intended to make a serious
encroachment of the
owner’s proprietary rights as discussed.
[43] and [45] Doyle J, agreeing with the approach taken by Lovell DCJ in
I agree with the approach taken by Lovell DCJ. In
particular, I agree with his Honour’s view that an intention to abandon a
motor vehicle will usually suffice to establish an intention to make a serious
encroachment upon the owner’s proprietary rights
for the purposes of
134(1)(c)(ii).
If a defendant abandons a motor vehicle, he or she may expect or
contemplate that, by reason of it being registered to its owner,
it will in all
likelihood soon be returned to that owner. While this will generally prevent the
prosecution establishing an intention
permanently to deprive the owner of their
vehicle, in my view it will ordinarily involve a sufficient level of
indifference to the
owner’s rights to establish the intention required by
s 134(2)(a).
But in the typical case of a defendant who takes a car with the intention of
using it for joyriding, or for using it to transport
him from A to B (with a
view to abandoning it at B), I consider the state of mind required by
will be made out. I do not think that the reference in that subsection
to an intention to treat the property as his or her own requires
an intention to
keep the vehicle and use it as their own for an extended period of time or on
multiple occasions. In my view, an
intention by the defendant to use for the
purpose of joyriding or as a means of transport from A to B will suffice to
establish an
intention to treat the vehicle as his or her own. And if the
intention is thereafter to abandon the vehicle, I consider this will
sufficient to establish the requisite degree of indifference to the
owner’s rights to constitute an intention to treat the
vehicle as his or
her own to dispose of “regardless of the owner’s rights”.
[46], Doyle J concluded that the defendant’s intention to drive the car to
Whyalla, without any evidence that he had considered
returning the car to its
owner, amounted to an intention to use the car as his own to dispose of
regardless of the owner’s
rights. Accordingly, the requirements of
were made out and, therefore, the defendant was found to have the
intention of making a serious encroachment on the proprietary rights
owner of the car.
first blush, the conclusion that the defendant in that case intended to use the
car as his own to dispose of regardless of the
owner’s rights might seem
to favour the Prosecution position in this case, however I do not consider that
s 134(2)(a)
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) provides for
an intention on the part of a defendant, “
to treat property as his or
her own to dispose of regardless of the owner’s rights
equivalent to the intention provided for in s 306(1)(b) of the
Criminal Code
, the intentions are used in aid of different concepts.
Criminal Code 2002
, a defendant’s intention to treat property
as his or her own to dispose of regardless of the owner’s rights
establishes
that the defendant has an intention to permanently deprive someone
else of their property.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA), a defendant’s
intention to treat property as his or her own to dispose of regardless of the
owner’s rights does
not establish that the defendant had an intention to
permanently deprive someone else of their property. The
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) does not provide for any circumstances by which
a defendant will be taken to have that intention.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) provides that a
defendant’s intention to treat property as his or her own to dispose of
regardless of the owner’s
rights will instead establish that a defendant
intended to make a serious encroachment on the owner’s proprietary rights.
intention, which is not provided for in the
Criminal Code 2002
clearly embraces circumstances beyond those where the Defendant intends to
permanently deprive the owner of the property. I say
“clearly”, both
because I consider that the breadth of the wording of the provision has that
effect and because the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
establishes it as an additional (alternative) intention to, and not in
substitution for, an intention to permanently deprive
an owner of their
different legislative context means that Doyle J’s interpretation of the
concept of “intention to treat property as
his or her own to dispose of
regardless of the owner’s rights” cannot be adopted in the
interpretation of s 306(2) of
Criminal Code 2002
. In my view, Doyle
J’s reasons also support this conclusion.
his Honour accepted that, in the context of the South Australian legislation, a
defendant’s intention to treat property
as his or her own to dispose of
regardless of the owner’s rights contemplates a form of dealing or use by
the defendant that
ignores, or is inconsistent with, the owner’s rights
over the property, and extends to use that involves indifference as to
owner’s rights. This interpretation reflects the nature of the statutory
intention to which the interpretation is directed
– being an intention to
make a serious encroachment on the owner’s proprietary rights.
contrast, for the purposes of s 306(1) of the
Criminal Code 2002
defendant’s intention to treat property as his or her own to dispose of
regardless of the owner’s rights is taken
to establish that the defendant
had an intention to permanently deprive the owner of the property. This requires
the circumstances
of the taking and disposal of the property to have a quality
of permanence about them.
as noted above, his Honour found that an intention to permanently deprive an
owner of their car will generally not be inferred
from a car being abandoned but
will usually only suffice to establish an intention to make a serious
encroachment on the owner’s
proprietary rights. It is also this intention
(and not an intention to permanently deprive) that his Honour considered would
be established
in the typical case of a defendant who takes a car with the
intention of using it for joyriding, or for using it to transport him
location A to location B with a view to abandoning it at location B.
other significant distinguishing feature between the
Criminal Code 2002
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) is that, as
discussed above, sections 306, 308 and 318 of the
Criminal Code 2002
inserted into that Act at the same time (and were drafted to address different
mischiefs), whereas
section 134
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) was introduced at a later time to
section 86A
of that legislation
(which created an offence of using a motor vehicle without consent).
that, in addition to the overlap between
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) not being complete,
it was relevant that
was enacted earlier in time to address a particular
issue with respect to the illegal use of motor vehicles, whereas
was part of a later and more general reform of provisions dealing with
all forms of property
”. His Honour said that: “
broader range of matters that
is intended to address, there is no reason
to consider it unlikely that Parliament intended that there be significant
the operation of
the reasons that are set out earlier in this decision, it is my view that the
legislative context for, and the wording of, sections
308 and 318 of the
Criminal Code 2002
reflects an intention that there not be any overlap in
the operation of those two provisions.
intention to permanently deprive another of their property will be satisfied if
a defendant means for the owner of the property
to permanently lose it (where,
for example, the defendant intends to retain possession of the property). An
intention to permanently
deprive will also be established if the defendant
intends to treat the property as their own to dispose of regardless of the
of the owner, even where the defendant does not mean for the owner to
permanently lose the property: s 306(1) of the
Criminal Code 2002
is not enough, to establish this “deemed” intention, that a
defendant takes property intending to treat it as his or
her own. There must
also be an intention to dispose of the property regardless of the rights of the
owner. The circumstances surrounding
this intention, including the intended
disposal, must have a quality of permanence about them:
are statutory examples in which a defendant may be taken to have treated a
person’s property as their own to dispose of
regardless of the
owner’s rights. They are set out in subsections 306(2) and (3) of the
Criminal Code 2002
. They are not exclusive examples: s 306(4).
a car for the purposes of destroying it would satisfy the deemed intention,
being a disposal that has a quality of permanence
another’s car on fire may be evidence on which an intention to permanently
deprive may be inferred.
a car for a joyride, for use as a getaway vehicle, or as a means of otherwise
conveying the defendant from one location to
another and then to be abandoned,
will not ordinarily be accompanied by an intention to permanently deprive the
owner of the car
of their property. That is because the defendant is unlikely to
have an intention for the owner of the car to permanently lose it
and there is
unlikely to be any quality of permanence about the taking and disposal of the
car. The defendant’s intention is
unlikely to go any further than the
intention required to satisfy the elements of s 318.
an intention to permanently deprive an owner of their car will generally not be
inferred merely from a car being abandoned.
Such an inference is unlikely to
arise because the abandonment of a car will ordinarily indicate that there was
no quality of performance
in the defendant’s disposal of the car. Where
there is a realistic possibility that the defendant had an expectation that the
car would be returned to its owner (given that its registration would identify
who the owner of the car was), that will provide a
further indication that the
defendant had no intention of permanently dispossessing the owner of the
Did Mr Smith intend to permanently deprive the victim of
Prosecution submitted that Mr Smith accepted the victim’s car as his own
by taking it home, and must have had the intention
to permanently deprive the
victim of her car because he did not know her and had no mechanism to return the
car to her. The Prosecution
submitted that just because the car was not burned
does not mean that Mr Smith did not have an intention to permanently deprive the
victim of it. The Prosecution further submitted that, just because the police
could locate the vehicle does not mean that, at the
time it was taken, there was
no intention on Mr Smith’s part to permanently deprive the victim of the
is no evidence as to Mr Smith’s intentions with respect to his use of the
victim’s car at the time he appropriated
it. In particular, there is no
evidence as to what Mr Smith intended to do with the car once he arrived at his
destination.
the evidence does not allow me to make any findings with respect to Mr
Smith’s disposal of the victim’s car.
The evidence which I accept is
simply that:
(a) Mr Smith drove the car away from the Canberra Centre;
(b) at some point he drove the car to his house; and
(c) the car was ultimately found in Narrabundah, seemingly abandoned, four days
after it was taken by Mr Smith.
note that there was a concession on the part of Miss Nowell that the car was
found a short distance from Mr Smith’s house,
however that concession was
not given by Miss Rowland. The evidence does not allow me to make any finding as
to whether the location
where the car was found had any particular relevance to
Mr Smith or the Young People.
note that the number plates on the victim’s car had been swapped for
stolen number plates. While that might provide some evidence
of an intention to
keep the car, by taking away the registration link to the victim, that conduct
still does not have any quality
of permanence, given that the number plates
could be identified by police to be stolen. Further, there is no evidence that
was the person who swapped the number plates.
also noted above, the car was parked with the driver’s door against the
hedges (making it hard for anyone to access the driver’s
seat). This
suggests that the car had been abandoned. Further, there is no evidence that the
car had been damaged and it was located
in Narrabundah, which is not a long
distance from where it was taken in the city. As I have noted already, the car
was found four
days after Mr Smith took it. In my view, the disposal of the car
does not have any quality of permanence about it.
circumstances do not permit any inference that Mr Smith had an intention to
permanently deprive the victim of her car, either
on the basis that she be
permanently dispossessed or on the basis that he intended to treat the car as
his own to dispose of regardless
of the victim’s
Young People are not guilty of the joint commission
I am not satisfied that Mr Smith intended to permanently derive the victim of
her car at the time that he appropriated it from
her, I am not satisfied that Mr
Smith committed the offence of theft (nor, therefore, of robbery or aggravated
Accordingly,
I am not satisfied that the Prosecution has proved that the Young People
committed any of the joint commission offences
with which they were
Miss Rowland
the charge of ride motor vehicle without consent, contrary to s 318 of the
Criminal Code
2002 (CH2023/1076), I find the young person guilty.
the charge of joint commission aggravated robbery, contrary to s 310 of the
Criminal Code 2002
by virtue of s 45A of the
Criminal Code 2002
(CH2023/1499), I find the young person not guilty.
the charge of joint commission robbery, contrary to s 309 of the
by virtue of s 45A of the
Criminal Code 2002
(CH2023/1500),
I find the young person not guilty.
the charge of joint commission theft, contrary to s 308 of the
Criminal Code
by virtue of s 45A of the
Criminal Code 2002
(CH2023/1501), I
find the young person not guilty.
Miss Nowell
the charge of ride motor vehicle without consent, contrary to s 318 of the
Criminal Code
2002 (CH2023/1072), I find the young person guilty.
the charge of joint commission aggravated robbery, contrary to s 310 of the
Criminal Code 2002
by virtue of s 45A of the
Criminal Code 2002
(CH2023/1502), I find the young person not guilty.
the charge of joint commission robbery, contrary to s 309 of the
by virtue of s 45A of the
Criminal Code 2002
(CH2023/1503),
I find the young person not guilty.
the charge of joint commission theft, contrary to s 308 of the
Criminal Code
by virtue of s 45A of the
Criminal Code 2002
(CH2023/1504), I
find the young person not
I certify that the preceding one hundred and thirty-two [132] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of his
Honour Magistrate
Associate: Niamh Dwyer
Date: 26/04/24
RTF format (362 KB)
Signed PDF/A format