Brewer & Quinn & Ors and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Anor [2009] ACTAAT 1 (5 February 2009)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: BREWER & QUINN
& ORS AND ACT PLANNING & LAND AUTHORITY & ANOR
[2009] ACTAAT 1
FEBRUARY 2009)
AT08/72, 73, 75-78
Catchwords:
Land and planning – review of decision approving
multi-unit residential re-development in A10 area – design and streetscape
– parking – traffic – private open space – clotheslines
– disabled access – property values -
overlooking
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1989, s 37
Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991, ss 8, 230, 237, 245
Planning and Development Act 2007
AMC Projects Pty Ltd and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Ors
[2006] ACTAAT 13
(2 May 2006)
Stoddart & Ors and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Anor
[2007] ACTAAT 27
(21 December 2007)
Whitfield and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Ors
(26 February 2008)
Mr M H Peedom, President
Ms P O’Neil, Senior Member
Dr D McMichael, Senior Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NOS: AT08/72, 73,
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION ) 75-78
HELEN BREWER &
Applicant in AT08/72
JOHN MAGUIRE
Applicant in AT08/73
RAYMOND WALTERS
Applicant in AT08/75
IAN & KAREN
Applicant in AT08/76
Applicant in AT08/77
Applicant in AT08/78
ACT PLANNING &
DAVID SHEARER
Party Joined
Mr M H Peedom, President
Ms P O’Neil, Senior
Dr D McMichael, Senior Member
The decision under review is varied by:
(i) deleting paragraph 8(a)(ii);
(ii) adding after the word “evidence” in paragraph 8(c)(iii) the
words “to the satisfaction of the respondent from
a qualified and
independent traffic engineer approved by the respondent.”;
(iii) amending paragraph 8(c)(iv) by deleting the words “the ACT
Parking and Vehicular Access Guidelines” and substituting
“performance measure D5.11 of Appendix III.2: Residential Design and
Siting Code for Multi-Dwelling Developments.”;
(iv) adding paragraph 8(c)(vii) as follows:
“evidence to the satisfaction of the respondent from a qualified and
independent traffic engineer approved by the respondent
of efficient vehicle
manoeuvrability in the basement
(1) to and from each vehicle parking space, and
(2) for a vehicle that has entered the basement in circumstances where all
vehicle parking spaces are occupied to exit the basement,
an amended basement plan if required.”
(v) adding paragraph 8(c)(viii) as follows:
“the erection of a clothesline on the balcony of unit 2 and unit 10
fixed to the north facing screen adjoining the wall on
the balcony at a height
not exceeding 1.4m or the installation of a clothes dryer in unit 2 and unit
(vi) adding paragraph 8(c)(ix) as follows:
“a revised driveway and fence plan showing deletion of the words
“2m High” from the Fence Legend for F1 fencing.”
.................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NOS: AT08/72, 73,
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION ) 75-78
HELEN BREWER &
Applicant in AT08/72
JOHN MAGUIRE
Applicant in AT08/73
RAYMOND WALTERS
Applicant in AT08/75
IAN & KAREN
Applicant in AT08/76
Applicant in AT08/77
Applicant in AT08/78
ACT PLANNING &
DAVID SHEARER
Party Joined
REASONS FOR DECISION
5 February 2009 Mr M H Peedom, President
Ms P O’Neil,
Senior Member
Dr D McMichael, Senior Member
The applicant in each of these applications has sought the review of a
decision made by a delegate of the respondent in relation to
a development
application. The decision, dated 21 August 2008 and made pursuant to section
230 of the Land (Planning and Environment)
) was to approve the development application subject to conditions
imposed pursuant to section 245 of the Land Act.
2. Each applicant is the owner of land adjoining or nearby the site on which
the approved development is proposed to be constructed
“the subject
) and was an objector to the development application pursuant to
section 237 of the Land Act. The party joined was the applicant
for approval of
the development application on behalf of the lessee of the subject land.
3. As many of the issues were common to all of the applications the Tribunal
directed that they be heard together.
4. This development application is to be assessed under the provisions of
the Land Act. The
Land Act was repealed and replaced by the
Planning and
Development Act 2007
on 31 March 2008, when a new Territory Plan also came into
effect. However transitional provisions require this application to be
considered under the Land Act and the version of the Territory Plan in force at
the date of the development application. A decision
cannot be made that is
inconsistent with the Territory Plan (section 8 Land Act).
The development application
5. The subject land, which comprises Blocks 20 and 21, Section 69, Division
of Evatt, is located at 19 and 21 Norton Street, Evatt.
The development
application proposes that the Crown leases of the two blocks be consolidated so
as to form a single block; the variation
of the purpose clause of the
consolidated lease to permit 11 residential dwellings; the demolition of the
existing dwellings and
outbuildings; the erection of one single storey building
and two buildings each containing a second storey element; common basement
parking for all 3 buildings; and associated landscaping and other works.
6. The area of the subject land will be 1825.14m
with a frontage to Norton Street of about 70m and to the two arms of Gleadow
Street, each of about 25m. The central single storey
building is to contain 3
one bedroom units and the buildings at either end are each to contain 1 one
bedroom unit and 2 two bedroom
units at ground level and 1 one bedroom unit with
an external balcony at second floor level. A basement with a single entry point
on the eastern arm of Gleadow Street is to contain garages for 11
residents’ vehicles and 3 visitor car parking spaces.
The hearing
7. The applicants were self-represented at the hearing on 20-23 January
2009. One of the applicants, Mr G Quinn gave evidence on
behalf of himself and
Ms H Brewer. A statement of facts and contentions prepared by each of the
applicants was admitted in evidence
without objection by the other parties.
8. The respondent was represented by Mr G McCarthy, of counsel. He called
Mr P Isaks and Ms R Singh to give evidence.
9. Mr Isaks is a transport specialist with the Office of Transport in the
Department of Territory and Municipal Services (
holds a Bachelor of Applied Science degree and has had 19 years’
experience with transport-related aspects of development
applications both in
the office of the then ACT planning authority and in TAMS.
10. Ms Singh holds a post graduate diploma in town planning and is a
graduate in Architecture from the Centre for Environmental Planning
Technology, Ahmedabad, India. She is a corporate member of the Planning
Institute of Australia and is a certified practising
11. The party joined was represented by Mr P Walker, of counsel, who called
Mr P Cohen to give evidence. Mr Cohen is a qualified
urban and regional planner
and a certified practising planner.
12. A number of documents were tendered in evidence by the parties during
the course of the hearing and the Tribunal had before it
the documents required
to be lodged with the Tribunal pursuant to section 37 of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal Act 1989. The
Tribunal also undertook a site inspection of the
subject land and surrounding area in the presence of the parties and/or their
representatives
to enable it to better understand the evidence presented during
the course of the hearing.
13. The issues which were raised at hearing and in the material lodged by
the applicants with the Tribunal pursuant to its directions
and the conclusions
which we have reached in relation to them are as follows.
Design/streetscape issues
14. The Territory Plan contains policies and guidelines made under it which,
the applicants submitted, were not satisfied by the
development application.
15. In particular, it is an objective of the Part B1 Residential Land Use
Policies of the Territory Plan to:
high quality living environments in both new and developing areas which
contribute to Canberra’s landscape character.
16. Further, an objective of the Area A10: Residential Core
policies which apply to the subject land is:
that development respects existing streetscapes and adjoining development
17. These policies were relied upon by some of the applicants in
support of their contention that the proposed development was neither
quality nor respectful of the existing Norton Street/Gleadow Street streetscape
18. The policies relied upon by the applicants are not, however, to be read
in isolation. They are required to be balanced with
other objectives of the
Part B1 policies which include:
to the social and economic changes that are affecting housing provision and
a wider range of affordable and sustainable housing choices throughout the ACT
that will accommodate population growth and
meet changing household and
community needs;
The quality and style of a living environment achieved by a
development subject only to objective 1(a) is likely to be different to
achieved by a development subject also to objectives 1(b) and 1(c).
19. In relation to the Part A10 policies the applicants identified the
second storey component of the two end buildings as failing
to show respect for
the predominantly single storey dwellings in the surrounding Norton
Street/Gleadow Street streetscape.
20. Evidence was given on this issue on behalf of the party joined by Mr
Cohen. He identified a number of features of the proposed
development to
explain the basis upon which he had formed the opinion that the proposed
development did not fail to respect the existing
streetscape. They included the
separation of the development into three building components opposite to and
broadly reflective of
the scale of development on the opposite side of Norton
Street; the articulation of the front façade of the 3 buildings created
by their design and separation; the front building setbacks in Norton Street
being insignificantly different to those of the existing
buildings; the interest
that would be added to the view from the road by the emphasis given by the
second storey elements to the
vertical street geometry; the different treatment
of surface materials; the muted colours to be used; the blend in architectural
style that currently existed in the streetscape; the extensive plantings
proposed forward of the buildings on both the subject land
and the verge areas;
the restriction in the plot ratio of the proposed development to 46%, less than
the 50% maximum specified in
Control 3.6(i) of the Residential Land Use
Policies; and the restriction in height of the second storey elements to about
than that permitted in both core and non-core residential areas.
21. The Tribunal has addressed the issue under consideration in a number of
cases involving proposed developments in A10 core residential
areas including
AMC Projects Pty Ltd and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Ors
[2006] ACTAAT 13
(2 May 2006) and
Whitfield and ACT Planning & Land
Authority & Ors
[2008] ACTAAT 5
(26 February 2008). It also examined
the streetscape features of the area in which the development is proposed in an
appeal against
an approval of an earlier development application made in respect
of the subject land (see
Stoddart & Ors and ACT Planning & Land
Authority & Anor
[2007] ACTAAT 27
(21 December 2007)).
22. It is unnecessary to repeat what was said in those cases. It is
sufficient to note that the A10 policies do not require the
existing building
style to be replicated. Such an approach would plainly undermine the intention
of policies which are designed
to facilitate more intensive development than was
previously permitted.
23. Having examined the plans of the proposed development and undertaken a
site inspection, we see no reason not to accept the evidence
of Mr Cohen that
the proposed development respects the existing streetscapes. Nor is there any
basis for a finding that the proposed
development fails to foster a high quality
living environment in a re-developing area.
24. It was contended by some of the applicants that the provision made for
parking in the basement of the proposed development was
inadequate and
unworkable. In particular, they contended that the dimensions required for the
parking spaces proposed would not
meet requirements under the Territory Plan and
that the turning circles for the vehicles of residents and their visitors would
permit their convenient manoeuvring. They also contended that visitors to
the premises on the subject land would find greater convenience
in parking their
vehicles in Norton Street adjacent to the building entrances, rather than
parking in the basement.
25. Plans prepared in August 2008 on behalf of the party joined to respond
to the conditions of approval of the development application
showed 6 single
garages, 5 double garages and unenclosed visitor car parking spaces delineated
by surface line markings for 3 vehicles.
The visitor car parking spaces were
5.8m in depth. One of them was 2.4m, one was 2.7m and the other 2.8m in width.
The width of
the aisle from which access to the garages and visitor car parking
spaces would be obtained varied from 5.95m to 6.550m. Further
plans prepared in
December 2008 on behalf of the party joined and tendered in evidence (Exhibit
12) showed the three visitor car
parking spaces each at 2.8 m wide, with
commensurate reduction in the dimensions of other elements of the basement
26. A plan produced in evidence by Mr Quinn plotted with the swept path of a
vehicle exiting from visitor car space 3 appeared to
show inadequate space for a
vehicle to reverse into the aisle and then proceed in a forward direction
without making contact with
the projecting wall of a stairwell. Mr Quinn gave
evidence that in plotting the path of the vehicle he had merely transposed the
swept path of a vehicle from visitor car space 2 as drawn by the party’s
joined engineer on a plan of the basement.
27. We note that the basement plan used by Mr Quinn shows a different depth
of the visitor car parking spaces to that shown on the
approved basement plan.
It appears to be a revised version of the approved basement plan. The accuracy
of the transposition of
the swept path of the vehicle on the basement plan was
challenged by Mr Walker. However, no evidence was provided to the Tribunal
any party to enable a reliable assessment of the path of a vehicle reversing
from visitor car space 3.
28. Control 5 of Appendix III.2 Residential Design & Siting Code for
Multi-Dwelling Developments (
) specifies
objectives, performance criteria and performance measures in relation to vehicle
parking and access. Relevantly to the
issue under consideration they provide as
To provide sufficient and convenient parking for
residents, visitors and service vehicles.
To ensure streets and access ways provide safe and
convenient vehicle access to dwellings and provide for service vehicles.
Resident and visitor car parking to be provided
according to projected needs of the dwelling and taking into account:
the provision
of public car parking easily accessible to
location and use of car spaces and access ways including adequate
manoeuvrability for vehicles between the street and the
front boundary.
Minimum Dimensions of Parking Spaces
Single covered space:
Double covered space:
Hardstanding space: as per
As specified in AS 2890.1 – The Australian
Standard for Off-Street Parking
Car parks, access ways, driveways and internal roads to
allow comfortable, safe and efficient vehicle movement and good connections
the existing street network, while minimising loss of on-street parking.
Parking Space and Access Dimensions
Hardstanding car spaces, minimum dimensions:
..................
If entry to a car space is from the end (other than
direct from a street), the minimum width of the access lane is as
Angle to Access Lane
Width of Access Lane
[error corrected]
................
Where efficient 90° parking layout is
constrained, the access way width may be reduced provided the width of car
spaces is increased
as follows:
Car Space Width
Access Width
29. Control 5 also contains provisions specifying the minimum number of car
parking spaces for residents and visitors based upon
the number of bedrooms
contained in each dwelling. Provided that the requirements as to the dimensions
of the parking spaces and
the manoeuvrability of vehicles within the basement
were satisfied, there was no contention at the hearing that the number of
spaces specified in Control 5 were satisfied.
30. Reference was also made during the course of the hearing to the ACT
Parking and Vehicular Access Guidelines dated October 2000
Parking Guidelines”
). They contain provisions in relation to the
layout and dimensions of parking spaces and the paths of access to them in
parking areas. The Parking Guidelines adopt the requirements
specified in the Australian Standard for Parking Facilities, Part 1:
Car Parking (
“AS2890.1-1993”
). AS2890.1-1993 has, in fact,
been replaced by a new Australian Standard for Parking Facilities,
AS2890.1-2004.
31. In his evidence, Mr Cohen said that AS2890.1-1993 was unclear as to
whether it applied to residential off-street car parking
but the current (2004)
standard had introduced a new vehicle user class that specifically made
reference to residential car parking.
32. The respondent and the party joined submitted that resolution of the
issue under consideration should be resolved by the imposition
of a condition
that was designed to ensure that the standard specified in AS2890.1-2004 was
satisfied. Mr Garrity, however, submitted
that neither standard should be the
determinant of compliance and that the matter should be resolved in accordance
with Control 5
of the Code. In support of his submission, he drew attention to
the following statement in clause 1.3 of the Parking Guidelines:
Any specific requirements for the provision of parking and access in areas
subject to the National Capital Plan or to other Guidelines
under the Territory
Plan would take precedence over the requirements specified in these
Guidelines.
He also drew attention to the definition of “planning guideline”
in Part D of the Territory Plan which states:
Planning Guideline
means any map, plan, guideline, standard,
code, or other like document adopted by Authority for the purpose of guiding
planning decisions.
33. In the course of her evidence Ms Singh stated that it was the practice
of the Authority/respondent to apply the current Australian
Standard in
resolving parking issues in basements because the Code made reference to it and
because the respondent considered that
Control 5 in the Code had greater
relevance to ground-level garages and hard-standing parking areas rather than
basement car parking.
34. The only reference which appears to an Australian Standard in Control 5
is in performance measure D5.4 which specifies “AS2890.1
Australian Standard for Off-Street Parking”. D5.4 deals with sightlines
that are to be achieved in off-street
parking areas. It provides no basis for
the adoption of an Australian Standard, current or otherwise, as the relevant
performance
measure for Control 5 in respect of matters other than sightlines.
If, as Mr Cohen’s evidence suggests, the terms of AS2890.1-1993
unclear that it applied to residential off-street parking areas when the Parking
Guidelines were introduced, there seems
to be even less basis upon which to
apply AS2890.1, current or otherwise, as the standard to satisfy the
Code’s performance
measure, which in most cases do not normally require
further evidence of compliance with the objectives and performance criteria
Control 5. Nor do we find anything in the references in Control 5 to
“hardstanding space”, “access lanes”
spaces” to prevent their application to basement car parking. Indeed it
is difficult to find any basis for
adopting the lower standard of compliance
contained in the current Australian Standard, when it was accepted by Ms Singh
that columns
and other obstructions usually to be found in basements were not
ordinarily present in other parking areas.
35. We accept that it would be open, despite the failure of a development
application to meet a relevant performance measure, nevertheless,
to be approved
if it were found to meet the relevant objectives and performance criteria.
However, in the light of Mr Cohen’s
evidence that the basement area is
capable of compliance with Control 5, in particular performance measure D5.11,
we consider that
the performance measures in Control 5 should be adopted as the
standard for compliance with that control. In light also of the lack
evidence to demonstrate how such compliance could be achieved, it would be
appropriate for Condition 8(c)(iv) of the approval
of the development
application to be amended to require the performance measures of Control 5 of
the Code in relation to parking
space and access aisle dimensions to be met. We
also consider that a further condition (8(c)(vii)) should be added in the
evidence to the satisfaction of the respondent from a qualified and
independent traffic engineer approved by the respondent of efficient
manoeuvrability in the basement
(1) to and from each vehicle parking space, and
(2) for a vehicle that has entered the basement in circumstances where all
vehicle parking spaces are occupied to exit the basement,
an amended basement plan if required.
In the absence of such evidence, approval of the development application
would be precluded.
36. It was contended by Mr Stoddart that, irrespective as to the adequacy of
parking provided for residents and visitors in the basement,
they would find
greater convenience by parking in Norton Street because of the closer access
from such a position to the front entrance
of each of the buildings. Vehicles
parked in such a position, he asserted, would obscure the vision of motorists
turning left from
the western arm of Gleadow Street into Norton Street and
create a traffic hazard. This prospect, he said, would result in the
development
application failing to satisfy Objective O5.2 of the Code which
To ensure that parked vehicles do not obstruct the
passage of vehicles on the carriageway or create traffic hazards.
37. It is to be noted that the front entrances to the two end buildings are
in close proximity to the two existing dwellings and
that there has been no
recorded history of accidents in the area. Mr Stoddart suggested that the only
reason accidents had been
avoided was that the residents of both of the existing
houses had used common sense and not parked their cars near these corners.
Stoddart produced in evidence a photograph of a vehicle parked in Norton Street
near the intersection in question in support
of his contention that a
potentially dangerous situation would exist.
38. In her evidence, Ms Singh acknowledged the possibility that a visitor to
the subject land for a period of short duration may
choose to park his/her
vehicle in Norton Street. She considered, however, that a visitor for a longer
period of time would be likely
to take advantage of the security afforded by the
basement parking provided.
39. Mr Isaks also gave evidence on the issue raised by Mr Stoddart. Mr
Isaks had previously given evidence on the same and other
traffic issues at the
hearing of the earlier (Stoddart) appeal to the Tribunal. On that occasion the
Tribunal concluded that the
traffic generated by the proposed development would
not significantly affect safety in the area and nor would any car parking on
Norton Street that arose as the result of the development create unacceptable
hazards that could not be dealt with by traffic calming
40. The effect of Mr Isaks’ evidence in both cases was that any cars
parked in Norton Street near the intersection in question
would require vehicles
entering Norton Street from the western arm of Gleadow Street to exercise
greater caution to watch for oncoming
traffic than might otherwise be the case.
He considered, however, that the need for greater caution was unlikely to be
with more than a few seconds delay and was the kind of situation that
was commonplace in Canberra.
41. We see no reason to change the conclusion that was arrived at in the
earlier appeal. We would add, however, that apart from
the fact that it was not
established that the vehicle shown in the photograph was parked legally or
otherwise, the re-location of
the car parking entrance to the basement to the
eastern arm of Gleadow Street can be expected to result in vehicles associated
the proposed development entering Norton Street from the eastern arm of
Gleadow Street where the obstruction to vision anticipated
by Mr Stoddart is
unlikely to exist. Nor do we see any basis for a finding that the drivers of
other vehicles entering Norton Street
from the western arm of Gleadow Street
would not exercise the same commonsense attributed by Mr Stoddart to the
residents of the
existing dwellings and their visitors.
42. In relation to the convenience of the basement parking provided for by
the development application, we accept that there may
be occasions upon which
motorists visiting the premises on the subject land as well as the residents,
especially for a short period,
may choose to park their vehicles in the street.
The provisions of Control 5 set out above do not dictate an absolute standard of
convenience. They do not require the quality of the living environment of a
permitted multi-unit development to be outweighed by
the convenience of
motorists. In the context of the totality of the policies and guidelines which
apply to the proposed development
they are standards that are required to be
balanced against other standards that are required to be met.
43. In our opinion, the parking arrangements proposed for the residential
units which they are designed to serve can properly be
regarded as
convenient.
Private open space
44. Performance measure D4.1 of the Code is entitled ‘Minimum
Dimensions of Private Open Space’ and provides:
The average area of private open space per dwelling is not less than 60%
of the average area of the block per dwelling less
The total required area of private open space on any multi-unit housing
block is the average area of private open space per dwelling
multiplied by the
proposed number of dwellings on the block.
45. Performance measure D4.2 provides:
Location and dimensions of private open space:
attached or detached house, provision of at least one area of useable private
open space that is screened from public view,
directly accessible from an indoor
daytime living area and meets the following minimum area and dimension
requirements:
Minimum Area
10% of the average block area per
Minimum Dimension
dimension of private open space on balconies:
46. There was no disagreement between the parties that the private
open space provided for each unit satisfied the minimum dimension
specified in
performance measure D4.2. Mr Quinn, however, submitted that, in her calculation
of the total area of private open space
required by performance measure D4.1, Ms
Singh had incorrectly included areas that were not properly to be regarded as
private open
space. The areas which he identified included the spaces between
the 3 buildings, the use of which was intended to include the storage
bins; the area designed as the private open space of unit 1 in which area shrubs
were growing and proposed to be retained;
pathways in front of the proposed
units; and other areas shown in the landscape plan of the approved development
as containing plantings
of various kinds.
47. Ms Singh did not disagree with Mr Quinn’s calculation that if the
areas identified by him were excluded from the calculation
of the total area of
private open space required by performance measure D4.1, there would be a
deficit of 73m
. She disagreed, however, that such
areas should be excluded from the calculation of the total area of private open
space specified
in performance measure D4.1. The only areas, she contended,
which should be excluded from the area of the subject land were the
area of the
building footprint and the driveways and that there should be added the area of
the balconies. When so calculated the
total area of private open space
) was almost double the area specified in
performance measure D4.1.
48. “Private open space” is defined in Part D of the Territory
Plan as follows:
Private open space
means an outdoor area within a block
useable for outdoor living activities, and may include balconies, terraces or
decks but does
not include any area required to be provided for the parking of
motor vehicles and any common driveways and common vehicle manoeuvring
Up to 25 per cent of any part of private open space may be roofed over, except
that a balcony may be entirely roofed over.
49. The rationale of Mr Quinn’s submission was that the notion of
private open space is directed at the space used for the
private enjoyment of
the resident of each unit and that Ms Singh’s calculation had,
impermissibly, included areas that were
available for the common use by all of
the residents.
50. The definition of “private open space” does not, in our
opinion, support Mr Quinn’s submission. There is nothing
in the terms of
the definition of private open space to exclude areas that are available for the
common use of all of the residents
of the subject land. The reference in the
definition to “an outdoor area
within a block
” (emphasis
added) suggests the contrary.
Whilst it is arguable that the use of an area for the storage of
waste bins is not properly to be regarded as an outdoor living activity
context of Control 4 of the Code, we see nothing to exclude the use of the other
areas identified by Mr Quinn from being regarded
as available for outdoor living
activities, which include but are not confined to, for example, gardening and
unit residents.
52. We conclude that even by allowing for the exclusion of an area for the
use of storage of waste bins for the residents, the total
amount of private open
space exceeds that specified as the total area of private open space in
performance measure D4.1.
Clotheslines
53. Some of the applicants contended that the design of the upper level
units made it likely that the residents of them would hang
their washing on the
balconies of the units and be exposed to public view thereby lowering the tone
of their neighbourhood.
54. In order to address the applicants’ apprehensions the respondent
proposed that a condition be imposed on any approval of
the development
application that required a clothesline to be fixed in a location on the slatted
screens adjacent to the living room
window on each of the balconies. A computer
generated image of the balcony and evidence given by Mr Cohen made it apparent
only a small section of any clothesline fixed in such a position would be
visible from the street.
55. Whilst the evidence does not enable any finding to be made that the
design of the balconies of the units was likely to result
in a detrimental
impact on the amenity of the neighbourhood the imposition of such a condition,
which was not opposed by the party
joined although not accepted as necessary,
would reduce whatever potential for the applicants’ apprehensions to be
and we are disposed to impose such a condition.
Disabled access
56. Mr Maguire contended that there was inadequate evidence that units 5 and
6, which appeared from revised plans of the development
application to have been
identified to be adapted for disabled access, were configured to enable them to
be so adapted and that the
party joined should be directed to install a stair
climber from the basement to access those units.
57. Control 3.11 of the Part B1: Residential Land Use Policies of the
Territory Plan requires that:
10% of the dwellings of any multi-unit housing development consisting of
10 or more dwellings shall be designed to meet the relevant
Australian standard
or building code for adaptable housing, or other guidelines adopted by the
Authority for adaptable housing.
58. On behalf of the party joined, Mr Cohen gave evidence that the
dimensions of spaces and openings of units 5 and 6 were consistent
relevant standards and that the stairwell to the basement was wide enough for a
stair climber and that a drawing provided
by the applicants contained
specifications for a device of that nature.
59. It would be inappropriate for the Tribunal to make any approval of the
development application conditional upon a requirement
for a stair climber to be
installed in any building. The requirement of Control 3.11 is that the
buildings be adaptable in the relevant
way, not that they be adapted. We are
satisfied on the basis of Mr Cohen’s evidence and the absence of any
contrary evidence
that the requirements of Control 3.11 are satisfied by the
development application.
Property values
60. Mr Maguire submitted that the proposed development would be likely to
attract the “lower end” buyers to the market
and, over time, would
reduce the value of existing nearby residential properties.
61. No evidence was provided to the Tribunal in support of this submission
and it would be inappropriate for the Tribunal to make
any assumption about the
impact of any approval on the value of surrounding properties, particularly as
the policies of the Territory
Plan in relation to A10 areas include the
retention of a moderate level of flexibility to accommodate a wider variety of
housing and to assist in creating a more sustainable pattern of urban
settlement by providing for more housing to be developed.
These policies give
effect to one of the more broadly stated objectives of the Residential Land Use
Policies to respond to social
and economic changes that are affecting housing
provision and choice and the creation of a wider range of affordable and
sustainable
housing choices that will accommodate population growth and meet
changing household and community needs (see Objectives 1(b) and
(c)). These
objectives are required to be balanced against other objectives which include
the need to safeguard the amenity, safety
and special qualities of established
residential areas (see Objective 1(d)).
62. Although not necessarily unrelated, issues of amenity, safety and
special qualities of a residential area are different to the
issue of the value
of property within the area. The focus of the Tribunal’s consideration is
required to be upon the former
issues in the context of the planning policies
made applicable by the Territory Plan. We have addressed those issues elsewhere
these reasons for decision.
Overlooking
63. Condition 8(a)(ii) of the decision under review required the party
joined to lodge with the respondent for approval a revised
plan showing that the
ground level of the private open space of units 7, 8, 9 and 11 (adjacent to
Block 9) be retained at natural
ground level. The approved driveway and fencing
plan required the fence on the boundary of the subject land and Block 9 to be a
1.8m high lapped and capped timber fence or a 2m high colourbond fence, with
neighbour’s approval.
64. The condition was designed to protect the residents of Block 9 from
overlooking from units 7, 8, 9 and 11. The lessee of Block
9 indicated his
agreement to the approval of the plans (which show a 1.8m fence on top of a 0.5m
high retaining wall) without these
conditions and the respondent and the party
joined have requested their deletion.
65. On this basis, we agree to their deletion.
PUBLICATION DETAILS
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by Member's
________________________________________________________________________
AT08/72, 73, 75-78
APPLICANTS:
HELEN BREWER & GREG QUINN; JOHN MAGUIRE; RAYMOND
WALTERS; IAN & KAREN GARRITY; PETER & MAREE MITCHELL; JAMES & JEAN
RESPONDENT:
ACT PLANNING & LAND AUTHORITY
PARTY JOINED:
DAVID SHEARER
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANTS:
RESPONDENT:
MR G MCCARTHY
PARTY JOINED:
MR P WALKER
SOLICITORS: APPLICANTS:
RESPONDENT:
ACT GOVERNMENT
PARTY JOINED:
JS O’CONNOR, HARRIS & CO
OTHER: APPLICANTS:
RESPONDENT:
PARTY JOINED:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
MR M H PEEDOM, PRESIDENT
MS P O’NEIL,
SENIOR MEMBER
DR D MCMICHAEL, SENIOR MEMBER
DATE/S OF HEARING:
20-22 JANUARY 2009
DATE OF DECISION:
_______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (114 KB)
Signed PDF/A format