Inquest into the death of Liam Fletcher Moors [2023] ACTCD 10 (28 June 2023)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Inquest into the death of LIAM FLETCHER
[2023] ACTCD 10
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Coroner Russell
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– death in care – cause and manner of death
– whether issue with quality of care, treatment or supervision –
whether matter of public safety arises.
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
sections 13(1)(i)
Cases Cited:
Inquest into the Death of Dean Christopher Brice
[2022] ACTCD 1
Counsel Assisting:
Ms Xiao Lin King
File Number
CD 222/2022
CORONER RUSSELL
Fletcher Moors died between the evening of 9 August 2022 and the afternoon of 11
August 2022. He was 46 years of age.
Moors was found deceased on the afternoon of 11 August 2022 by a worker employed
by Catholic Care in the bathroom of unit 14/143
Goodwin Street, Lyneham, ACT.
The unit was in disarray with evidence of prolonged drug use, including
‘numerous’ discarded used syringes.
Police officers located discarded syringes and two empty small clip seal bags in
the bathroom sink.
the time of his death, Mr Moors was subject to a Psychiatric Treatment Order
(‘PTO’) which was made on 21 July 2022
for a period of 6
Moors was born on New Years Eve, 1977. He grew up in Canberra. His mother,
Kerrin Rae Madden, said he was a delightful child.
He completed Year 12 and
obtained a TAFE certificate. She described him as a sensitive soul who was kind
and generous. He loved animals
and they, she said, loved him. Even after the
onset of his illness, he tried hard and was, for years, compliant with his
medication.
It is clear that he was loved.
inquest, including a hearing, is mandatory in relation to Mr Moors’ death.
The death of a person subject to a PTO is a
death in care
Coroners Act 1997
(‘the ACT’). A Coroner must hold an
inquest into the manner and cause of death of a person who dies in care
(s13(1)(i))
and, in such circumstances, a Coroner must not dispense with a
of the Act sets out, relevantly, the principal functions of a Coroner
conducting an inquest. Those are to record the identity of
the person who has
died, the date and place of his death and the manner and cause of that death.
The Coroner must also state whether
a matter of public safety is found to arise
in connection with the inquest and, if so, comment on the
relation to a death in care,
of the Act requires that findings also
be made about the quality of care, treatment and supervision of the deceased
person that,
in the opinion of the Coroner, contributed to the cause of
C. Cause of Death
17 August 2022, Dr Peter Ellis, the forensic pathologist performed an autopsy
examination. Dr Ellis identified a possible puncture
mark on the right
antecubital fossa. Toxicological examination of samples taken at autopsy
revealed a quantity of methylamphetamine
in post-mortem blood that, in Dr
Ellis’s opinion, would ‘[u]nder “normal” circumstances
... be sufficient
to explain death’.
Dr Ellis found the presence of a significant quantity of pus in the pericardial
cavity surrounding the heart which was associated
with obvious inflammation of
the pericardium and the heart surface. A small number of bacteria was present in
that pus. The length
of time between the autopsy and death was, in Dr
Ellis’s opinion, a possible explanation for the “relatively light
of bacteria from the sample and, it was his opinion that acute
purulent pericarditis was the cause of Mr Moors’ death. In those
circumstances, Dr Ellis concluded that the quantity of methylamphetamine found
‘should be considered toxic but not necessarily
fatal on its
Ellis considered it likely that the microorganism responsible for the fatal
pericarditis was introduced by way of ‘a non-sterile
injection at the time
of the administration of methylamphetamine’.
find that Liam Moors’ death was caused by acute purulent pericarditis, as
a consequence of an infected injection, in the presence
of methylamphetamine
D. Circumstances of Death
records of mental health clinicians treating Mr Moors, note his use of
methylamphetamine, including by intravenous injection.
had been staying at the unit in Goodwin Street for a few days after meeting the
occupier, SN, on a tram on 1 August 2022. At that
unit, SN and Mr Moors smoked
cannabis and injected methylamphetamine.
4 August, Mr Moors went to his mother’s home in O’Connor and asked
her for money. His mother, spoke to him briefly
before he walked away. That was
the last time she saw him.
the evening of Tuesday, 9 August, SD was also at the unit. SN, SD and Mr Moors
injected themselves with methylamphetamine. At some
point, Mr Moors went into
the bathroom and locked the door behind him. This was the last time he was seen
Wednesday 10 August, SN and SD continued to use methylamphetamine. SN left the
unit at some time either on 10 August or 11 August
and SD left on 11 August, not
returning until 4pm, after Mr Moors’ body had been
E. Findings required by
find that the infection which caused Mr Moors’ death was the result of
self-administration of methylamphetamine by injection
with an infected
evidence establishes, and I find, that Liam Moors died at unit 14/143 Goodwin
Street, Lyneham in the Australian Capital Territory.
find that Liam Moors died between the evening of 9 August 2022 and the afternoon
of 11 August 2022.
F. Quality of Care, Treatment and Supervision
Moors was first diagnosed with schizophrenia at the age of 20, in 1997. The
mental health notes refer to the use of illicit drugs
and, at least by 2005,
those records note the use of methylamphetamine. Mr Moors’ struggles with
mental health problems continued
and he was involuntarily admitted to hospital
and placed on compulsory treatment orders. There was, however, a period of some
in which he was relatively stable and did not require involuntary
admission to a hospital. The mental health records reflect the
fact that that
period coincided with a time when he was being treated with clozapine which, at
least in the latter part of that period,
was being taken orally.
period of relative stability ended in early 2019 when he stopped taking
clozapine. It is not clear from the medical records why
Mr Moors stopped taking
clozapine at that time, but clinicians suspected the ongoing use of cannabis and
amphetamines may have been
implicated.
Drug treatment regime
Madden has expressed concerns about whether, from February 2019, her son should
have been placed back on clozapine for the management
of his schizophrenia. With
those concerns in mind, I have carefully considered the records which detail Mr
Moors’ treatment
in hospital and in the community.
his treating clinicians became aware that he was no longer taking clozapine, a
hospital admission was organised for its safe
reintroduction by titration. Mr
Moors attended the hospital on 15 February 2019, for that purpose, but left
before he could be treated.
the following days, he was involuntarily admitted to hospital with psychosis in
the context of the suspected recent use of amphetamine.
During a lengthy
admission he indicated a willingness to take olanzapine but was refusing
clozapine. He was again placed on a PTO.
acute psychosis resolved on an olanzapine treatment regime and he was released
from the Adult Mental Health Unit (‘AMHU’)
of The Canberra Hospital
on olanzapine by depot injection. The clinicians treating him at that stage,
considered trying to reintroduce
clozapine when he was more mentally stable.
Nonetheless, during his stay at the AMHU, he repeatedly expressed a reluctance
taking clozapine and, when the acute psychosis had resolved, he told
the clinicians he was happy to take olanzapine, despite it being
prescribed to
him by depot injection.
records of early 2019 note that Mr Moors suffered from long term leukocytosis.
Clinicians queried whether that was connected to
clozapine use.
Moors continued to receive olanzapine by depot injection in the community but
was very often late for his injection. The records
indicate strenuous efforts on
the part of the mental health staff to engage with Mr Moors and have him attend
for his injection.
There were repeated involuntary admissions to hospital over
the following two and a half years.
records indicate that, over that time, clinicians tried to encourage Mr Moors to
consider changing to clozapine. At times, he
was prepared to engage in those
discussions and admissions were arranged for him to hospital so that it could be
reintroduced safely.
Ultimately, however, he could not be brought to the point
of actually being prepared to attend. Although the records note that he
complain of such side effects when he was stable on clozapine, he told
clinicians that he had nightmares on clozapine and
that it was a
‘terrible’ drug for him. He was often highly resistant to mental
health clinicians attempts to have him
reconsider taking it, while, at the same
time, agreeing to continue on olanzapine.
records indicate that, conscious of the requirement imposed upon them to treat
Mr Moors with respect and to provide him with treatment
in a way which was least
restrictive or intrusive to him, clinicians were continually assessing his drug
regime and decisions were
made to keep him on olanzapine while he was relatively
compliant with it and while it was effective, because that accorded with his
strongly expressed wishes. In coming to those decisions, clinicians also took
into account, what they considered would be, his preparedness
to comply with a
clozapine regime while in the community. When his health and his compliance
deteriorated in 2022, a decision was
made, in June 2022, to replace olanzapine
with paliperidone and, at the time of his death he was being transitioned onto
records demonstrate, and I find, that Mr Moors’ treating clinicians were
diligently assessing him and that the clinical
decisions made about his drug
treatment regime, while difficult, were not inappropriate.
Illicit drug use
records further demonstrate that clinicians were aware, at times, of Mr
Moors’ use of illicit drugs and, at other times,
suspected that he was
using such drugs, including methylamphetamine. They attempted to bring him to
the point where he would engage
in drug rehabilitation programs. Such engagement
could not be enforced, however, under the PTO to which he was
respect to the ACT Mental Health Services, the records do not support any
finding that the quality of care, treatment and supervision
of Mr Moors
contributed to the cause of his death.
G. Matter of Public
Moors died of acute purulent pericarditis, as a consequence of self-administered
methylamphetamine by injection with an infected
syringe. The City Mental Health
Team were actively engaged with him and attempting to assist him in the months
leading to his death.
I can make no finding that the care provided to Mr Moors
by ACT Mental health agencies was deficient. I am satisfied that no matter
public safety arises in connection with this inquest.
Closing remarks
Moors was loved by his family. Although his illness, at times, made him
difficult, his mother maintained involvement with the services
treating him. It
is clear that she feels his loss deeply. I extend my condolences to her and to
his family and all who cared for
E. Formal findings
make the following findings as required by
of the Act:
Place of death
Liam Fletcher Moors died at 14/143 Goodwin Street, Lyneham in the Australian
Capital Territory.
Date of death
He died between the evening of 9 August 2022 and the afternoon of 11 August
Cause of death
Acute purulent pericarditis,
as a consequence of
an infected injection
significant conditions
Methylamphetamine toxicity
Manner of death
Self-administration of methylamphetamine by injection with an infected
close this inquest.
I certify that the preceding thirty six [36] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Decision of her Honour Coroner
Lawyer: Xiao Lin King
Date: 28 June 2023
I respectfully adopt the
findings of His Honour Magistrate Morrison in Inquest into the Death of Dean
Christopher Brice
[2022] ACTCD 1
in this respect.
RTF format (195 KB)
Signed PDF/A format