El-Debel v The King; Kahlon v The King [2025] ACTCA 23 (16 July 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
El-Debel v The King; Kahlon v The King
[2025] ACTCA 23
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
McCallum CJ, Baker and Bromwich JJ
The appeal is dismissed.
Catchwords:
– CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal against Conviction
– conspiracy with intention to dishonestly obtain a gain from a
Commonwealth
entity – whether verdicts unreasonable – whether open
to the jury to conclude that the appellants had entered into an
agreement to
dishonestly influence the procurement system for the selection of candidates to
a government department – where
evidence that the appellants would receive
a portion of the margin received by labour hire companies – history and
proper construction
of s 135.4 of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) – whether
the prosecution failed to properly particularise its case – appeal
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), s 86A
Criminal Code
130.1, 135.4
Criminal Code Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and Related Offences) Act
Cases Cited:
Marshall v The King
[2023] ACTCA 11
Peters v The Queen
[1998] HCA 7
192 CLR 493
(1987) 44 SASR 436
El-Debel (No 6)
[2022] ACTSC 156
R v El-Debel (No 7)
[2022] ACTSC
[2007] NSWCCA 272
230 FLR 276
; 241 CLR 17
(1987) 27 A Crim R 438
R v Vilayur
[2024] ACTSC 132
R v Vilayur
[2022] ACTSC 110
[2025] HCA 9
99 ALJR 676
Texts Cited:
Explanatory Memorandum, Criminal Code Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and
Related Offences) Bill 1999 (Cth)
Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of
the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code
Model Criminal Code Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code
(Report, December 1995)
Explanatory Memorandum, Criminal Code Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and
Related Offences) Bill 2000 (Cth)
Abdul Aziz El-Debel (First Appellant)
Raminder Kahlon (Second Appellant)
The King (Respondent)
Representation:
C Newman (First Appellant)
M Kalyk and H Thomas-Dubler (First Appellant)
A Haban-Beer and S Young (Respondent)
Kamy Saeedi Law (First Appellant)
Murphy’s Lawyers (Second Appellant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) (Respondent)
File Numbers:
ACTCA 64 of
2022; ACTCA 16
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: ACT Supreme Court
Before: Elkaim J
Date of Decision: 7 July 2021
Case Title:
R v Khalon; R v El-Debel
Court File Number(s): SCC 96 of
2021; SCC 97
Aziz El-Debel (the first appellant) and Raminder Singh Kahlon (the second
appellant) were jointly charged with one count each
of conspiring with one
another and another man, Gopalakrishnan Surinaya Vilayur, with the intention of
dishonestly obtaining a gain
from a Commonwealth entity, contrary to s 135.4(1)
Criminal Code
El-Debel was a public servant employed by the Commonwealth Department of Finance
(the Department), working within the Service Delivery
Office (SDO). The SDO
provided ‘shared IT services’ to other federal government
departments. Some of those services involved
the provision of enterprise
resource planning software. In August 2018, the SDO began developing a prototype
whole of government
resource planning software called “GovERP” (the
Project). Mr El-Debel’s role was to lead a team in this project.
Mr Kahlon and Mr Vilayur were engaged as contractors of the Department to
assist with this project.
the time that they were engaged by the Department, Mr Kahlon and Mr Vilayur each
operated labour hire companies, New Horizons
Business Solutions Pty Ltd (New
Horizons) and Algoram Pty Ltd (Algoram) respectively. The operation by Mr Kahlon
and Mr Vilayur of
these companies was known to the Department.
to the technical nature of the Project, from time to time the Department would
approach the market seeking the engagement of suitably
skilled IT and IT-related
professionals to perform certain roles. New Horizons and Algoram would submit
candidates to the Department
on these occasions. The candidates submitted by
these companies would on occasion be hired by the Department following a
recruitment
process, which involved an assessment of the quality of the
candidates by a panel of decision-makers.
a candidate was successful, the Department would enter into a contract with the
submitting company to engage the candidate. The
submitting company would receive
the entirety of the funds paid by the Department pursuant to work performed by
the contractor but,
in effect, would pay to the contractor the amount received
from the Department less a recruitment fee, referred to as a
New Horizons and Algoram received money from the
Department in this way each time one of their submitted candidates was
successfully
engaged by the Department.
essence of the prosecution case was that Mr El-Debel, Mr Vilayur and Mr Kahlon
entered into an agreement where Mr El Debel would
dishonestly provide Mr Kahlon
and Mr Vilayur with information about upcoming procurements; and further, that
Mr El-Debel would provide
advice to the relevant procurement panel with the
object of influencing the recruitment process in favour of candidates put
by New Horizons and Algoram. It was also alleged that it was agreed that
Mr El-Debel and Mr Vilayur would organise for these candidates
to have advance
knowledge of the procurement panel process to which they would be subjected, so
as to give such candidates a dishonest
advantage over other candidates. Finally,
it was also agreed that Mr El-Debel would be paid for his role in this process.
prosecution did not allege that the appellants’ actions had caused a
relevant loss to the Department. Rather, the prosecution
contended that the gain
to New Horizons and Algoram was dishonest because it was to be shared with Mr
Mr El-Debel, Mr Kahlon and Mr Vilayur were each charged on a single indictment.
All three entered pleas of not guilty.
On 20 May 2022, Mr Vilayur’s
criminal trial was severed from that of Mr El-Debel and Mr Kahlon:
[2022] ACTSC 110.
Mr Vilayur subsequently pleaded guilty and was
sentenced on 2 May 2024:
R v Vilayur (No 3
[2024] ACTSC 132.
El-Debel and Mr Kahlon were jointly tried before a jury presided over by Elkaim
J (the trial judge) which commenced on 31 May 2022.
On 28 June 2022, at the
close of the Crown case, both appellants made an no case application. The trial
judge refused that application:
R v El-Debel (No 6)
[2022] ACTSC 156.
7 July 2022, a jury of eleven found both appellants guilty of the offence
15 November 2022, the trial judge sentenced each appellant to a period of
imprisonment of three years and six months, to be served
by way of an Intensive
Correction Order:
R v El-Debel (No 7)
[2022] ACTSC 313.
appellants each appeal against their convictions, but not the sentences imposed
the oral hearing of the appeals (by convenience to be referred to in the
singular in these reasons) both appellants ultimately
pressed a portion of their
respective notices of appeal amounting to the same grounds. Given that
commonality of approach, it is
convenient to describe those common grounds of
appeal by reference to grounds 1 and 2(a) in Mr Kahlon’s Further Amended
of Appeal as follows:
(1) The verdict is unreasonable or unable to be supported by the evidence, the
trial judge erred in finding there was a case to answer
(a) The failure by the prosecution to properly particularise its case in
opening, closing or both meant that the verdict was not
open or alternatively
amounted to a miscarriage of justice.
oral argument, the appellants also conceded that their contention that the trial
judge erroneously found that there was a case
to answer did not, in the present
case, relevantly add to the unreasonableness ground. Specifically, the
appellants conceded that
if they did not establish that the verdicts were
unreasonable, it would also follow that it could not be established that the
judge erred in finding that there was a case to answer.
appellants required an extension of time to file their appeal. That leave was
not opposed by the Crown, and leave to appeal out
of time was granted at the
oral hearing.
the reasons outlined below, the appellants have not established either that the
jury’s verdicts were unreasonable, or that
there was anything inadequate
in the particulars provided by the Crown. Accordingly, the appeals must be
Section 135.4 of the
Criminal Code
135.4(1) of the
Criminal Code
provides as follows:
Obtaining a gain
(1) A person commits an offence if:
(a) the person conspires with another person with the intention of dishonestly
obtaining a gain from a third person; and
(b) the third person is a Commonwealth entity.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 10 years.
(2) In a prosecution for an offence against subsection (1), it is not necessary
to prove that the defendant knew that the third
person was a Commonwealth
addition to the offence of conspiring with another person with the intention of
dishonestly obtaining a gain from the Commonwealth,
s 135.4 of the
also creates offences of:
(1) conspiring with another person with the intention of dishonestly causing a
loss to a Commonwealth entity (s 135.4(3));
(2) conspiring with another person with the intention of dishonestly causing a
loss to a Commonwealth entity, and the person knows
or believes that the loss
will occur or that there is a substantial risk of the loss occurring (s
135.4(5)); and
(3) conspiring with another person with the intention of dishonestly influencing
a Commonwealth public official in the exercise of
the official’s duties as
a Commonwealth public official (s 135.4(7)).
135.4(9) and (10) contain the following prescriptions, which apply to all
offences created by s 135.4:
General provisions
(9) For a person to be guilty of an offence against this section:
(a) the person must have entered into an agreement with one or more
other persons; and
(b) the person and at least one other party to the agreement must
have intended to do the thing pursuant to the agreement; and
(c) the person or at least one other party to the agreement must have
committed an overt act pursuant to the agreement.
(10) A person may be found guilty of an offence against this section
(a) obtaining the gain, causing the loss, causing the risk of loss, or
influencing the Commonwealth public official, as the case
may be, is impossible;
(b) the only other party to the agreement is a body corporate; or
(c) each other party to the agreement is a person who is not criminally
responsible; or
(d) subject to subsection (11), all other parties to the
agreement have been acquitted of the offence.
are a number of important definitions contained in div 130 of the
which apply to the s 135.4 offence:
(i) The term “dishonest” is defined to mean “(a) dishonest
according to the standards of ordinary people; and (b)
known by the defendant to
be dishonest according to the standards of ordinary people”;
(ii) The term “obtaining” is defined to include “obtaining for
another person; and inducing a third person to do
something that results in
another person obtaining”;
(iii) The term “gain” is defined to mean “(a) a gain in
property, whether temporary or permanent; or (b) a gain
by way of supply of
services; and includes keeping what one has”; and
(iv) The term “property” is defined to include,
“personal property” and “money”.
History of s
135.4(1) of the Criminal Code
will be discussed further below, although the appellants did not challenge the
indictment, or any aspect of the trial judge’s
directions to the jury
concerning the elements of the s 135.4(1) offence, there are issues of statutory
construction which underlie
the appellants’ contentions with respect to
the unreasonable verdict ground. For this reason, it is convenient to briefly
the history of s 135.4(1) of the
Criminal Code
turning to a consideration of substantive grounds of appeal.
offence of conspiracy to obtain a gain from the Commonwealth was first enacted
Criminal Code Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and Related Offences)
(Cth), following two reports of the Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee of the Standing Committee of the Attorneys General (MCCOC)
in 1995 and
its 1997 Report, the MCCOC considered whether to abolish the common law offence
of conspiracy to defraud (then contained in s 86A
Crimes Act 1914
The MCCOC concluded that the offence of conspiracy to defraud
should be retained. In so concluding, the MCCOC acknowledged that the
contained in ss 86 and 86A of the
may be criticised on the
basis that the “same conduct would not be criminal if committed by an
individual”. However,
the MCCOC was of the view that the offence should
nonetheless be retained because of the “long history” of the offence
and “its recent use in significant cases”: MCCOC (1997) at 27.
MCCOC also considered a proposal to “expand” the offence to include
conduct committed with an intent to obtain a gain
(rather than to cause a loss):
MCCOC (1997) at 27. The MCCOC set out the various submissions supporting and
opposing the amendment,
the latter of which included that “mundane
economic transactions [would be] open to scrutiny subject only to the
uncertainties
of the test of dishonesty”. After considering these
competing submissions, the MCCOC recommended that the offence be expanded
include conduct with an intent to obtain a gain. The Committee explained (at 34
Submissions generally supported the inclusion of an intent to a gain in this
offence. The Australian Law Reform Commission agreed
that in virtually all cases
where a person dishonestly causes a loss or a detriment to another, the
intention is to obtain a gain
or financial advantage and that in major attacks
on large public or private institutions fraudsters pay little heed to where
may fall, but certainly have gains for themselves very much in mind. The
South Australian Police pointed out that including a gain
in the offence will
avoid an artificial or convoluted description of the conduct of the offender so
as to fit into the description
of causing a loss.
MCCOC believes that the arguments for including gain are more persuasive.
Section 17.4(1)(a) reflects this conclusion.
form of the provision proposed by the MCCOC was as follows:
17.4 Conspiracy to defraud
(1) A person who conspires with another person to do something dishonestly:
(a) with the intention of obtaining a gain; or
(b) with the intention of causing a loss or being reckless with respect to that
(c) with the intention of influencing the exercise of a public duty,
is guilty of an offence.
135.4 was enacted in somewhat different terms to what was proposed by the MCCOC.
As enacted (and not materially amended since
its enactment), s 135.4(1) and (9)
relevantly provide:
(1) A person is guilty of an offence if:
(a) the person conspires with another person with the intention of dishonestly
obtaining a gain from a third person; and
(b) the third person is a Commonwealth entity.
(9) For a person to be guilty of an offence against this section:
(a) the person must have entered into an agreement with one or more other
persons; and
(b) the person and at least one other party to the agreement must have intended
to do the thing pursuant to the agreement; and
(c) the person or at least one other party to the agreement must have committed
an overt act pursuant to the agreement.
offence created by s 135.4 is limited to frauds on the Commonwealth. The
particular vulnerability of the Commonwealth to fraud
was noted in the Revised
Explanatory Memorandum to the Criminal Code Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and
Related Offences) Bill
2000 (Cth) at [189] and [191].
text and history of s 135.4(1) make clear three matters which were, to varying
extents, in issue in the present appeal.
as the Crown submitted, whilst the s 135.4 offences must be read against the
common law (
[2010] HCA 17
; 241 CLR 17 at
), it is clear from
the history outlined above that in enacting s 135.4(1), the Commonwealth
Parliament intended to create a new offence
which deliberately departed both
from the common law and from the previous Commonwealth statutory offences
concerning frauds upon
the Commonwealth. In particular, the s 135.4(1) offence
may be committed where there is an intention to obtain a gain from the
Commonwealth,
and does not require an intention to cause a loss, or a
“prejudicing or imperilling [of] existing legal rights or
interests”:
Peters v The Queen
[1998] HCA 7
192 CLR 493
. It follows that cases concerning the meaning of
“defraud” at common law and under previous statutory provisions do
provide any guidance as to the scope of the s 135.4(1) offence.
the textual and historical context of s 135.4 makes clear that the intention to
“do the thing pursuant to the agreement”
in s 135.4(9)(b)
directs attention to the intended object of the conspiracy, which differs for
each of the separate offences (that
is, to obtain a gain from a Commonwealth
entity (s 135.4(1); to cause a loss to a Commonwealth entity (s 135.4(3)
and (5)); or to
influence a Commonwealth public official in the exercise of the
official’s duties (s 135.4(7)). As noted above, the subjects
conspiracies in s 135.4 need not themselves be criminal offences, provided
that the conspiracy is entered into with a “dishonest”
Accordingly, as the appellants properly accepted, in a case such as the present,
the prosecution will have demonstrated
that each appellant intended to “do
the thing pursuant to the agreement” if the prosecution establishes that
the appellant
entered into an agreement with the intention of obtaining a gain
from the Commonwealth.
(following from the above), the only element in the s 135.4 offence which
directs attention to the means to be employed in the
conspiracy is s
135.4(9)(c), which requires that the accused “or at least one other party
to the agreement must have committed
an overt act pursuant to the
agreement”.
enacting s 135.4, the legislature departed from the recommendation of the MCCOC
that a person “do something dishonestly”
in favour of a textual
requirement that the person conspire “with the intention of dishonestly
obtaining a gain”.
view of this legislative choice, there is no textual basis to import the
additional element proposed by the appellants that:
... the parties reach an agreement to do a particular “thing” being
in the nature of an act or acts, with that thing
(being conduct): (a) was
intended to obtain, in the sense of cause the obtaining of, the particularised
gain; and (b) was dishonest.
the appellants correctly accepted, there is a distinction to be drawn between
the “thing” agreed (the object of the
agreement) and the
“overt acts” (the way the agreement is carried out). This
distinction was clearly drawn in the decision
(1987) 44 SASR
at 439 , which recognised that “a person can be a willing conspirator
in a fraudulent scheme, well knowing that the scheme
is fraudulent, but having
no idea of the manner in which it is implemented – not knowing any of the
essential steps leading
up to its implementation”. This distinction is at
the heart of s 135.4(1): it is the agreement to obtain a gain from the
Commonwealth
which must be dishonest. The Crown does not need to prove that
there was an agreement to
engage in a particular act or acts
dishonest intention
support of their arguments, the appellants relied upon the Explanatory
Memorandum to the Criminal Code Amendment (Theft, Fraud,
Bribery and Related
Offences) Bill 1999 (Cth), which states that the provision attaches
“dishonesty to the various types of
conduct”. However, read in
context, and consistently with the text of the provision, this statement simply
reflects the fact
that the dishonest intention may attach to the different forms
of “conduct” in issue in each offence (ie to obtain a
gain from a
Commonwealth entity; to cause a loss to a Commonwealth entity; and to influence
a Commonwealth official). In any event,
to the extent that the Explanatory
Memorandum departs from the text of the legislation, it is aspirational and must
give way to what
has been legislated: see
[2007] NSWCCA 272
FLR 276 (Spigelman
CJ, with whom Mason P, McClellan CJ at CL, Hidden and Howie
JJ agreed) at [141] – [145], especially at [144].
prosecution case
prosecution called oral evidence from the following witnesses:
(i) Lucelle Veneros, the Acting Deputy Secretary of the Shared Services
Transformation Group (SSTG);
(ii) Stuart Munro, an executive in the SDO. Mr Munro reported to Ms Veneros;
(iii) Rishi Abrol, an individual employed by SAP, but who worked with the
Department to provide SAP expertise;
(iv) Martin O’Dea, Procurement Advisor to the Department
(v) Ivan Spudic, Chair of the Evaluation Committee and Director of the Hub Team
providing enterprise resource planning solutions
within the Department
(vi) Caterina Costanza, Member of the Evaluation Committee and Assistant
Director of the Hub Team
Crown case was a circumstantial case, which relied upon the combined effect of
the following evidence.
spreadsheets found on Mr Kahlon’s computer and seized pursuant to a search
warrant. The prosecution submitted that these spreadsheets
demonstrated that
“all of the income which was derived by New Horizons ... was obtained from
the funds which flowed from the
engagement of the contractors [to] the
Department of Finance”.
spreadsheet contained entries for “Profit Representative 1”;
“Profit representative 2” and “Other
Share (Cash)”. The
Crown submitted that these entries were consistent with a conversation between
Mr Vilayur and Mr Kahlon
on 1 June 2020, which referred to the “evolution
of the split” of New Horizons’ profits between them and, on the
Crown case, Mr El-Debel. The Crown also relied on the fact that the entry
“Other Share (Cash)” was equal to $5 per hour
worked by every
contractor on the spreadsheet. The Crown submitted that this was the
“brother’s cut” which was
to be paid to Mr El-Debel. The Crown
contended that the jury would reject Mr Kahlon’s explanation that the
“Other Share
(Cash)” was an amount for “working capital”
which was not paid to anyone.
evidence that on 11 October 2019, Mr El-Debel made arrangements by text message
to travel to Sydney and back to pick up something
which Mr El-Debel described to
Mr Kahlon in an intercepted call as “three four”. In that call, Mr
Kahlon replied “thirty
four huh?” and Mr El-Debel told Mr Kahlon
that he would check when he returned to Canberra if that was correct or not. The
Crown submitted that the conversation concerned cash, which Mr El-Debel would
count on his return to Canberra.
respect to this evidence, the Crown also relied on an intercepted call between
Mr Vilayur and Mr Kahlon on 16 October 2019, in
which Mr Kahlon asked
“do you want 100k or more”, before adding “our other friend is
fixed”. Different channels
of the recording which separately captured Mr
Vilayur and Mr Kahlon’s voices were played to the jury. The Crown
contended that
the jury would find that Mr Kahlon said the start of the word
“Alex”, while Mr Vilayur talked over him, before changing
the name “Alex” to “our other friend”. (Mr
El-Debel’s preferred first name is Alex).
a large number of intercepted calls, in which Mr Kahlon and Mr Vilayur spoke
or “brother”,
in terms consistent with that man being a manager in the Department. The calls
made reference to the payment
of a “brother’s cut” to be paid
to that man. The prosecution contended that, considered in totality, it was
that the man referred to as “bai” or “brother” was
Mr El-Debel. The prosecution also contended that these
calls demonstrated that
Mr El-Debel was receiving the “brother’s cut” for his role in
the recruitment process,
including his involvement with the selection committee,
and his role in arranging for Algoram and New Horizons’ candidates
advance knowledge of the procurement process, including the interview questions
that they would be asked.
were over 24 hours of
calls played to the jury over 10 days. These calls
(i) An intercepted phone call on 12 October 2019, in which Mr Kahlon told Mr
El-Debel “for your information ... I’ve
picked up the ... um the
stuff”, and when asked by Mr El-Debel how much he picked up, Mr Kahlon
said “three four”;
(ii) Intercepted calls of 18 November 2019, 1 June 2020 and 3 June 2020, in
which Mr Kahlon told Mr Vilayur that he had given money
to “Alex” or
(iii) An intercepted phone call of 28 January 2020, which recorded Mr Vilayur
telling Mr Kahlon “brother is saying one thing,
Stuart is saying another
thing, and Lucelle is saying something different”, suggesting that
“bai” (or brother)
was a manager in the Department with
responsibilities related to Stuart Munro and Lucelle Veneros;
(iv) An intercepted phone call of 10 March 2020, which recorded Mr Kahlon and Mr
Vilayur using the Hindi word for “brother”
to describe a person who
had complained of being “exhausted” and who was about to
“start working” on a project
involving “ERP
transformation” under “Lucelle”;
(v) An intercepted phone call of 10 March 2020, in which Mr Vilayur talked about
“our brother” and said “today
he was telling me that Eugene...
needs to be your person. He needs to be our person”. Mr Kahlon responded
that “he was
very clear on that” and described a conversation with
“brother” which was consistent with a conversation between
El-Debel and Mr Vilayur occurring immediately after, in which Mr El-Debel spoke
of having had a conversation with “Raminder”
more out there”;
(vi) An intercepted phone call of 20 March 2020 (the day after Requests for
Quotation for SST-044 and 045 were issued), in which
Mr Vilayur spoke of the
roles he was applying for, and told Mr Abrol that “Brother is coming to my
office on Sunday for developing
some strategies” and laughed;
(vii) An intercepted phone call on 25 March 2020, which recorded Mr El-Debel
telling Mr Vilayur: “I’m going to sit down
with Stuart
[Munro]” to discuss setting up the panel; [
(viii) An intercepted phone call of 26 March 2020, which recorded Mr Kahlon give
advice to Mr Vilayur about how to set up a spreadsheet
of which each had a copy.
They switched to Hindi when the discussion turned to a “bai’s cut of
$5 per hour” (the
Crown pointed out that the spreadsheet indicated that
the “Other Share (Cash)” was in the sum of $5 per hour);
(ix) An intercepted phone call of 28 March 2020, in which Mr Kahlon referred to
a meeting with “brother” tomorrow, which
was consistent with earlier
conversations about meeting “brother” on a Sunday, and discussed
with Mr Vilayur the recruitment
of “Lindsay” Pearce;
(x) An intercepted phone call of 28 March 2020, which recorded Mr Kahlon asking
Mr Vilayur about the prospects of Eugene O’Reilly
getting the program
manager’s job. Mr Vilayur responded that “brother will be in the
panel”. Mr Kahlon later suggested
going through a margin sheet “in
front of Alex ... because he is also about his margin”;
(xi) An intercepted phone call of 28 March 2020, in which Mr Vilayur said to Mr
Kahlon “today I have deleted all my chats...
not just you and me”
but “everything” including “our brother ABCD”. Mr
Vilayur asked Mr Kahlon to “do
that in your phone as well”;
(xii) An intercepted phone call of 28 March 2020, which recorded Mr Kahlon and
Mr Vilayur showing Mr El-Debel their margins so that
he would be motivated
by the margin that he himself would keep, which would be compensation;
(xiii) An intercepted phone call of 29 March 2020, in which Mr Vilayur and Mr
Kahlon discussed a meeting they were about to have
with “Alex”,
consistent with earlier conversations about meeting “brother” on
(xiv) An intercepted phone call of 29 March 2020
in which Mr Vilayur told
to “write who is shortlisted and who is in merit
list” on a sheet of paper for “Alex” because “he
take Excel”;
(xv) An intercepted phone call on 30 March 2020, in which Mr Vilayur told Mr
Abrol “if you see or hit upon a gold mine ...
let’s discuss”
and further told Mr Abrol that he “needs to get a good outcome”;
(xvi) An intercepted phone call of 31 March 2020, in which Mr Vilayur and Mr
Abrol laughed about the selection process, and discussed
“Alex’s” role in it, which included trying to control
“Ivan (Spudic)”, the chair of the evaluation
committee, and
discussed the use of the “Houseparty” app, in which “room can
be locked no one can come in”;
(xvii) An intercepted phone call of 1 April 2020, in which Mr Abrol spoke to Mr
Vilayur about what “our brother is saying”
and Mr Vilayur confirmed
that he was speaking about “Alex”;
(xviii) An intercepted phone call of 9 April 2020, in which Mr Abrol
congratulated Mr Vilayur on the recruitment of Lindsay Pearce
and told Mr
Vilayur to “tell your brother to sort out their differences” in the
context of discussion about “Alex”
and “Stuart”;
(xix) An intercepted phone call of 18 April 2020, in which Mr Kahlon’s
wife referred to the company name “Algoram”
as being an abbreviation
of “Alex, Gopal and Raminder”;
(xx) An intercepted phone call of 3 June 2020, in which Mr Kahlon referred to
“our brother Alex’s candidates”;
(xxi) An intercepted phone call on 11 May 2020 (Exhibit A, 816) in which Mr
Vilayur informed Mr Ravi Kiran Jagannathan, a Solution
Advocate who was
recruited by the DOF through Algoram, that he would be interviewed by El-Debel
and asked questions which reflected
those in the interview notes.
evidence of international money transfers from New Horizons, a pool of funds out
of which money, including cash, could be transferred
to Mr El-Debel or Mr
a bundle of records from the Department of Finance, which included emails from
each of the co-accused; registers of the contracts
engaged by the SDO and the
Project; work orders for the Algoram and New Horizons candidates for the major
procurement exercises that
took place during the alleged offending (SST-044 and
SST-045). The records bundle also contained notes of an interview of 11 May
2020 with Mr Jagannathan, which indicated that Mr El-Debel attended the
interview and asked questions. This interview occurred shortly
intercepted call referred to at [42(xxii)] above, in which Mr Vilayur told Mr
Jagannathan that he would be asked questions
by Mr El-Debel in the interview
which reflected the questions in the interview notes.
evidence from Stuart Munro, the delegate for the work orders for SST-044 and
SST-045. Mr Munro gave evidence that Mr El-Debel attended
a number of interviews
with candidates put forward by Algoram.
Crown ultimately submitted in the closing address to the jury that the evidence
revealed that Mr Vilayur, Mr Kahlon and Mr El-Debel
were “deeply
financially involved together in a way which is totally inconsistent with their
obligation to be open and transparent
to the Department of Finance”. The
Crown acknowledged that “but for the fact that they shared in a way in a
joint arrangement
with Mr El-Debel... most of what happened although it might
have been procedurally wrong and may have created disciplinary issues
Department’s perspective... would not have been criminal”. The Crown
case was that the payment of money to Mr
El-Debel tainted the whole process such
that the jury should conclude that the agreement was one to
“dishonestly” obtain
a gain from the Commonwealth.
above facts and the inferences drawn therefrom demonstrate that, in
circumstances where the Department did not know of the agreement
between the
three men and where a conflict of interest plainly arose from that agreement
with their engagement by the Department
, both the recruitment process and the
whole of the circumstances in which the money was shared between Mr Vilayur, Mr
Mr El-Debel were dishonest.
Ultimately,
a conclusion should be drawn from the evidence that Mr Vilayur, Mr Kahlon and Mr
El-Debel, as the parties to the agreement,
knew that their conduct was dishonest
and that they should have disclosed their conduct (ie, their conflict of
interest) to the Department.
If that disclosure had been made, the Department
most likely would not have made the recruitments which resulted in Algoram and
Horizons obtaining a gain by way of those recruitments.
appellants’ cases
central submission advanced by the appellants at trial was that the evidence
relied on by the prosecution was too uncertain to
prove the elements of the
offences beyond reasonable doubt.
the appellants submitted that the evidence revealed that there was a genuine
frustration held by the appellants that candidates
of poor quality were being
employed in relation to the Project. It was submitted that this frustration
arose in the context of the
Project being under pressure, under-resourced, and
time constrained. In these circumstances, the appellants’ motivation in
directly sourcing candidates rather than engaging in the standard consulting
process was to quickly procure the most suitably qualified
candidates to deliver
on the Project. These intentions were made known by the appellants to their
superiors. In these circumstances,
it was submitted that the prosecution failed
to prove that the appellants were knowingly dishonest.
the appellants contended that there was no evidence that the appellants had
breached the Commonwealth Procurement Rules. Direct
sourcing is a legitimate
method of procuring resources under those rules.
the appellants contended that the prosecution’s submission that the
recruitment process was from time to time corrupted
was not supported by the
evidence; to the contrary, they submitted that the evidence established that the
recruitment process was
entirely merits-based. In particular, the appellants
submitted that the following evidence demonstrated the integrity of this
(1) Mr El-Debel and Mr Vilayur concluded that Mr Vilayur would not sit on a
recruitment panel if Algoram was submitting a candidate;
(2) Mr El-Debel withdrew himself from a panel, filled out a conflict of interest
form and disclosed: “As I’m aware a
number of the firms have a
principal working for me, I’ve excluded myself from the
committee”;
(3) Mr Vilayur would on occasion give candidates submitted by New Horizons a
lower assessment than other members of the panel, indicating
that he was honest,
fair and impartial in his assessment;
(4) The majority of the candidates initially engaged through New Horizons and
Algoram were re-engaged by the Department after the
appellants and Mr Vilayur
left the Department in June 2020.
appellants submitted that, as the recruitment process was fair and merits-based,
it cannot be said that the appellants intended
to obtain a benefit to which they
would otherwise not be lawfully entitled.
the appellants contended the evidence did not establish any connection between
any money received by either the appellants
or Mr Vilayur, and any act of
misconduct.
the appellants submitted that the prosecution’s submission that
“bai” is exclusively used to refer to Mr
El-Debel should not be
accepted. A proper reading of the use of “bai” (which translates to
“brother” in Hindi)
in the intercepted phone calls is that the term
may refer to multiple people, depending on its context.
judge’s summing up
his summing up, the trial judge directed the jury that they must be satisfied of
the following four elements “and then one
more” beyond reasonable
Firstly, the two accused conspired with each other and Mr Vilayurs. This means
they were intentionally part of an agreement with
each other. The agreement does
not have to be in writing and it does not have to be explicitly stated. The
agreement can be expressed
by words or implied by conduct, but the fact of the
agreement must be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
Secondly, when the accused participated in the agreement they must have had the
intention of dishonestly obtaining a gain from the
Commonwealth. This means that
they intended that New Horizons or Algoram would dishonestly receive money from
the Commonwealth and
they would each receive a share of that money.
Thirdly, the agreement must not have been hypothetical. One or more of the
conspirators must have done something that was part of
the object of the
Fourthly, at least one of the three alleged conspirators must have committed an
overt act pursuant to the agreement. In other words,
one of them must have
carried out a step to further the agreement.
So all of those four things must be proved beyond reasonable doubt, but
there’s one other thing that has to be proved beyond
reasonable doubt.
That is you must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Mr Vilayurs, Mr
Kahlon and Mr El-Debel agreed that pursuant
to the agreement between them, a
portion of the margins received by New Horizons and/ or Algoram would be paid to
Mr El-Debel.
trial judge then expanded upon these directions, first, by explaining the
alleged agreement as follows:
The purpose of the agreement was to influence the procurement system for the
selection of candidates so that the candidates put forward
by New Horizons and
Algoram would be successful.
Once this occurred, according to the Crown, the Department of Finance would pay
the companies for the services of the successful
candidates. The companies would
then pay the candidates their, in effect, wages, leaving a margin which would
remain in the companies.
You must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
there was an agreement to influence the procurement process with the intention
of dishonestly obtaining the margins which would flow from that influence...
trial judge noted that the Crown case concerning the agreement was
circumstantial in nature, and that the prosecution sought to
rely on the
intercepted calls, together with some of the financial documents that had been
tendered to show that each of the accused
“knew what was proposed as the
objective of the agreement and ... intended to carry that objective into
to the element of dishonesty, the trial judge observed that the Crown case was
that “the intention of the agreement was to
dishonestly obtain a gain from
the Department of Finance”, noting that the “gain is the margin that
I’ve referred
to”, and that the Crown contended that “the
dishonesty arose from the fact that the selection committees were influenced,
sometimes even included Mr Vilayur or Mr El-Debel”. His Honour also noted
that the Crown invited the jury to find that “it
was dishonest to hide
from the Department the fact that the margins were being shared between New
Horizons and Algoram when as far
as the Department was concerned these were two
separate companies independently providing separate candidates”. His
then directed the jury that:
... the test for dishonesty has two parts.
First the conduct must be dishonest according to the standards of ordinary
people. So, it’s a matter for you to reach a conclusion
Secondly, you must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the two accused
knew that their conduct was dishonest. That is, that
Mr Kahlon and Mr El-Debel
knew their conduct was dishonest according to the standards of ordinary people.
Now that is, in a way,
like saying you must be satisfied that the accused
neither had nor believed that they had a right to the proceeds paid by the
of Finance, another way of saying the same thing. That they knew it
was dishonest.
trial judge also briefly summarised the appellants’ cases. His Honour
observed that both appellants denied the existence
of any agreement. His Honour
also noted that the appellant had “emphasised that all of the acts of the
accused have explanations
which are not necessarily connected to any
conspiracy” (such as the transfer of funds for legitimate overseas
investments).
trial judge also noted that the appellants had pointed out that the
“actual appointments of the candidates was not, in any
improper”, and that this fact was conceded by the Crown. His Honour
The candidates were qualified for the job and there is no suggestion they did
them other than well. The points is simply, according
to the Crown, that the
candidates ... that were put forward by New Horizons and Algoram were put in a
better position to obtain the
positions than if they had been put forward by
other companies or vendors. You will also remember the eight points made by Mr
and the emphasis placed by Ms Newman, in her build up to the 21 points, on
the need for the Crown to prove that Mr El-Debel was paid
or to be paid pursuant
to the agreement.
You will remember that I said that is something that has to be proved beyond
reasonable doubt. Ms Newman also pointed out the declarations
of interest and
the putting forward of the better candidates regardless of who the vendor was.
She highlighted that when referring
to Algoram that Mr El-Debel never expressed
an ownership of the company. He never, for example, referred to it as ‘our
The accused say how could there be a dishonest conspiracy if the
best candidates were being put forward for the jobs? The Crown says,
implication, if their good candidates were not being put forward, the scheme
would soon fail if the Department realised that candidates
from New Horizons or
Algoram were not much good.
The accused also say, and this, of course, is very fundamental to the whole
case, that the Crown has simply not proved its case against
them beyond
reasonable doubt and I have repeated it so many times, that is where the onus
the course of the summing up, the trial judge also provided the jury with a
written directions document, which described the matters
that must be proved
beyond reasonable doubt as follows:
Although both accused are charged with the same offence, you must consider the
case against each separately. You must only find an
accused guilty of the charge
if you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that:
accused you are considering conspired with the other accused and Gopal Vilayur.
This means that the conspirators were intentionally
party to an agreement with
each other. Such an agreement need not have been attended by any formalities and
could have been expressed
by words or implied by conduct,
the accused you are considering participated in the agreement, he had the
intention of dishonestly obtaining a gain from the
Commonwealth. This means that
he intended that New Horizons or Algoram would dishonestly receive money from
the Commonwealth, and
he would receive a share of that money,
accused you are considering
at least one of the other
conspirators intended to do the thing which was the object of the agreement.
This means that the agreement
was not hypothetical from this accused’s
perspective, because he and at least one of the other conspirators intended to
steps to carry it out,
At least one of the conspirators committed an overt act pursuant to the
agreement. This means that at least one of the conspirators
actually carried out
a step to further the agreement.
Before you can find either accused guilty of the charge, you must also be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Gopal Vilayur, Raminder
Kahlon and Alex
El-Debel agreed that pursuant to the agreement between them, an amount
representing a portion of the share of the
margins received by New Horizons and
Algoram would be paid to Alex El-Debel.
Determination
Ground 1: The
verdict is unreasonable or unable to be supported by the evidence, the trial
judge erred in finding there was no case
to answer or
Applicable principles
principles to be applied in determining an unreasonable verdict ground are
settled. They were succinctly articulated by this Court
Marshall v The
[2023] ACTCA 11
The question is whether an independent examination of the evidence establishes
that it was open to the jury to be satisfied of the
guilt of the appellant
beyond reasonable doubt:
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
– 493 , 494 – 495 (
–[66]. In conducting that examination, regard must be had to the advantage
the jury had in seeing and hearing the witnesses.
Finding that a verdict is
unreasonable requires that the appellate court be satisfied that the jury must,
as opposed to might, have
entertained a reasonable doubt as to the
accused’s guilt:
[2007] HCA 30
(2007) 230 CLR 559
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 94 ALJR 394
The principles were recently summarised in
[2022] HCA 25
(2022) 96 ALJR 728
–[15], accepting that
represents the
correct approach. In applying that test, it was said that the court is to
determine for itself whether the evidence
was sufficient in nature and quality
to eliminate any reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty of the offence. In
answering that
question, the court must take into account that the jury is the
body entrusted with the primary responsibility of determining guilt
innocence, and that it has had the benefit of seeing and hearing the witnesses.
However, it is only where a jury’s advantage
in seeing and hearing the
evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by the appeal court that
the court may conclude that
no relevant miscarriage of justice has occurred. It
is important to remember, as observed in
Hillier v R
[2007] HCA 13
(2007) 228 CLR 618
, that “neither at trial, nor on appeal, is a
circumstantial case to be considered piecemeal”.
undertaking of this “‘independent assessment’ of the
sufficiency and quality of the ‘whole of the evidence’”
within the adversarial process of the appeal:
[2025] HCA 9
at [11]. As the High Court recently emphasised in
[11] – [12]:
... it is for the parties to identify the evidence that the appellate court must
review and assess and the features of that evidence
that support their
respective cases on appeal. The appellate court does not determine the grounds
of appeal by simply reconsidering
the parties' respective cases at the trial....
it is for the parties to identify and address the aspects of the evidence
at the trial that warrant the conclusion that the verdict was either
unreasonable or not.
The particulars of the unreasonable verdict ground of
appellants allege that there were seven core deficiencies in the evidence, by
reference to the following particulars:
(1) The Crown did not establish (or even identify) any “causative
conduct” engaged in by the appellants;
(2) Any gain that was obtained by the appellants was obtained by NHBS or
Algoram, rather than from the Department;
(3) Assuming that any gain was the margin retained by NHBS and Algoram after
paying the relevant contractors, any gain was not caused
by any dishonest
conduct, but rather should be characterised as the payment of money pursuant to
lawful commercial contracts;
(4) The Crown could not demonstrate that the appellants’ actions were
dishonest, because the purpose of the appellants’
actions was to ensure
“the Department [had] the best candidates”, and to avoid “the
consequential losses if sub-standard
resources [were] engaged”;
(5) The Crown failed to demonstrate that the conduct engaged in by the
appellants was dishonest;
(6) The Crown failed to establish the agreement that was alleged;
(7) The Crown failed to establish that any “overt acts” were
committed pursuant to any agreement.
Application
elements of an offence under s 135.4(1) as applied to the present allegations
(1) The accused “conspired” with one or
more other persons (here, the other appellant and Mr El-Debel)), meaning that
the accused intentionally entered into an agreement with those other person(s)
(here, the other appellant and Mr El- Debel);
(2) When the accused conspired with the other conspirators, he had the intention
of obtaining a gain (here, money) from a Commonwealth
entity (here, the
Commonwealth Department of Finance) for himself or another person (here, the
intended gain was by each appellant
and Mr El-Debel);
(3) The obtaining of the intended gain would be dishonest according to the
standards of ordinary people;
(4) The accused knew that the obtaining of the intended gain would be dishonest
according to the standards of ordinary people;
(5) The accused and at least one other conspirator intended to “do the
thing” which was the object of the agreement,
namely to obtain a gain from
the Commonwealth; and
(6) At least one of the conspirators committed an overt act pursuant to the
outlined at [56] – [62] above, the trial judge properly directed the jury
in accordance with these elements. The trial judge
also directed the jury that
they needed to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of an intermediate fact,
namely that the appellants
and Mr Vilayur “agreed that pursuant to
the agreement between them, an amount representing a portion of the share of the
received by New Horizons and Algoram would be paid to Alex
complaint was made by either appellant concerning these directions, either in
the trial, or on the appeal.
summary of the evidence in the Crown case has been set out at
– [48]. This evidence was capable of establishing each of the elements of
the offence as outlined above. It was open to
the jury on the strength of that
evidence to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of each of the elements of the
offence as outlined
, the jury were instructed by the trial judge that the
agreement alleged was between the appellant and Mr Vilayur to “influence
the procurement system for the selection of candidates so that the candidates
put forward by New Horizons and Algoram would be successful”.
appellants submitted that this element could not be satisfied because the Crown
“called no evidence from any witness who
either witnessed El-Debel being
paid any money or witnessed any conversation concerning El-Debel about the
payment of money”.
submission must be rejected. It matters not that there was no evidence adduced
from any person who witnessed the agreement to
engage in the dishonest conduct.
As the jury were properly instructed, an agreement can be implied by conduct.
Evidence that the
appellants and Mr Vilayur had in fact engaged in conduct of
the nature alleged was strong circumstantial evidence that they had an
trial judge also directed the jury that they must be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the appellants and Mr Vilayur “agreed
that pursuant to the
agreement between them, a portion of the share of the margins received by New
Horizons and/or Algoram would
be paid to Alex El-Debel”.
evidence outlined above was amply capable of demonstrating that there was an
agreement in these terms. In particular, in circumstances
where there was
evidence that during intercepted phone calls made between 18 November 2019 and 3
June 2020, Mr Kahlon told Mr Vilayur
that he had given money to
“Alex” or “brother” and where documentary evidence
demonstrated that Mr El-Debel
was at various time directly or indirectly
involved in the procurement process that hired New Horizon and Algoram
candidates, it
was well open to the jury to conclude that references in other
intercepted conversations relating to a “brother’s cut”
“bai’s cut” referred to money that would be received by Mr
El-Debel as part of an agreement to engage in dishonest
Accordingly, particular (5) has no merit.
element of gain
, once the jury were satisfied that the appellants
and Mr Vilayur had entered into an agreement to “influence the procurement
system for the selection of candidates so that the candidates put forward by New
Horizons and Algoram would be successful”,
it followed that the jury would
also be satisfied that the intention of the conspirators was to obtain a gain
from the Commonwealth.
whole point of the agreement was to assist candidates from New Horizons and
Algoram to be selected via a corruption of the recruitment
process. New Horizons
and Algoram were paid by the Commonwealth when one of their candidates was
successfully employed. As Mr Kahlon
and Mr Vilayur were the owners of New
Horizons and Algoram and were entitled to draw down upon the funds of each
any gain by those companies also constituted a gain by
those two individuals, one being the present second appellant, although the
element of dishonesty in those payments came from the portion that was paid to
Mr El-Debel. The jury were further instructed that
they could not find either
appellant guilty unless they were also satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that a
portion of the margins
received by New Horizons and/ or Algoram would be paid to
Mr El-Debel. Accordingly, the element of gain was established for each
appellants contended that there was no intention to obtain a gain from the
Commonwealth because “Mr Kahlon [was] just taking
money out of his company
... [which] may not necessarily be the same money that came from the Department
of Finance relevant to the
agreement”, rendering any such gain “too
remote”. This contention must be rejected. Contrary to the
appellants’
submissions, payment by the Department of Finance was not
remote to the agreement. Such payment was an integral part of the agreement,
which intended that, as a result of the corruption of the recruitment process,
New Horizons and Algoram would obtain contracts that
they otherwise might not
have been awarded. Accordingly, particular (2) must be rejected.
the Crown submitted, the fact that the candidates themselves were not a party to
the conspiracy (so that there was “no impugning
of funds” received
by them) did not mean that the “gain” was limited to the profit
margins of New Horizons and
Algoram. The essence of the offence contrary to s
135.4(1) is the agreement: the intent of the agreement was for candidates of
and/ or New Horizons to be selected through a corrupt process, resulting
in a financial gain to Mr Kahlon and Mr Vilayur via their
companies, and to Mr
El Debel via the ‘secret commission’. Accordingly, the
appellants’ contention that the “gain”
should be characterised
as the “payment of money pursuant to a (valid) contract” (particular
(3)) must also be rejected.
appellants’ contention that the Crown did not demonstrate the element of
gain because the agreement was only to “increase
the chance of their
candidates being selected” must be rejected for similar reasons. Again, as
the essence of the offence is
in the agreement, the offence is forward looking
and focussed on the parties’ intent. The intent of the agreement was that
Algoram and New Horizons candidates would be selected in the recruitment,
resulting in payments to Algoram and New Horizons, and
these payments would
ultimately represent a gain to the appellants and Mr Vilayur. The fact that the
conspirators acknowledged (even
as a part of the agreement) that there was a
prospect that, despite their efforts, their candidates might not be selected
alter the character of the agreement. As Bromwich J observed in oral
argument: “The intention is to obtain a gain, not a certainty
will obtain a gain, but an intention to do so”.
is likewise focussed on the
between the parties. As explained at [20] – [34]
above, it is
the agreement to obtain a gain from the Commonwealth which must be dishonest.
The Crown does not need to prove that there
was an agreement to engage in a
particular act or acts
with a dishonest intention.
evidence in the Crown case was amply capable of demonstrating that the intent to
obtain the gain was dishonest. In particular,
it was well open to the jury to
conclude that the parties’ joint intention to obtain a gain from the
Commonwealth was dishonest
when measured against community standards where the
agreement was that a ‘secret commission’ was to be paid to one of
the conspirators for his role in the corruption of the recruitment process
(noting that the jury were instructed that they could
not find either appellant
guilty unless they were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that each conspirator
agreed that an amount representing
a portion of the share of the margins
received by New Horizons and Algoram would be paid to Mr El-Debel).
mattered not the appellants may
have been motivated to ensure that
qualified candidates were engaged by the Department. Where an agreement is made
for mixed purposes,
the fact that one of the motivations of the agreement is
dishonest may be sufficient to support a conclusion by the tribunal of fact
the entire agreement was dishonest. Each case will turn on its own facts.
the present case, if the intent of the conspirators had
ensure that the best qualified candidates were employed, the element of
dishonesty may not have been satisfied. However,
the jury were entitled to
reject this as a reasonable possibility. In particular, it was well open to the
jury to conclude that there
would be no reason to pay Mr El-Debel a portion of
the margins received if the agreement had only been to ensure that qualified
were engaged by the Department. Accordingly, particulars (4) and (5)
must be rejected.
commission of an overt act
, there was no dispute that Mr Kahlon
and Mr Vilayur (via Algoram and New Horizons) submitted candidates for
recruitment. As the Crown
submitted, this constituted an overt act in
furtherance of the agreement. In these circumstances, the issue raised before
judge as to whether a verbal exchange may constitute an “overt
act” does not arise.
remaining particular (particular (1)) must also be rejected. It was not
incumbent on the Crown to demonstrate that any act or
conduct of the appellants
caused a gain to the appellants. As has been emphasised, the
essence of the s 135.4 offence is in the
to obtain a gain, not
of the gain. It was not necessary for the Crown to
identify, or establish any “causative conduct” on the part of the
appellants. All that was required to demonstrate was that the appellants
to obtain the gain as per the agreement. For the reasons
outlined above, this was amply demonstrated in the present case.
as the appellants’ complaint under particular 1 was in fact a complaint
that the appellants’ agreement was not
of causing the
obtaining of a gain, this complaint should also be rejected. The purpose of the
agreement was to ensure that contractors
from Algoram and New Horizons were
selected. As explained above, the selection of Algoram and New Horizons
candidates would result
in a gain to each of the appellants.
Crown contended that the jury had a “considerable” advantage in
hearing the telephone intercepts. The Crown submitted
that having
“listened to the appellant’s words for many hours ... [t]he
impression which the jury formed of the appellants’
personalities and
speech patterns would have been critical in interpreting the disputed
calls”. In this respect, the Crown
also noted that, on the Crown case, the
appellants “were taking steps to obscure their language and delete
The Crown submitted that any doubt that may be held by this
Court as to the appellants’ guilt would be resolved by the recognition
the jury’s advantage in hearing all of the evidence.
the submissions in reply, the appellants disputed this contention, and submitted
that: “Should there be matters in the audio
that do not appear in the
transcript, the Crown is at liberty to point them out if they are material and
copies of the audio can
be provided to the Court”. The appellants
contended that this Court was in fact in a “better position [to determine
issues in dispute] tha[n] the jury”.
careful consideration of the evidence, we do not hold a reasonable doubt as to
the appellants’ guilt. In these circumstances,
it is not necessary to
consider whether the jury had a relevant advantage in hearing the telephone
intercepts (many of which were
in Hindu). This ground of appeal must be
the alternative, the appellants submitted that the prosecution had failed to
properly particularise its case in opening, closing
or both, and that the
prosecution’s failure to do had meant that the jury’s verdicts were
not open, or alternatively,
amounted to a miscarriage of justice.
the Crown properly accepted, an accused is “entitled to precise
particulars of the persons with whom it is going to be alleged
that he conspired
and as to the specific scope of the conspiracy alleged”:
(1987) 27 A Crim R 438
the opening address, the Crown adequately particularised the conspiracy alleged.
The Crown made clear that the conspiracy was alleged
to be an agreement between
each of the appellants and Mr Vilayur. The Crown explained that the conspiracy
was alleged to be an agreement
to dishonestly influence the procurement system
for the selection of candidates, so that the candidates put forward by New
and Algoram would be successful. The dishonesty alleged was that
“the process of recruitment was from time to time corrupted”
Vilayur and Mr Kahlon “getting together” with Mr El Debel and Mr
Vilayur so as to influence the recruitment of
particular contractors, and that
each of the conspirators would “share in those proceeds in a way which
made their involvement
... dishonest and, therefore, criminal”. The
intended gain was particularised as the “moneys [which] flowed back to the
two companies Algoram and New Horizons” in connection with the recruitment
processes. The Crown was not required to provide
any further particulars.
Accordingly,
this ground of appeal must also be dismissed.
the above reasons, the appeal is dismissed.
I certify that the preceding ninety-four [94] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Court.
Date: 16 July 2025
RTF format (344 KB)
Signed PDF/A format