De Maine v Kizmann [2025] ACTCA 26 (25 July 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
De Maine v Kizmann
[2025] ACTCA 26
Hearing Date:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL FROM THE SUPREME COURT – Application for
leave to appeal out of time – where basis of delay is a mistaken
that $1,000,000 is to be paid to the court to hear the appeal – delay
adequately explained – where appellant was
not cross-examined at hearing
– where appellant believes outcome of hearing would have been different
had he been cross-examined
– no fresh evidence to be adduced –
forensic decision not to be manipulated to permit a re-hearing – appeal
Legislation Cited:
Supreme Court Act 1933
Cases Cited:
Aulich Civil Law Pty Ltd v Pappas
[2022] ACTSC 345
Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT)
[2015] ACTCA 15
Kizmann v De
Maine (No 2
[2024] ACTSC 139
Kizmann v De Maine (No 3)
Gregory John De Maine (Appellant)
Ivan Gerad Kizmann (Respondent)
Representation:
Self-represented (Appellant)
S Baker-Goldsmith (Respondent)
Self-represented (Appellant)
Legal on London (Respondent)
File Number:
AC 1 of 2025
Introduction:
1. I am sitting in this matter as a single
judge constituting the Court of Appeal pursuant to
Supreme Court
. The application before me is for leave to appeal out of time from
a final judgement. The application was filed on 20 February 2025.
2. The decision which the applicant wishes
to appeal is
Kizmann v De Maine (No 2
[2024] ACTSC 139.
It is a decision
of the Chief Justice.
3. The application was filed on
20 February 2025 together with a draft notice of appeal. The notice of appeal
should have been filed
by 6 June 2024. Accordingly it is about eight months
late. This is a significant period.
application is supported by an affidavit of Mr Gregory De Maine (the applicant)
dated 20 February 2025. There is also another
document dated 20 February 2025
addressed to the Chief Justice in which the applicant provides a commentary on
assorted paragraphs
in the judgment.
applicant is self-represented so that it is necessary to give him some leeway
but not so much as to unfairly prejudice the
respondent.
6. The respondent has pointed out the
many court rules that the applicant has either contravened, or failed to obey,
in the drafting
of his application and supporting documents. I think the leeway
that I have mentioned above enables me to allow him to present his
application
in the way he has prepared it. Obviously if he were to obtain leave he would
need to, at the very least, amend his notice
7. I note that the hearing was completed
within one day and the applicant was represented by counsel and solicitors. Each
filed affidavit evidence, but only the respondent was
cross-examined.
8. In her reasons on costs
Kizmann v De Maine (No 3)
[2024] ACTSC 171)
the Chief Justice summarised
the dispute between the parties:
1․ In these proceedings, Mr Ivan Kizmann sought to enforce loans made
through negotiation with a longstanding friend, Mr Gregory
Maine. The single issue in the proceedings by the time it was heard
by me was whether the loans were made to Mr De Maine personally
or instead to
his now defunct company, Shostko Systems Pty Ltd.
2․ In a judgment published on 9 May 2024, I found in favour of Mr Kizmann
against Mr De Maine personally; see
Kizmann v De Maine
[2024] ACTSC 139.
I ordered that the first defendant pay the
plaintiff's costs. However, upon being informed that there was an
application by the
plaintiff for a different order as to costs, I stood the
matter over to today for determination of that application.
Aulich Civil Law Pty Ltd v Pappas
[2022] ACTSC 345
Mossop J confirmed the application of the principles stated by
Refshauge J in
Kelly v Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT)
[2015] ACTCA
to civil matters. Mossop J summarised the principles at [16]:
limits are important and must prima facie be obeyed.
application to extend time should only be granted if, having regard to the
important value of finality in litigation and the need
for timeliness to be
respected, it is proper to do so.
mere absence of prejudice is not enough to justify an extension of time.
merits of the appeal must be taken into account in deciding whether to extend
application should be determined by the court’s view of the demands of
justice in accordance with a broader judicial discretion
and not by the
application of a verbal formula.
court should determine whether if leave is refused there would be a miscarriage
of justice.
10. I think these six considerations can
be further refined to the following:
limits have a purpose; there must be an explanation for the
• The merits of the appeal must be taken
into account.
• A miscarriage of justice would
arise if leave was refused.
11. In his affidavit, the
applicant concentrates on asserting that the respondent was personally involved
in the financial woes suffered
by the applicant, that the respondent was a
“liar” and there is “critical information” that was not
during the hearing.
12. As to the reasons
for delay the applicant states:
I could not Appeal because I did not have over a $1M to lodge with the
An Appeal opportunity was never really available to me Your Honour, which is
why I am reaching out to you now. I am sorry Your Honour
but there is no other
avenue that I know for me to take to get the truth to you.
At what opportunity do you get to Appeal if you don’t have a lazy $1M
laying around...Appeal out of time?”
13. During the hearing I asked the applicant what he
meant by the above reason. He said he had come to the conclusion that in order
to appeal he needed to pay $1 million into court. This arose from an email he
had received from his counsel on 21 May 2024. The email
“If you were to appeal in your current circumstances I would anticipate an
application for security for costs in circumstances
judgement including costs against your will exude $1,000,000
is documentary evidence authored by you indicating an incapacity to pay
prospects of success of the appeal likely to poor”
14. I assume, in fact hope, the
grammatical errors in the email as just recorded, have come about in their
recording and were not
present in the original email. I also note that the
applicant used the word “counsel” to refer to his lawyers generally.
Whatever the case, the email does not say there must be a payment of $1 million.
It says no more than that an application for security
for costs could be
anticipated. Security for costs, if ordered, would never equal, or come close
to, the verdict sum. The likely
security would be referable to costs and not to
the verdict.
15. The applicant did however read out
an email, or a letter, dated 15 May 2024 in which his solicitor is told in
unequivocal terms
that he wished to appeal. This probably prompted the above
email of 21 May 2024 which was misinterpreted by the applicant so that
thought he needed to pay $1 million into court. On this background I think there
is an explanation for the delay, notwithstanding
that it is derived from an
erroneous reading of the 21 May 2024 email.
draft notice of appeal is not particularly helpful in establishing even a
foundation upon which merits of the appeal might
be identified. The notice
“The grounds for the Appeal are to bring to the Judges attention that the
Complainant deliberately lied under oath to pervert
the Courts judgement of the
case against me the Defendant.”
17. Like the affidavit, the grounds seem to
concentrate on asserting the dishonesty of the respondent. The orders sought in
“(a) Once Her Honour is satisfied that the Judgement against me was made
on false information, I ask for the matter to be thrown
out of court...or
(b) There being a new Hearing at the
Supreme Court ACT
to rehear the Case with,
this time, me the Appellant (Defendant, Gregory De Maine) being allowed to stand
in the dock and defend
himself against these false allegations.”
18. Returning to the affidavit the suggestion seems
to be that there will be a “submission of further critical information not
presented during the Court Hearing that supports my case that debunks the
fabricated statements made by the plaintiff on the 10
2023.” 10 July 2023 is the day when the matter was
19. The affidavit then goes on to give an
explanation of the “Main Points”. There is a commentary on various
matters that arose during the case. The explanations are supplemented
by the letter I referred to above which has a more extensive
commentary related
to various paragraphs in the decision.
20. Because of
the unhelpful documentary material, and I do not mean to be critical of the
applicant, I asked the applicant to tell
me in the hearing what his complaint
actually was. He responded that he had assumed that he would have been called to
give evidence,
by one side or the other, so that he would be given an
opportunity to rebut the “lies” that had been given in evidence
the respondent.
21. As stated above, the applicant
had not given evidence in chief, or been cross-examined, during the primary
hearing. He was not
required for cross-examination so that one would normally
assume his affidavit evidence, which was before the court, was not challenged.
Her Honour dealt with this point, at [14]:
The evidence was given by affidavit. Mr Kizmann’s primary
affidavit was sworn on 15 July 2022. He also swore an affidavit
reply dated 23 November 2022. He was cross-examined at the
hearing. Mr De Maine swore an affidavit dated 18 October 2022. Mr
Maine did not attempt to reproduce the relevant conversations in direct speech
and much of the content of his affidavit was ruled
inadmissible. In
written submissions provided before the hearing, he foreshadowed giving oral
evidence in addition to his affidavit
evidence. However, that course
was not pursued at the hearing and he was not required for
cross-examination. His case rested principally
on the existence of
the signed written agreement and the contention that “the later advances
were all on the same basis”.
22. In addition I think it is important to quote
from the transcript of the proceedings where the applicant’s affidavit and
his giving evidence were discussed:
HER HONOUR: Well, we can have that debate. What about things that Mr Kizmann
says Mr De Maine said that he hasn't addressed in his
affidavit? Do you abandon
those parts of your evidence?
MR CONNELL: No, Mr De Maine has not addressed our affidavits. It's a classic
...(inaudible)... situation. He's had the opportunity.
There was an order of the
court by the Registrar for exchange of affidavits.
HER HONOUR: I'm talking about things that came out of Mr Kizmann’s mouth
just now in his evidence, such as the statement about
the reason the contract
was in the name of the company.
MR CONNELL: Your Honour, I'm not obliged to adduce evidence.
HER HONOUR: I don't want to have an argument with you, Mr Connell. I just want
to make sure that - - -
MR CONNELL: Sorry, your Honour, I'm not trying to argue. I'm just trying to put
a proposition.
HER HONOUR: Yes. No, we'll deal with it in submissions. I just want to make sure
that I'm understanding correctly that we're at the
point of a deliberate
forensic choice being made not to cross-examine Mr De Maine. And I think you're
making that clear.
MR CONNELL: We are, your Honour. It's an issue I anticipated in my written
submissions, which I understand your Honour's just glanced
on. We say it's a
classic ...(inaudible)... situation. The defendant did not traverse in any
meaningful way the statement of the
pleadings of the plaintiff. He did not
traverse in any way the plaintiff's evidence when he had the opportunity to
adduce an affidavit.
He's left with effectively no evidence to contradict Mr
Kizmann's version of events. There's nothing to cross-examine on.
HER HONOUR: The first sentence might be correct without the second sentence
being correct, that's my concern. But you made your position
clear. We'll deal
with it in submissions.
23. I asked the applicant if there had been any
discussion between him and his lawyers about whether or not he would give oral
I understood him to say there had been discussion but he had relied on
the “instructions of counsel” who he thought had
made an assumption
that he would win the case.
24. In oral submissions,
the applicant said the fresh evidence was “the truth”. Obviously,
that is not fresh evidence
in the sense of evidence that is relevant but has
emerged, or been discovered, since the
25. In addition, the commentary, as
described by the applicant, is a series of explanations. It is not an analysis
or identification
of error on her Honour’s part. On one understanding of
the applicant’s complaints, he does not challenge her Honour’s
findings, but rather says that they would have been different had she had the
benefit of his own oral evidence.
26. In his Reply
submissions the applicant makes allegations against the counsel that represented
him at the hearing. He says:
“Unfortunately, my Counsel did not consult with me on the validity of the
statements made by the Plaintiff. Such an opportunity
would have allowed me to
be cross-examined by my own Counsel, which would have, at the very least,
allowed me to correct the blatantly
false statements made by the
Plaintiff.”
27. The applicant’s counsel would not have
been allowed to cross examine his own client. If the applicant is suggesting
incompetence
on the part of his lawyers, the type of conduct of a lawyer which
might give rise to an injustice is far from present in this matter.
There would
need to have been, at least, some evidence of gross
incompetence.
28. Further, the overwhelming
impression that I have of the manner in which the hearing was conducted is that
forensic decisions were
taken, on advice and after discussion, which cannot now
be effectively manipulated to permit a new case to be run. The applicant
well be disappointed with his lawyers but he has not provided any evidence that
would lead me to a conclusion that they had acted
without discussing the manner
in which the case was to be heard with him, in particular concerning his giving
evidence, and there
is no suggestion that his lawyers acted contrary to his
instructions.
29. The applicant, even graciously
stated in his oral submissions that “it’s not that they did the
wrong thing”
and then he said they simply made the wrong assumption about
how the case would end.
30. In his final oral
submissions, the applicant stressed that had he been given the opportunity to
challenge the respondents “lies”
the result would have been
different. As I hope I have explained, his argument does not rely on fresh
evidence and does not amount
to an allegation of such bad conduct on the part of
his lawyers that a different result might have emerged had they followed his
instructions.
31. Finally, I note that although the
hearing was on 10 July 2023, the decision date is 9 May 2024. This means the
applicant had 10
months to apply to make further submissions or call fresh
evidence. He did not do so.
32. I can well
understand that a person who receives a judgement against him for over $850,000
will be aggrieved and anxious to right
a perceived wrong. The commentary
however does not provide grounds of appeal. If it is supposed to represent
evidence that was not
put forward at the hearing, there is no identification of
any evidence that was not available at the hearing.
33. While I sympathise with the applicant, because
I think he genuinely believes he was not given an opportunity to present his
nevertheless the application must fail. The delay is just adequately
explained, but there is no identifiable merit in the appeal
and there is no
miscarriage of justice that would arise if the application is refused. The fact
that the applicant will now be faced
with having to pay a large sum of money is
not a miscarriage of justice; it is a consequence of a well-reasoned judgment
him based on the evidence that was before the
34. I make the following
(1) The application for leave to appeal out
of time is dismissed.
(2) The applicant is to pay
the respondent’s costs of the application.
I certify that the preceding thirty-four [34]
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of his Honour
Justice Elkaim.
RTF format (208 KB)
Signed PDF/A format