Canberra Aero Club and Federal Airports Corporation [1998] ACTTT 17 (11 June 1998)
IN THE TENANCY TRIBUNAL )
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY ) No: TT 102 of 1997
In the matter of:
CANBERRA AERO CLUB
(applicant)
FEDERAL AIRPORTS CORPORATION
(respondent
DECISION OF PRESIDENT BURNS RELATING TO THE QUESTION OF THE
DELIVERED ON 11 JUNE 1998
The applicants, Canberra Aero Club, by a Notice of Dispute dated 2 February
1997 notified the Registrar of the Tenancy Tribunal
of a dispute with the
respondent, the Federal Airports Corporation. The applicant was the tenant of
the respondent. The premises
the subject of the dispute are Site 283, Canberra
Airport. The particulars of the dispute as outlined by the applicant are as
"[The applicant] entered into a written lease commencing 16 June 1966 with the
respondent. On or about 22 December 1986 the tenancy
became a monthly tenancy
incorporating terms including that the [respondent] would give the [applicant]
adequate time after termination
of the lease to remove [the applicant's]
building, fixtures and fittings.
[The respondent] terminated the monthly tenancy by notice expiring on 31 July
[The applicant] entered discussions/negotiations with [the respondent] on a
number of matters, including being reimbursed for the
market value of the
applicant's on site improvements.............
The [respondent] made representations on which the [applicant] relied, that it
would provide compensation for its improvements."
The applicant alleges that the respondent resiled from its representations in
failing to allow the applicant adequate time to remove
its building, fixtures
and fittings and in failing to provide compensation for the improvements which
the applicant had made to the
premises. As a result, the applicant claims it
lost opportunity and business income. The applicant alleges that the conduct of
respondent in that regard was harsh and oppressive. The applicant submits
that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to deal with this dispute
pursuant to
paragraphs 6(1)(b) and 6(1)(g) of the
Tenancy Tribunal Act
The respondent submits that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear the
dispute, as a result, inter alia, of sections 27 and 28
Capital Territory (Self Government) Act
1988 ("the Self Government
The respondent has other grounds upon which it denies that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear this dispute but they require the
Tribunal to
receive evidence in order to determine them. The parties accepted that the
present objections to jurisdiction could
conveniently be dealt with separately
to the remainder of the grounds, which could await further hearing if
The parties were notified by the Registrar of the Tenancy Tribunal by a letter
dated 24 March 1997 that submissions as to the ability
of the Tribunal to deal
with the matter under section 13 of the
Tenancy Tribunal Act
be required. Written submissions were filed by the respondent on 24 April 1997
and by the applicant on 16 May 1997.
Due to the complexity of the issues
relating to jurisdiction the Registrar decided, pursuant to section 15(1) of
Tenancy Tribunal Act
1994 to refer the matter to the Tribunal to
determine the issue of jurisdiction. The parties were notified of this
decision by letter
dated 19 May 1997.
Notices under
section 78B
Judiciary Act
were served on the
Commonwealth, State and Territory Attorneys-General. Surprisingly, the
Australian Capital Territory Attorney-General
declined to make any submissions
on the ambit or effect of section 27 of the
Self Government Act.
Further written submissions were filed by the applicant and respondent with
respect to sections 27 and 28 of the
Self Government Act
submissions were orally addressed on 22 December 1997. The Commonwealth and
ACT Attorneys-General declined to make any submissions
to the Tribunal on the
interpretation of s 27.
A first draft of this decision was completed by early February 1998. However,
in completing that draft the issue arose as to whether
the relationship between
Judiciary Act
and s 27 of the
Self Government
could illuminate the meaning of the latter provision, albeit that
Judiciary Act
has no direct application to the present
proceedings. The Tribunal therefore directed the Registrar of the Tribunal to
the ACT Attorney General to again request submissions from the
Territory on the interpretation of s 27 of the
Self Government Act.
forwarding of this letter was delayed by the ACT elections until 31 March 1998.
The ACT Government Solicitor provided written
submissions on 21 May 1998 which
merely pointed out that
Judiciary Act
did not apply to
this dispute, and unfortunately did not address the interpretation of s 27 of
Self Government Act.
The Tribunal is thus called upon to consider a provision of the
Government Act
of potentially considerable significance to the Territory
and its citizens with no guidance or assistance from the Government of
The respondent submits that this Tribunal has no jurisdiction to deal with this
dispute, and relies in that regard upon the provisions
of sections 27 and 28 of
Australian Capital Territory (Self Government) Act
1988 ("the Self
Government Act"). These sections provide:
"s 27 Except as provided by the regulations, an enactment does not bind the
Crown in right of the Commonwealth."
"s 28 (1) A provision of an enactment has no effect to the extent that it is
inconsistent with a law defined by subsection (2),
but such a provision shall
be taken to be consistent with such a law to the extent that it is capable of
operating concurrently with
(2) In this section:
(a) a law in force in the Territory (other than an enactment or a
subordinate law); or
(b) an award, order or determination, or any other instrument of a
legislative character, made under a law falling
within paragraph (a)."
"Enactment" is defined in section 3 of the
Self Government Act
alia, ".. a law (however described or entitled) made by the Assembly under this
It is common ground that the
Tenancy Tribunal Act
1994 is an "enactment"
as defined in section 3 of the
Self Government Act
. It is also common
ground that the
Tenancy Tribunal Act
1994 has not been prescribed by
regulation as an enactment that binds the Crown in the right of the
Commonwealth.
The respondent contends that it enjoys the privileges and immunities of the
Crown in the right of the Commonwealth, and as such
the provisions of the
Tenancy Tribunal Act
1994 do not apply to give this Tribunal
DOES THE FEDERAL AIRPORTS CORPORATION ENJOY THE PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES
OF THE CROWN IN THE RIGHT OF THE COMMONWEALTH?
This question has already been judicially determined. In
Ventana Pty
Federal Airports Corporation & Ors
(1997) 147 ALR 200
J sitting as the Federal Court determined that the Federal Airports Corporation
was entitled to the immunities of the Crown
in the right of the
Commonwealth.
Whilst it may be argued that this Tribunal is not strictly bound by the rules
of precedent that govern the operation of the Courts,
as a question of policy
relevant decisions of Superior Courts should be treated as determining the
relevant issue.
This is particularly so in the instant case, as an appeal lies from this
Tribunal to the ACT Supreme Court, which would be bound
by the Federal Court
decision in
For this reason the Tribunal accepts that the Federal Airports Corporation
enjoys the privileges and immunities of the Crown in
the right of the
Commonwealth.
SUBMISSIONS WITH RESPECT TO S 27 SELF GOVERNMENT ACT
The respondent submitted that the effect of s 27 of the
Self Government
was to deny to this Tribunal the jurisdiction to hear this dispute.
Were it not for the existence of s 27 of the
Self Government Act
legal issue of the jurisdiction of this Tribunal would have been elucidated by
the decision of the High Court in
Re Residential Tenancies Tribunal of New
South Wales & Ors; Ex Parte Defence Housing Authority
(1997) 146 ALR
495 ("the Defence Housing Case"). It is convenient to examine the principles
examined in that case.
In the Defence Housing Case the High Court considered whether the
Residential Tenancies Act
applied to premises leased to the
Defence Housing Authority. The majority of the High Court (Brennan CJ, Dawson,
Toohey and Gaudron
JJ), relying upon
Commonwealth
Cigamatic Pty Ltd
[1962] HCA 40
(1962) 108 CLR 372
, drew a distinction between the "...
capacities and functions of the Crown in the right of the Commonwealth and the
transactions
in which that Crown may choose to engage in exercise of its
capacities and functions." (per Brennan CJ at p 497). The Chief Justice
further stated:
"By `capacities and functions' I mean the rights, powers, privileges and
immunities which are collectively described as the `executive
power of the
Commonwealth' in s 61 of the Constitution." (at p 497).
Section 61 of the Constitution provides:
"The executive power of the Commonwealth is vested in the Queen and is
exercisable by the Governor-General as the Queen's representative,
and extends
to the execution and maintenance of this Constitution, and of the laws of the
Commonwealth."
The position of the States with respect to the ability to bind the Crown in
the right of the Commonwealth in the exercise of its
capacities or functions is
clear. In a joint judgment Justices Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron said:
it was held that a State legislature had no power to
impair the capacities of the Commonwealth Executive, but at the same time it
was recognised that the Commonwealth may be regulated by State laws of general
application in those activities it carried on in common
with other citizens."
(at pages 508-509)
The respondent submits that when s 27 of the
Self Government Act
provides that an ACT enactment does not "bind the Crown" it is intended that
such an enactment will not bind the Crown whether in
the exercise of its
functions or capacities, or in the transactions in which the Crown chooses to
engage in the exercise of those
functions or capacities. The applicant submits
that s 27 of the
Self Government Act
is only intended to preclude ACT
enactments "binding the Crown" in the former of those two senses, so that the
Commonwealth Crown
would be subject to Territory enactments of general
application when engaging in ordinary transactions.
The language of some earlier cases was such as to suggest that an enactment
only sought to "bind" the Crown if it sought to modify
what Brennan CJ referred
to as the functions and capacities of the Crown. Enactments that affected the
Crown in the wider sense
of regulating the transactions in which the Crown
chose to engage in the exercise of its functions and capacities were referred
as "affecting" the Crown: see
Commonwealth
It is difficult to see any real distinction in those concepts. As
Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ said in the Defence Housing case:
"But it is impossible to say what is meant by "affected by State laws" if it
does not mean that the Crown in the right of the Commonwealth
is bound by
them." (at p.515)
Thus whilst a State has no power to bind the Crown in the right of the
Commonwealth in the exercise of its capacities and functions,
the Commonwealth
Crown may be bound by State laws of general application regulating transactions
into which the Commonwealth Crown
may choose to enter.
For the applicant's submission on s 27 to be correct, it follows that there
must be some circumstance in which it was envisaged
by the Commonwealth
Parliament that the enactment of the Australian Capital Territory
bind the Crown in the right of the Commonwealth in the exercise of its
capacities and functions. Otherwise the provision is otiose,
which should not
lightly be inferred of a provision of an Act of Parliament.
Little assistance in the interpretation of s 27 of the
Self Government
can be gleaned from the Explanatory Memorandum of the
Government Act
. In common with virtually all Explanatory Memoranda of
Commonwealth Acts since the passing of the provisions of s 15 AB of the
Interpretation Act
the Explanatory Memorandum of the
Government Act
merely paraphrases section 27 of the Act.
I have also referred to the Second Reading speech of the then Minister for the
Arts and Territories in the House of Representatives
on 19 October 1988.
Slightly more assistance is available from this document. The Minister
frequently emphasises the fact that the
Territory is the national capital and
the seat of government. With respect to Part III of the
Self Government
the Minister said:
"The Assembly will have the power to make laws for the peace, order and good
government of the Territory. Most ordinance law in
place in the Territory will
become Assembly law on the commencing day. The Governor General will, as
occurs in the Northern Territory,
have the power to disallow any Assembly law
within six months of the law being made. Commonwealth law will prevail over
law. Protections such as these are essential in the national
The reference to Commonwealth law prevailing over Assembly law is very likely a
reference to the provisions of s 28 of the
Self Government Act
than to s 27, but the Minister's statements reflect an attitude that the
position of the Territory as the national capital
was a significant
consideration for the Parliament. This lends some slight support to the
respondent's submission in that it may
explain why the Parliament in enacting s
27 (if one accepts the respondent's submissions as to the interpretation of
this section)
was placing the Territory in a different position to the States
and the Northern Territory (there being no equivalent to s 27 of
Government Act
to be found in the
Northern Territory (Self Government)
It is axiomatic that no other body politic within the Commonwealth may modify
the executive power of the Commonwealth: see
Re Residential Tenancies
Tribunal of New South Wales & Ors; Ex Parte Defence Housing Authority
(1997) 146 ALR 495 at pp 497-498 per Brennan CJ. As their Honours Dawson,
Toohey and Gaudron JJ said in that case:
"The States ... do not have specific legislative powers which might be
construed as authorising them to restrict or modify the
executive capacities of
the Commonwealth. The legislative power of the States is an undefined residue
which, containing no such
authorisation, cannot be construed as extending to
the executive capacities of the Commonwealth. No implication limiting or
giving power is needed; the character of the Commonwealth as a body
politic, armed with executive capacities by the Constitution
by its very nature
places those capacities outside the legislative power of another body politic,
namely a State, without specific
powers in that respect." (at page 509)
As noted above the position with respect to State legislation binding the Crown
in the right of the Commonwealth in the exercise
of its capacities and
functions is clear. If the Territory is to have such a power, which is not
enjoyed by the States, it must
arise from the fact that the Territory is a
territory, and not a State. Logically, the only manner in which it could be
that the Territory as a territory could differ from the States in its
ability to pass laws binding the Crown in the right of the
Commonwealth in the
exercise of its capacities and functions, is if the Territory is exercising the
same legislative power as the
Commonwealth. In other words, the Territory must
be exercising delegated Commonwealth legislative power.
THE NATURE OF SELF GOVERNMENT IN THE ACT
The question of the nature of the ACT's legislative power has also been
considered by the High Court. In
Capital Duplicators Pty Ltd
Australian Capital Territory
[1992] HCA 51
(1992) 177 CLR 248
the majority (Brennan,
Dean and Toohey JJ with whom Gaudron J agreed) with reference to s 22 of the
Self Government Act
"(ACT) Enactments are made under a power to make laws "for the peace, order and
good government" of the Australian Capital Territory.
Such a power has been
recognised as a plenary power...The terms in which s 22 confers power on the
Legislative Assembly show - to
adopt the language of
. (1885) 10 App. Cases at p 289 - that the Parliament did not
intend the Legislative Assembly to exercise its powers "in any sense
or delegate of the ... Parliament, but... intended (the Legislative Assembly)
to have plenary powers of legislation as
large, and of the same nature, as
those of Parliament itself." (at page 281)
Their Honours continue:
"The Legislative Assembly of the Australian Capital Territory has been erected
to exercise not the Parliament's powers, but its
own, being powers of the same
nature as those vested in the Parliament." (at page 282)
At page 283 their Honours conclude:
"The question is not whether the Parliament has abdicated its legislative
powers: it cannot abdicate and it has not abdicated
its powers under s 122 of
the Constitution. Nor is the problem whether Parliament could delegate its
legislative powers: it can,
but it has not done so. The question is whether
Parliament has purported to create a legislature with its own legislative
concurrent with, and of the same nature as, the powers of the
Parliament: that is what the Parliament has done, and what it has
done is of a
radically different constitutional character form either abdication or
delegation."
The legislative power of the ACT Legislative Assembly is not a delegated
Commonwealth power. The Commonwealth Parliament has created
a new body politic
(see s 5 of the
Self Government Act
) with legislative powers concurrent
with, and of the same nature as, the powers of the Parliament. It must follow
that the Legislative
Assembly of the ACT, similar to State legislatures, has no
power to bind the Crown in the right of the Commonwealth in the exercise
functions and capacities by enactment.
JUDICIARY ACT 1903
The applicant submitted that in the event that the respondent was found to be
entitled to the privilege and immunities of the Crown
in the right of the
Commonwealth,
Judiciary Act
(Commonwealth)
operates to make the respondent subject to the provisions of the
Tribunal Act
Section 64 provides:
"In any suit in which the Commonwealth or a State is a party, the rights of
the parties shall as nearly as possible be the same,
and judgement may be given
and costs awarded on either side, as in a suit between subject and subject."
The term "suit" "includes any action or original proceedings between parties":
Judiciary Act
. It is arguable that a dispute between parties
in the Tenancy Tribunal is a "suit" as defined. But
Judiciary Act
only applies to proceedings in a Court exercising federal
Re Residential Tenancies Tribunal of New South Wales
& Ors; Ex Parte Defence Housing Authority
(1997) 146 ALR 495, at pp
515-516 (Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ), 525-6 (McHugh J), 536 (Gummow J) and
566-7 (Kirby J). See also
China Ocean Shipping Co.
[1979] HCA 57
(1979) 145 CLR 172
at pp 223-4. Leaving aside the issue whether
the Tenancy Tribunal is a "Court" for this purpose, it is unarguable that the
Tribunal does not exercise federal jurisdiction.
In order to elucidate which of the two possible interpretations of s 27 of the
Self Government Act
was that which was intended by the Parliament, it is
legitimate to examine the repercussions of the different alternatives. A
of some concern in that regard was the submission by the respondent that
s 27 of the
Self Government Act
impliedly repeals
Judiciary Act 1903
to the extent that
would otherwise apply the
provisions of ACT enactments to entities such as the respondent that are
within the shield of the Crown
in the right of the Commonwealth.
For the reasons I have given it is unnecessary to determine finally whether s
Self Government Act
would have any such effect in proceedings
before a Court exercising federal jurisdiction. But it appears unlikely that
consequence is inevitable if one accepts the interpretation of s 27 of
Self Government Act
urged by the respondent. Both s 27 of the
Self Government Act
Judiciary Act
can be given
effect. There will be many suits in which the Commonwealth is a party brought
before Courts exercising federal jurisdiction
in the Territory in which the
executive capacities of the Commonwealth are not sought to be bound in either
sense referred to. However,
as I have said, the exact relationship between s
Government Act
does not require definition in these proceedings.
COMMONWEALTH PLACES (APPLICATION OF LAWS) ACT 1970
Commonwealth Places (Application of Laws) Act
defines "Commonwealth place" to mean:
" a place (not being the seat of government) with respect to which the
Parliament, by virtue of section 52 of the Constitution
has, subject to the
Constitution, exclusive powers to make laws for the peace, order and good
government of the Commonwealth."
Section 4(1) of the Act provides:
" The provision of the laws of a State as in force at a time (whether before
or after the commencement of this Act) apply, or shall
be deemed to have
applied, in accordance with their tenor, at that time and in relation to each
place in that State that is or was
a Commonwealth place at that time."
As Toohey J observed in
[1994] HCA 62
(1994) 181 CLR 548
p 569: "Section 4 applies only to the laws of a state; it has nothing to say as
to the laws of a Territory."
Commonwealth Places (Application of Laws) Act
therefore cannot
assist the applicant's case.
SECTION 27: CONCLUSION
The proposition that the executive power of the Commonwealth under section 61
of the Constitution can only be exercised by the Commonwealth
and is beyond the
reach of any other body politic within the Federation is so fundamental that it
is impossible to believe that the
Commonwealth Parliament felt it necessary to
restate this principle, and nothing more, in enacting s 27 of the
Government Act
It follows from this proposition that it is inherently unlikely that the
Commonwealth Parliament would enact a provision (s 27
Self Government
) to prohibit the ACT Legislative Assembly from doing something it never
had the power to do.
Inevitably, the Tribunal concludes that s 27 of the
Self Government Act
is not intended to merely provide that ACT enactments are not to bind the
Commonwealth Crown in the exercise of its functions and
capacities unless such
an enactment is specified by Regulation. It is the clear intention of s 27
that ACT enactments are not to
bind the Commonwealth Crown in any capacity,
including regulating ordinary transactions into which the Crown may choose to
unless the enactment is specified by regulation.
Accordingly, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear the dispute between the
applicant and the respondent.
SECTION 28: SELF GOVERNMENT ACT
In view of my decision with respect to s 27 of the
Self Government Act
it is strictly unnecessary for me to consider whether s 28 of the
Government Act
applies to deprive the Tribunal of jurisdiction to hear this
dispute. However, it is desirable to deal with the issue, if only to
issues to be ventilated on appeal, if such should eventuate.
The respondent in its submissions referred to the provisions of the
Airports Corporation Act
. The respondent submitted that the land in
Federal Airports was a major Commonwealth asset. The respondent submitted it
is in nature
of airports that competing land uses must be planned and
coordinated and the
Federal Airports Corporation Act
confers that
function on the Federal Airports Corporation. It was submitted that the
Federal Airports Corporation Act
provides a detailed scheme for the
management and coordination of planning of airports including conferring on the
corporation a
power to make by-laws. It was the submission of the respondent
Federal Airports Corporation Act
covers the field of decision
making about how the land within Federal Airports should be used and who should
be granted leases over
land within those airports and leaves no room for the
subjection of land use decisions to discretionary orders under the
Tribunal Act
. The applicant, supported by the ACT Attorney-General,
submitted that s 28 of the
Self Government Act
did not deprive the
Tribunal of jurisdiction to hear this dispute. The interpretation of s 28 of
the Self Government Act has been
the subject of a decision in the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal in the matter of
Peter John Jacob
Discrimination Commissioner and Attorney General
, a decision of 9 August
1996. In that matter President Curtis sitting as the ACT AAT stated: "the
effect of this section is that
a law of the Territory is inconsistent with a
law of the Commonwealth only to the extent to which the two laws are not able
concurrently.... This clearly represents an intention by the
Commonwealth Parliament that the "covering the field test" should not
between the Commonwealth and Territory law."
As President Curtis stated in that decision it is only at the point of direct
inconsistency where Commonwealth law and Territory
law deal with the same
subject matter and it is not possible to comply with both laws that the
Commonwealth law prevails over the
Territory law.
Some assistance is gained by referring to a similar provision being
Trade Practices Act
. This provides:
"Except as provided by subsection (2), this part is not intended to exclude or
limit the concurrent operation of any law of a State
or Territory."
Queen v Credit Tribunal Ex Parte GMAC
[1977] HCA 34
(1977) 137 CLR 545
Honour Justice Murphy in considering this section stated:
"Section 75 of the Act expresses the intent that state laws on the subject
dealt with in "Part V - Consumer Protection" are not
to be precluded except
where they directly collide with the provisions of the Act. As there is no
direct collision .... there is
no inconsistency." (In that regard see also the
decision of Gummow J in
Grace Brothers
Magistrates, Local Court of
(1988) 84 ALR 492.)
The covering the field test does not apply to s 28 of the
Self Government
. There is nothing in the
Federal Airports Corporation Act
is directly inconsistent with the provisions of the
Tenancy Tribunal
. There is no point at which it is not possible to comply with both
laws. Therefore I am satisfied that s 28 of the
Self Government Act
does not preclude the Tribunal from dealing with the dispute.
Section 28 of the
Self Government Act
does not preclude the Tribunal
from hearing this dispute. However, section 27 of the
Self Government
does operate to deny jurisdiction to the Tribunal to hear the dispute.
The applicant is therefore required to bring any claim it
may have against the
respondent before the ordinary Courts of the Territory.
RTF format (37.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format