BATES v CONSTRUCTION OCCUPATIONS REGISTRAR (Occupational Discipline) [2025] ACAT 64 (26 September 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
BATES v CONSTRUCTION OCCUPATIONS
REGISTRAR (Occupational Discipline)
[2025] ACAT 64
Catchwords: OCCUPATIONAL DISCIPLINE – Construction Occupations
– Reviewable decisions – Tribunal’s jurisdiction to review
decision of respondent to disqualify applicant from holding
a licence after
applicant incurred 15 or more demerit points – Construction of
Construction Occupations (Licensing) Regulation 2004
Tribunal does not have jurisdiction
Legislation cited:
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
, ss 9, 32, 66
Administrative Tribunal Legislation Amendment Bill
Administrative Tribunal Legislation Amendment Act
Construction Occupations (Licensing) Act 2004
Construction Occupations (Licensing) Bill 2003
Human Rights Act 2004
Legislation Act 2001
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Statute Law Amendment Act 2009 (No 2)
Statute Law Amendment Act 2011 (No 3)
Subordinate
Legislation cited:
Construction Occupations (Licensing) Regulation
, cl 42A, 42B, Sch 4
Magistrates Court (Construction Occupations Infringement Notices) Regulation
Cases cited
Capital Property Projects (ACT) Pty Ltd v Australian Capital Territory
Planning and Land Authority
[2008] ACTCA 9
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
Disorganized Developments Pty Ltd v South Australia
[2023] HCA 22
Eastman v Australian Capital Territory
[2014] ACTSC 105
In The Matter of a Bail Application by Isa Islam
[2010] ACTSC 147
Islam v Director-General, Justice and Community Safety Directorate
Northern Land Council v Quall
[2020] HCA 33
Leon Fink Holdings Pty Ltd v Australian Film Commission
Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd v Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty
[2021] HCA 39
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
Thiess v Collector of Customs
[2014] HCA 12
Texts/Papers cited:
Hansard: Debates of the Legislative Assembly for
the Australian Capital Territory,
The Allen Consulting Group, “Occupational Licensing in the ACT Building
and Construction Industry: A National Competition Policy
Review of the
Building Act 1982
Electricity Act 1971
Drainers and Gasfitters Board Act 1982
: Final Report,” August 2000
Government Response to the Final Report on the National Competition Policy
Review of Occupational Regulation in the ACT Building and
Construction Industry
Conducted by the Allen Consulting Group - October 2000
Presidential Member J Lucy
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) OR 15/2025
JOHN DAVID BATES
CONSTRUCTION OCCUPATIONS REGISTRAR
Presidential Member J Lucy
The Tribunal orders that:
application is dismissed pursuant to section 32(2) of the
ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
, as the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction
to hear it.
And the Tribunal notes:
reasons for the dismissal decision will be
.............
..............
Presidential Member
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
decision concerns the question of whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear
and determine an application for review made
by a licensed building surveyor.
applicant incurred 15 or more demerit points under the
Construction
Occupations (Licensing) Act 2004
) within three years. The
respondent (the
) gave him notice that, as a consequence, the
Registrar proposed to disqualify him from holding a building surveyor licence
months and invited him to make submissions about that proposal. The
Registrar subsequently served on him a notice of licence disqualification,
stating that the Registrar had decided to disqualify him from holding a building
surveyor licence for 12 months.
question for the Tribunal to consider is whether the Registrar’s decision
to give the applicant a notice of licence disqualification
is a reviewable
decision on the basis that it is a decision to “take disciplinary
action” within item 19 of Schedule
Construction Occupations
(Licensing) Regulation 2004
have found that the words to “take disciplinary action,” in item 19
of Schedule 4 to the Regulation, do not include
giving a notice of licence
disqualification under section 98 of the Act. Accordingly, the Tribunal does not
have jurisdiction to
hear and determine the application, and I have dismissed
applicant is a licensed building surveyor. He incurred 15 or more demerit points
within a three-year period under the Act.
95 of the Act applies to a licensee if the licensee has a licence and incurred
15 or more demerit points for a construction
occupation within the previous 3
If section 95 applies, the
Registrar is required to:
(a) serve a notice of licence suspension under section 97 on the licensee in
relation to the licensee’s licence in the construction
occupation;
(b) serve a notice of licence disqualification under section 98 on the
licensee in relation to the licensee’s licence in the
construction
occupation; or
(c) take any other action against the licensee that—
(i) the ACAT could take or direct the registrar to take; and
(ii) the registrar considers appropriate.
98(1) of the Act provides for the requirements of a notice of licence
disqualification. Subsection 98(2) provides: “If
the licensee has a
licence, the licence is cancelled in relation to each construction occupation or
occupation class mentioned in
the notice on the date of effect.”
98(3) of the Act provides: “The licensee is disqualified from holding a
licence in each construction occupation or
occupation class during the period of
licence disqualification and is not entitled to apply for, or be issued with, a
the construction occupation or occupation class during the
100 of the Act provides, in effect, that the Registrar is not required to give a
licensee an opportunity to make representations
to the Registrar before giving a
notice of licence suspension or licence disqualification to a licensee under
Part 8 (Demerits Points
21 May 2025, the respondent emailed the applicant, providing him with a notice
of intention of disciplinary action resulting from
incurring 15 or more demerit
points. The notice invited him to respond to the proposed action, that action
being to disqualify his
building surveyor licence under section 98 of the Act
for 12 months.
Bates’ evidence is that he did not receive the respondent’s email of
21 May 2025. However, as I will explain in more
detail later in these reasons,
he does not contest that the respondent’s email was sent.
3 July 2025, the respondent emailed the applicant, providing him with notice of
its decision to disqualify him from holding a building
surveyor licence for 12
months from 31 July 2025. The notification was said to be made under section 98
of the Act.
123C of the Act provides:
The following may apply to the ACAT for
a review of a reviewable decision:
(a) an entity prescribed by regulation for the decision;
(b) any other person whose interests are affected by the decision.
123A of the Act provides that a
reviewable decision
decision prescribed by regulation.
42A of the Regulation provides:
A decision mentioned in schedule
4, column 3, under a provision mentioned in column 2 in relation to the decision
is prescribed.
4 to the Regulation relevantly
take disciplinary action
refuse application for licence or renewal
applicant for licence or renewal
give notice of licence suspension without opportunity to make
representations
person whose licence suspended
give notice of licence disqualification without opportunity to make
representations
person whose licence disqualified
4 July 2025, the applicant applied to the Tribunal for a review of the
respondent’s decision.
issue has arisen as to whether the respondent’s decision is a
“reviewable decision” which the Tribunal has jurisdiction
Tribunal’s jurisdiction: The issue
Tribunal only has jurisdiction to hear an application if jurisdiction is
conferred upon it by legislation. Section 9 of the
ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
) provides that “[a]
person may apply to the tribunal if an authorising law provides that the
application may be made.”
22 of Schedule 4 to the Regulation provides that a decision to “give
notice of licence disqualification without opportunity
representations” is a reviewable decision. It does not provide that a
decision to give notice of licence disqualification
with an opportunity to make
representations is reviewable.
applicant accepts, in his written submissions of 2 September 2025, that the
notice of intended disciplinary action was served
upon him, even though he did
not see the email. As he accepts,
section 247(1)(d)
Legislation Act 2001
allows notice to be
given by emailing the notice to a person’s email address. “Email
address” is defined in
section 246
Legislation Act 2001
include the latest email address kept in the records of the administrator of the
law, which in this case is the Registrar.
Subsections 250(3)
and (4) deem
service by email to be valid if there is no reply message indicating that the
email server did not send the email or
that the email address is not an address
of the recipient. In the absence of such a message, service is complete when the
sends the email to the recipient’s email address.
applicant accepts that the Registrar was entitled to rely upon the email address
provided by Mr Bates. He also accepts that the
Registrar did in fact give notice
and invite representations.
issue, then, is whether the Registrar’s decision to give the applicant a
notice of licence disqualification, after giving
him an opportunity to make
representations, is a reviewable decision.
parties provided the Tribunal with detailed written submissions on this issue
and also made oral submissions as to the Tribunal’s
initial hearing and an adjourned hearing, through their counsel.
the conclusion of the adjourned hearing, I made an order dismissing the
applicant’s application, on the basis that the Tribunal
does not have
that decision later.
are those reasons.
Respondent’s submissions
respondent has not taken a position as to whether or not the Tribunal has
not assert that the
Tribunal lacks jurisdiction” but raises some jurisdictional issues for the
Tribunal’s consideration.
respondent provided helpful submissions on the legislative history of the
relevant provisions and other considerations relevant
to whether the Tribunal
has jurisdiction. The respondent submitted that “there are two possible
interpretations of the relevant
provisions of the COL Act and the COL
Regulation.”
One of those
interpretations is that the Registrar’s decision to give a licensee a
notice of disqualification, in circumstances
where the Registrar has first
provided the licensee with an opportunity to make representations, is not a
reviewable decision.
interpretation is that that decision is reviewable, being a decision captured by
item 19 of Schedule 4 to the Regulation
(being a decision to “take
disciplinary action”).
respondent accepted “the applicant’s assertion that it would be
unusual if the effect of the relevant provisions of
the COL Act and COL
Regulation is that a decision of the Registrar to impose a ‘lesser’
sanction on a licensee (pursuant
to s 95(1)(c) of the COL Act) is reviewable by
ACAT, but a decision to serve a notice of licence suspension or licence
disqualification
(pursuant to s 95(1)(a) or (b)) is
Applicant’s submissions
applicant’s case is that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and
determine his application under item 19 of Sch 4 to the
Regulation, which refers
to a decision made under section 95 of the Act to “take disciplinary
applicant accepts that one reading of items 19 to 22 of Schedule 4 to the
Regulation is that a decision to give notice of licence
suspension or notice of
licence disqualification without an opportunity to make representations is
reviewable, but a such a decision
made after giving an opportunity to make
representations is not reviewable. The applicant acknowledges that the words
opportunity to make representations” in items 21 and 22
could be taken to imply that a decision described in those items, made
opportunity to make representations, is not reviewable.
applicant says, however, that there is no apparent legislative purpose for
carving out decisions to suspend or disqualify from
the review process, where
other decisions of lesser severity may be reviewed by the tribunal.
applicant refers to item 19 of Schedule 4 to the Regulation which provides that
a decision to “take disciplinary action”
under section 95 of the Act
is a reviewable decision. The applicant notes that “the range of possible
action under s.95 includes
any action that the ACAT could take” and
submits that “this must be a reference to an application under s.56, and
turn to s.66 of the ACAT Act relating to occupational discipline
orders.” The applicant points out that “[t]he range
of such orders
under the ACAT Act includes everything from a reprimand to disqualification,
cancellation, or a
and 22 were read as excluding a right of review in any suspension of
disqualification where representations had been invited,
it would lead to the
result that every disciplinary action from the lightest to the most severe is
reviewable, except for those two
situations. That is manifestly absurd, and
manifestly unreasonable.
applicant relies upon
section 138(c)
Legislation Act 2001
provides that, in
working out the meaning of an
(a) resolving an ambiguous or obscure provision of the Act; or
(b) confirming or displacing the apparent meaning of the Act; or
(c) finding the meaning of the Act when its apparent meaning leads to a
result that is manifestly absurd or is unreasonable; or
(d) finding the meaning of the Act in any other case.
139(1) of the
Legislation Act 2001
(which is in Part 14.2 of the Act)
provides: “In working out the meaning of an Act, the interpretation
that would best achieve the purpose of the Act is to be
preferred to any other
interpretation.” The term “Act” in sections 138 and 139
includes a statutory instrument
regulation).
applicant submitted that interpreting Schedule 4 to the Regulation as excluding
his right of review would be absurd or
unreasonable.
Accordingly, he
said, an interpretation that best achieves the purpose of the legislation is to
be preferred.
applicant submitted that the regulation-making power in section 123A of the Act
was not to be construed as authorising the making
of unjust, arbitrary,
capricious or unreasonable regulations. In his submission, that was a reason to
favour his construction of
it (and thereby to construe it as a valid
regulation).
is submitted for the applicant that there is nothing in the text, context or
extrinsic materials to suggest that there was a deliberate
purpose of excluding
cancellations or suspensions where representations had been invited. The scheme
of allowing minor disciplinary
orders to be reviewed demonstrated, in the
applicant’s submission, “an overall intention to allow review of all
disciplinary
decisions, whether or not representations were
Consideration
starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning of a statutory provision is
the text of the statute whilst, regard is also
to be had to its context and
words “without opportunity to make representations” in items 21 and
22 of Schedule 2 to the Regulation provide a strong
indication that the
legislature’s intention is that the giving of a notice of licence
suspension or disqualification will only
be reviewable if the licensee has not
been given an opportunity to make representations before that decision was
principles of statutory construction are relevant. The first is that “when
a statute confers both a general power, not subject
to limitations and
qualifications, and a special power, subject to limitations and qualifications,
the general power cannot be exercised
to do that which is the subject of the
special power”.
is that a court, when construing a statutory provision, should strive to give
meaning to every word in the provision and
should avoid a construction which
leaves any provision as superfluous, void or
insignificant.
of the items in Schedule 4 to the Regulation confers power on the Tribunal, in
that, when read with sections 123A and 123C of
the Act and clauses 42A and 42B
of the Regulation, each gives the Tribunal power to review a decision specified
in the item. The
Tribunal’s power to review a decision to “take
disciplinary action” is a general power, not subject to limitations
qualifications. The Tribunal’s powers to review a decision to give a
notice of licence suspension or disqualification are
specific powers, subject to
the limitation that the licensee has not been given an opportunity to make
representations.
application of the principle referred to above suggests that the general power
to review a decision to “take disciplinary
action” cannot be
exercised to do that which is the subject of the special power – that is,
it is not the source of the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction to review a decision
to give a notice of licence suspension or disqualification under sections 97 and
98 of the Act.
second principle, that a construction leaving a provision as superfluous should
be avoided, also supports that construction. If
the words “take
disciplinary action” in item 19 of Schedule 4 to the Regulation were
construed to include giving notice
of a licence suspension or disqualification
under sections 97 or 98, then items 21 and 22 would be superfluous.
is another textual reason to prefer this construction.
93(1) of the Act (“Deleting demerit points”) refers to demerit
points taken into account for “other action
disciplinary
) allowed to be taken under section 95(2)(c).” A definition
within a section would normally only apply within the section itself.
as the definition refers specifically to section 95(2)(c), this suggests that
the use of the term “disciplinary action”
in relation to section 95
in item 19 of Schedule 4 to the Regulation may refer only to section 95(2)(c)
and not to section 95(2)(a)
and (b). This inference is strengthened by the
circumstance that only section 95(2)(c) uses the term “action”;
95(2)(a) and (b) refer to serving a notice.
action which may be taken under section 95(2)(c) is “any other
action.” The word “other” means that the
action is not action
the subject of section 95(2)(a) or (b).
the applicant pointed out,
term “disciplinary action” is also used in item 15 of Schedule 4 to
the Regulation, referring to action which the
Registrar may take under section
56(1)(b), (c) and (d). In that context the term does not refer to action taken
under section 95(2)(c).
It does not necessarily follow, however, that
“disciplinary action” in item 19 does not mean action under section
consistently with the definition in section 93 which expressly refers
to that provision. Column 2 in the Schedule makes express that
it refers to
disciplinary action taken under section 95.
term “disciplinary action” as it appears in each item in Schedule 4
to the Regulation is to be construed in the context
of the other columns
applying to each item. A “reviewable decision” is a “decision
mentioned in schedule 4, column
3, under a provision mentioned in column 2 in
relation to the decision.”
That is, for item 15, the reviewable decision is “disciplinary
action” under section 56(1) and, for item 19, the reviewable
decision is
“disciplinary action” under section 95. The term “disciplinary
action” in each case takes its
meaning from the associated provision.
working out the meaning of the items in Schedule 4 to the Regulation, it is
important to consider the purpose of those items,
and the provisions of the Act
to which they refer, as required by
section 138
Legislation Act
The task of ascertaining that purpose is facilitated by a review of
the legislative history of the relevant provisions.
Legislative history
4 to the Regulation is to be construed in the context of the legislative history
of that Regulation and the provisions in
the Act to which the Schedule refers.
Understanding that broader context “has utility if, and in so far as, it
assists in fixing
the meaning of the statutory
It is to be borne
in mind that “[l]egislative history and extrinsic materials cannot
displace the meaning of the statutory
working out the meaning of an Act, material not forming part of the Act may be
considered.
That includes, but
is not limited to, presentation speeches and explanatory
statements.
At common law, the
context in which legislation must be understood includes legislative history and
extrinsic materials.
Construction Occupations (Licensing) Bill 2003
was introduced into
Parliament as part of a legislative package which included a draft
Regulation.
24 June 2003, the Minister for Health and Minister for Planning, Mr Corbell,
made a statement in Parliament, tabling the exposure
drafts of the
Construction
Occupations (Licensing) Bill
and Regulations
The Minister stated:
... This package of legislative reforms
represents a significant proposal to improve the regulation of the building
industry trades.
The process of reform has been under way since 1998 when
Planning and Land Management released a discussion paper on the options
moving to a single licensing regime to cover architects, builders, electricians,
plumbers, drainers and gas fitters.
Following that discussion paper, a national competition policy review of
occupational licensing was undertaken in 2000. ...
Mr Speaker, the previous government endorsed most of the recommendations
of that review but did not proceed to implement the recommendations
prior to the
change of government in October 2001. This government has taken the opportunity
to consider the relevance of the recommendations,
given the time passed since
the initial review was undertaken. We endorsed the implementation of reforms to
the current licensing
regime, as it is clear that there are substantial
improvements that can be made which will benefit both licensees and
Perhaps the most significant reform contained within this legislative
package is the creation of more flexible and effective forms
of disciplinary
action against delinquent licence holders. This includes a new demerit points
system for licensees, and the capacity
to issue infringement notices under the
Magistrates Court Act 1930
against unlicensed persons who do work requiring a
The demerit points system will ensure that licensed persons are held
accountable for the work that they undertake by providing an
effective sanction
against persistent breaches, particularly where that work is not in accordance
with approved standards. The infringement
notice system will enable
“on-the-spot” fines to be administered, where unlicensed persons are
found to be doing work
requiring a licence or where a licensed person is
undertaking work not allowed under their licence.
is notable that the Minister considered the most significant reform brought
of more flexible and
effective forms of disciplinary action against delinquent licence
holders.” That included the introduction
of the demerit points system. The
Minister considered that the demerit points system would “ensure that
licensed persons are
held accountable for the work that they undertake by
providing an effective sanction against persistent breaches, particularly where
that work is not in accordance with approved standards.”
comments tend to suggest that the mischief being addressed by the Act and
Regulation was the lack of an effective sanction for
licensed persons, and that
disciplinary action against “delinquent” licence holders was
perceived by the legislature
to be insufficiently flexible and effective. The
purpose of the demerit points systems appears to have been to create a simple
cost-effective way of disciplining licence holders who acquired a large
number of demerit points for “persistent breaches.”
Minister referred, in his speech, to the “national competition policy
review of occupational licensing was undertaken in
reference to the Final Report in August 2000, prepared by the Allen Consulting
Group, entitled “Occupational Licensing
in the ACT Building and
Construction Industry: A National Competition Policy Review of the
Electricity Act 1971
Plumbers, Drainers and
Gasfitters Board Act 1982
National Competition Policy
Review Report
). The Preface to that report states that it was
“prepared on behalf of the Government of the Australian Capital Territory
does not necessarily represent the views of the Government.”
authors of the National Competition Policy Review Report, who described
themselves as the “Review Team,” indicated
that there were “a
number of problems with the current arrangements” for disciplining
licensees. It
costs of prosecuting unlicensed individuals providing building and construction
work are prohibitive for the Department and rarely
undertaken. Therefore threat
of prosecution is not a deterrent for unlicensed tradespeople.
Review Team stated that it was “concerned that some of the review
legislation makes it hard to take effective action under
the standard show cause
procedure.” The Review Team noted that “[i]ndustry ... indicated
preference for a demerit points
system of discipline whereby the penalties are
based on the severity of the contravention.” The Team
some debate about the level of penalties that should be applied:
• one view is that the current penalties are insufficient to provide
a sufficient deterrent; and
• the alternative view is that the costs of the prosecution process
are so large that they deter prosecution for small offences.
referred to submissions it had received, the Team
Review Team suggests that an appropriately structured demerit points system
should provide a system of penalties such that minor
contraventions can be
punished, and multiple or large offences have sufficient penalties attached such
that they are a real deterrent.
It recommends a system of progressively
increasing penalties as the number of major defects incurred increases. It also
that, given the potential damage that a major defect can cause, these
penalties be of sufficient amounts to act as a deterrent.
then made the following
recommendation:
system of demerit points should be adopted, with increasing penalties based on
number of major/minor defect or re-inspections. The
level of penalty should be
set at such a level that the penalty acts as a deterrent. In order to further
strengthen the disciplinary
action available, automatic show cause actions could
occur after a pre-determined number of major defects or re-inspections are
by the same individual within a set period of time.
Government Response to the National Competition Policy Review Report indicated
that this recommendation was “agreed,”
but also indicated that there
was a need for further consultation on the
explanatory statement to the
Construction
Occupations (Licensing) Bill 2003
stated, relevantly:
Bill introduces significant reforms to the regulation of building and
construction industry trades. The Bill implements the recommendations
National Competition Policy Review of Occupational Licensing
in the ACT, which reflected reform proposals that had been considered over
a number of years.
... Some new provisions have been included to improve the effectiveness of
the regulatory scheme, including a demerits points system
for licensees.
Part 5 Automatic licence suspension and disciplinary action
Part 5 outlines the circumstances in which a licence can be automatically
suspended, and the disciplinary process where the registrar
determines that the
grounds for taking action exist.
Disciplinary action by registrar
Clause 53 lists the disciplinary grounds in relation to a licensee. A
disciplinary ground must exist for the registrar to commence
disciplinary
Part 8 Demerit Points System
Part 8 establishes a demerit points system for licensees and former
licensees, and outlines the operations of the system.
If a licensee has incurred 15 or more demerit points within a construction
occupation within the
previous three years
registrar to serve a notice of licence suspension, or disqualification on the
licensee. Alternatively the registrar may
take other disciplinary action against
the licensee if particular circumstances do not support suspension or
disqualification. Before
making a decision on the appropriate action to take,
the registrar must take into account the need to protect public safety, the
financial capacity of the licensee, the nature and regularity of the breaches,
and the likelihood of further disciplinary incidents
relating to the licensee.
The registrar may also take into account any other relevant information.
indication in the Explanatory Statement that the Bill was “implement[ing]
the recommendations of the National Competition
Policy Review of Occupational
Licensing in the ACT” provides some insight into the mischief being
addressed by the Bill. It
may be inferred that the legislature was addressing
the mischief, identified in the report, that “the costs of prosecuting
unlicensed individuals providing building and construction work are prohibitive
for the Department and rarely undertaken” and
therefore the existing
penalties were ineffective. It may also be inferred that a purpose of the
demerits system was to provide “a
real deterrent.” As stated
expressly in the Explanatory Statement, a purpose of the demerits points system
was “to improve
the effectiveness of the regulatory scheme.”
Mr Hassall proposed, for the Registrar, at the adjourned hearing, it may be
inferred that the demerits system was intended to be
“self-executing” to some extent. The legislature did not initially
make provision for “automatic show cause actions,”
as recommended in
the Report, if the term “show cause” indicated that the authors of
the Report intended a licensee to
be given an opportunity to show cause why
disciplinary action should not be taken. However, by requiring the Registrar to
take action
when 15 or more demerit points were incurred within a three year
period, it did provide for “automatic” disciplinary
sanctions to
apply after “a pre-determined number of” demerit points had been
incurred “within a set period of
time,” as recommended in the
Report, albeit that the Registrar was given a discretion as to the form of
disciplinary action
Act also contained provision for a more conventional form of disciplinary
action, to be taken in response to the existence of
a disciplinary ground, and
only after providing a licensee with procedural fairness.
Act, as enacted, contained “Division 5.2: Disciplinary Action by
Registrar” (sections 54 to 65). The Act specified
in section 54(1) a
number of “disciplinary grounds.” It provided, in section 55, that
the Registrar may give a licensee
a disciplinary notice if satisfied that a
disciplinary ground existed. A notice had to give a licensee an opportunity to
a written response.
Section 60 of the Act provided that, if the Registrar had given a licensee a
disciplinary notice and taken into account any response,
the Registrar was
empowered to take disciplinary action if satisfied on reasonable grounds that a
disciplinary ground was
established.
61(1) of the Act set out various forms of disciplinary action the registrar
could take, from issuing a reprimand, to imposing
conditions on a licence, to
cancelling a licence and disqualifying a licensee from applying for a licence
for a stated period. The
Act contained a definition of “disciplinary
action,” being “action the registrar may take under section
Act, in its original form, contained a Part 8, “Demerit Points
System” (sections 89 to 102). The Registrar was empowered
to record, in
the demerit points register, demerit points where “a demerit disciplinary
ground exists in relation to a
demerit disciplinary ground
” was defined for Part 8
to include a disciplinary ground in relation to the licensee for which the
registrar may take disciplinary
action under section 60, but to exclude certain
grounds for which an infringement notice could be
“infringement notice” was defined by reference to
section 117
Magistrates Court Act
Under that Act, an
infringement notice could be given in relation to an infringement notice
Magistrates
Court (Construction Occupations Infringement Notices) Regulation 2004
notified, provided that offences against sections 81 and 84 of the Act were
infringement notice offences. These involved pretending
to be licensed and
providing a service without the required licence.
Registrar was required to record, in the demerits points register, the
prescribed number of demerit points, if a demerit disciplinary
ground existed in
relation to a licensee.
Registrar was required to give licensees warning notices when they reached 10
demerit points. If the Registrar recorded a demerit
point against a licensee for
a construction occupation and in the previous 3 years, and the licensee had
incurred at least 10 other
demerit points for the construction occupation, and
the Registrar had not sent the licensee a warning notice within 3 months before
the demerit point was incurred, registrar was required to notify the licensee of
how many points the licensee had and the effect
of Part 8 of the
95 of the Act applied if a licensee had incurred 15 or more demerit points for a
construction occupation within the previous
Section 95(2)
(2) The registrar must consider the disciplinary incidents for which the
licensee incurred the demerit points and—
(a) serve a notice of licence suspension under section 97 on the licensee in
relation to the licensee’s licence in the construction
occupation;
(b) serve a notice of licence disqualification under section 98 on the
licensee in relation to the licensee’s licence in the
construction
occupation; or
(c) take any other disciplinary action against the licensee that the
registrar considers appropriate.
93 provided that demerit points were deleted from the register once a form of
disciplinary action was decided upon. When originally
enacted, section 93(1) of
the Act provided:
93 Deleting demerit points
(1) This section applies to demerit points incurred by a licensee for a
construction occupation, recorded in the register and taken
into account
(a) a notice of licence suspension under section 97 or
(b) a notice of licence disqualification under section 98; or
(c) other disciplinary action allowed to be taken under section 95(2)(c).
93(2) provided:
(2) The demerit points are deleted from the
register at the beginning of the period of suspension or disqualification, or on
the imposition
of the disciplinary action, relating to the licence for the
construction occupation.
97 and 98 of the Act provided for the Registrar to serve on a licensee a notice
of licence suspension or notice of licence
disqualification respectively. The
notice was to state the date, at least 21 days after the day the notice was
served on the licensee,
when the suspension of the licensee’s licence, or
the disqualification of the licensee to obtain a licence and the cancellation
the licence, was to begin.
100 of the Act provided that the Registrar could take serious forms of
disciplinary action without giving the licensee an
opportunity to be heard. It
The registrar may give a notice of licence suspension
or licence disqualification to a licensee under this part without giving the
licensee an opportunity to make representations why the notice should not be
is no explanation, in any of the extrinsic material, as to why this provision
was included. However, it may be inferred that
the provision for the Registrar
to suspend a licence or disqualify a person from holding one, without hearing
from the person first,
was designed to make the system work quickly and
efficiently.
is to be noted that section 100 addressed (and still addresses) the forms of
disciplinary action contemplated by section 95(2)(a)
and (b), but not the
disciplinary action contemplated by section 95(2)(c). This is probably because,
as a matter of statutory construction,
the power in section 95(2)(c) was not
conditioned upon the Registrar giving a licensee an opportunity to make
representations about
any other forms of disciplinary action the Registrar may
take. In circumstances where the “Demerits points system” required
the Registrar sanction a licensee upon the licensee incurring 15 demerit points,
the normal rules of procedural fairness were displaced.
conclusion is borne out by the text of the Act, as enacted.
95(2)(c) gave the Registrar power to take other disciplinary action, defined to
mean “action the Registrar may take
under section
Section 61(1)
commenced with the words “If the registrar may take disciplinary action in
relation to a licensee or former licensee,
...” then provided for the
61(1) (being that
“the registrar may take disciplinary action”),
being the precondition to taking disciplinary action, was satisfied if
95(2)(c) was engaged, because of the terms of that provision, authorising such
action. If, on the other hand, the Registrar
decided to take disciplinary action
under Division 5.2, then the Registrar was required to provide a licensee with
procedural fairness
by giving the licensee a disciplinary notice (section 55)
and an opportunity to make representations (section 56(1)(d)). In other
if the disciplinary process was commenced under Division 5.2, the condition in
section 61(1) would not be satisfied unless
the disciplinary notice had been
given to a licensee and any response considered (see section 60(3)(a)).
95(2)(c) effectively provided a shortcut to section 61 of the Act, where a
licensee had incurred fifteen demerit points within
three years. Section 94
(Warning notices) provided some degree of procedural fairness, being the
provision of a warning when the
licensee reached ten demerit points. Otherwise,
for reasons given above, the scheme clearly manifested an intention to displace
requirements of procedural fairness, insofar as the Registrar was not
required to give licensees an opportunity to be heard as to
disciplinary action
taken under section 95(2)(c).
Act, as enacted, also provided for some rights of review.
124(1) of the Act provided: “Application may be made to the AAT for review
of an [sic] reviewable decision” (referring
to the former ACT
Administrative Appeals Tribunal). Subsection 124(2) of the Act provided that
“[t]he regulations may prescribe
which decisions are reviewable
decisions.” Clause 45 of the Regulation contained in schedule 1 to the
Act, as enacted, provided
for certain decisions of the registrar to be
reviewable decisions. These did not include decisions under sections 95 to 98 of
Act. The taking of disciplinary action under section 60 was, however, a
reviewable decision.
legislative choice not to provide for rights of review in relation to
disciplinary decisions made as part of the operation of
the demerits points
system is consistent with a legislative intention for that system to operate in
a quick, cheap and efficient
manner, providing a deterrent for “delinquent
licence holders,” without the costs associated with the previous
disciplinary
schemes. This may be seen to serve similar purposes to the
introduction of infringement notices for unlicensed persons. Both reforms
replaced a more costly prosecution system with a system with fewer procedural
protections, which was intended to be more effective.
Act was amended when ACAT was created, including by transferring some of the
functions of the Registrar and the AAT to ACAT.
Explanatory Statement to the
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Legislation Amendment Bill 2008
Construction Occupations (Licensing) Act
This part provides that, in future, the registrar may apply to the ACAT
for an occupational discipline order for an [sic] licensee
under this Act
(previously the registrar held a hearing and imposed disciplinary sanctions).
In hearing a matter, the ACAT consider
a number of matters. These are similar
to those previously required to be considered by the Board but now also include
general considerations set out in section 65(3) of the ACAT Bill.
This part also makes a number of related consequential amendments –
for example, it replaces references in the Act to “disciplinary
ground” to “ground for occupational discipline”.
This part also provides that an application may be made for a review of
specified administrative decisions in the Act (previously
brought before the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal) to the ACAT. A review is not provided for
taking disciplinary action (as that
decision is now taken by the ACAT itself).
A new ground of review is included in respect of the demerits scheme (Part
Construction Occupations (Licensing) Regulation 2004
This part provides that an application may be made for a review of
specified administrative decisions in the Act (previously brought
Administrative Appeals Tribunal) to the ACAT. A new ground of review is
included in respect of the removal of material
from the register
Construction Occupations (Licensing) Act 2004
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Legislation Amendment Act 2008
ACAT Legislation Amendment Act
) made a number of significant amendments
to the Act and Regulation. It repealed Division 5.2 and inserted a new Division.
Division gave the Tribunal (ACAT) responsibility for disciplinary action
instead of the Registrar. It provided for grounds for occupational
(section 55) and gave the Registrar power to apply to ACAT for an occupational
discipline order if the Registrar believed
on reasonable grounds that a ground
for occupational discipline existed in relation to a licensee (section 56(1)).
ACAT Legislation Amendment Act omitted the definition of “disciplinary
action” in the Dictionary to the Act and other
places in which it
appeared. However, the term “disciplinary action” was used in some
of the new amendments.
ACAT Legislation Amendment Act substituted a new section 93(1)(c) (relating to
the deletion of demerit points) as follows: “(c)
other action
disciplinary action
) allowed to be taken under section 95 (2)
also substituted a new section 95(2)(c), which gave the registrar power, where a
licensee had incurred 15 demerit points, to:
(c) take any other action against the licensee that—
(i) the ACAT could take or direct the registrar to take; and
(ii) the registrar considers appropriate.
is no indication that the legislature intended to change the existing situation
by the replacement of section 95(2)(c), being
that the Registrar was not
required to give a licensee notice of the proposed disciplinary action before
taking it. Action that “the
ACAT could take” (within section
95(2)(c)(i)) includes action under section 66 of the ACAT Act and under section
58(2)(a) of
the Act. Action that ACAT could direct the Registrar to take (within
section 95(2)(c)(ii)) includes action under section 58(2)(b)
of the Act. Each of
those provisions applies where ACAT “may make an order for occupational
discipline” or “may
make an occupational discipline order”
(ACAT Act, section 66(1); Act, section 58(1)). The legislation evinces a clear
that the Registrar is not obliged to hear from the licensee before
acting under section 92(2); the registrar is empowered to take
that action once
15 demerit points have been incurred, and “must” take some form of
ACAT Legislation Amendment
(a) introduced a new Part 11A of the Act. This provided (ss 123A-123C) for
certain persons to be permitted to apply to ACAT for review
of a reviewable
(b) Inserted into the Regulation a new Part A, which provided for reviewable
decisions to be identified in Schedule 4 (ss 42A, 42B)
(c) Inserted a new Schedule 4 into the Regulation which relevantly included the
following items:
column 3 decision
take disciplinary action
refuse application for licence or renewal
applicant for licence or renewal
give notice of licence suspension or disqualification without opportunity
to make representations
person whose licence suspended or disqualified
schedule includes the “new ground [or grounds] of review ... in respect of
the demerits scheme” referred to in the
Explanatory Statement to the
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Legislation Amendment Bill 2008
identifies reviewable decisions which may be made within that scheme.
introduction of Schedule 4 to the Regulation at the same time that the
definition of “disciplinary action” was inserted
into section
93(1)(c) of the Act strengthens the inference that the legislature intended, by
“take disciplinary action”
in item 16 of Schedule 4, to refer only
to action taken under section 95(2)(c). That inference is further strengthened
by the circumstance
that item 18, which is referable to section 95(2)(a) and
(b), was inserted at the same time. That indicates an intention to limit
circumstances in which a person the subject of a notice of licence suspension or
disqualification may apply for review of that
is no explanation in the extrinsic materials of why the legislature chose to
provide for a right of review of a decision to
take disciplinary action under
section 95(2)(c) of the Act, but not to provide a right to review a decision to
issue a notice of
suspension or disqualification after providing an opportunity
to make submissions. As the applicant points out, the disciplinary
action which
may be taken under section 95(2)(c) includes less serious forms of disciplinary
action, such as a reprimand.
may be, however, that the legislative intention was to provide for a review by
ACAT in circumstances where a disciplinary sanction
had been imposed by the
Registrar without first hearing from the applicant. The legislature may have
considered that the scheme did
not provide for the Registrar to hear from a
licensee if taking action under section 95(2)(c) of the Act.
2009, there were some further amendments to the Act and the Regulation. Under a
new section 56(1)(b), the Registrar was given the
power to reprimand the
licensee, require the licensee to complete a course of training, or impose or
amend a condition on the licence,
as an alternative to apply to ACAT for an
occupational discipline order.
The Regulation was amended to add a new reviewable decision, being the
Registrar’s decision to “take disciplinary action”
section 56(1)(b) of the
is no indication, and no reason to consider, that this amendment was intended to
alter the meaning of “disciplinary action”
in item 16 of Schedule 4
to the Regulation.
2011, a further amendment was made to Schedule 4 to the Regulation, to correct
an inadvertent error in item 19. The
Statute Law Amendment Act 2011 (No
amended Schedule 4 to the Regulation, providing, with an explanatory
give notice of licence suspension without opportunity to make
representations
person whose licence suspended
give notice of licence disqualification without opportunity to make
representations
person whose licence disqualified
Explanatory note
Item 19 currently refers to a decision under the Act, section 97 to give
notice of licence suspension or disqualification without
opportunity to make
representations. However, a decision to give notice of licence
disqualification is made under the Act, section
98. This amendment
replaces item 19 with 2 new items that refer to the correct decisions under the
2 provisions.
amendment demonstrates that the legislature considered the reviewable decisions
of giving notice of licence suspension and disqualification
under sections 97
and 98 of the Act again, and again decided that those decisions should only be
reviewable if the affected person
had not been given an opportunity to make
representations.
items in Schedule 4 were later renumbered.
Purposive interpretation
applicant submits that interpreting Schedule 4 as excluding his right of review
would be absurd or unreasonable within
section 138(c)
Legislation Act
and that the Tribunal is required to prefer the construction that best
achieves the purpose of the legislation under
section 139
of that Act.
applicant relies upon
In The Matter of a Bail Application by Isa Islam
[2010] ACTSC 147
as a guide to the Tribunal in understanding how
section 139
Legislation Act 2001
operates. In that case, Penfold J pointed out
section 139
takes a different approach from orthodox purposive
interpretation provisions, such as
section 15AA
Acts Interpretation
(Cth), which require a construction of a provision that promotes
the purpose underlying the Act to be preferred to one that does
not. As her
Honour observed, section 139 “requires adoption of the meaning that
achieves the legislative purpose” (original emphasis). That
is, it “specifies exactly which meaning, determined by reference
legislative purpose, is to be
applicant did not identify the purpose of items 19 to 22 of Schedule 4 to the
Regulation in his written submissions. However,
at the adjourned hearing, the
applicant’s counsel, Mr Erskine SC, identified the purpose of the
legislature as being that all
disciplinary decisions should be reviewable.
Erskine SC said, at the adjourned hearing, that it can be gleaned from ACT
statutes generally that there is a general legislative
purpose to make
disciplinary action either the purview of ACAT (as an original decision-maker),
or if disciplinary action may be
taken by an agency or statutory authority, that
action is generally reviewable by ACAT. Mr Erskine SC said this could be seen
specifically
in section 56 of the Act.
is hard to reconcile the purpose, as identified by the applicant, with the text
of the provisions of Schedule 4 to the Regulation.
The express carve-outs
(“without opportunity to make representations”) from items 21 and 22
are in tension with such
is not a conventional process of statutory interpretation to consider what the
legislature has done in other Acts, and then to
infer that its purpose must have
been to do the same thing in a particular piece of legislation. Even if this
were a legitimate approach,
there are features of the Act which are atypical of
disciplinary statutes. In particular, there is no other disciplinary regime in
the Territory of which I am aware, or which the parties identified, which
employs a demerits points system.
Erskine SC suggested that the purpose of items 21 and 22 of Schedule 4 may be to
remove any doubt that, if a licensee has not been
given an opportunity to make
representations about a proposed suspension or disqualification, the licensee
has a right of review.
He submitted that the purpose of section 100 of the Act
(which allows the registrar to make such decisions without giving a person
opportunity to make representations) was an exercise of abundant caution, for
the avoidance of doubt. It was, he said, to make
plain that the failure to give
a person an opportunity to make representations would not invalidate the
effect of section 100 is to displace the common law presumption that a statutory
power is conditioned upon a duty to give procedural
It was, in my view,
included in the Act to make plain that none of the decisions referred to in
section 95(2) were conditioned upon
such a duty (that intention being manifest
in the case of section 95(2)(c) for reasons given above).
Schedule 4 lists reviewable decisions, it is unlikely that a decision, taken
only in certain circumstances, would be included in
the list to avoid doubt that
it is covered by a general category, such as “disciplinary action.”
That strategy would
be more likely to create doubt. For these reasons, I do not
find this submission of the applicant to be persuasive.
applicant submitted that interpreting Schedule 4 as excluding the
applicant’s right of review would be absurd or unreasonable,
definition of “working out the meaning of the Act” in
section 138
Legislation Act 2001
I do not accept that the construction which
the applicant rejects, and which I prefer, is absurd or unreasonable. However,
if it were, it would follow that
section 139(1)
Legislation Act
applied, requiring the Tribunal to prefer the interpretation that would
best achieve the purpose of the Act (or Regulation), when
working out its
purpose of the legislature when enacting items 19 to 22 of Schedule 4 to the
Regulation (as presently numbered) is not plain.
It may, however, be concluded
that a purpose of the demerits points system was to provide for a quick, cheap
and effective disciplinary
system which provided an effective sanction against
persistent breaches. A right of review of disciplinary decisions made on the
basis of this system was not initially included in the legislation, probably to
advance the purpose of maintaining a system which
was quick and cheap, and which
provided deterrence for persistent breaches. The legislature was focused upon
deterrence, speed and
economy, not upon licensees’ rights or procedural
a right of review of a notice of licence suspension or disqualification was
inserted into the legislative scheme, it was only
a limited right, being for
decisions made without opportunity to make representations. The legislature
clearly expressed an intention
to exclude notices of licence suspension or
disqualification given after an opportunity to make representations. As
indicated above,
the right of review of disciplinary sanctions of lesser
severity is provided on the basis that the Registrar is not required to provide
licensees with an opportunity to be heard before imposing such sanctions. The
legislature apparently contemplated that the Registrar
would not do so.
factor in favour of this construction of the legislative scheme is that it means
that the provisions in items 19 to 22 of Schedule
4 to the Regulation
“give effect
to harmonious goals.”
All of the reviewable decisions in relation to the demerits points system in the
present items 20 to 22 of Schedule 4 relate to disciplinary
decisions made
without giving the affected person an opportunity to make representations. The
Registrar is not expressly required
to give an applicant an opportunity to make
representations before refusing an application for renewal of a licence under
96 of the Act (a reviewable decision under item 20), in circumstances
where the licensee has incurred 15 or more demerit points for
the construction
occupation within the previous 3 years. The better construction of that
provision is that the Registrar may refuse
such an application without first
hearing from an applicant.
preferred construction of items 19 to 22 of the Regulation reflects an inferred
legislative purpose of providing for the review
of disciplinary decisions, but
only where the person affected had not first been provided with procedural
fairness. It avoids the
potential absurdity (as claimed by the applicant) of
making minor disciplinary decisions reviewable, and not making certain types
more serious disciplinary decisions reviewable, with no good reason. The common
thread is that the right of review attaches to
decisions where procedural
fairness has not previously been provided.
applicant advanced an argument that:
(a) If the decision to give a licensee a notice disqualification, when taken
after giving the licensee an opportunity to make representations,
reviewable decision, that would be illogical, absurd and unjust, because less
serious disciplinary action would be reviewable,
whereas action denying a person
their livelihood would not be;
(b) Delegated legislation may be declared to be invalid on the ground of
unreasonableness if it leads to manifest arbitrariness,
injustice or partiality,
because this could not have been intended by the legislature;
(c) A provision of subordinate legislation should be construed so as not to
exceed, the power given by the Act under which it is
made, pursuant to
Legislation Act 2001
(d) Schedule 4 should therefore be construed so that its provisions do not
operate in a way which is absurd or unreasonable.
significant problem with this argument is that Schedule 4 to the Regulation was
inserted by the ACAT Legislation Amendment Act.
It was not made by the Executive
under section 129 of the Act.
reason for rejecting the argument is, for reasons given above, I do not consider
that the construction I have adopted leads
to an absurd or unreasonable result.
On the contrary, the provisions give effect to harmonious goals. They
balance the need to provide
procedural fairness, with the purpose of achieving a
quick and effective disciplinary system.
Interpretation compatible with human rights
applicant relied upon
Human Rights Act 2004
provides: “So far as it is possible to do so consistently with its
purpose, a Territory law must be interpreted in a way
that is compatible with
human rights.” The applicant submitted that a construction of the
Regulation which denied a licensee
a right of review of a decision to suspend a
licence, or a decision to disqualify a person from holding a licence, would be
inconsistent
Human Rights Act 2004
. That section
Everyone has the right to have criminal charges, and
rights and obligations recognised by law, decided by a competent, independent
and impartial court or tribunal after a fair and public hearing.
provision does not have application in this case.
applies to civil
proceedings,
but it does not
have the effect that a legislative provision which provides for only limited
merits review of an administrative decision
is not compatible with the
“Fair Trial” human
The Tribunal, in a merits
review, is not deciding “rights and obligations” within
Human Rights Act 2004
but rather is making an administrative
decision. Licensees have a right to seek judicial review of all administrative
decisions, consistently
section 21.
have concluded, for the reasons given above, that the reviewable decision in
item 19 of Schedule 4 to the Regulation, being to “take
disciplinary
action” under section 95 of the Act, refers only to a decision taken under
section 95(2)(c) of the Act to take
disciplinary action. It does not encompass a
decision to serve a notice of licence suspension or disqualification under
or 98 of the Act.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine the
applicant’s application. I have dismissed the
application under section
32(2) of the ACAT Act, on the basis that it is frivolous, vexatious or lacking
in substance.
The Tribunal orders that:
application is dismissed pursuant to section 32(2) of the
ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
, as the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction
to hear it.
And the Tribunal notes:
reasons for the dismissal decision will be
......................................
Presidential Member J Lucy
Date(s) of hearing:
4 and 18 September 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr C Eskine SC
Solicitors for the Applicant:
BAL Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr M Hassall
Solicitors for the Respondent:
ACT Government Solicitor
Act, s 95(1)
Act, s 95(2)
Respondent’s Submissions
Regarding Stay Application filed on 27 August 2025 at [15]
Respondent’s
Supplementary Submissions Regarding Stay Application,” filed 12 September
2025 at [19]
Respondent’s Submissions
Regarding Stay Application filed on 27 August 2025 at [13]
Respondent’s Submissions
Regarding Stay Application filed on 27 August 2025 at [14]
Respondent’s
Supplementary Submissions Regarding Stay Application,” filed 12 September
2025 at [21]
Applicant’s Written
Submissions in Reply in Support of Stay Application, filed 2 September 2025 at
Applicant’s Written
Submissions in Reply in Support of Stay Application, filed 2 September 2025 at
Legislation Act 2001
Applicant’s Further
Submissions on Jurisdiction of Tribunal, filed 10 September 2025 at [14]
Applicant’s Written
Submissions in Reply in Support of Stay Application, filed 2 September 2025 at
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media
Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
Northern Land Council v
[2020] HCA 33
, Kiefel CJ, Gageler and Keane JJ at [61], citing
Fink Holdings Pty Ltd v Australian Film Commission
(1979) 141 CLR
Northern Land Council v
[2020] HCA 33
, Kiefel CJ, Gageler and Keane JJ at [61], citing
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
Applicant’s Further
Submissions on Jurisdiction of Tribunal, filed 10 September 2025 at [19]
Act, s 123A; Regulation, cl
Port of Newcastle
Operations Pty Ltd v Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] HCA 39
Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Gordon, Steward and Gleeson JJ at [87], citing
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
Thiess v Collector of Customs
Commissioner of Taxation
v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
, French CJ, Hayne ,
Crennan, Bell and Gageler JJ at [39]
Legislation Act 2001
Legislation Act 2001
Commissioner of Taxation
v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
, French CJ, Hayne ,
Crennan, Bell and Gageler JJ at [39]
Hansard: Debates of the
Legislative Assembly for the Australian Capital Territory,
24 June 2003,
National Competition Policy
Review Report, page 53, cl 8.1.6
National Competition Policy
Review Report, page 54, cl 8.1.6
National Competition Policy
Review Report, page 55, cl 8.1.6
National Competition Policy
Review Report, page 55, cl 8.1.6
Government Response to
the Final Report on the National Competition Policy Review of Occupational
Regulation in the ACT Building and
Construction Industry Conducted by the Allen
Consulting Group - October 2000
Act as enacted, section
Act as enacted, s
Act as enacted, section
Act as enacted, section
Act as enacted, section
Magistrates Court Act
(as at 2004), ss 117, 120
Act as enacted, section
Act as enacted, section
92(1) and (2)
Act as enacted, section
Act as enacted, section
97(1)(c), 98(1)(c) and (d)
Act, Dictionary
Regulation, as enacted,
clause 45(n); contained in Schedule 1 to the Act, as enacted
Statute Law Amendment Act
2009 (No 2)
, Sch 1, Pt 1.4, item 1.11
Statute Law Amendment Act
2009 (No 2)
, Sch 1, Pt 1.5, item 1.13, introducing new item 13A in Sch 4 to
Statute Law Amendment Act
2011 (No 3)
, Sch 3, Pt 3.11, item 3.49
In The Matter of a Bail
Application by Isa Islam
[2010] ACTSC 147
Disorganized Developments
Pty Ltd v South Australia
[2023] HCA 22
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
Islam v Director-General,
Justice and Community Safety Directorate
[2021] ACTSC 33
Capital Property Projects (ACT) Pty Ltd v Australian Capital Territory
Planning and Land Authority
[2008] ACTCA 9
Eastman v Australian
Capital Territory
[2014] ACTSC 105
RTF format (419 KB)
Signed PDF/A format