Watson and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Ors [2008] ACTAAT 24 (1 October 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: WATSON AND ACT
PLANNING & LAND AUTHORITY & ORS
[2008] ACTAAT 24
Catchwords:
Land and planning - appeal against approval of multi-unit
residential building complex designed to provide affordable housing in
requirements of the Territory Plan relating to lease or development conditions -
whether proposed development compatible
with adjacent development - density of
development - appropriateness of boundary setbacks and adequacy of private open
and communal
space in light of adjacent public open space - whether pervious
surfaces required in car parking areas- impact of proposed development
traffic in adjacent street.
Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991, ss 7, 8, 13, 227, 230,
Land (Planning and Environment) Regulation 1992
Coghlan and ACT Planning and Land Authority & Ors
[2004] ACTAAT
Nowicki v Martyn and Johnston
(1996) 131 FLR 88
Ms S Tongue, Senior Member
Mr R Nichols, Member
Mr J Ashe, Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/50
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
ALISON WATSON
ACT PLANNING AND
HARRY & JUDY REDFERN
CHC AFFORDABLE
Parties Joined
Ms S Tongue, Senior Member
Mr R Nichols,
Mr J Ashe, Member
The Tribunal varies the respondent’s decision of 2 May 2008 as
to condition 3(a)(iii) the words: “including opaque fencing adjacent to
private open spaces of ground floor units”;
2. deleting condition 3(a) (ix);
a condition 3(a)(ix) that: “subject to evidence of support from the
Manager, Asset Acceptance, TaMS, a flared driveway
design for the entry to the
central carpark”;
a condition 3(e): “an external colour scheme in accordance with the
scheme lodged as an exhibit with the Tribunal”;
a condition 3(f): “a revised on-site stormwater detention plan including
run off from surface carparks providing for
water reuse on site”.
..............................
Senior Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/50
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
ALISON WATSON
ACT PLANNING AND
HARRY & JUDY REDFERN
CHC AFFORDABLE
Parties Joined
REASONS FOR DECISION
1 October 2008 Ms S Tongue, Senior Member
Mr R Nichols,
Mr J Ashe, Member
Introduction
Mrs Alison Watson (
“the applicant”
review of a decision of the ACT Planning and Land Authority (
respondent”
“the authority”)
Development Application (
“the 2007 DA”
). Approval was sought to construct a
multiunit development on Block 18 Section 21 in the Division of Holt at 12
Davison Place (
“the subject land”
2. The decision to approve the application was made pursuant to section 230
of the Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991
) and was subject to conditions imposed pursuant to section 245 of
the Land Act (
original decision”
3. The applicant, who opposes the development, is the current lessee of
Block 2, Section 20 in the Division of Holt and resides at
9 Davison Place. Mr
Harry and Mrs Judy Redfern, who are the current lessees of Block 1, Section 20
in the suburb of Holt, and reside
at 11 Davison Place, were joined as parties
who oppose the proposed development (
“the parties joined”
The applicant and the parties joined (“
the objectors
directly across the road from the southern boundary and entry points to the
subject land.
4. The DA was made by CHC Affordable Housing, which was joined as a party to
the proceedings (“
the developer
”). This is a non-profit
company limited by guarantee and a charity whose charter includes the
development of affordable housing.
It was represented in the proceedings by its
project officer, Mr Andrew Short.
5. In the hearing before the Tribunal the applicant, the objectors and the
developer were self-represented and Dr Douglas Jarvis
instructed by the ACT
Government Solicitor appeared for the respondent.
Applications and documents relating to the proposed development
6. The applicant lodged the 2007 application with the respondent on 5
November 2007. Objections to the development were received
from residents of
Davison Place and Griffiths Street and other residents. The application was
approved on 2 May 2008 subject to
compliance with conditions. In response to
these conditions the developer made changes to the proposed development and
amended plans. Meanwhile an appeal against the decision was made to
the Tribunal.
7. The developer has lodged a further Development Application (“
in relation to the subject land, the application has been
notified and the Tribunal was told that objections have been, or are being
to that proposal.
8. Prior to, and at the commencement of the hearing in relation to the 2007
DA, the objectors requested that the Tribunal not consider
the amended plans
prepared by the developer in response to the conditions imposed by the
respondent. The Tribunal decided that the
amended plans would illustrate how
improved compliance with the Territory Plan could be achieved. As this would
assist the Tribunal
in its task of reaching the correct or preferable decision
it decided to admit the documents into evidence.
Applicable Law and Policy
9. As this application was lodged prior to 31 March 2008 the 2002 Territory
”) applies.
10. The Plan is established by section 13 of the Land Act
framework is usefully described in
Nowicki v Martyn and Johnston
(1996) 131 FLR 88
). The object of the
Plan is described in section 7(1) of the Act as providing the people of the
Territory with an “ecologically
sustainable, healthy, attractive, safe and
efficient environment in which to live, work and have their recreation”.
to section 7(2)(a) the Plan sets out planning principles and policies
for giving effect to its object. When it considers whether
to approve an
application pursuant to section 230 a Territory authority must not make a
decision inconsistent with the Territory
11. Part A of the Plan sets out general planning principles and policies and
Part B contains specific objectives and policies for
giving effect to the
planning principles and policies set out in Part A. The objectives are a formal
statement of the planning aims
sought by the land use policy and the controls
are specific policy provisions identifying the purposes for which land may be
and planning criteria that apply to development proposals in the relevant
land use policy area.
12. Section 8 of the Land Act requires the Tribunal not to approve any act
inconsistent with the Plan. Clause 9.1(a) of Part A3 of
the Plan provides that a
DA cannot be approved if it is inconsistent with the applicable land use policy
in Part B which is the B1
Residential Land Use Policies (
). Part A3 section 9.1 provides that “the relevant authority
shall not approve a development or proposal for the use of land
that would be
inconsistent with” a list of matters. A “relevant authority”
includes the Tribunal and the use of
the mandatory word “shall”
makes it incumbent on the Tribunal to pay particular attention to the matters
listed which
include, inter alia:
(d) for proposals in a Residential Area, the relevant provisions of any
Residential Code at Appendix III;
Appendix III.2 is the Residential Design and Siting Code for Multi-Dwelling
Developments (
13. The subject land is located in an A10 Core Area and the A10 Residential
Core Policies, which are Area Specific Policies, are
also in Part B1. The
Objectives of the A10 policies include:
development respects existing streetscapes and adjoining development, or
contributes to the desired future suburban character
of the area as defined by
an approved master plan.
To retain a
moderate level of flexibility to accommodate a wider variety of additional
housing close to facilities and services to
meet changing community needs and
preferences.
To assist in
creating a more sustainable pattern of urban settlement by providing for more
housing to be developed close to identified
commercial centres.
14. The A10 policy control (g) states that the maximum site
density for residential development on a standard block “shall
a plot ratio of 0.5:1 (50%)....”.
In A10 areas in addition to the
general controls in clause 3.5 of the Residential Land Use Policies, there is a
control that multi-unit
housing redevelopment on standard blocks shall not be
approved on blocks with an area less than 1400m
Residential Core Areas. A standard block is a term defined in the Plan as
“a block with an area greater than 500m
originally leased or used for the purpose of single dwelling housing”. The
subject land is not a standard block as
it has not been leased or used
previously and consequently the above controls do not apply. They do however
give some guidance as
to appropriate block size and plot ratio in A10 areas.
15. As was explained in
(p 28), “(T)he Code itself is
divided into objectives, performance criteria and performance measures.
Performance measures
are stated in the introduction to the Code to be sufficient
to satisfy the objectives and relevant performance criteria (presumably
Code only) in most cases, and (that) normally an applicant does not have to
provide evidence beyond compliance with the performance
measures. Compliance
with performance measures will be ‘normally considered to meet the
objectives and performance criteria’
relevant to those performance
measures.” However, a failure to meet performance measures is not
necessarily fatal if the objectives
and criteria are met.
16. The objectives, performance criteria and performance measures in the
Plan that are relevant to the issues in this matter are
set out below.
17. Part A3 of the Plan, section 9.2 provides that:
(t)he relevant authority shall, in relation to an application to undertake
a development to a proposal to use land, carefully consider
the following
matters:...
relevant planning guidelines or interim guidelines contained in the Register of
Planning Guidelines;
Part A3, section 9.3 requires careful consideration by the Tribunal of:
d) impacts on the amenity of surrounding land uses...;
e) impacts on the visual amenity and landscape or streetscape of the
18. Section 245(3) of the Land Act gives the Tribunal the power to require
that the approval given by the authority for the development
does not take
effect unless a specified approval is revoked, amended or given and also gives
the Tribunal the power to impose a condition
that a specified controlled
activity be conducted to the satisfaction of a specified body.
19. The subject land is also subject to Lease and Development Conditions
attached to the lease when the developer acquired it. The
Land Act section 227
requires that the authority maintain a register of such conditions and they are
referred to in the Land (Planning
and Environment) Regulations 1992
“the Regulations”
). Part A3 paragraph 9.3 of the Plan
requires that a relevant authority
must consider
(emphasis added) a range
of matters and:
In addition to the matters in paragraph 9.2, the relevant authority shall
carefully consider those of the following matters that are
relevant to the
x) The provisions of any Lease or Development Conditions applying to the
20. The status of Lease and/or Development Conditions was discussed by the
Tribunal in
Coghlan and ACTPLA & Ors
[2004] ACTAAT 7
). The Tribunal agrees with the comments
made by the Tribunal at paragraphs 21 to 28 inclusive and the conclusion reached
at paragraph
28 that the intention of the authors of the Plan was to require the
relevant authority to carefully consider any Lease and/or Development
that had been approved in relation to a block of leased land.
21. As the Tribunal explained in
, in the Plan
“Lease” is defined as having the same meaning as in the Land Act.
“Lease Condition” is not
defined but Development Condition is
defined as:
any condition subject to the Land Act, contained in a lease or agreement
collateral to a lease, or in a lease or an agreement collateral
to the lease
that was made prior to the commencement of the Land Act.
The punctuation in this provision could be clearer. However it is sufficient
for this case that a development condition includes
a condition subject to the
Land Act which is contained in an agreement collateral to a lease.
Description of the Proposed Development
22. The subject land has an area of 1467.19 square metres with a frontage to
Davison Place of 45.5 metres. The block falls approximately
3 metres from
Davison Place down to the Trumper Street frontage of 15.8 metres to the north of
the block. On the northern, eastern
and western boundaries there is public open
space. The nearest adjacent property at the Trumper Street end is located 20
away on the eastern boundary. There is a public footpath on the western
boundary. There are mature trees in the public open space.
23. On the Davison Place frontage the objectors’ properties are
directly across the street. The parties joined have enjoyed
uninterrupted views
across the vacant land for 35 years. The residence at Block 17 Section 20 with
a frontage to Davison Place is
separated from the subject land by public open
space and there is a garage and planting on the western side of that property.
24. The proposed development consists of 7 two-bedroom units and 1 one
bedroom unit contained in two buildings. Unit 1 is an adaptable
unit. There
are car parking spaces allocated to each unit and two visitor parking spaces on
the site. A communal open space and
driveway is between the two buildings. All
of the units have north-facing decks and the private open spaces and communal
faces north.
25. The proposed building closest to Davison Place has an irregular front
facade generally set back more than 6 metres from the street
boundary but with a
small corner element set back 5.38 metres from the street boundary. The
building comprises Unit 1 which is an
adaptable unit, which means that it has
features to enable use by people with a disability. Unit 2 is at the ground
floor level
and above it are Units 3 and 4. Units 1, 2 and 3 are two-bedroom
units and Unit 4 is a one-bedroom unit. Unit 1 and Unit 3 have decks
adjacent to
the eastern boundary of the subject land. The deck of Unit 2 is adjacent to the
communal open space and the deck of
Unit 4 overlooks that space. This building
is not parallel to the eastern boundary but at two corners it is 1.052 metres
26. The other proposed building is located on the northern portion of the
block, set back from Trumper Street. It contains 4 two-bedroom
units facing
northeast. Car parking facilities are at the front of the units and the
bedrooms face the western and eastern boundaries
of the subject land. The
building is not parallel to the eastern boundary but at its closest point it is
a distance of 1.58 metres
from it and it is 1.6 metres from the western
27. There are two driveway entrances onto Davison Place with one for the
adaptable unit and one for the other units. A driveway
runs down the western
edge of the property to the rear building in a north-south direction.
28. There are no protected trees on the subject land but it is proposed that
mature trees will be retained, apart from a tree in
front of Unit 2. The
developers propose to take advantage of the borrowed landscape. Some evergreen
trees, eucalyptus, acacia and
other trees will be planted. There will also be
extensive planting of small trees and shrubs inside the property boundary. It
proposed that the boundary fence will consist of a combination chain link and
opaque material to provide screening for private open
spaces and open vistas
where appropriate.
29. Both buildings have flat roofs. As the land falls about 3 metres from
south to north the buildings are stepped down the block.
The issues, including evidence and findings
30. The Tribunal had before it the documents prepared by the applicant,
respondent and parties joined. The Tribunal visited and
inspected the subject
land and heard oral evidence from: the applicant; the objectors; Mrs Ravi Singh,
who is an ACTPLA senior assessment
officer; Mr John Randall, who is a traffic
expert called by the developer; and Messrs Short and Carr representing the
31. The applicant and the parties joined lodged the same statement of facts
and contentions. They called no expert witnesses to
support their contentions,
relying on the evidence of their own experience, the information contained in
the Tribunal documents,
the written statements and testimony of the
developer’s witnesses, their interpretation of the provisions of the Plan
Assessment Report of the proposed development prepared by Mr Ken
Hungerford, an assessment officer in the respondent’s office.
32. The applicant and the parties joined gave evidence that they have lived
in Davison Place for 32 and 35 years respectively. They
based their objections
to the proposed development on a range of matters set out in their statement of
facts and contentions, which
were tendered in evidence, save for paragraph 7
which referred to discussion during mediation in the Tribunal and was expunged
the document.
33. The developer outlined the compliance of the development application
with the Territory Plan, explaining the changes that had
been made to the plans
to comply with the conditions imposed by the respondent.
34. The evidence and argument focussed on the following issues.
(a) Streetscape
35. The A10 specific policies in the Plan include a number of
objectives:
development respects existing streetscapes and adjoining development, or
contributes to the desired future suburban character
of the area as defined by
an approved master plan.
To retain a
moderate level of flexibility to accommodate a wider variety of additional
housing close to facilities and services to
meet changing community needs and
preferences.
To assist in
creating a more sustainable pattern of urban settlement by providing for more
housing to be developed close to identified
commercial centres.
36. The explanatory statement to the A10 policies states their aim
.......... to retain opportunities for developing more housing close to
the facilities and services contained in the commercial centres
and to assist
over time in creating a more sustainable pattern of urban settlement for
37. A control in the A10 policies states that proposals involving
subdivision or consolidation of standard blocks for multi-unit
housing must be
accompanied by information that demonstrates how the proposed development fits
with the existing streetscape character
or statement of desired future suburban
character as defined by an approved master plan. There is no master plan for
Holt and the
block is not a standard block but the objective and control
regarding streetscape act as a guide. “Streetscape” is defined
Part D of the Plan as follows:
Streetscape
includes the visible components within a street
(or part of a street) including the private land between facing buildings,
the form of buildings, treatment of setbacks, existing trees,
landscaping, driveway and street layout and surfaces, utility services
street furniture such as lighting, signs, barriers and bus shelters.
38. The objectors argued that the proposed development was incompatible with
the existing streetscape primarily because of its appearance.
The parties
joined referred to it being “in our face”. Davison Street consists
of 10 single storey dwellings and Trumper
Street is similarly configured. The
houses were all privately built.
39. A main concern of the objectors is the density of the development on the
block. They argue that, by reducing the number of units
to 6, traffic pressure
would be alleviated, communal and private open space would be increased for unit
residents, the amenity of
neighbours would be improved and the development would
be more compatible with the streetscape.
40. The objectors argued that the use of a more attractive building material
than colour bond cladding such a brick or cement render
would help the dwellings
fit in to the surrounding area.
41. The respondent’s evidence was that the proposed development met
the requirements of the Plan in terms of height and compliance
with the building
envelope requirements. Colour bond roofs are commonly used throughout the
suburbs of Canberra and exist side by
side with tiled roofs. While cladding may
not be used on existing dwellings it is being used in newer developments and is
not necessarily
a reflection of cheaper materials.
42. The developer provided a new schedule of exterior finishes for the
proposed development that has been prepared for the 2008 DA
for the subject land
in response to the objectors’ concerns. It shows alternative finishes
that are acceptable to the objectors
and can be provided at a moderate cost to
the developer.
43. The respondent gave evidence that the density of 8 units on a block of
this size complied with the Plan. There is no mandatory
requirement or criteria
of the provision of communal open space but the accessibility of public open
space provides an additional
open space amenity.
44. In addressing the issue of the impact of the proposed development on the
streetscape, the Tribunal considers all the objectives
of the Plan including the
need to provide a wider variety of housing close to commercial centres to meet
changing community needs
and preferences. The proposed development meets the
requirements of the Plan and, while it will be different from existing dwellings
in the area, the Tribunal accepts the respondent’s evidence that it is
consistent with development in newer areas of Canberra.
The Tribunal accepts
that the changes in exterior finishes proposed by the developers make the
development more appropriate to the
streetscape of Davison Place. In
considering the height of the proposed development the Tribunal has had regard
to the slope of
the subject land and the compliance of the development with the
Plan as it fits within the building envelope. In considering the
density of the
proposed development the Tribunal has regard to the fact that this development
is not on a standard block but, in
any event, the development does not exceed a
plot ratio of 50%.
45. The objectors were concerned about the height of the buildings.
Existing residences in Davison Street and Trumper Street are
one storey.
46. The relevant objective, performance criteria and performance measure of
the Code are:
To provide an appropriate residential scale within a
To ensure scale, height and length of a building and walls
relative to side and rear boundaries are of appropriate residential
Buildings to be limited in height to ensure compatibility
with adjacent development.
Building walls to be sited and to be of length and height to
ensure no significant loss of amenity to adjacent dwellings and private
Buildings not exceeding two storeys in height.
46. We have already addressed the issue of the impact of the proposed
development on the streetscape. Our examination of the plans
of the development
application, the site inspection which we undertook and the evidence presented
at the hearing indicates that the
height of the building is acceptable. A view
of a two storey dwelling on adjoining land is not an unusual feature of a
residential
environment and two storeys meets the performance measure D1.1. We
therefore consider that the development is of appropriate residential
having regard to the kind of residential development permitted by A10 policies
and that it meets objective 1.1 and performance
criterion 1.1.
(c) Traffic and Safety
47. Section 7 of the Land Act states the object of Plan as follows:
(1) The object of the plan is to ensure, in a way not inconsistent with the
national capital plan, that the planning and development
of the ACT provides the
people of the ACT with an ecologically sustainable, healthy, attractive, safe
and efficient environment in
which to live, work and have their recreation...
48. Part A3 clause 9.3 of the Plan (Plan Administration
Policies) requires, among other things, that consideration be given to:
The amount of traffic likely to be generated and its impact on the
movement of traffic on the road system.
49. The Residential Land Use Policies at Part B1 of the Plan include the
objective to:
amenity, safety and special qualities .... of established residential areas
while carefully managing change in suitable
locations .
50. A main concern for the objectors was the traffic and related
safety issues from the addition of 8 units in a cul-de-sac street
that currently
contains 10 houses. The objectors noted that there is not a “No through
Road” sign on the street and
some vehicles drive into the street expecting
to be able to access Holt shops. The objectors were also concerned about the
that would be caused by the increase in visitors’ vehicles
parking on the street and causing congestion, particularly when
vehicles, such as garbage trucks, seek access to the 8 units.
51. The applicant argued that the traffic problems would be reduced by
providing access to the development through Trumper Street
and by reducing the
number of units. The parties joined gave evidence that the proposed development
contains two driveway entrances
on Davison Place, both of which are opposite
their residence at 11 Davison Place. They question whether two driveways are
and are concerned about vehicle lights at night, general vehicle
congestion and possible accidents as the age of the parties joined
52. The respondent noted that one of the driveways is an entrance to the
adapted unit, the site has an unusual shape and the additional
driveway will not
compromise the safety of pedestrians and vehicles.
53. The developer submitted that two visitor parking spaces had been
allocated, an improved vehicle entry arrangement devised for
the rear units and
planting planned to soften the visual impact of parking bays. During the
hearing the developer proposed a variation
on the driveway entrance to Unit 1 to
alleviate the concerns of the parties joined about traffic light at night,
although the applicant
was concerned that this might increase their impact on
her enjoyment of her property.
54. Mr Randall gave evidence that the standard number of trips estimated for
a single unit dwelling is 8 per day and a multiunit
dwelling is expected to
generate slightly fewer. This estimate is based on the Future Urban Areas
Residential Subdivision Development
Code traffic table. It was pointed out
that, whilst this Code is part of the 2008 Territory Plan and therefore not
directly applicable,
the table has been included in previous documents of a
similar kind, and the relevant provisions have been unchanged for some years.
The Tribunal notes that this Code relates specifically to new estates in Future
Urban Areas. However it is useful as an indicator
of acceptable traffic volumes
in local streets. Based on this table the 10 current houses in Davison Place
are expected to generate
80 trips per day and the multiunit dwelling 48 trips
per day which brings the total for the street to 128 per day. Under the Code
is an “Access Street A” with the capacity of up to 300 trips per day
which brings Davison Place well within the acceptable
range for vehicle
movements on a street with no footpaths.
55. The respondent agreed with the evidence given by Mr Randall, stating
that Davison Place has the capacity to accommodate the additional
generated by the proposed development. Mrs Singh’s evidence was that it
is considered safe for pedestrians to walk
on a street without footpaths when
the verge widths are the distance of those in Davison Place (approximately 5
metres at the north
and 8 metres at the south) and where the sightlines comply
with the Australian Standard (AS2890).
56. It is clear that there will be an increase in traffic in Davison Place
from the proposed development but the evidence is that
the traffic flows will be
within the acceptable range. The interference with the objectors’ amenity
from headlights on vehicles
emerging from the proposed development can be
alleviated in part by flaring the driveway to Unit 1. During the hearing the
provided a sketch showing a possible driveway design solution that can
be explored.
(d) Setbacks of buildings and driveway
57. The setback requirements are contained in the Plan’s objectives,
performance criteria and performance measures.
58. Objective 2.1 is:
to provide attractive streetscapes which reinforce the functions of the
street and enhance the amenity of dwellings.
59. The relevant performance criteria are:
The setback from the street to be appropriate to the
streetscape character, the efficient use of the site and the amenity of
The privacy of dwellings and outdoor areas to be
Dwellings to be sited to enable their northern facades
to receive adequate sunshine in winter.
Dwellings to be sited to ensure good sunlight access to
their main private open space.
Buildings to be sited to minimise overshadowing of
northern facades of adjacent dwellings and private outdoor spaces.
Building walls to be sited and to be of length and
height to ensure no significant loss of amenity to adjacent dwellings and
open spaces.
60. Performance Measure D2.1 states:
Minimum setback of buildings from street front boundary
All street frontages:
lower floor level 6 metres
pper floor level 7.5 metres
.........as shown on ..........development conditions included in a lease
or agreement collateral to a lease;
61. The objectors referred to Mr Hungerford’s Assessment Report and
argued that Unit 1 is 5.38 metres from the front boundary
instead of 6 metres
and Unit 3 is 6.86 metres from the boundary instead of 7.5 metres. Some
objectors are concerned about overlooking
of their houses.
62. The respondent argues that the Lease and Development Conditions contain
setbacks that are less than the setbacks contained in
the Code and, in any
event, there is compliance with the Code.
63. The respondent told the Tribunal that when the lease over the subject
land was being drawn up it contained draft development
conditions which included
setbacks that varied from those in the Code, having regard to the adjacent
public open space. The respondent
and developer submit that this was an
agreement collateral to the lease. Mrs Singh told the Tribunal that these were
when the lease was finalised. The Tribunal was later told
that the conditions appear on a register but the Tribunal made its own
investigations and was unable to locate those conditions.
64. The respondent submits that the Plan provides that proposals that do not
meet the Plan’s performance measures may still
be considered in terms of
whether they meet the Plan’s objectives and performance criteria.
Further, it is argued the location
of the development at the end of the
cul-de-sac, where the street widens, pushes the frontage forward. Finally it
argued that the
encroachment does not have a significant detrimental impact.
65. One of the objectors’ main concerns is their perception that
concessions have been made to the developers. They argue
that the setbacks
allowed by the respondent on the eastern, northern and north-eastern boundaries
are a concession that would not
be given to an ordinary citizen seeking to build
on a residential block. They also refer to the concessions on the setbacks on
front boundary and driveway (see below).
66. The respondent submits that the relevant boundaries are adjacent to
public open space and, in the case of the eastern boundary,
a significant
distance from screened boundaries of neighbours. The respondent cites the
provision in the Plan for the measures in
the Lease and Development Conditions
to prevail over the performance measures in the Plan. The respondent refers to
performance
criteria P2.1.
67. There is a small encroachment of the driveway within the 1.5 metre
setback for a short distance on the north-western side of
the property.
68. The side boundary setbacks of the Plan aim to deal with the issues of
loss of amenity of
adjacent dwellings and their private open spaces (see performance measures P3.1
to 3.5 above). In this development,
adjacent dwellings are separated by more
than 20 metres of urban open space which is well in excess of the distances
achieved under
the performance measures. The Tribunal is therefore of the view
that the performance criteria and objectives of the Plan are met.
69. In any event the evidence before the Tribunal was that conditions
preceded the lease and were “dropped” once the
lease was entered.
There is no current evidence of the conditions being attached to the lease. The
Tribunal finds they are in an
agreement collateral to the lease and these
conditions vary the setbacks imposed by the Plan.
(e) Private Open Space
70. Objective 4.1 of the Plan refers to the requirement to provide each
dwelling with private open space that meets the reasonable
recreational, service
and storage needs of residents. Performance criteria 4.1 to 4.4 inclusive
relate to location and use of private
open space for the enhancement of
enjoyment of the dwelling by its occupants and to take advantage of the site.
Performance measure
4.1 relates to the minimum dimensions of the private open
71. The objectors argue that the private open space requirements for the
ground floor and upper floor units are not met.
72. The respondent submits that, while the ground floor units do not
strictly meet the 6 square metres private open space requirement
they meet the
reasonable needs of residents, are directly accessible to indoor daytime living
areas and located to the north of the
units. Given the communal open space and
the location of the development in public open space the respondent considers
the private
open space allowance acceptable.
73. The developers are willing to amend the fencing plans to provide a
combination of opaque fencing adjacent to private open spaces
of units and
chain-link fencing to allow access to the vistas of the public open space.
74. The need to strictly apply the performance measures in relation to
access to private open space and communal open space are alleviated
in this case
by the access to public open space on three sides of the subject land. The
Tribunal finds that the objectives and performance
criteria of the Code are met
in relation to private open space and communal open space.
(f) Surface of parking areas
75. Performance Measure 5.6 states:
Surface parking areas and access ways are designed, surfaced and graded
to facilitate stormwater infiltration on-site, and minimise
the areas of hard
surfacing materials.
76. This requires that the surface of parking areas and access ways allow
infiltration on-site and that areas of hard surfacing material
are minimised.
The developers have provided for concrete on the relevant surface areas which
will allow water to flow into underground
tanks to provide water for the
landscaped areas. At the hearing Mr Short said that he could investigate
whether the provision of
pervious material was possible.
77. Mrs Singh said that the respondent interpreted the word
“infiltration” to mean that porous material must be provided
conceded that this interpretation could be examined.
78. The Tribunal interprets performance measure 5.6 regarding infiltration
of stormwater on site to mean that surfaces must allow
water from storms to be
collected on the site and channelled into the ground. This is the commonsense
interpretation of that provision.
Since the developer’s solution for
collecting rainwater from parking areas allows recycling of water to grow plants
the Tribunal accepts that the requirements of the Plan have been met.
(g) Site facilities including waste management and postal deliveries
79. Objective 8.1 is to provide site facilities and design them to be
convenient and visually attractive, blend with the development
character and require minimal maintenance.
Performance criterion 8.1
requires the location and design of site facilities including garbage bin
enclosures and mail boxes to be
co-ordinated and complementary to the overall
building design. Criterion 8.3 requires a convenient area suitable for storage
to be provided in order to protect the amenity of the block and the
street in general. Performance measure 8.2 requires that garbage
handling and
storage meet the requirements of Waste Management of the Department of Urban
80. The objectors raised concerns about the access of service vehicles to
bins set out for waste collection on Davison Street and
the location of bins
within the complex. The respondent had sought the approval of a waste
management plan by TaMS to alleviate
their concerns about waste management and
the developer provided evidence that approval had been given to such a plan.
81. The Tribunal is satisfied that the waste management plans for the site
meet the requirements of the Plan.
82. The objectors questioned the suitability of proposed letterbox
arrangements. The respondent provided evidence that Australia
Post is satisfied
with the revised arrangements for deliveries. Mrs Singh gave evidence that this
does not necessarily mean that
compliance with the Australian Standard has been
83. The Tribunal accepts that the letterbox arrangements meet Australia
Post’s standards. However, they do not appear to the
meet the Australian
Standard which is necessary to complement the overall building design in
accordance with performance criterion
8.1. The Tribunal therefore imposes a
condition in this regard.
(h) Other Issues
84. The objectors argued that this development was premature and should be
integrated with other potential adjacent development which
would impact on
traffic flows. This included the redevelopment of Holt Primary and preschool
which are scheduled to close and the
opening of the “super school”
on Starke Street.
85. The objectors argued that the introduction of affordable housing would
reduce property prices in the area. The respondent said
there was no evidence
that this occurs. The developer told the Tribunal that affordable housing is
targeted at those who are ineligible
for government housing assistance but are
on moderate incomes.
86. The Tribunal’s task is to decide whether the 2007 DA meets the
requirements of the Plan. Other matters raised by the objectors
are outside the
scope of this review.
87. The subject land is in an A10 area and the lease relates to land
available for affordable housing. Unlike many applications
before the Tribunal
involving objections from close neighbours abutting the side fence of the
proposed development, the subject land
is in an island of open space. Block 24
Section 21 is public open space. The adjacent dwelling on Block 17 is separated
proposed development by a large garage and mature plantings. The
dwelling adjacent to the southern end of the proposed development
is located at
a distance of approximately 20 metres and some screening already exists for that
88. The developers have provided amended plans in response to the conditions
imposed in the original decision and in response to
concerns of the objectors.
The changes they have made are reflected in the 2008 application which is not
before this Tribunal.
89. The Tribunal has carefully considered the concerns of the objectors
performance criteria
and performance measures in the Plan including the objectives for A10 areas
which include increasing the diversity
and density of housing close to
commercial facilities and providing a wider range of affordable housing.
PUBLICATION DETAILS
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by Member's
________________________________________________________________________
ALISON WATSON
RESPONDENT:
ACT PLANNING &
LAND AUTHORITY
PARTIES JOINED:
HARRY & JUDY REFERN; CHC AFFORDABLE HOUSING
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
DR D JARVIS
PARTIES JOINED:
SOLICITORS: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
ACT GOVERNMENT SOLICITOR
PARTIES JOINED:
OTHER: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
PARTIES JOINED:
SELVES; MR A SHORT
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
MS S TONGUE, SENIOR MEMBER
MR R NICHOLS,
MR J ASHE, MEMBER
DATE/S OF HEARING:
DATE OF DECISION:
_______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (164 KB)
Signed PDF/A format