Director-General, Community Services Directorate v T, D and Y [2025] ACTCC 2 (8 August 2025)
CHILDRENS COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Director-General, Community Services Directorate v T, D and Y
[2025] ACTCC 2
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Magistrate Stewart
Catchwords:
CARE AND PROTECTION
– application of implied undertaking to
not use documents and materials in other care proceedings – no such
implied undertaking
in care and protection proceedings
Legislation Cited:
Children and Young People Act 2008
Court Procedures Act 2004
Court Procedures Rules
Cases Cited:
Harman v Secretary of State for Home Office
(1983) 1 AC 280
Hearne v Street
[2008] HCA 36
Paul Graham Unicomb v Gregory Scott Blais
[2024] NSWSC 903
Director-General, Community Services Directorate (Applicant)
Independent Children’s Lawyer (ICL) (First Respondent)
Mother (Second Respondent)
Father (Third Respondent)
Representation:
K. Musgrove / Director-General, Community Services Directorate
J. Cruise / ICL
B. Collaery / Father’s Representative
ACT Government Solicitor (First Respondent)
Legal Aid ACT
(Second Respondent)
Collaery Lawyers (Third Respondent)
File Number:
CP 183 of 2023
CP 184 of 2023
CP 185 of 2023
MAGISTRATE STEWART:
Introduction
Court has noted a significant increase in applications in the care and
protection jurisdiction this year that seek relief from
the implied undertaking,
or rule, in
Harman v Secretary of State for Home Office
(1983) 1 AC 280
matter presents itself as a convenient vehicle to set out a ruling in the
context of care and protection proceedings. Whilst
this decision cannot bind any
other judicial officer sitting in this jurisdiction it may present a helpful
enunciated the expectation of the English courts about certain categories of
materials in one litigation proceeding not being used
in a separate litigation
proceeding. Lord Diplock’s decision at 304-305 is oft quoted and worth
“...an order for production of documents to a
solicitor on behalf of a party to civil litigation is made upon the implied
undertaking
given by that solicitor personally to the court (of which he is an
officer) that he himself will not use or allow the documents or
copies of them
to be used for any collateral or ulterior purpose of his own, his client or
anyone else; and any breach of that
implied undertaking is a contempt of court
by the solicitor himself. Save as respects the gravity of the contempt no
distinction
is to be drawn between those documents which have and those which
have not been admitted in evidence; to make use for some collateral
or ulterior
purpose of the special advantage obtained by having possession of copies of any
of an adverse party’s documents
obtained upon discovery is, in my view, a
contempt of court.”
Hearne v Street
[2008] HCA 36
) the majority stated
“Where one party to a litigation is compelled,
either by reason of a rule of court, or by reason of a specific order of the
court, or otherwise, to disclose documents or information, the party obtaining
the disclosure cannot, without leave of the court,
use it for any other purpose
other than that for which it was given unless it is received into
pause to observe that the majority of the
applications in the care
and pertain to materials previously disclosed by her in the conduct
of earlier proceedings on the same file for the same child, or
on files for
siblings or half siblings.
should also be noted that although materials may be received into evidence at
hearing, not all decisions of the Court are published
and all care proceedings
are conducted in a closed court
This is relevant because both
are decided on the
basis that materials are placed onto the public record a result of being
received into evidence. That is not necessarily
so with care matters.
think that it is useful to separate the types of materials that appear on care
and protection files into categories – affidavits,
expert reports and
assessments gathered without an order of the Court, Court ordered reports and
assessments, care plans that set
out what the DG plans to do in terms of her
responsibility to a child
applications and, sometimes, written submissions. I will also deal with
subpoenaed materials.
is trite to observe that not every affidavit filed and served in civil
proceedings is done so by the same compulsion as materials
produced under
care proceedings affidavits are often filed in compliance with timetables that
are issued by a registrar or magistrate. However,
this is not compelled
disclosure, it is a function of case-flow management that may or may not be
complied with depending on how
the party intends to proceed with their case.
For example, a party may have no further materials above and beyond what they
already placed before the Court and would have difficulty complying with a
filing order “to file and serve any further materials
relied upon”
in those circumstances.
undertaking were the subject of lengthy consideration by
McGrath J in
Paul Graham Unicomb v Gregory Scott Blais
[2024] NSWSC 903.
I draw the following from his Honour’s broad consideration of the
fall within the implied
undertaking, disclosure of the documents
of information must be
Timetabling
orders which require a party to file and serve an affidavit generally do not
compel disclosure of specific
information;
of affidavits in the usual course of litigation does not involve a compulsory
and very serious invasion of privacy and confidentiality
as contemplated in
a matter proceeds by hearing or contested application, affidavits on care files
would not be received into evidence –
they are served to the parties and
filed on a court file that is not open to a
explain my findings below in the context of care matters: a child may initially
be the subject of a 12 month or two-year order
application depending on the
child’s age. There may then be further applications to amend or revoke the
initial orders. There
may also be different files with applications for full
siblings and half-siblings (to be clear, by half sibling I mean only one
is shared).
find that any affidavit previously filed by the DG can be filed without leave by
her in a later application relating to the same
child. This is because these
materials are the DG’s own materials and not filed as a result of
compelled disclosure. This
is because further applications under the
Children and Young People Act 2008
) in relation to
the same child are not properly categorised as fresh, new or different
proceedings. Subsequent applications under
the CYP Act for the same child are
applications in the same proceeding. In the words of
there is no
collateral or ulterior purpose in re-using affidavits in later proceedings in
relation to the same child.
any affidavit that is filed by another party in a care proceeding can be filed
and served or relied upon by that party
or another party on the same file in
later applications without leave of the court.
there is another care file for a full sibling, there are the same parties
– the same parents, the DG and the same over-arching
child representative.
Each of those parties has already been served with (or created) the material
from the other sibling’s
file in those other proceedings. No leave
is required to use the other full sibling’s
affidavit material from any party.
Consideration
of litigation for a half-sibling is not as tricky as it may seem at first blush.
Where an affidavit has been filed for
a half sibling, only part of that
affidavit’s contents may be relevant to care proceedings for a different
half-sibling. For
example, part of the affidavit may relate to a parent who has
little or no contact with their child’s step-sibling. The conduct
parenting capacity of that parent may have little or no relevance to care
proceedings for their child’s half-sibling. It
does not stop the
affidavit from one file from being filed and served on a step-sibling’s
file without leave. Objections may
be taken to
, but there is no apparent
requirement to seek leave for release from the
undertaking in such
a circumstance.
Reports filed without a Court order
materials are filed voluntarily and draw the same immunity from the
undertaking as affidavits. I find that they cannot be subject to
an implied undertaking in any circumstance of care litigation by
a party that
has previously filed them. Similarly, where reports have been voluntarily filed
on a care file they can (in theory)
be filed and served without leave on any
other care file by any party who has been previously served with them. Relevance
to a different
care file may be a separate issue.
Court ordered reports
Court has power to make appraisal and assessment orders under the
Such orders inevitably result
in reports being filed and served. Attendance by parents is a result of an
order – although
some parents choose not to attend. I am not aware of
contempt proceedings in the circumstance of parental non-attendance at
assessments.
A non-attending parent is deprived of the benefit of being
observed with the child who is the subject of the litigation and further
deprived of the benefit of input into the report.
those circumstances the same findings apply to Court ordered reports. They do
not involve compulsory disclosure in the sense of
and are not subject to an implied undertaking pursuant to
for any party who has been served with them in a care proceeding.
plans are usually filed and served voluntarily by the DG, bearing in mind that
the Court cannot make a care and protection order
without considering a care
In that sense, an order
will generally not be granted unless a care plan is filed. This does not amount
to compulsory disclosure.
find that care plans are not subject to an implied undertaking pursuant to
for any party who has been served them in a care proceeding.
Subject to considerations of relevance, care plans may be filed in other
proceedings by any party who had created or been served with them in another
care proceeding.
Applications and written submissions
see no reason to regard these two categories of materials in a different manner
to affidavits, care plans and court ordered reports.
Applications and written
submissions may be the subject of court orders that attempt to ensure case-flow
management. If a party chooses
not to file them, they cannot be considered by
the Court. The party loses the opportunity of persuasion. They are not compelled
disclosures
and do not attract the protection of
Subpoenaed materials
materials are involuntarily produced by order of the Court. They form a similar
category of documents to materials produced
by a civil discovery process.
Subpoenaed materials remain with a file for the life of a file unless ordered
they may require an application for further access and copying, subpoenaed
materials on the same file for the same child do
not require an application for
release from the
undertaking in later applications.
do expect that there should be an application for such a release when a party
seeks to subpoena materials produced in relation to
a different child or file.
One might also expect a challenge to the relevance of such materials where there
is not a common parent
on the file in which the application is filed.
find that in relation to care and protection proceedings, the implied
undertaking in
does not apply to filed affidavits, reports, care
plans, applications and submissions. The implied undertaking does not apply to
subpoenaed materials where subsequent applications are made for the same
thank the DG and children’s representative for their helpful
submissions.
I certify that the preceding twenty-eight [28] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the decision of his Honour Magistrate Stewart
Associate: Zeinab Elsheekhly
Date: 8 August 2025
Court Procedures Act
and Young People Act 2008
ACT (CYP Act)
Unicomb at 246,247 and
Court Procedures
(ACT) r 2903
To be clear
‘parent’ also includes ‘carer’ in this
Bearing in mind that
the rules of evidence do not apply without intervention from the Court –
CYP Act (ACT) Part
CYP Act (ACT) s
RTF format (187 KB)
Signed PDF/A format