Land Architecture Australia and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Ors [2008] ACTAAT 33 (18 December 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE
APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: LAND ARCHITECTURE AUSTRALIA AND ACT PLANNING & LAND
AUTHORITY & ORS
[2008] ACTAAT 33
(18 DECEMBER 2008)
Catchwords:
Land and planning – appeal against refusal of
approval of multi-unit residential building in Fraser – requirements of
the Territory Plan relating to development conditions – whether proposed
development compatible with adjacent development –
density of development
– appropriateness of boundary setbacks and adequacy of private open space
– impact of proposed
development on traffic in adjacent street.
Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991, ss 7, 8, 13, 222, 230, 231, 245
Land (Planning and Environment) Regulation 1992, s 37
Planning and Development Act 2007
Tree Protection Act 2005
AMC Projects Pty Ltd and ACT Planning & Land Authority &
[2006] ACTAAT 13
(2 May 2006)
City of Unley v Claude Neon
(1983) LGRA 65
Freeman & Evans and ACT Planning & Land Authority
(16 June 2006)
Mison v Randwick Council
[1991] 23 NSWLR 734
Nowicki v Martyn and Johnston
(1996) 131 FLR 88
Pashalidis and ACT Planning & Land Authority
[2004] ACTAAT 21
Stoddart & Ors and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Anor
[2007] ACTAAT 27
(21 December 2007)
Strategic Developments Pty Ltd and Minister for Urban Services
(6 May 1999)
Whitfield and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Ors
[2008] ACTAAT 5
(28 February 2008)
Winn v Director of National Parks and Wildlife
[2001] NSWCA 17
Ms S Tongue, Senior Member
Dr E McKenzie, Senior
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/61
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
LAND ARCHITECTURE
ACT PLANNING AND
ANTHONY HOBBS
DAVID & JANE MARTIN
GARY JOHNSTON
Ms S Tongue, Senior Member
Dr E McKenzie, Senior
The decision under review is set aside and substituted with
following decision:
The development application is refused.
..................................
Senior Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/61
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
LAND ARCHITECTURE
ACT PLANNING AND
ANTHONY HOBBS
DAVID & JANE MARTIN
GARY JOHNSTON
REASONS FOR DECISION
18 December 2008 Ms S Tongue, Senior Member
Dr E McKenzie,
Senior Member
Land Architecture Australia Pty Ltd (
has sought review of a decision of the ACT
Planning and Land Authority (
“the respondent”
“the authority”
to refuse approval of a Development
Application (No. 200800855) (
). Approval was sought to
construct a multi-unit development on Block 1 Section 19 in the Division of
Fraser at the street address
of 25 Nott Street (
“the subject
2. The applicant lodged the DA with the respondent on 28 March 2008 pursuant
to section 230 of the Land (Planning and Environment)
“the Land Act”
). (The Land Act was repealed by the
Planning and Development Act 2007
with effect from 31 March 2008). Objections
to the development were received from thirty-two residents of the area.
Pursuant to
sections 222 and 230(2) of the Land Act and the Land (Planning and
Environment) Regulation 1992 (now repealed) the prescribed time
for a decision
was 45 working days (section 37) and, since a decision was not made before the
expiration of that prescribed period,
the application was taken to have been
refused. The refusal of the application is deemed to have occurred on 2 June
original decision
”). The application for review by
the Tribunal was lodged on 11 July 2008. The Tribunal granted an extension
of time for lodgement.
3. The applicant is the current lessee of the subject land. In the hearing
before the Tribunal the applicant was represented by Mr
D Mossop instructed by
Dibbs Abbott Stillman, lawyers. Dr D Jarvis, instructed by the ACT Government
Solicitor, appeared for the
respondent.
4. Messrs Anthony Hobbs and Gary Johnston, Dr Anthony Krone, Mr and Mrs EA
and MJ Brett, and Mr and Mrs David and Jane Martin were
joined as parties who
oppose the proposed development (
“the parties joined”
They were self-represented at the hearing. Mr Hobbs is the current lessee of
Block 10 Section 19 in the suburb of Fraser, and
resides at 20 Nott Street,
across the road from the subject land. Dr Krone is the current lessee of Block 2
Section 19 in the suburb
of Fraser, and resides at 23 Nott Street which adjoins
the subject land on the western boundary. Mr Johnston is the current
of Block 32 Section 19 in the suburb of Fraser, and resides at 45 Daley
Street which adjoins the rear of the subject land at the
north-eastern
side. Mr and Mrs Martin are the current lessees of Block 1 Section 18 in
the suburb of Fraser, and reside at 43 Daley
Street which does not directly abut
the subject land but is immediately adjacent and removed by the public pathway.
Mr and Mrs Brett
are the current lessees of Block 7 Section 19 in the suburb of
Fraser and reside at 14 Nott Street. Mr and Mrs Martin were represented
hearing by Mr Ewers who is the lessee of Block 10 Section 18 in the suburb of
Fraser which has the street address of 27 Nott
Street and therefore immediately
adjoins the subject land on the eastern boundary being only removed by the
public pathway. The parties
joined and Mr Ewers (“
”) thus live immediately adjacent or in the immediate
vicinity of the subject land.
Applicable Law and Policy
5. As this application was lodged on 28 March 2008 and the new Territory
Plan commenced on 31 March 2008, the 2002 Territory Plan
”) applies.
6. The Plan is established by section 13 of the Land Act.
framework is usefully described in
Nowicki v Martyn and Johnston
(1996) 131 FLR 88
). The object of the
Plan is described in section 7(1) of the Act as providing the people of the
Territory with an “ecologically
sustainable, healthy, attractive, safe and
efficient environment in which to live, work and have their
recreation”. Pursuant
to section 7(2)(a) the Plan sets out planning
principles and policies for giving effect to its object. When it considers
to approve an application pursuant to section 230 a Territory authority
must not make a decision inconsistent with the Plan.
7. Part A of the Plan sets out general planning principles and policies and
Part B contains specific objectives and policies for
giving effect to the
planning principles and policies set out in Part A. The objectives are a
formal statement of the planning aims
sought by the land use policy and the
controls are specific policy provisions identifying the purposes for which land
may be used
and planning criteria that apply to development proposals in the
relevant land use policy area.
8. Section 8 of the Land Act requires the Tribunal not to approve any act
inconsistent with the Plan. Clause 9.1(a) of Part A3 of
the Plan provides that a
DA cannot be approved if it is inconsistent with the applicable land use policy
in Part B which is the B1
Residential Land Use Policies (‘Part
B1’). Part A3 section 9.1 provides that:
the relevant authority shall not approve a development or proposal for the
use of land that would be inconsistent with “a list
9. A “relevant authority” includes the Tribunal and the use of
the mandatory word “shall” makes it incumbent
on the Tribunal to pay
particular attention to the matters listed which include, inter alia:
(d) for proposals in a Residential Area, the relevant provisions of any
Residential Code at Appendix III.
10. Appendix III.2 is the Residential Design and Siting Code for
Multi-Dwelling Developments (“
11. The subject land is located in an A10 Core Area and the A10 Residential
Core Policies, which are Area Specific Policies, are
also in Part B1. The
Objectives of the A10 policies are:
development respects existing streetscapes and adjoining development, or
contributes to the desired future suburban character
of the area as defined by
an approved master plan.
To retain a
moderate level of flexibility to accommodate a wider variety of additional
housing close to facilities and services to
meet changing community needs and
preferences.
To assist in
creating a more sustainable pattern of urban settlement by providing for more
housing to be developed close to identified
commercial centres.
12. The controls for A10 policies state:
a) Multi-unit housing........ may be approved in circumstances specified
..........multi-unit
housing redevelopment on standard blocks shall not be approved on blocks with an
area less than 1400m2.
and basements may be permitted in addition to 2 storeys. However, on a standard
block, ramps to basement car parking forward
of the building line shall
generally not be approved unless the block has a public road frontage greater
than 30 metres.
maximum site density for residential redevelopment on a standard block or block
resulting from consolidation of standard blocks
shall depend on provisions in
the relevant residential code at Appendix III (eg, setbacks from boundaries,
building envelope controls,
private open space requirements, etc) and shall not
exceed a plot ratio of 0.5:1 (50%) ........
13. A “standard block” is a term defined in the Plan
as “a block with an area greater than 500m2 that was originally
used for the purpose of single dwelling housing”.
14. As was explained in
(T)he Code itself is divided into objectives, performance criteria and
performance measures. Performance measures are stated in the
introduction to the
Code to be sufficient to satisfy the objectives and relevant performance
criteria (presumably of the Code only)
in most cases, and (that) normally an
applicant does not have to provide evidence beyond compliance with the
performance measures.
Compliance with performance measures will be
‘normally considered to meet the objectives and performance
criteria’ relevant
to those performance measures.
However, a failure to meet performance measures is not necessarily fatal if
the objectives and criteria are met. That is, if a DA
does not meet the
performance measures it could still meet the objectives and criteria.
15. Part A3 of the Plan, section 9.2 provides that:
(t)he relevant authority shall, in relation to an application to undertake
a development to a proposal to use land, carefully consider
the following
relevant planning guidelines or interim guideline contained in the Register of
Planning Guidelines;
16. Part A3, section 9.3 requires careful consideration by the
Tribunal of:
d) impacts on the amenity of surrounding land
uses..........;
e) impacts on the visual amenity and landscape or streetscape of the
17. Section 245(3) of the Land Act gives the Tribunal the power to require
that the approval given by the authority for the development
does not take
effect unless a specified approval is revoked, amended or given and also gives
the Tribunal the power to impose a condition
that a specified controlled
activity be conducted to the satisfaction of a specified body.
18. The Land Act section 231(5) provides:
The relevant authority may make a decision under section 230 that is
inconsistent with the advice of the conservator under the
Tree Protection Act
in relation to a regulated tree only if the authority is
satisfied, having regard to the broader strategic objectives of the territory
plan, that all reasonable development options and design solutions have been
considered to avoid or minimise the need to damage the
tree or undertake
prohibited groundwork.
Tree Protection Act 2005
(1) This section applies if the conservator is satisfied, on reasonable
grounds, that a development involves, or is likely to involve,
an activity that
would or may—
(a) damage a protected tree; or
(b) be prohibited groundwork in—
(i) the protection zone for a protected tree; or
(ii) a declared site.
(2) The conservator may give the planning and land authority written
advice in accordance with
Preliminary issue
20. The DA was lodged on the last working day on which the 2002 Territory
Plan applied to original applications. The Tribunal was
told that the
application would not be approved under the 2008 Territory Plan. The Tribunal
did not test the veracity of this claim
and has not had regard to this
information as it cannot influence its application of the 2002 Plan to the facts
Description of the Proposed Development
21. The subject land has an area of 1428 square metres with a narrow
frontage to Nott Street of 13.5 metres. The block fans out so
that the rear
boundary is 52.34 metres with a western boundary of 54.96 metres and eastern
boundary of 42.2 metres. A public pathway
runs along the eastern boundary of the
block separating the block from the neighbour, Mr Ewers. The subject land block
falls diagonally
approximately 6.6 metres from Nott Street to the
22. The proposed development consists of 8 units comprising four two bedroom
units and four one bedroom units. The proposed building
has two storeys of
living spaces and a basement car park which is excavated and takes advantage of
the slope of the land. It is proposed
that there be four units on each of the
two storeys above ground with each having a balcony with a glass balustrade
and/or some screening
to comply with the requirements in relation to overlooking
(see below). The proposed building has a hipped, concrete tiled roof.
23. There are two car parking spaces allocated to each two bedroom unit and
one to each one bedroom unit. Access to the carpark is
via a driveway down the
western boundary (along the fence line adjacent to Dr Krone’s property at
23 Nott Street). There are
two proposed visitor parking spaces in the basement.
All of the units have north facing decks and the private open spaces and
open spaces face north. There would be pleasant views to the
north, particularly from the balconies on the proposed upper level.
24. A narrow easement runs along the rear east-west fence line of the
property to which ACTEW requires access.
25. There is a protected tree on the subject land near the eastern
boundary. The developers also propose to take advantage of the
landscape. It is also proposed that there will be extensive planting of small
trees and shrubs inside the property boundary.
The issues, including evidence and findings
26. The Tribunal had before it the documents prepared by the applicant,
respondent and parties joined. The Tribunal visited and
the subject land and heard oral evidence. The applicant’s witnesses were:
Mr Paul Cohen, a planner; Mr Andrew Curran,
a traffic expert; and Mr Eddie
Gonzalez, an architect. The respondent’s witness was Ms Rachel Dang, an
ACTPLA assessment officer.
The parties joined gave evidence and also called Mr
Edward Streatfeild who is a planner, builder and former ACTPLA assessment
All witnesses are qualified experts in their respective fields. During
the course of the hearing thirty-one documents were admitted
into evidence.
27. The evidence before the Tribunal shows that plans prepared in March 2008
were considered by ACTPLA officials prior to the original
decision. Further
plans that were lodged with the application to the Tribunal were dated 16
September 2008. The applicant provided
amended plans dated 15 October 2008 that
clearly showed the amended portions of the plans. The applicant outlined the
of the development application with the Territory Plan, explaining
the changes made to earlier plans to comply with the concerns
indicated by the
respondent in the original decision. Ms Dang, Messrs Cohen and Streatfeild
and other witnesses commented on the
amended plans at the hearing. The
parties’ expert witnesses supported their contentions and the information
contained in the
Tribunal documents and had the opportunity to refute evidence
provided by the other parties.
28. The parties joined gave evidence that some of them have lived in Nott
Street and Daley Crescent for over thirty years. They based
their objections to
the proposed development on a range of matters set out in their statement of
facts and contentions, which were
tendered in evidence, and other matters. They
relied, in part, on concerns about aspects of the development’s
non-compliance
with the Plan raised by the respondent in response to the
original plans and the continuing concerns of the respondent in relation
amended plans.
29. The Tribunal was assisted by written submissions provided by all the
parties and supplemented by oral evidence and submissions.
30. The evidence and argument focussed on the following issues.
Private Open Space
31. Objective O4.1 of the Code refers to the requirement:
To provide each dwelling with private open space that meets the reasonable
recreational, service and storage needs of residents.
32. Performance Criteria P4.1 and P4.2 relate to location, dimensions and
capability of private open space for the enhancement of
enjoyment of the
dwelling by its occupants and to take advantage of the site.
33. Performance Measure D4.1 refers to dimensions that will normally meet
the objectives and performance criteria. These are 6 metres
and 1.8 metres on
34. The objectors argue that the provision of private open space (POS) for
residents of the ground floor and upper floor units are
inadequate and the
requirements of the Plan are not met. The respondent noted that
requirements of residents differ.
35. The applicant submits that while the ground floor units do not strictly
meet the 6 square metres private open space requirement
they meet the reasonable
needs of residents, are directly accessible to indoor daytime living areas and
located to the north of the
36. With regard specifically to the dimensions of private open space areas,
the Tribunal is satisfied that the requirements are met
in the proposed
development.
Traffic and Safety
37. Section 7(1) of the Land Act states:
The object of the plan is to ensure, in a way not inconsistent with the
national capital plan, that the planning and development of
the ACT provides the
people of the ACT with an ecologically sustainable, healthy, attractive, safe
and efficient environment in which
to live, work and have their
recreation...
38. Part A3 clause 9.3 of the Plan (Plan Administration Policies) requires,
among other things, that consideration be given to:
The amount of traffic likely to be generated and its impact on the
movement of traffic on the road system.
39. The Residential Land Use Policies at Part B1 of the Plan include the
objective to:
safeguard amenity, safety and special qualities ....... of established
residential areas while carefully managing change in suitable
40. A main concern for the objectors was the traffic and related safety
issues from the addition of eight units in a suburban street.
Mr Hobbs argued
that limited manoeuvrability in the basement car park would result in increased
on street parking. The objectors
were also concerned about the problems that
would be caused by the increase in visitors’ vehicles parking on the
causing congestion, particularly when service vehicles, such as
garbage trucks, seek access to the eight units.
41. The applicant submitted that, in response to the respondent’s
concerns with the original plans, the layout of the basement
car park was
remodelled and the visitor car parking spaces moved inside.
42. Mr Curran gave evidence that traffic usage on Nott Street is low and the
car parking entry and other arrangements comply with
Australian Standards.
43. The Tribunal finds that it is clear that there would be an increase in
traffic in Nott Street from the proposed development but
the evidence is that
the traffic flows will be within the acceptable range.
Access and mobility
44. ACT planning laws do not require an adaptable unit to be included in a
development of less than ten units. The ACT Guidelines
for Access and
Mobility (AMG), to which the Tribunal has regard, refer to the need for a
continuous path of travel to communal spaces.
There is no requirement that such
a path be provided but the applicant has indicated a path on the amended plans.
The applicant has
also nominated that a stairway from the basement car park to
the ground floor would be capable of accommodating a stair lift but
flight of stairs would need to be climbed to reach the street entry. No doubt
reasonable accommodation would be arranged
by residents if necessary. The
Tribunal finds that there is nothing in the Plan requiring further accessibility
Streetscape
45. Part A3 of the Plan requires the Tribunal to “carefully
consider” the following matters that are of relevance to
e) impacts on the visual amenity and landscape or streetscape of the
46. An objective of the A10 policies in the Plan is to:
ensure development respects existing streetscapes and adjoining
development, or contributes to the desired future suburban character
of the area
as defined by an approved master plan.
47. A control in the A10 policies states that proposals involving
subdivision or consolidation of standard blocks for multi-unit
housing must be
accompanied by information that demonstrates how the proposed development fits
with the existing streetscape character
or statement of desired future suburban
character as defined by an approved master plan. There is no master plan for
Fraser but the
objective and control regarding streetscape act as a guide.
48. As the Tribunal noted in
AMC Projects Pty Ltd and ACT Planning &
Land Authority & Ors
[2006] ACTAAT 13
(2 May 2006):
It is apparent that, in order to balance the competing planning objectives
of providing for continuing development without further
urban expansion, on the
one hand, and protection of the existing low density character of most
residential areas, on the other hand,
one strategy to achieve those objectives
has been to identify parts of some residential areas with specific features
which are to
lose the kind of protection considered appropriate for most
residential areas.
Whitfield and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Ors
[2008] ACTAAT 5
(28 February 2008) the Tribunal said (para
It is to be expected, therefore, that more intensive development of the
kind proposed in this case, provided that it meets the requirements
relevant design and siting code and does not fail to respect the existing
streetscapes and the adjoining development, will
be permitted in areas to which
the A10 policies apply. It would not meet the overall objectives of those
policies to require development
proposals to replicate the style and scale of
development undertaken in accordance with the policies they have
50. In addressing the issue of the impact of the proposed development on the
streetscape the Tribunal considers all the objectives
of the Plan including the
need to provide a wider variety of housing close to commercial centres to meet
changing community needs
and preferences.
51. “Streetscape” is defined in Part D of the Plan as
Streetscape includes the visible components within a street (or part of a
street) including the private land between facing buildings,
including the form
of buildings, treatment of setbacks, existing trees, landscaping, driveway and
street layout and surfaces, utility
services and street furniture such as
lighting, signs, barriers and bus shelters.
52. In the original reasons the respondent said that the development did not
meet the objective but the revised plans showed windows
on the south and western
elevations assisting in presentation to the street. The applicant submitted that
impact of the proposal
viewed from Nott Street is reduced because of the facts
that: the street curves sharply at the point of the subject land; there is
significant amount of vegetation on the street; and the development is cut into
the downward slope.
53. The objectors argued that the proposed development was incompatible with
the existing streetscape. They said that Nott Street
consists of single
storey dwellings and the bulk, height and nature of the development would be
inconsistent with the surrounding
development. In submissions the objectors
noted the limited opportunity for passive surveillance from the allegedly
limited front
windows which lack a visual connection with the street. The
objectors referred to the ACT Crime Prevention and Urban Design Resource
(CPUDRM) which refers to surveillance afforded by activity rooms and argues for
special consideration where development is
adjacent to a laneway.
54. The respondent said the impact of the proposal viewed from the street is
reduced by being cut in so it is similar in height to
the adjacent single storey
development and by the curve of the street and vegetation. It was
submitted that the addition of windows
assist the presentation to the street.
55. If the term “streetscape” is interpreted broadly, the
arguments of the parties in relation to the bulk or density
of the development
can usefully be considered in this section of the decision, as well as in later
sections. It is appropriate to
introduce consideration of this issue here since
it arises when testing the development against several controls, objectives,
and measures in the Plan.
56. In response to illustrations of various views from adjoining blocks of
the development provided by Mr Gonzales, the respondent
submitted that Blocks
32, 31 and 2 would be unacceptably affected by the visual impact of the
development when viewed from their
rear POS. Ms Dang said she thought the impact
would be significant on Blocks 31 and 32. The respondent submitted that there
be a greater impact on the amenity of Block 2 (Dr Krone’s block)
because the view from his block encompasses the length of
the development.
57. The parties joined supported the respondent’s submissions and
argued that the development had an inappropriate visual impact
on the residents
and users of Nott Street and Daley Crescent. They noted that Mr Streatfeild
considers the development to be credible
in relation to streetscape issues. They
do not argue that it should not be approved on the streetscape issue alone but
the problems be considered in relation to the overall assessment of
the development.
58. They argued also that the proposed development was inconsistent with
existing development and referred to the complex roof form
cited by Ms Dang in
her evidence. Regarding the roof issue, the Tribunal has regard to Ms
Dang’s concession that there are
other hipped roofs in the area as well as
the applicant’s submission that there are other complex hipped roof forms
59. The applicant further submitted that there was no uniformity of
architectural form in the area and the proposed development was
consistent with
existing development. Mr Cohen gave evidence that the building would be no more
remarkable than others in the area.
The applicant’s evidence was that the
proposed development met the requirements of the Plan in terms of height and
with the building envelope requirements. It was said to have
appropriate address to the street and provide passive surveillance through
windows of Units 1 and 3.
60. The Tribunal has regard to the A10 policy of respect for “existing
streetscapes” which would include Nott Street
and Daley Crescent. It
is required to carefully consider the “streetscape of the area” but
the definition of streetscape
in the Plan refers to the visible components
“within a street”. Street is not defined in the Plan so the
Macquarie Dictionary
definition of “paved way or road” is used. This
leads to a consideration of the streetscape from Nott Street rather than
“area” of residences in Daley Crescent, or even down the pathway on
the eastern side of the subject land. This is
important in this case
because the Tribunal finds that the development viewed from Nott Street clearly
respects the existing streetscape
as it presents an angled section with windows
providing passive surveillance to the street. It is set on the low side of the
down the slope and takes advantage of the borrowed landscape of a well
vegetated street – as was seen during the site visit
and stated in
uncontroverted evidence by Mr Cohen.
Site facilities including waste management
61. Objective O8.1 of the Code is to provide site facilities and design them
to be convenient and visually attractive, blend with
the development and street
character and require minimal maintenance.
62. Performance criterion P8.1 requires the location and design of site
facilities including garbage bin enclosures and mail boxes
to be co-ordinated
and complimentary to the overall building design. Criterion P8.3 requires a
convenient area suitable for storage
purposes to be provided in order to protect
the amenity of the block and the street in general. Performance measure D8.2
that garbage handling and storage meet the requirements of Waste
Management of the Department of Urban Services.
63. The objectors raised concerns about the waste removal arrangements. Mr
Streatfeild said that it created unnecessary risk for
waste management vehicles
to drive in forwards and reverse backwards up the driveway. The respondent had
sought the approval of a
waste management plan by the Territory and Municipal
Services (TAMS) to alleviate their concerns about waste management and the
provided evidence that approval had been given to such a plan.
64. The TAMS approval (T88) stated that: “Waste Vehicles will enter
the property and drive to the end of the driveway (ramp)
where they will collect
the waste from the recycling and refuse hoppers...The truck will then reverse
back out of the development
and continue on its way.” Evidence was given
on the gradient of the ramp up which the truck would be reversing. The
pointed out that, as presently proposed, the vehicle access ramp must
descend from about Reduced Level (RL) 619 to RL 611. Mr Curran
conceded that, at
one point, the ramp gradient was 1:5.6 (18%). The Australian Standard (AS 2590
1-2004) was cited.
65. During the course of the hearing a revised plan for the ramp was
proposed but the respondent submitted that the plan was unworkable
and provided
an overlay plan to prove this (Ex 9). The applicant told the Tribunal it would
be possible to prepare a suitable revised
plan. The respondent argued that TAMS
would have to approve any revision to the ramp plan.
66. The Tribunal is not satisfied that the plans for the ramp, and thus the
plans for the waste management removal from the site,
meet the requirements of
the Plan. The evidence is unclear about the degree of compliance of the ramp
gradient and the modifications
required for it to enter the basement at the
correct entry point. Revisions are required to the ramp to satisfy the
requirements
of “convenience” and “amenity”. If this
was the only unresolved matter the Tribunal may impose a condition
but there are
other issues of non-compliance (see below).
Number of storeys
67. Control 3.4 of the Part B1 provides:
Except where provided for in a relevant Area Specific Policy (see Section
4) or in Special Requirements under the National Capital
Plan, buildings shall
not contain more than two storeys.
Subject to clause 3.6, a
basement and/ or an attic, may also be permitted. Notwithstanding this clause or
clause 3.6, on land where
a lawfully constructed building exceeds 2 storeys in
height, a new building or buildings up to the height of the existing building
may be permitted subject to consideration of any adverse impact resulting from
increase in building bulk.
68. The two storey requirement also appears in the height performance
measure that is discussed below.
69. “Basement” is defined in Part D of the Plan as:
a space within a building where the floor level of the space is
predominantly below natural ground level and where the finished floor
the level immediately above the space is less than 1.0 metre above natural
ground level.
70. “Natural ground level” is defined as meaning “the
ground level at the date of grant of the lease of the
71. The Tribunal was told that the lease of this block was granted in 1975.
The contour lines produced as result of a survey in 2007
(T doc 384) provide a
guide to the natural ground level (NGL) but excavations and the existing
building on the subject land make
it impossible to accurately ascertain the NGL
without a current detailed survey.
72. As a result of cross-examination of the oral evidence given by the
applicant’s witness, Mr Gonzalez, it became apparent
that part of the
north-eastern portion of the floor level above the basement of the proposed
development would exceed the permitted
one metre height limit above natural
ground level.
73. The respondent, with the support of the parties joined, submitted that
this would have the effect that the basement – at
the north-east point
– could not be characterised as a basement. Since the only other
possible characterisation is “storey”
this would mean the
development is three storeys at that part of the building. The respondent said
this could also impact on the
plot ratio. The applicant’s evidence was
that the current plot ratio is 42%, which allows scope for an increase in
utilisation
before reaching the maximum allowable level of 50%.
74. The precise location and dimensions of the area which would infringe the
one metre height limit could not be determined at the
hearing. Both applicant
and respondent agreed that the extent of the problem could only be resolved
after a detailed survey was undertaken.
The possible remediation of the problem
is thus uncertain. The applicant suggested that excavation and lowering of the
basement floor
in the (undefined) area in question, together with an option to
step down a private open space area if required, could be a possible
which would not impact upon the rest of the building, and further contended that
the Tribunal could remit the matter to
the Authority with a condition
incorporating these options. By contrast, the respondent submitted that the
uncertainty about the
location and extent of the area affected by the
infringement and the number of potential consequential changes that might have
be made to the development in order to remedy the situation meant that it
would not be appropriate for the Tribunal to remit the
matter with such a
75. The respondent opposed the imposition of such a condition on the ground
that an approval by the Tribunal should not leave matters
of such broad scope
for further approval. In support of this contention it cited previous Tribunal
Strategic Developments Pty Ltd and Minister for Urban
[1999] ACTAAT 10
(6 May 1999) and
Pashalidis and ACT Planning
& Land Authority
[2004] ACTAAT 21
(24 May 2004). It also cited
Director of National Parks and Wildlife
[2001] NSWCA 17
Mison v Randwick
[1991] 23 NSWLR 734
City of Unley v Claude Neon
The applicant warned of the danger of applying decisions from other
76. The Tribunal has reviewed the authorities cited which show that a
condition such as that proposed by the applicant is not appropriate
revisions would have the effect of so substantially altering the development
that it becomes, in effect, a new proposal.
One reason for this is potential
denial of administrative justice to parties with an interest in commenting on
changes to the development.
77. It is agreed that, at one point, the proposed development consists of
three storeys and is therefore non-compliant at that point.
A survey is required
to determine the extent of the non-compliance and enable revision of the plans.
The extent of the modifications
that would be needed to the building’s
design is unknown. It is not appropriate for the Tribunal to formulate a
condition or
conditions to overcome the problem when the extent of the problem
is uncertain and the consequences are unknown.
Overlooking
78. Control 7 of the Code deals with the interfaces between dwellings.
Objective O7.2 is:
To limit overlooking of private open space and to enable residents to
effectively control outlooks between rooms in adjacent dwellings.
Performance Criterion P7.2 requires:
The private open spaces and living rooms of adjacent dwellings to be
protected from direct overlooking by dwelling layout, screening
distance or landscaping.
Performance Measure D7.2 requires:
Outlook from windows, balconies, stairs, landings and decks or other
private, communal or public areas within a development to be
screened or
obscured if there is a direct view into private open space of another
Performance Criterion P3.1 requires:
the privacy of dwellings and outdoor spaces to be protected
The setbacks from boundaries, which are discussed below, are also designed to
achieve this.
79. The blocks most directly affected by overlooking and privacy issues are
the next door neighbours (Dr Krone at Block 2 Section
19 and Mr Ewers at Block
10 Section 18) and the neighbours over the back fence (Mr Johnston at Block 32
Section 19 and the lessee
at Block 31 Section 19, who is not a party to these
proceedings but was an objector to the original application). Other
on the downward slope, including Mr and Mrs Martin (Block 1 Section
18) would also be somewhat affected. Lessees of properties on
side of Nott Street looking down onto the proposed development are less affected
by this issue (e.g. Mr Hobbs at Block 10
Section 19).
80. The Tribunal was assisted by drawings provided by the parties showing
sightlines from the upper level units to the private open
spaces of the affected
properties. Mr Cohen, for the applicants, provided an estimation of distances
from the balconies of units
in the proposed development to the back gardens of
adjacent dwellings (Ex 16). For example, he estimated the distance from
8 to Block 32 as 27 metres, the distance from Unit 8 to Block 31 as 31
metres and the distance from Unit 3 to Block 2 as 27 metres.
The point at which
these measurements were taken was questioned but they are a guide to the
relevant distances. For example, Dr Jarvis
noted that the pool in the garden of
Block 32 is closer than the distance stated by Mr Cohen.
81. The site visit also provided the view from the subject land and the
relevant private open spaces. The Tribunal was able to view
the extent of
current overlooking from the existing building on the subject land in
conjunction with actions taken by all neighbouring
residents to mitigate the
effects of overlooking, having regard to the fact that the land is situated on
the slope of Mt Rogers and
drops over six metres from the front of the block to
the rear and continues to fall beyond the rear boundary.
82. It is important in this case that the Tribunal carefully apply the words
in the Plan. The relevant objective refers to the need
overlooking and the criterion refers to the need to “protect”
there are challenges for any development on
a sloping block. As the respondent noted in submissions, the Tribunal
(differently constituted)
has previously observed that the Plan does not require
total elimination of overlooking, but that it be kept to an acceptable level,
having regard to the intention of the Plan to allow higher density development
in some areas:
Freeman & Evans and ACT Planning & Land Authority
[2006] ACTAAT 20
(16 June 2006) at 65.
83. In the decision in
Stoddart & Ors and ACT Planning & Land
Authority & Anor
[2007] ACTAAT 27
(21 December 2007), the
Tribunal (differently constituted) discussed the meaning and inter-relationship
of relevant provisions of
the Code. In that decision, the Tribunal considered
the application of Performance Measure D7.2 when dealing with the interface
multiple units in a development and dwellings on adjoining land. We
agree with the Tribunal’s interpretation of D7.2 in that
decision and its
statement at paragraph 70 that:
It is to be expected that planning guidelines would be concerned to impose
stricter controls over the development of multi-unit developments
their potential for greater impact than single dwellings on the amenity of the
properties of adjoining land owners.
84. The applicant submitted that the privacy of dwellings on Blocks 30, 31
and 32 would be protected by the distance between them
and the upper floor
balconies and further, that the privacy of the private open spaces of adjacent
blocks is protected by the inability
to see the areas of POS near the dwellings,
some of which have other structures intervening.
85. In the case of Block 2, that applicant pointed out that in the amended
plans the balcony of unit 3 complies with the performance
measure D7.2 and notes
that it faces a blank wall for some distance. The applicant argued that only a
small part of the POS on this
block would be visible.
86. In respect of the potential to overlook Block 32, the applicant argued
that the privacy of Block 32 is limited and protected
by screening on the
balcony of Unit 8, existing vegetation that will be retained and a shade cloth
structure on the property. It
was further argued that only a very small portion
of the block falls outside the limits of the performance measure D7.2 and the
of POS at the rear of the house is at least 27 metres from the balcony. The
applicant suggested that any overlooking could be further
reduced by the
addition of a small extension to the proposed screen.
87. In relation to Block 31 the applicant pointed out that only a small
portion of the southern corner of the block is within 9 metres
of the boundary
and contended that any views from the balconies of the upper floor units to
Block 31 are obscured by vegetation and
a 1.8 metre high fence. The applicant
argued that the area of POS in the back garden is large and its use is not
clear. The applicant
noted that the covered barbeque area is screened by an
aviary and the owner has chosen not to plant vegetation.
88. In the case of Block 30, the applicant argues it is more than 20 metres
from the balconies at its nearest point and that distance
eliminates any issue
of privacy or overlooking.
89. Mr Gonzales described the vegetative screening methods proposed to limit
overlooking. He stated that a 4 metre high screen of
pittosporum plants would be
planted along the fence line between the subject land and Blocks 31 and 32. The
Tribunal was given documentary
evidence about the capacity of pittosporum to
grow quickly and provide screening. Ms Dang pointed out that the ACTEW easement
that fence line means that screen planting there is limited to shrubs of
no more than a metre in height. When the parties joined
argued that ACTEW can
request that such vegetation be removed at any time, the applicant responded
that to date no plantings have
had to be removed.
90. In response, the parties joined argue that temporary structures such as
pergolas, aviaries and sheds in the back gardens of Blocks
31 and 32 should not
be relied upon to answer concerns about overlooking as they may be removed. As
evidence of this, Dr Krone (Block
2) stated that the POS on Block 2 is being
re-developed which he believes demonstrates the changing nature of the use of
back yards.
It was submitted that residents could reasonably expect that
performance measures would be upheld to protect their existing and future
interests in making use of those spaces without unreasonable
overlooking.
91. Mr Johnston, who lives on Block 32, argues that the
“imposing” development would result in a significant impact from
overlooking and loss of privacy. He also expressed a concern for the amenity of
the residents in Unit 8, which would be adjacent
to his property boundary,
because of the high sill windows and screening.
92. The respondent submitted that the overlooking arises not only from the
slope of the land but also from the design of the proposal
which is not stepped
down the slope, resulting in the upper floor level being elevated several metres
above the natural ground level
of adjacent blocks. Ms Dang gave evidence that
the plans were amended with the result that the balcony of Unit 3 complies with
Code. She stated that a person standing on the balcony of Unit 3 could look
into the rear of Block 2 (Dr Krone’s residence)
from heights of over 5
metres. The respondent argued that the issue for all the upper floor level (UFL)
balconies is whether the
effect on the amenity of adjacent blocks caused by
overlooking is kept to an acceptable level by distance or screening. The
submitted that due to the relative height of the balconies, despite
the distance and vegetation, people using the POS of Blocks 2,
31 and 32 would
feel that they were easily observed from the adjacent UFL balcony level and that
this would detract unacceptably
from the amenity of POS in those blocks. The
respondent asked whether it would be a correct or preferable decision for the
to find that overlooking is limited and the privacy of outdoor spaces
would be protected.
93. The Tribunal has carefully considered the proposed development in
relation to the overlooking of adjoining properties with regard
for planting
proposals, taking into account the Plan’s recognition that landscaping
proposals have a legitimate role to play
in the assessment of privacy issues.
(Appendix lll.2, P9.2 and P7.2).
94. Units 8 and 6 are adjacent to the boundary of Block 32. There is
existing vegetation on the subject land and there is a proposed
although this will always be subject to ACTEW’s access rights. There is
currently overlooking from the house on the
subject land but the proposed
development is much closer and does not comply with the performance measure,
albeit there is only minimal
non-compliance.
95. Some of the POS on Block 31 can be overlooked from the balcony of Unit
8, past the screen. Indeed a person standing on the balconies
of all the units
who is interested in the activities of their neighbours could go onto their
balcony and look over into the neighbouring
properties.
96. It is the bottom eastern corner of Block 2 which is most exposed to
overlooking from the balconies. This is the area that is
re-development by Dr Krone. It is some distance from the development and there
is some existing vegetation on his block.
There is limited scope for planting on
the subject land due to location of the proposed waste unit.
97. The Tribunal agrees that the proposed development is, as the respondent
pointed out, not designed to step down the block, but
is designed as a
two-storey building which, on a sloping block cannot but overlook the adjacent
properties to varying degrees. In
addition, there is some non-compliance with
relevant performance measures for setbacks. While the Tribunal notes the
applicant has
adjusted the plans and added extra measures such as screens and
vegetation to limit overlooking of adjacent residents, the Tribunal
finds there
is direct overlooking of neighbouring residents due to the height at the rear of
the proposed development from upper
floor balconies. Although distance,
screening devices and landscaping assist in some limiting of overlooking of
private open spaces
of adjacent dwellings, particularly Blocks 2 and 32, they
have not been protected from direct overlooking due to the dwelling layout
the proposed development.
Setbacks of buildings and driveway
98. The issue of setback requirements is closely connected with overlooking.
The setback requirements are contained in the Plan’s
objectives,
performance criteria and performance measures.
To site buildings to meet projected user requirements for
To site and design buildings to promote energy efficiency and
access to sunshine.
To ensure scale, height and length of a building and walls
relative to side and rear boundaries are of appropriate residential character.
99. The relevant performance criteria are:
P2.1 The setback from the street to be appropriate to the streetscape
character, the efficient use of the site and the amenity of
P3.1 The privacy of dwellings and outdoor areas to be protected.
P3.2 Dwellings to be sited to enable their northern facades to receive
adequate sunshine in winter.
P3.3 Dwellings to be sited to ensure good sunlight access to their main
private open space.
P3.4 Buildings to be sited to minimise overshadowing of northern facades
of adjacent dwellings and private outdoor spaces.
100. The performance measures provide minimum setbacks that will normally be
considered to meet the objectives and performance criteria.
The required
setbacks for lower floor levels are 3 metres and 6 metres for upper floor levels
with blank walls or walls with windows
with sill heights over 1.7 m or with
obscure glazing (if located more than 12 metres behind the UFL
line). In relation to other walls, outer faces of unscreened decks, balconies
and external stairs up to 12 metres behind
the UFL building line must be set
back 6 metres and over 12 metres behind the building line must be set back 9
Stoddart & Ors
(see above) the Tribunal analysed
the operation of objective O3.1 in conjunction with performance measure D3.1 and
performance criterion
P3.1. This Tribunal agrees with its statement that:
In practice, the specified minimum side and rear boundary setback
performance measures of Performance Control 3 have been applied
as the means of
affording privacy to dwellings and their POS on land which adjoins the site on
which the proposed development is
to be undertaken. ...The application of
performance measure D3.1 and performance criterion P3.1 in this way is not
obviously supported
by the relevant objective (O3.1) which, relevantly to the
issue of privacy, is expressed in a way that suggests it is confined in
application to achieving privacy for occupants of the land on which the
(multi-unit) development is to be undertaken.
102. As noted elsewhere, the steep slope of the subject land presents
significant problems for a building in respect of overlooking.
In response to
the respondent’s concerns about overlooking, adjustments were made to the
original plans. First, screens on
the balconies on some upper level units were
altered. The parties joined were not satisfied that the adjustments removed
bedrooms 1 and 2 of Unit 8 were raised to 1.7 metres but the parties joined
argued this would reduce the amenity of residents of the units. Other
adjustments were also made.
103. The two main areas where setback concerns arise are the balconies of
Unit 3 and Unit 8. Ms Dang agreed that while a small part
of the balcony of Unit
3 had been non-compliant this had been remedied in the amended plans. The Unit 3
balcony is adjacent to a
blank wall on the neighbouring property and receives
northerly sun. There is a view from the balcony over the backyard of the
The balcony is above the driveway for vehicles travelling to the
basement but would not be unduly affected by traffic.
104. Mr Cohen conceded that a screen located on the outer edge of the Unit 3
balcony to reduce any overlooking of Blocks 30 and 31
is an inelegant solution
that detracts from the utility of the balcony. The applicant submits that this
screen should be removed.
105. A small part of the Unit 8 balcony is within the setback area and the
applicant concedes that it does not meet the performance
measure. The question
whether it meets the objectives and criteria cannot be finally determined until
the height issue is considered
(below) because the issues are interwoven.
106. The Unit 8 balcony is within the 9 metre setback on the outer edge of
the balcony. The applicant explained to the Tribunal
how the plans could
be adapted to comply strictly with the setback but submitted that, since the
variation was slight, the impact
minimal, and the effect on residents’
amenity significant, the change was not warranted. The respondent and parties
argued that the privacy of the residents of adjacent blocks was not
107. The requirement that there must only be two storeys in a development
has already been discussed, as has the fact that the development
is on a sloping
block oriented to the north at the rear. Any development placed on this site
would have significant POS areas looking
out to the north and, given the slope
of the land, are likely to be elevated above natural ground level to a
significant extent.
This is particularly the case when the proposed building is
a two storey development.
108. The applicant’s evidence was that the proposed development meets
the requirements of the Code in terms of height and compliance
with the building
envelope requirements. The respondent submitted that the proposed development is
of a height and scale that would
unduly affect the amenity of the residences of
adjacent blocks at the side and rear. The parties joined support the
respondent’s
submissions.
109. One of the A10 objectives is respect for adjoining development. The
relevant objective, performance criteria and performance
measures of the Code,
some of which appear also elsewhere in this decision, are:
Objectives:
O1.1 To provide an appropriate residential scale within a locality.
O3.3 To ensure scale, height and length of a building and walls relative
to side and rear boundaries are of appropriate residential
Performance Criteria:
P1.1 Buildings to be limited in height to ensure compatibility with
development.
P3.5 Building walls to be sited and to be of length and height to ensure
no significant loss of amenity to adjacent dwellings and
private open
110. The agreed evidence is that Unit 8 has an RL of 617.3. The balcony of
Unit 3 is over 5 metres higher than Dr Krone’s adjacent
block (Block 2)
and a person standing on the balcony would be at about 7 metres above it. The
roof of the development is obviously
even higher. The slope of the land means
that the UFL of the development is elevated several metres above the natural
ground level
on adjacent blocks – even allowing for the slope of the
natural ground level on those blocks. Dr Krone gave evidence to the
Tribunal of his plans to redevelop the private open space at the rear of his
block. There is some vegetation on this block and Mr
Cohen gave evidence that
the distance from the U3 balcony to a point in the POS of the block is 27
111. The respondent submits that the development should have been stepped
down the slope to avoid the imposition of a development
of incompatible scale
and height for the area.
112. In considering the height of the proposed development the Tribunal has
had regard to the slope of the subject land and the compliance
development with the Plan. The Tribunal finds that the height of the
development, inevitable as it will be for a two storey
building on a sloping
block, does have a significant impact on the adjoining blocks. It is
significantly higher than the side boundary
on the eastern side and the rear
boundary (O3.3).
113. “Locality”, which is referred to in O1.1, is not defined in
the Plan. The
Macquarie Dictionary
definition is “place, spot, or
district...the place in which a thing is or occurs”. This broad term means
the proposed
development must be of an appropriate residential scale (O1.1) in
the place where the relevant blocks meet, to ensure that the building
“limited in height to ensure compatibility with adjacent
development” (P1.1) and that the height does not result in
“significant loss of amenity to adjacent dwellings and private open
space” (P3.5). The Tribunal finds that the height
of this proposed
development is not of an appropriate residential scale. The height relative to
side and rear boundaries is not of
an appropriate residential character.
114. The large eucalypt on the eastern boundary of the property is a
protected tree within the meaning of the
Tree Protection Act
. The Conservator
received the September plans and provided advice (Ex 6) that the proposed
development be supported provided certain
steps are taken to protect the tree
during construction subsequently including that there are “no ground
levels greater than
100 mm within 5 m from the outside edge of the
115. Ms Dang gave evidence that the October plans did not appear to comply
with the Conservator’s advice because the building
would encroach into the
5 metre area referred to above. The Conservator had not been provided with the
latest plans showing the proposed
access path which passes over the critical
zone of the tree.
116. The parties joined were concerned about what appeared to have been
lopping of some branches of the protected tree at some time
prior to the
Tribunal hearing. They argued that, if the development were to be approved, a
condition be imposed asking the Conservator
to make any necessary adjustment
having regard to the impact, if any, of the reduction in the canopy. They also
sought that final
approval be provided by Conservator after any works were
117. Clearly, the development cannot proceed without the Conservator’s
advice based on the current plans. Nor can the Tribunal
make a decision
different from that of the Conservator without evidence of alternative design
solutions (Land Act section 231(5)).
This matter remains in doubt.
118. The Tribunal has carefully considered the application, the adjustments
proposed by the applicant and the concerns of the respondent
and parties joined
and performance measures in the Plan
including the objectives for A10 areas
which include increasing the diversity and density of housing close to
commercial facilities
and providing a wider range of housing.
119. The parties joined referred to a “cascade” or
“amalgam” of problems with the proposed development and
argued that
there should be a design more in sympathy with the constraints of the block. For
the parties joined, this meant having
a smaller number of units.
120. There is non-compliance with the Code. While the applicant has attended
to many of the concerns of the respondent and the parties
joined by modifying
their plans, the development contains a number of unresolved issues. Some of
these, taken singly, would not necessarily
be fatal to approval of the
development application. Taken together as a whole, they present a different
picture to the Tribunal.
121. The first objective of the A10 areas is respect for existing
streetscapes and adjoining development. The other two objectives
are not linked
by any word so all three objectives are taken as cumulative. They relate to the
need to have more flexible housing
and a more sustainable pattern of urban
settlement. The three objectives have to be balanced. The proposed development
the objective of introducing more flexible housing and thus allow
122. However, a fundamental issue to be resolved by the Tribunal is the
appropriateness of the development within the residential
setting and adjoining
development. This requirement arises in the objectives and controls under
“appropriate residential character”.
123. Some issues that the Tribunal has questioned are relevant to this
matter of appropriateness of the development. The height of
the northern face of
the building is one such concern. A view of a 2 storey dwelling on adjoining
land is not an unusual feature
of a residential environment. Some overlooking
and loss of privacy is to be expected in a residential setting, especially when
land on a slope. In the case of this development, although measures
have been taken to reduce loss of privacy, there remains the
overlooking from adjacent blocks. This alone is not to the degree however, that
would lead the Tribunal to refuse the application.
The non-compliance with
performance measures in relation to setbacks is also acceptable. However, the
Tribunal must also have regard
to the scale of the building (O1.1).
124. Because of the slope of the land and the design of the building
proposed to be placed on it, the overall height of the building
that creates a
balcony over 5 metres above the adjoining residence on the eastern boundary, is
not appropriate and does not respect
adjoining development (O3.3). Similarly the
height of the building adjacent to the rear of Block 32 does not respect the
development
on that block. The evidence that was tendered to the Tribunal that
illustrated the views that residents of adjoining blocks would
proposed building, demonstrated to the Tribunal that it is not of an appropriate
scale and height within the locality
of the rear gardens of Blocks 31, 32 and 2
of Section 19.
125. It was suggested that a reduction in the number of units and a
development that stepped down the block would alleviate the problems
with the development. The Tribunal can only comment on the proposal before it.
126. Additionally, there is the matter of the infringement of the ground
floor one metre height requirement. Considerable discussion
during the hearing
was unable to determine the precise location and extent of the problem. The
difficulty for the Tribunal is that
this issue could have further ramifications
for the development that cannot be known at this stage. Likewise, there are
duration of a hearing that lasted five days with a spread over three
Various modifications to the ramp that were proposed during the hearing
introduced other inconsistencies in gradients. There
is a degree of uncertainty
development.
127. Eventually, the matter must be considered in its totality. An
aggregation of the issues of concern leads us to conclude that
the correct or
preferable decision is that this development application should be
128. We find that the development is not of appropriate residential
character having regard to the kind of residential development
permitted by A10
PUBLICATION DETAILS
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by Member's
________________________________________________________________________
LAND ARCHITECTURE AUSTRALIA
RESPONDENT:
PLANNING & LAND AUTHORITY
PARTIES JOINED:
ANTHONY HOBBS; ANTHONY KRONE; DAVID & JANE MARTIN;
EVAN & MARY BRETT; GARY JOHNSTON
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANT:
MR D MOSSOP
RESPONDENT:
DR D JARVIS
PARTIES JOINED:
SOLICITORS: APPLICANT:
DIBBS ABBOTT STILLMAN
RESPONDENT:
ACT GOVERNMENT SOLICITOR
PARTIES JOINED:
OTHER: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
PARTIES JOINED:
SELVES; MR G EWERS (FOR D & J MARTIN)
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
MS S TONGUE, SENIOR MEMBER
DR E MCKENZIE,
SENIOR MEMBER
DATE/S OF HEARING:
21-23 OCTOBER
NOVEMBER 2008
DATE OF DECISION:
_______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (279 KB)
Signed PDF/A format