Noakes v Star Aviation Services Pty Ltd [2017] ACTIC 1 (31 May 2017)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
NOAKES v STAR AVIATION SERVICES PTY LTD
[2017] ACTIC 1
Industrial Magistrate Walker
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL LAW –
recusal – reasonable apprehension of
bias – impartiality – prejudgment - particulars – description
of an offence
- defective information – defective charge – amendment
out of time
Legislation Cited:
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Quarrying Safety Act 1999
Occupational Health and Safety Act
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Work Health and Safety (National Uniform Legislation) Act
Regulation Cited:
Work Health and Safety Regulation 2011
(ACT) regs 19(1)(a),
19(3)(a), 19(3)(c), 19(3(f), 79(2)
Cases Cited:
AG NSW v Tho Services Limited
[2016] NSWCCA 221
Goritsas (No 2)
[2012] NSWSC 36
British American Tobacco Australia
Services Limited v Laurie & Ors
[2011] HCA 2
Burridge v Chief
Magistrate of the Magistrates Court of the Australian Capital Territory
[2016] ACTSC 332
DPP v Kypri
[2011] VSCA 257
Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
Environment Protection
Authority v Ramsay Food Processing Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWLEC
Fitzgerald v Director of Public Prosecutions
(1991) 24 NSWLR
Harrison v President of the Industrial Court of Queensland &
[2016] QCA 89
Jenkins v Director of Public Prosecutions
John L Pty Ltd v Attorney-General (New South Wales)
Johnson v Johnson
[2000] HCA 48
Kirk v Industrial
Relations Commission (New South Wales)
[2010] HCA 1
Kwan v Kang &
[2003] NSWSC 336
Lazarus v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2015] NSWSC 426
Carnall v Gibbons
[2016] ACTIC 1
Re JRL; Ex p
[1986] HCA 39
(1986) 161 CLR 342
R v Merrick (No 4)
[2016] NSWSC
Rozenes and Anor v Kelly and Ors
[1996] VicRp 20
[1996] 1 VR 320
NSW v Tamex Transport P/L
[2016] NSWDC 295
Safe Work NSW v Wollongong
[2016] NSWDC 58
S Kidman & Co Ltd v Dr John Lowndes CM
[2016] NTCA 5
State of Victoria v Psalia & Anor; State
of Victoria v Lamb
[1999] VSCA 193
[1994] HCA 30
O v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2009] NSWCA 370
(Victoria) Ltd v March
Unreported SCT Vic 12 June 1986
A Noakes (Informant)
Star Aviation Pty Ltd (Defendant)
Representation:
Australian Capital Territory Director of Public
Prosecutions
Mr D Chitty (Counsel)
(Solicitor)
File Numbers:
CC 40022 of 2016
CC 40023 of 2016
INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE WALKER
The application
Aviation Services Pty Ltd is being prosecuted for breaches of the
Work Health
and Safety Act
(ACT) (‘the Act’). On 8 December 2016, the
prosecution commenced an application orally that I should recuse myself from
hearing the matter on the grounds of bias arising from the circumstances of my
identification of an issue regarding the validity
of the charges. As the grounds
of the application were unclear, the prosecutor was directed to file a written
application. That application
was returnable before the court on 13 February
2017. Further argument was heard on that day. Since then, further enquiries have
made of the parties. I have determined that it is not appropriate to recuse
myself. I also conclude that the charges, whilst defective,
may be capable of
remedy. These are my reasons for those decisions.
the prosecution
The charges
are two charges relating to breaches of ss 32 and 33 of the Act alleged to have
occurred on 30 or 31 January 2014. The limitation
period in respect to these
charges is two years (s232
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Charges 40022-3 of 2016 read:
– Star Aviation Services Pty Ltd, who had a health
and safety duty, contravened
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
by failing to comply with the duty.
– Star Aviation Services Pty Ltd, who had a health
and safety duty, contravened
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
by failing to comply with the duty and that failure exposed an individual,
namely, Emmanuel Poulis, to risk of serious injury.
Both offences were alleged to have occurred on 30 January 2014 or 31 January
2014 at the Canberra Airport.
29 January 2016, the informations were sworn before a deputy registrar of the
Magistrates Court pursuant to
Magistrates Court Act
charges were thus “brought” within the limitation period. A summons
was issued in consequence.
defendant was served with charges, particulars, a statement of facts and summons
for each offence on 5 February 2016 at its registered
office, five days outside
the limitation period.
charges do not specify the capacity in which the defendant is alleged to hold a
duty nor the duty or duties alleged to have been
breached. For example, for duty
holders in the form of persons conducting businesses or undertakings, the
primary duty appears in
s 19 of the Act and further duties are
detailed in ss 20 to 26 inclusive.
Particulars
provided with the charges do furnish these details; they allege that the
defendant was a person conducting an undertaking
or business (PCBU), identify
what the informant alleges the defendant’s duty was and how it was
breached, when and where. Whether
those particulars are adequate remains in
receipt of an affidavit from the Director of Public Prosecutions Office on 31
March 2017, following an enquiry to the parties
through my associate, there was
no reliable basis to conclude that the particulars were filed in court along
with the charges on
29 January 2016. The defendant does not contest this.
offences are ambulatory in nature in that the sections relied on in the charges
create offences by reference to duties arising
elsewhere in the Act. The charges
fail to specify those duties. The capacity in which the duty is held and the
duty alleged to have
been breached are essential elements of the offences. The
charges are defective.
The bias application
were a number of mentions prior to the date set for hearing of this matter. On
25 May 2016, it was listed for a three day hearing
in September 2016. However,
on 22 August 2016, relying on assurances by the parties as to a substantial
level of agreement as to
the facts in the matter, the time allocated for the
hearing was reduced to a one day, being 6 December 2016.
that day, defence counsel opened by stating that he had received notice the
previous afternoon that facts served on the prosecution
prior to 16 August 2016
which he had
thought they were agreed, were not. As a result, the
defence would be prejudiced if the court permitted all issues to be ventilated
and the matter would take in excess of the allocated day. The defence relied on
Environment Protection Authority v Ramsey Food Processing Pty Ltd
to the effect that a party might be bound to an agreement
where another party had relied upon it to its
light of the pressure on court listings, it was apparent that the matter would
be delayed many months if it could not be completed
that day. As I was concerned
the prosecution further
if it was doomed to fail, I sought submissions from the
parties on this issue.
referred the parties to a decision I had delivered orally the previous week
which touched upon the issue.
I had specifically asked the prosecutor in that matter to draw the issue to
the attention of his colleagues dealing with work, health
prosecutions. The prosecutor in this case was unaware of it. The court was again
presented with charges which on their
face did not disclose a criminal offence.
Any likelihood of that issue being addressed as between the parties appeared to
have evaporated
because the issue had not been considered and the anticipated
discussions had not taken place.
regrettably intemperate response reflected frustration at the prospect of
resolution of the matter being derailed. I said to the
prosecutor, without
criticism of her personally, that the Director’s office was running
“these prosecutions”, being
a reference to prosecutions under the
Act, “abysmally” and that the particular case was “a
mess”. Based upon
my experience as the dedicated Industrial Court
magistrate, I observed that there were problems every time such prosecutions
to hearing and that the lack of effective prosecution caused delay which
disadvantaged defendants.
a further exchange regarding the issue, I posed the question: “the charges
being defective, why should I allow the
prosecution to
prosecutor requested time to consider the issue which was allowed. I stated:
We will not be proceeding with the matter today to hearing so any
witnesses can be called off. It will be a matter of either relisting,
the view that that can be done appropriately, or dismissing the charges. But
I’ll give the parties an opportunity
to consider that”.
matter was stood down. The parties were provided with a draft of the
decision. The Court resumed when the prosecutor indicated that
she was ready to resume. There was no application for further
18. In summary, the prosecutor submitted:
that the Court
had power to amend the charge pursuant to s28
Magistrates Court Act
that there was
no prejudice to the defendant in doing so because firstly, she asserted, there
was no lack of clarity in the Charge
and secondly, if there was, the
responsibility for it lay with both defendant and prosecution in not having
communicated about agreed
facts before the hearing;
it was not in
the public interest to dismiss the charge without consideration of the
prosecutor was asked if she had completed her submission and indicated that she
been referred to
Burridge v Chief Magistrate of the Magistrates Court of the
Australian Capital Territory
[2016] ACTSC 332
, I adjourned to 8 December
2016 to consider the matter.
defendant’s legal team again attended, now for the eighth time. When the
Court was assembled, prior to delivery of my decision
and without notice to the
defendant or the Court, the prosecution made an oral application that I recuse
myself. When I adjourned
briefly to consider the application, it was unclear to
me whether that application was made on the grounds of actual or apprehended
bias. I therefore directed that a written application be filed.
application was filed on 15 December 2016. Unfortunately, it was not possible to
relist the application until 13 February 2017.
On that date, the prosecution
filed written submissions in court, not having previously served them on the
defendant. Both parties
made oral submissions.
The written
application
clarification was again required at the hearing of the application, the
prosecution ultimately confirmed that its application
for recusal was based
solely on the ground of apprehended, rather than actual, bias.
prosecution submitted that this arose as a result of my conduct which evidenced
prejudice, partiality or prejudgment and also
as a result of my reference to
extraneous material, being generally other prosecutions in the Industrial Court
and specifically,
decision of the previous
particular, the prosecution referred to comments made by me said to evidence
partiality or prejudgment by “inviting a challenge
to the charge”
and evidencing prejudgment of the outcome of that invitation by asking "the
charges being defective, why should
I allow the prosecution to
was submitted that in criticizing the prosecution’s running of matters, it
could be apprehended that the prosecution would
not be heard fairly on the
preliminary issue of the charge and the substantive hearing would not be
determined fairly, impartially
and on its legal and factual
defendant did not cavil with the authorities relied upon by the prosecution nor
the principles extracted from those authorities
but submitted:
“that based upon the test of the fair-minded lay observer, who is
informed and with an understanding of all the relevant circumstances
of the case at hand, the only conclusion that such a lay observer would make in
regard to this application is that it is
one of judge shopping by the
prosecution.”
Legal principles - bias
R v Merrick (No 4)
[2016] NSWSC 309
observed at [57]:
“The question of bias or apprehended bias is determined objectively.
Legal principle is applied to established fact. It is an
unpleasant application
for a judicial officer to have to determine, because it involves a review of the
conduct of the Court and
a consideration of whether that conduct is such as to
establish actual prejudice or to cause a fair minded, reasonably well-informed
lay observer to apprehend bias. Because of the unpleasant nature personally of
such applications one must endeavour to apply legal
principle to established
fact, with rigor, lest a fundamental element of our system of justice, its
impartiality in the administration
of justice, be compromised.”
application to recuse on the grounds of bias may be brought in criminal
proceedings by either party:
Rozenes and Anor v Kelly and Ors
[1996] VicRp 20
[1996] 1 VR
per Tadgell, Callaway JJA and Crockett AJA.
ourts, when asked to exercise their supervisory jurisdiction...are
reticent to interfere in criminal proceedings before the completion
proceedings”
Lazarus v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2015] NSWSC 426
Jenkins v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2013] NSWCA 406
W O v Director of Public Prosecutions
test of apprehended bias is that detailed in
Ebner v Official Trustee in
[2000] HCA 63
, as applied in the Australian Capital Territory
Eastman v R
[2015] ACTCA 24
“...a judge is
disqualified if a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend that the
judge might not bring an impartial
mind to the resolution of the question the
judge is required to decide.”
question is one of real, not remote, possibilities as opposed to probabilities
identifies a two stage
identification of what it is said might lead a judge to decide a case other than
on its legal and factual merits; and
articulation of the logical connection between the matter and the feared
deviation from the course of deciding the case on its
lay observer may be assumed to
“have knowledge of the material
objective facts”
“is also assumed to be someone not wholly ignorant of legal
” and with some understanding of the factual circumstances of
determining the application, the judicial officer must prioritise the need to
maintain confidence in the judicial
. However, in doing so, the
judicial officer ought not be too ready to accede to applications, having an
obligation to perform the
judicial functions vested in her
and to avoid
judicial officer has an obligation to case manage matters which ought not be
confused with pre-judgment
test of reasonable apprehension of bias is not whether the judicial officer will
determine the matter adversely to the applicant
but rather whether she will not
decide the case impartially or without
. The test requires that
there must be a reasonable apprehension that the trial judge has formed a fixed
view, to which it may be
expected that she will adhere, regardless of the
evidence of submissions made by the complaining
four categories of bias were identified. The prosecution rely on two
in this case, namely pre-judgment and disqualification by
Prejudgment
of factual issues, particularly those involving a determination as to the credit
of witnesses, are likely to raise the
possibility of bias: see
American Tobacco.
By inference, prejudgment of legal issues involves
different considerations as the judicial officer is expected to bring some
of the law to matters before her.
the application is based upon conduct, including comment, the observations of
Wilson J in
Merrick (No 4)
are relevant:
“Fairness cannot be gauged by expressions of disapprobation from the
Court to one counsel or another. The Court has no obligation,
if it does express
disapprobation of one counsel, to express equal disapprobation of the opposing
counsel. That is simply a matter
related to the conduct of the respective
Consideration of bias application
used intemperate language regarding the manner in which work, health and safety
prosecutions have been conducted in the Territory.
The observations went beyond
those strictly necessary for the matter before me. However, I do not consider
that a reasonably informed
lay minded observer could conclude that this
evidenced a real possibility that I would therefore not judge either the
preliminary
or substantive issues before me fairly because of that expressed
to my observations about the conduct of the particular case, I am satisfied that
they were factual and did not evidence any attitude
impartiality.
to the issue of prejudgment, it was entirely proper to raise the issue of the
defective charges and the possible consequence of
this. It was clear that there
were problems in the matter proceeding on the day it was listed and certainly in
proceeding to finalisation.
Further delay or part-hearing was undesirable,
although most unfortunately this has happened anyway. If this issue was
to be determinative of the outcome, then it was appropriate that it
be addressed at the outset.
Court reasonably expected that the parties had considered the form of the
charge. Based upon defence counsel’s comments
and attempted clarification
of the issue, the defence clearly had. Both parties acknowledged that the charge
was defective. The parties
were given time to further to consider and make
submissions on the issue. No further time was sought. In allowing that time, I
an openness to persuasion as to how the matter would proceed.
Following receipt of submissions, I adjourned to consider the issue
further and
to review a potentially relevant recent authority.
conduct was not such as to raise a reasonable apprehension of prejudgment in an
informed, fair-minded lay observer that I would
decide the preliminary issue of
dismissal of the charges, nor the outcome of the prosecution if it was not
dismissed at that stage,
other than on its legal merits.
bias application is dismissed.
The defective
Submissions
46. The prosecution submitted that
the charges were
in proper form having regard to the provisions of sub-s 27(2) of the
Magistrates Court Act
which provides: “
The description of any
offence in the words of the Act, ordinance, law, order, by-law, regulation, or
other instrument creating the
offence, or in similar words, is sufficient in
or if they were
not they should be read in conjunction with the particulars;
necessary, they should be amended pursuant to s28 of the
(1) If at the hearing of any Charge or summons any objection
is taken to an alleged defect in it in substance or form or if objection
taken to any variance between the Charge or summons and the evidence adduced at
the hearing of it, the court may make any amendment
in the Charge or summons
that appears to it to be desirable or to be necessary to enable the real
question in dispute to be decided.
(2) The court must not make an amendment under subsection
(1) if it considers that the amendment cannot be made without injustice
and, if the
charges were to be amended, the appropriate way to address any prejudice which
might flow was to allow an adjournment
of the hearing.
defendant submitted that the charges as laid were defective in failing to
characterise the defendant as a person conducting a
business or undertaking and
failing to specify in either the charge or the particulars of the actual
worksite, being the aircraft.
The defendant submitted that it had been
“almost misled as to the nature of the case” and invited the court
the charges.
Legal principles – defective
the Australian Capital Territory, the proper form of a charge to be heard
summarily is determined by application of s27
unless other
legislation applies a different provision that is that the description of the
offence in the words of the Act creating
it, or similar words, is sufficient in
detailed analysis of the evolution of the law as to the form of summary charges
was recently provided by Mossop AsJ in the decision
Burridge v Chief
Magistrate of the Magistrates Court of the Australian Capital Territory
[2016] ACTSC 332.
His Honour concluded at [76]:
.... This means that the description of an offence in a charge is
sufficient in law if it adopts the words of the statute creating
the offence or
similar words. Any requirement for further particulars may be necessitated by
the rules of procedural fairness, but
the absence of those particulars from the
charge itself does not render the charge a defective one. John L is not to the
of this approach because it was a decision which applied the common law
and did not involve circumstances where statutory provisions
the equivalent of
ss 27 (2) or 28 applied.”
Honour was referring to the decision in
John L Pty Ltd
Attorney-General (New South Wales)
[1987] HCA 42
in which their Honours had
applied the common law position in respect to the correct formulation of a
charge as the statutory provision
akin section 27 did not apply, thus requiring
that the charge identify the ingredients of the actual offence including any
particular relied upon.
High Court in
Kirk v Industrial Relations Commission (New South Wales)
[2010] HCA 1
concluded that it is a jurisdictional error for an inferior court
to determine and convict on a charge not known to law. In that
particular case
the question was whether the charge brought by the regulator, which failed to
particularise what “reasonably
practicable” measures the defendant
could but did not take in order to fulfil its duty pursuant to the
Occupational Health And Safety Act
1983 (NSW), was one upon which the
Court could convict. The Court concluded that it was not.
nature of the duty holder and the content of the duty alleged to have been
breached are essential elements of offences under this
Act and like provisions
under the national uniform
legislation.
DPP v Kypri
[2011] VSCA 257
, the Court was required to consider the
validity of a criminal charge. The DPP submitted that a defendant could be in no
to the nature of the allegation against him because he had been served
with the full brief of evidence. Nettle JA, as he then was,
“The validity of a charge is to be determined according to the contents
of the summons and charge and a defendant is entitled
to insist upon a valid
charge before the matter proceeds to evidence.”
Significantly,
and unlike the particular facts in
, where the offence is
ambulatory in nature, it is necessary to incorporate both the words of the
offence creating provision and those
of any relevant provision in so far as they
are required to provide essential elements of the
Kidman & Co Ltd v Dr John Lowndes CM & Anor
[2016] NTCA 5
an appeal in relation to the
Work, Health and Safety
(National Uniform
Legislation) Act (NT). The Court, referring to
, observed at
“Generally no difficulty will arise in circumstances where the
offence is created by a single provision which contains all the
elements of that
offence. Different considerations arise where, as here, one provision creates
the offence by reference to basic
elements, and recourse is required to some
other provision or provisions in order to determine the content of one or more
basic elements”.
observations are consistent with the approach taken in relation to the framing
of charges in the occupational or work health
and safety area both under
previous legislation and more recently in cases involving the national uniform
legislation.
v President of the Industrial Court
of Queensland & Ors
[2016] QCA 89
, the Queensland Court of Appeal dealt
with a case stated in relation to a prosecution pursuant to the
Quarrying Safety and Health Act
(Qld). Their Honours considered whether
defective complaints were a nullity because the charges failed to specify the
health and safety obligations which the defendant was said to have
failed to comply with and, further, whether if the charges were
because of defects, they were amenable to an amendment. Their Honours observed
“The industrial court looked at the defects in the complaints by
reference to both the text of the charge, the particulars included
complaint and further particulars provided by the complainant. It assists
analysis to confine attention to the charge and
the particulars in the
complaints because, as the industrial court observed, if the complaints as
originally laid were nullities,
the later particulars were
irrelevant”.
their Honours observed that if a particular
obligation was alleged to have been breached, that should be stated in the
fact that a charge is defective in formulation does not, at least in the
Australian Capital Territory, mean that an inferior court
has no jurisdiction to
deal with the matter. In relation to the legislative scheme prescribed in the
, Mossop AsJ observed that whilst a magistrate is required to
determine if she has jurisdiction when presented with a defective charge,
a jurisdictional error to proceed to hearing on such a charge (
at [46-7]).
Determination
of the adequacy or sufficiency of a charge or charge is made by reference to the
terms of the charge itself and not
by reference to extraneous material. Other
evidentiary material may be relevant, not to cure any defect but in relation to
the understanding of the defendant as to the charge he, she or it
faces. That understanding may be relevant in determining whether
an amendment
should be allowed (
of a defective charge is available in accordance with
even after evidence is received. Both
that amendment should be allowed in the circumstances of those cases as the
defendant was aware of the true nature of the
application within the limitation
Nettle JA at [27] noted that as a matter of principle
amendment was allowed before expiration of the limitation period provided the
true nature of the charge was discernible from particulars or otherwise. Nettle
JA commented that this approach may create practical
difficulties, such as
disputes over what was received and when but this issue was one of fact and
degree ([39]-[40]).
amendment outside the limitation period which in effect purports to create a new
offence will not be allowed (see
the provision of particulars which provide details of the essential elements of
the offence may be relied on to cure a defective
charge if brought to the
defendant’s notice within the limitation period but not thereafter. To do
so would amount to allowing
a charge to be brought outside the limitation
period, effectively defeating the intention of the legislature in limiting the
of exposure to criminal sanction.
such notice has been given is a question of fact. Whether it should be taken to
have cured a defective charge may be arguable
in the circumstances. A
consideration will be whether such a conclusion would be unfairly prejudicial to
the defendant.
considered the form in which injustice might manifest
from amendment of charges outside the limitation period [119]. They include:
the impact on
the manner in which an hearing might be conducted when the amendment comes late
in the process,
an increased
likelihood of lost evidence,
oppression of
the defendant as a result of delay,
defendant’s ability to defend itself may be reduced because of how it has
arranged its affairs in light of its understanding
of what it faced and
interest in expeditious resolution of criminal
litigation.
Application of principle to these
charges in their current form are defective in that they fail to specify
essential elements of the offences, including the nature
of the duty holder and
the content of the duty or duties alleged to have been breached.
particulars relied upon do specify the alleged nature of the duty holder, do
identify particular duties which that duty holder
is said to hold, being those
arising pursuant to sub-ss 19(1)(a), 19(3)(a), 19(3)(c), s19(3)(f) of the Act
and sub-s79(2) of the
Work Health and Safety Regulation 2011
do identify
to whom the duty is alleged to be owed and provide details of manner in which it
is alleged the duty was breached and
indeed what steps were reasonably
practicable to prevent that breach.
the defence submits that this particularisation is insufficient to allow it to
know what it is to meet at hearing, the particulars
are sufficient to identify
the essential elements of the offences. But those particulars do not form part
of the charges in this
matter; they are extraneous documents, like the statement
of facts also filed in court.
is at this point that the chronology of bringing the charges, what was filed
with them and service of them and related documents
relied upon by the
prosecution becomes critical. It is now unchallenged that the particulars and
statement of alleged facts were
filed in court along with the information and
summons. It is also common ground that they were not served on the defendant
the limitation period.
being the case, the charges before the court cannot now be considered cured in
the sense of being sufficient by having put the
defendant on notice of the case
it is to meet within the limitation period.
was no application to amend the charges within the limitation period. Indeed,
there was no application to amend until the Court
raised its concern regarding
the apparent defect in the charges at the hearing. The authorities make it clear
that a defective charge
cannot be amended out of time if doing so creates a new
offence or the defendant was not on notice of the true nature of the charge
within the limitation period. That would be so if amendment was allowed in this
MCA cannot apply in these
circumstances.
application to recuse is dismissed.
application to amend is refused.
16/40022 and 16/40023 are dismissed.
make no order as to costs.
4 is stayed for 28 days with liberty to apply within that time on 48 hours
L.A. Walker
Industrial Magistrate
I certify that the preceding seventy [70] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of her Honour Industrial
Associate: Christina Karolis
Date: 31 May 2017
At paragraph 16, Biscoe J
“The onus is on the party seeking leave to contradict or qualify
agreed facts to make out a case for leave including as to the
circumstances in
which they came to agree the facts. An application to contradict or qualify
agreed facts after considered negotiation
and legal advice, particularly when
made as late as the hearing, challenges the integrity of the agreed facts
procedure and should
be approached with caution. There has to be an incentive
for parties to agree facts. To allow a party to back out of such an agreement
easily does not encourage agreement in the first place. In a general sense,
there is prejudice in denying to a party the right to
rely on something that
they reasonably thought was
[2016] ACTIC 1
[1994] HCA 30
per Deane J at [2].
Johnson v Johnson
per Kirby J at [53] applied in
R v Merrick (No 4)
[2016] NSWSC 309
by Wilson J. See also Ormiston J A in
State of Victoria
v Psaila & Anor; State of Victoria v Lamb
[1999] VSCA 193
Re JRL; Ex p CJL
[1986] HCA 39
161 CLR 342
Fitzgerald v Director of
Public Prosecutions
Gleeson CJ,
Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ in
reasonableness of any suggested apprehension of bias is to be considered in the
context of ordinary judicial practice.
The rules and conventions governing such
practice are not frozen in time. They develop to take account of the exigencies
litigation. At the trial level, modern judges, responding to a need
for more active case management, intervene in the conduct of
cases to an extent
that may surprise a person who came to court expecting a judge to remain, until
the moment of pronouncement of
judgment, as inscrutable as the
British American Tobacco Australia
Services Limited v Laurie & Ors
[2011] HCA 2
per Basten J in
Goritsas (No. 2)
[2012] NSWSC 36
Kwan v Kang &
[2003] NSWCA 336
AG NSW v Tho Services
[2016] NSWCCA 221
Safe Work NSW v
Wollongong Glass P/L
[2016] NSWDC 58
Safe Work NSW v Tamex Transport
Services P/L
[2016] NSWDC
Almaston J in
Woolworths (Victoria) Ltd v March
Unreported SCT Vic 12 June 1986:
“It cannot have been intended that [the section] should be relied upon
merely by the recitation of the words of the “offence”
section for
that would tell the defendant nothing.”
Nettle JA at [15]
“Further, because
section 49(1)(e)
operates in an
ambulatory fashion, creating offences by reference to contraventions of
obligations otherwise appearing in several
different subsections of the act, it
is semantically inapt to speak of something as framed in terms
“similar” to
s. 49(1)(e)
unless it is specifically identifies the
particular obligation which is alleged to have been breached. Furthermore, and
perhaps for
that reason, it has been held that a provision like
no application in relation to an ambulatory provision like
“a charge is to be interpreted in the way in
which a reasonable defendant would understand it, giving reasonable
consideration
to the words of the charge in their context. If, therefore the
contents of the charge in the summons are sufficient when read as
bring home to a reasonable defendant the essential elements of the offence
alleged, the charge will not be invalid...
Where, however, as here, the charge
and summons do not allege sufficient facts to enable a reasonable defendant to
determine ex facie
the subsection of
under which the requirement is alleged to have been uttered, the
charge is defective because it fails to convey the nature of the
RTF format (262 KB)
Signed PDF/A format