Inquest into the death of Nathan Booth [2025] ACTCD 3 (30 April 2025)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Inquest into the death of Nathan Booth
[2025] ACTCD 3
Hearing Date:
29 – 31 May 2024, 5 December 2024
Decision Date:
Coroner K J Archer
[112], [117], [130]-[155], [156]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– Death of Aboriginal man – opioid
addiction and methadone use – death in remote location – inquest
missing persons investigation – possible third party involvement
– expert evidence – movement of a body through
water – death
by hypothermia – restorative coronial processes – appropriate scope
of recommendations made after
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
Cases Cited:
Inquest into the death of Joshua
[2023] ACTCD 2
Texts Cited:
Report of the National Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Children from Their Families (‘Bringing
Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
(Final Report,
April 1991).
ACT Coronial Restorative Reform Process and Summary Report
the Legge Report
’) (May, 2024).
Coronial Responses to Suicides of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
(October 2023).
File Number:
CD 283 of 2019
CORONER ARCHER:
– Introduction
2 September 2019, Nathan Booth’s mother went to the Tuggeranong Police
Station and reported Nathan missing. Nathan, at the
time of his disappearance,
was 40 years old. He was an Aboriginal man who had spent most of his life in the
Canberra area. He was
last seen by people who knew him on 27 June 2019. Sudden
and sometimes extended absences from his home were, for Nathan, not unusual.
However, this absence was different. He had not been present at the celebration
of his 40th birthday on 15 July 2019. The significance
of this day was not just
because it was a milestone birthday. Nathan’s Aunt, Ms Coral King, who was
a central figure in Nathan’s
life and upbringing, happened to share this
birthday with him. Nathan knew that this day was special to her, as it was the
Nathan was born, and the day Coral King’s Dad had passed away.
He always had made a point of being with his Aunt on this day.
report was made to police until 2 September 2019, but the unease of the family
grew as time passed. Rumours began to spread within
the community that he may
have been harmed.
the matter was reported to the Australian Federal Police (‘AFP’), a
missing persons investigation began. Given the
length of his absence and
Nathan’s background, the report was allocated a ‘high risk’
rating, and the investigation
was allocated to the Homicide Team. Little headway
was made in establishing Nathan’s movements and whereabouts. Many of the
usual means of establishing a person’s whereabouts were absent. Nathan
didn’t have a phone. He wasn’t on social
media. He didn’t
carry a bus pass. He didn’t own a car. He wasn’t employed. He
didn’t have a credit card,
so he didn’t leave a trail of credit card
11 September 2019, investigators had discovered that at 1500 hours on 27 June
2019 Nathan had obtained a dose of methadone at the
Canberra Hospital (TCH),
dispensed by a machine that operated by an iris scan. No trace was found of
Nathan after he left TCH. CCTV
cameras were present outside the methadone
clinic. The footage had been overwritten before investigating police attended at
the missing person report had been received.
body was found on 1 December 2019 at a remote spot on the Murrumbidgee
central theme of the coronial process in addressing the findings that I was
required to make as to the manner and cause of Nathan’s
examining the intersection between known facts concerning the nature of
Nathan’s connection to the community in
which he lived and the
geographical isolation of the spot where his body was found.
– Jurisdiction
the circumstances in which Nathan died were unknown, his death fell within the
Coroners Act 1997
(ACT) (‘the
Act’). The relevant Coroner was required to hold an inquest into the
manner and cause of his death.
– Required Findings
of the Act sets out the findings I am required to make. Relevantly, that
section of the Act provides:
52 Coroner’s findings
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find, if possible—
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the person has
(2) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection with the
inquest or inquiry; and
matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the matter;
(b) may comment on any matter about the administration of justice connected with
the inquest or inquiry
find a ‘cause’ of death in any given case, a Coroner is required to
consider what physiologically produced that result.
Separately, a finding as to
the ‘manner’ of death involves a consideration of the circumstances
in which the death took
is detailed below, the evidence before me allows me to find what the cause of
Nathan’s death was. The evidence does not allow
me to say what the manner
of his death was.
- An Outline of The Coronial Process
Nathan was found, his family wanted to learn how he had died and why his body
came to be in such a remote location. It fell to
an ACT Coroner to conduct an
investigation to answer those questions.
the ACT, that investigative process is referred to as an ‘inquest’.
Unfortunately, by the time I became the dedicated
Coroner in March 2022, that
coronial investigation had not been adequately progressed. Findings of
’misadventure’ had
been foreshadowed by the Court against the
background of an investigation that had largely been treated as complete soon
autopsy process.
are presently no specific legislation or Practice Directions that give direction
or guidance to Coroners as to how inquests
into the deaths of Aboriginal people
should be conducted. The Act does permit a flexible approach. Section 3BA(2) of
the Act enjoins
every Coroner to conduct inquests in a way that -
(a) ... recognises the following:
(i) the family and friends of the deceased person have an interest in having all
reasonable questions about the circumstances of
the person’s death
(ii) the death of a person, and an inquest into the person’s death, has a
significant impact on the person’s family and
(iii) that where appropriate, members of the immediate family of the deceased
person should be given the earliest opportunity to
participate in, and be kept
informed of the particulars and progress of, the inquest into the person’s
(iv) that different cultures have different beliefs and practices about death
that should, where possible, be respected; and
(b) maintains the inquisitorial, non-adversarial nature of the Coroner’s
Court, and its function to inquire into and publicly
examine the causes of
death, fire and disaster.
conscious attempt was made during the inquest process to give expression to
those principles.
expression ‘restorative’ is often used to describe a developing
trend in coronial jurisprudence. However, what a restorative
coronial process
looks like has never been clearly described and its content may vary from case
to case depending on the circumstances
of the death, the number of interested
parties and how contestable the issues in the inquest process are. The learned
Ian Freckleton described the general trend towards therapeutic,
restorative processes in the coronial system in these terms (references
Therapeutic jurisprudence has emphasised the harmfulness
of exclusion and alienation of participants to the legal process. Conversely,
has stressed the therapeutic advantages to their being included, given a
meaningful voice and treated as integral to the matters
traversed by courts.
This is more than the chance just to author a statement. It often includes the
need to say what most concerns
the participant, freed of some of the confining
strictures of the rules of evidence within the adversary system. Family members
identified their need to receive prompt and sensitive communication about
coronial processes of investigation and their wish to have
opportunities to
express their perspectives about a death, what caused it and what occurred in
its aftermath. Addressing the needs
of grieving relatives includes provision of
information in a culturally and religiously sensitive way about exhumation,
autopsy and
inquest processes during the death investigation, as well as about
access to the body of the deceased, and its release for burial
or cremation. It
is apparent from the expression of a variety of grievances in this regard that
there is a strong perception among
some family members that administrative
reforms are needed, as well as the need to institute short-term counselling and
support programs
for the bereaved. ..... In addition, for the integrity of the
death investigation system, means of enabling family members to satisfy
need to participate meaningfully in inquests, without abusing the process or
unduly elongating it, require further investigation.
An aspect of this is
recognition of the specialisation of legal practice in coroners’ inquests
and, more importantly, provision
of legal aid funding (at a suitable level) for
family members to be energetically and competently legally represented at
Another crucial part of relatives’ involvement is affording them
the capacity to give voice to their distress and grievances
in a sensitive and
unthreatening way, not unduly constrained by evidentiary proprieties, in the
course of inquests, whether in the
form of oral evidence or provision of written
material to the coroner.
guiding principle of a restorative coronial process is that the inquest process
should aim to do no greater harm to families already
traumatised by the death of
a loved one.
the ACT, the practices of the Coroner’s Court have been reviewed by an
independent facilitator with a view to making formal
provision for restorative
based processes. I address the findings of that review in the context of
recommendations arising from the
A Restorative Approach to the Inquest
the absence of established restorative processes, but consistent with broad
restorative principles, the Court engaged with the
family to more actively
involve them in discussions about the scope of the investigation and how the
hearing for the inquest might
be conducted. This level of contact was made
easier by virtue of the fact that the only represented interest in the inquest
grieving family.
met with the extended Booth family in August 2022. I apologised to the family
for the lack of progress in the investigation and
for the paucity of information
that had been provided to them by the Court. Nathan’s family said they
wanted information about
the circumstances of Nathan’s disappearance and
death to be drawn from as wide a source as possible. They were promised a
investigation, a hearing and better communication from the Court.
Assisting was appointed and was instructed to give those commitments some
practical focus. The AFP were asked by me to appoint
a new case officer and to
ensure his investigation was appropriately resourced. A brief of evidence was
produced, the scope of which
was significantly defined by Counsel Assisting. It
included reports from a number of experts. The family was encouraged to meet
the experts on their own before the hearing so they could have the chance
to meet them in an informal setting and ask questions of
them. They took up that
opportunity with Professor Olley.
hearing was conducted from 29 to 31 May 2024. It was opened by me on the banks
of the Murrumbidgee River a few kilometres upstream
from where Nathan’s
body was found. The balance of the hearing was conducted in the Galambany Court.
Galambany means ‘we
all, including you’. Its name and physical
configuration encourage an inclusive environment. The extended family was
to come to the Court, and they attended in large numbers. Parties to
the inquest sat at the round bar table. Dialogue occurred (with
the permission
of their legal representatives) directly between the Court (Coroner and Counsel
Assisting) and family members who
were in the court room. Family members were
permitted to use the remote witness room as a means of engaging in the Court
without the formalities associated with the court room.
The Hearing
hearing that followed focused on the experts who had been briefed to help
explain how Nathan’s body came to be in the position
in which it was
the conclusion of that phase of the inquest, I indicated to the family that the
coronial brief would be supplemented by material
that would address the missing
persons investigation.
fresh statement was prepared by the new case officer and given to the family by
Counsel Assisting. The lengthy statement was drafted
to address the various
theories and rumours that had been brought to the family’s attention as to
how Nathan died and test
them against the known evidence, particularly that
given by the experts called in the first phase of the inquest.
Assisting wrote to the family after the first phase of the inquest. He indicated
that his assessment of the fresh evidence
was that whilst it put the various
rumours and theories to rest, it could not provide an explanation of why Nathan
went to such a
remote area of the river and entered the water where his body was
found. In his view, a further hearing would not assist me in arriving
finding I was required to make. He indicated (consistent with an indication
given by me at the end of the first phase of the
hearing) that the Coroner was
likely to make an open finding as to the ’manner’ of Nathan’s
death. The family agreed
that no further hearing was required. Submissions
prepared by Counsel Assisting were given to the family. At a directions hearing
conducted on 5 December 2024, I received the fresh evidence and confirmed that I
did not intend to hold a further hearing. Nathan’s
family and former
partner were given the opportunity to make submissions which were later received
by the Court.
Part 5 – Nathan Booth And His Family
understanding who Nathan was and what he meant to his family and friends, I was
greatly assisted by a written reflection prepared
by his family. What follows in
this Part is substantially a recitation of aspects of that reflection.
was born on 15 July 1979. He grew up in their modest home in Red Hill,
surrounded by the warmth of his family. Born as the
third child, Nathan was the
younger brother of Alex and Deanne and older brother to Melanie, Erica, Bill and
Shona. His mother and
father separated before he was born. His mother, Rayleen,
worked tirelessly to give her children love and stability.
age 11, Nathan and his family moved to Rockhampton where he lived with his aunt
for a number of years.
he returned to Canberra, and as he entered his teenage years, the weight of the
disadvantage his family suffered became heavier.
flooded the streets of Canberra in the mid-1990s, and like many young people,
Nathan was caught in its wake. What started as
experimentation using marijuana
developed into heroin and amphetamine use. His family described heroin as a
substance Nathan and
his friends didn’t fully understand until it was too
became part of Nathan’s life. With the support of those around him, he
sought to address that addiction with placements
in residential rehabilitation
programs, without long term success. The reality of Nathan’s use of
illicit drugs brought him
in contact with the criminal justice system. As his
family conceded, he ‘was no saint’. He spent significant periods
time in prison, usually for offences commonly associated with his opioid
addiction. Nathan’s last period of incarceration
was when he was remanded
in custody from 6 December 2018 to 6 April 2019.
when addiction took hold, he showed moments of incredible love and care. His
family described to me an episode when at just 14,
Nathan stepped in to help
raise his sister’s newborn son.
was the father of four daughters. He fought to remain a presence in the lives of
his children after child welfare intervention.
was involved in a major accident in 2009 when he was hit by a train. He suffered
head injuries. He suffered depression for
many years of his life and took
anti-depressant medication to address that issue.
the time of his disappearance, Nathan was in a relationship with Sharelle
Charles. They commenced their relationship in around
2006. Sharelle had three
children from a previous relationship. She resided with Nathan and her children
at a house in Kambah.
relationship between Sharelle and the deceased was fraught, with periods of
separation and ongoing arguments, often about Nathan’s
drug usage. He
regularly absented himself from the family home.
family described his life, particularly in relation to his struggles with drug
addiction, as reflective of the challenges faced
by the children of the Stolen
Generation. The
Report of the National Inquiry into the Separation of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children from Their Families (Bringing
found that members
of the Stolen Generation and their children suffered a range of adverse personal
and social consequences including
greater exposure to violent behaviour, poorer
mental health, higher rates of incarceration, poor educational, employment and
outcomes and higher rates of drug use.
family in their submissions explained this reality:
Nathan Booth’s story is not just the story of one Aboriginal man. It is
the story of his family, his people, and the nation
we all exist within; a
nation that has spent too long ignoring the painful truths it needs to
Nathan’s life provides an insight into what it means to grow up as an
Aboriginal in Australia; a reality shaped by systemic
racism, oppression,
violence, loss, and the ongoing fight for justice. Nathan’s story and his
legacy deserve more than convenient
conclusions or empty promises.
[It] shines a light on the harsh realities faced by Aboriginal families like
ours, the Booth family. These harsh realities are a
result of simply being born
Black, realities too many Australians will never experience or understand.
Nathan’s story carries grief and real truth-telling, but also the power of
his legacy to our family; a family who refused to
be broken, even when the
system tried its hardest to break us.
mother Rayleen is from the Stolen Generation and had been removed from her
family as a three-year-old. She was accommodated in
out of home
‘care’ and it was only as a 12-year-old that she was placed with
extended family. In the words of Nathan’s
family, Nathan was ‘born
into a society that claimed to be changing but remained deeply unjust’.
family was touched with tragedy. His older cousin Patrick Booth was 17 when he
died in custody in the 1988. An inquiry into his
death was conducted as part of
the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody.
cousin, Ida Lyn Booth, was killed in a hit-and-run incident while crossing the
street in Redfern, Sydney. No one was charged,
and there was no inquest into her
cousin, Felicity Dalton, was found dead on a pathway in Canberra. The family
told the Court that ‘authorities blamed
her death on her addiction, her
life reduced to a statistic in a system that ignored the humanity of Aboriginal
cousin, Danny Taylor, drowned in a channel in the Riverina district while in the
care of foster parents. He had been taken
from his mother’s care with the
promise of being returned to her.
Doolan, another cousin, died of alcohol poisoning which caused liver failure.
more cousins, Owen and Bryan King, both died in the 2000s. One from a drug
overdose and the other from suicide in Canberra.
cousin, Rayleen Booth, died in the 1990s at the hands of her ex-partner after he
was released from prison, where he was charged
with domestic violence against
her. He killed her the day of his release.
family described the effect of this family history in these terms:
For the Booth family, these losses weren’t isolated tragedies. They were
part of a pattern of neglect and abandonment by authorities;
a constant reminder
that the system was not built to protect them. It was built to control, contain,
and dismiss them. These deaths
were more than heartbreak; they were fuel for
anger, a reason to resist. Nathan carried that anger with him, not as
bitterness, but
as a fierce love and protection for his family.
family spoke to the Court of their profound dissatisfaction with the missing
persons process and what they regarded as the neglect
of the coronial system.
They wanted to know how it was that Nathan’s body ended up where it was
found. They had to wait four
years for that question to be seriously addressed:
This lack of transparency and the disregard for vital facts surrounding his
death was a profoundly draining and painful experience
for our family. The
emotional toll of pushing for justice while being met with systemic indifference
must not be ignored. We demand
acknowledgment of the obstacles we faced and the
failures that compounded our grief.
family addressed these issues in the submissions that were made to the Court at
the completion of the inquest [130]-[145].
Part 6 – Nathan Booth – His Associates and
Methadone Use
The Rumours Surrounding Nathan’s
Disappearance
have canvassed aspects of Nathan’s connection to family and community and
his struggles with addiction. His family justifiably
resisted any attempt to
define Nathan simply by reference to that issue. However, the reality of his
life was that his addiction
influenced his social context. When Nathan was
reported missing, the investigation addressed all possibilities to explain his
disappearance.
Necessarily the missing persons investigation and then the
coronial investigation addressed the possibility that he had been murdered
known associates.
began circulating after he went missing. Those rumours were reported to his
distressed family. In the inquest, to address
the family’s concerns, a
‘rumour matrix’ was developed by the police for what was intended to
be the second part
of the inquest. It would be unfair to the named persons to
refer to those rumours in detail, other than to say that the rumours included
suggestions that:
(a) Nathan had stolen drugs from ‘Asians’ or ‘drug
dealers’ and that they were looking for him;
(b) Bikies were after Nathan (for reasons unknown);
(c) Nathan had been killed for doing ‘something bad’ and his body
dumped on Mount Ainslie;
(d) Nathan had been dragged away in a car, either by ‘a white woman’
in a Mercedes Benz or by ‘Asians’;
(e) Two [named] men had killed Nathan with a machete and buried him at Kambah
Pool/in ‘the river’;
(f) Nathan had been taken to Kambah Pool and that his ankle was broken when
trying to run away;
(g) Nathan had been tortured (by ‘Asians’) which had been
(h) A named person (1) (known to be a drug dealer) had killed Nathan and may
have been tasked by ‘Asians’ from Sydney
to do that;
(i) A named person (2) had ‘put a contract’ out on Nathan and his
body was dumped in the river after they shot him with
(j) A named person(s) (3) was/were s involved in Nathan’s murder or was
present when he was killed;
(k) A named person (4) had committed gun offences and was known to be hanging
around with Nathan;
(l) Named person (5) was involved and had set ‘Nathan up’. That
person had stolen something and Nathan had been trying
to return it;
(m) Named persons (6) were involved in Nathan’s murder;
(n) Named person (7) with bikie associations had confessed to having murdered
Nathan; and
(o) Named person (8) with bikie associations was involved in Nathan’s
all, 23 separate rumours were identified and assessed by the AFP. Where names
were given to the rumoured wrong doers, people were
interviewed (if they were
willing to speak to the police).
Ultimately,
the veracity of those rumours fell to be tested in light of the expert evidence
tendered at the hearing (see Part 9 and
Part 10, [82]-[112]).
Methadone Use
use of methadone was circumstantially relevant to when he disappeared and when
he came to be in the river where he
was found. His pattern of usage can also
assist in understanding those same issues.
was first prescribed methadone in a methadone dosing program in 1999. Daily
dosing recommenced from 2005 and appears to have
continued until 2019. By
November 2016, his dosage had increased to 120 mg daily (where it appears to
have remained). The deceased
apparently felt better on a higher dose. He used
other drugs including benzodiazepines and pregabalin to address withdrawal
obtained his methadone at the methadone clinic at TCH. He presented each day. An
iris scan allowed him the access his dose.
On 1 May 2019 Nathan had a
‘medical review’ in which the registered nurse noted the daily
methadone dose of 120 mg and
recorded ‘Comfortable. Has been on the same
dose for a long time, intermittent cannabis use. No other substance use
No other regular medication. No other health issues’. The
observations were that he looked well, not intoxicated and no objective
withdrawal.
16 May 2019 at 0930 hours Nathan presented for his methadone dose at TCH
intoxicated with slurred speech. He was ‘too intoxicated
dosed’. He returned that afternoon after 1500 hours not intoxicated and
received his 120 mg dose.
records confirm that apart from these occasional problems, Nathan was very
consistent in obtaining his methadone at the clinic
and the routine (except
during periods of custody) was uninterrupted for several years.
last known dose of 120 mg methadone was dispensed at 1508 hours on 27 June 2019.
Part 7 - The Scene of Death
central consideration in my findings as to the manner and cause of
Nathan’s death was the isolated location in which his body
was found. The
Murrumbidgee River flows through the ACT in a northerly direction. Two boys who
had found Nathan’s body had
trekked a considerable distance. On 1 December
2019, they left the Tuggeranong Dam early. The plan was to find their way to the
Murrumbidgee
River and follow it up to Kambah Pool where they would be picked
up. The boys trekked along its banks following the northerly flow
of the river,
fishing as they went. There was no established walking trail. The level of the
water was low. They smelt something
on the breeze and tried to find where the
smell came from. They found Nathan’s body. The evidence establishes the
within the eastern part of the Murrumbidgee River north of Pine Island
and south of Red Rocks Gorge, about 300 metres off the Centenary
Trail (that
follows the River to the east) between the Bullen Range Reserve to the west and
the Urambi Hills Nature Hill Reserve
to the east. The GPS co-ordinates were
latitude 35.411037 longitude 149.043158.
path the boys took highlighted the challenges facing anyone minded to access
that spot by following the river. Accessing the spot
from the Centenary Trail
that roughly followed the river required walking down to the river through steep
and rocky terrain and sometimes
through quite heavy vegetation. It would be a
very considerable challenge to take either route to the spot where Nathan was
in limited light. The suburb of Bonython borders the Pine Island Reserve.
Nathan was known to visit that suburb by walking through
out below are two images. The first is taken from an AFP Geospatial Report, with
RP being the Reference Point where Nathan’s
body was found. The second is
a photograph taken by investigating police. A broom appears at the place where
Nathan’s body
was found (an arrow has been added). The images show the
challenges confronting anyone wanting to access the areas.
Nathan’s Body
body was substantially decomposed. His feet and shoes were wedged under a rock,
and his legs and torso draped over
a number of other rocks. The bottom of his
left leg was wedged between rocks, and his foot was turned up, unnaturally,
against his
leg. Part of his body was in the flowing water. His arms were
extended above his head. His body was partially submerged. He was still
clothed, including shoes and socks still on his feet.
body was photographed and a forensic examination was conducted at the scene. No
injury consistent with an assault could
be seen. His clothing did not indicate
he had been stabbed or shot. Whilst this examination revealed a cut in the
buttock area of
his tracksuit pants, the cut was not reproduced in the boxer
pants that were worn beneath that area.
phone had somehow remained in the pocket of Nathan’s tracksuit pants (the
pocket did not close with a zip, button, Velcro
or similar). When examined, the
phone yielded, in my view, no information of relevance [127].
The Surrounding Area
A mobile phone and a watch were found, neither of
which could be linked to
Police Search and Rescue, including Maritime members, conducted a search of the
riverbanks and the river body 350 metres upstream
of where Nathan was located
and 900 metres downstream. This included wading and snorkelling of the river.
clothing and rubbish located at several locations
on the riverbank were examined
and dismissed as not related to the deceased.
Part 8 – The Postmortem Process
to autopsy, Nathan’s body was subject to a computed tomography
(‘CT’) scan. On those parts of the body that
could be fully
visualised (which included the head, neck and abdomen/pelvis), no acute
fractures were seen. Some of the limbs could
not be fully visualised, although
no fractures were identified.
Forensic Odontology – Identification
the purposes of identification, Nathan’s dental records were obtained and
compared against images obtained through postmortem
dental imaging. Forensic
odontologist Dr Griffith formed the opinion that sufficient points of
concordance existed between Nathan’s
dental records and that imaging to
confirm that the person found was indeed Nathan.
Autopsy - Observations & Testing
the direction of the allocated Coroner, Professor Johan Duflou, forensic
pathologist, conducted a post-mortem examination. The
extent of decomposition
made the process of examination difficult.
Duflou was able to identify (and exclude) some matters of relevance:
(1) a fracture of the distal left fibula (a broken ankle) was diagnosed by
direct visualisation of the bone. No other fractures of
bones were identified.
(2) within the limits imposed by decompositional changes:
(a) there was no indication of fatal neck compression.
(b) no gunshot wounds were identified.
(c) no sharp force injuries were identified.
(d) there was no indication of blunt force head injury.
(e) no blunt force injuries to the trunk were identified.
(f) there was no indication of significant natural disease.
of tissue and hair were taken for the purpose of DNA testing and toxicological
following positive results were reported in a specimen of liver
Methadone 15 mg/kg (approx.)
Methamphetamine 2 mg/kg (approx.)
Amphetamine Detected
Mirtazapine Detected
sample of head hair obtained from the nape of the neck region of the scalp was
submitted to the Victorian Institute for Forensic
Medicine for toxicological
testing. The following positive results were
Methadone 3 ng/mg (approx.)
EDDP (methadone metabolite) 0.7 ng/mg (approx.)
Methylamphetamine 0.09 ng/mg (approx.)
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
7-amino-clonazepam
Autopsy - Opinion
appearance of the body suggested to Professor Duflou the ‘likelihood the
deceased had been dead for a number of months prior
to being found at the
the opinion of Professor Duflou, the fracture to the ankle likely occurred at
around the time of death. Professor Duflou noted:
... a fractured distal fibula is typically the result of twisting an ankle or
similar event when landing on the foot often as a result
of jumping or falling
from a height. Less commonly, this fracture can be the result of direct impact
to that part of the lower extremity,
for example by a blow with a blunt object
to that part of the body. Because the fibula is not a direct weight bearing
bone, a person
with such an injury is often still able to walk, albeit with
difficulty and with a significant limp. The affected part of the leg
generally very painful and is usually swollen. It may appear deformed. If the
fracture is compound, i.e. is associated with
penetrating injury to the
overlying skin, there may be blood loss from the injury.
Overall, it is very likely that the deceased’s movement across terrain,
and especially in the area where found, would have
been significantly inhibited.
to the drugs detected by testing:
... [the level of] both methadone and methamphetamine are such that they may
individually or together have resulted in death from
overdose, although it is
also possible that the drugs at the levels detected were providing an effect
desired by the deceased and
did not cause or contribute to death.
was not able to attribute death to a specific cause:
Possible causes which cannot be excluded in this case include a drug overdose
(by methamphetamine and/or methadone, and other drugs),
exposure to elements,
drowning, injury which has not been identified at autopsy, and natural disease
not identified at autopsy.
Specialist Toxicology
Drummer, one of Australia’s leading toxicologists, was briefed to give
more detailed opinions as to the possible significance
of the drugs that were
found in the toxicological analysis done of the tissue and hair taken from
Nathan’s body. He was briefed
with a range of material including the
results of Nathan’s toxicological analysis, records relevant to
Nathan’s use of
methadone and his medication prescription history.
Drummer provided the following information and opinions:
(a) The extent of decomposition in this case makes it difficult to determine
what drugs Nathan had used in the period close to his
death. Some drugs may have
been present in his system as the time of his death but were no longer
detectable because of the process
of decomposition. The sample from
Nathan’s liver suggested he had used methadone and methamphetamine
‘within a few days
of his death’. It is not possible to say in what
dose those drugs were taken.
(b) The hair analysis provided confirmation that in the 6 months before he died,
Nathan used methadone, methamphetamine, THC (cannabis),
diazepam and clonazepam.
It was not possible to say in what doses these medications/substances were
taken. Neither diazepam nor clonazepam
were in his prescription history.
(c) No pregabalin was detected but may have been present in his body at the time
(d) Methamphetamine rarely causes death on its own. If the methadone had been
used as prescribed, then absent the presence of another
opioid, death from the
combined effects of methadone and methamphetamine ‘would be
(e) Deaths involving methadone usually entail the use of additional methadone
and misuse of other central nervous system drugs such
as heroin, other opioids,
alcohol or natural disease processes (such as heart disease) or injury.
(f) The analgesic effects of methadone may have reduced pain of a broken ankle.
However, it is not possible to say what level of
pain Nathan experienced at the
time of his death.
Part 9 – Determining When and How Nathan Died
When Nathan Died
companies produce, for a commercial purpose, high resolution aerial images of
urban (and adjoining) areas taken from over
flying planes. Such images were
available for 2019. AFP investigators had taken photographs, video, and drone
footage of Nathan’s
body and where it was found on 1 December 2019. The
images taken by the AFP were used to identify distinctive features of rocks and
boulders that surrounded and supported Nathan’s body. The river at this
time was very low, allowing relevant rocks to be identified.
Aerial images had
been taken by different companies in 2019 on 17 May, 19 June, 25 July, 18 and 22
at those images, an object was identified within the river precisely where the
body was later found in the images taken on
25 July and in the subsequent
images. At the hearing, evidence was received from two eminently qualified
geospatial specialists from
the AFP. The effect of their evidence was that the
object that was identified in the images first appeared on 25 July (and remained
present in the October images). Significantly, the object was absent in the May
and June images. It was, therefore, after 27 June
2019 (when Mr Booth left his
2019 (when the object
first appeared in the aerial imagery) that Nathan’s
body came to be at the place where it was found on 1 December 2019.
missing persons investigation found no trace of Nathan’s movements after
he received his last dose of methadone at 1508
hours on 27
He had been living at the home he shared with Sharelle before that date. No
reason is known as to why he did not return
found by the police that Nathan was staying at another person’s house
around this period.
required methadone and regularly attended to receive his dose. The dose was
high. It is possible, as his family suggested,
that the methadone found in his
blood during the postmortem process had been derived from his contacts in the
drug community. Whilst
I cannot completely discount this possibility, it is
difficult to understand why after 27 June 2019 he would choose to source
in the community when he would likely have been asked to pay for it.
He had a free source of methadone available in the large dose
that he physically
required. The missing persons investigation did not produce evidence of Nathan
sourcing methadone from other users
in the community. It is likely that he would
have reported this change of routine to Sharelle and his family.
consider it is much more likely that Nathan died around the time he failed to
return home on 27 June 2019 (rather than at a time
near to 25 July 2019),
However, I am, consistent with the submission made by the family, content to
find that Nathan may have died
on a date somewhere between those two dates.
How Nathan Died
to the question as to how Nathan died, was the issue of where Nathan entered the
hypothesis, and a possibility that haunted his family, was that Nathan had been
the victim of foul play and had entered the water
upstream (dead or unconscious)
at or closer to Pine Island (a commonly used recreation area to the south
sometimes associated with
drug dealing) and had drifted to where he was found.
opinion was obtained to address this possibility (what I will call the
‘drift theory’).
(a) Rain and River Data
flows were obviously relevant to the drift theory – the flow of water
around the time of Nathan’s disappearance
would have had to be capable of
transporting his body over a distance. Raw rain data was required to begin the
analysis of water
levels. Lobbs Hole Creek is the nearest rain and river data
collection point used by the Bureau of Meteorology south of the Pine
Reserve. This station is about 5 km upstream from where Nathan’s body was
found. The evidence suggested that it would
take about 10 hours for the water to
travel from Lobbs Hole Creek to the spot where Nathan’s body was found.
The data that
was collected at Lobbs Hole Creek included readings of the river
height and the water discharge rate
at that point
. That historic
information has assisted the calculation of the water level, flow and
restriction points (mostly rocks that were present
in the flow of the river) in
June and July 2019 that were nearer to where Nathan’s body was found.
(b) Modelling of Water Flow
raw rainfall data was then considered in the context of the characteristics of
this stretch of the river. Advice was received
from two fluvial
geomorphologists, Professor Jonathan Olley and Dr Timothy Peitsch. They
co-authored a report as to the behaviour
of the Murrumbidgee River from Pine
Island Reserve to the point where Nathan’s body was found. Using
‘LiDAR’ imagery
constructed a digital model of the river to show its depth, width and other
physical characteristics. The water discharge
(using the Lobbs Hole Creek
data) were used to calculate the water depth as it flowed along the
. The maximum flow that the
river achieved between 27 June and 25 July 2019 was 2 cubic metres per second.
If the river channel was
20 metres wide, the water would be about 15 cm deep.
that a body could not be carried by water less than 15 cm deep, Professor Olley
identified eight points in the river between
Pine Island and where
Nathan’s body was found, through which his body could not have been
carried. The closest of these points
was about 20 metres upstream from
Nathan’s body. This was also the part of the river that was referred to by
kayakers as ‘the
Olley went further. He concluded that it would have been impossible for water to
have moved Nathan’s body at all.
Professor Olley produced a diagram of the
river cross-section at the mark where Nathan’s body was found. The
elevation of the
riverbed was traced out, with the boulders amongst which
Nathan’s body was found. The width of the River at that point is about
metres. With a flow rate of
2 cubic metres per second
, which was the
maximum flow achieved between 27 June 2019 and 25 July 2019, at the position
where Nathan’s body was, the water
level is just at, or marginally below,
of boulders on the riverbed. For the water to have reached the
top of the boulders at the point where his leg was wedged, a flow
cubic metres per second
was required. Nathan’s body could not have
drifted, even from nearby shallow waters, into the position in which it was
on and between
two boulders.
(c) The Kayaker’s Experience
give this evidence practical expression, Court investigators identified a
kayaker who regularly paddled in this stretch of the
river. Mr Geoffrey Perman
had been an active kayaker for about 20 years. He would have paddled from Pine
Island to Red Rocks Gorge
somewhere between 100 and 150 times. He kept detailed
notes in his diary of his paddling journeys and produced videos that recorded
those journeys on a
camera attached to his helmet. Mr Perman gave
evidence in the inquest at the same time as Professor Olley and the Court and
the parties
had the opportunity to cross check the scientific modelling against
Mr Perman’s experience and knowledge of the area.
Perman had kept a video of when he went kayaking on 7 February 2019. The data
from Lobbs Hole Creek that day was higher than the
June-July 2019 period (a
river height of 1.829 metres, and a discharge rate of 2.448 cubic metres per
second). At ‘the chasm’,
Mr Perman and the other kayakers
‘portaged’ – that is, they paddled to the riverbank, and then
carried their kayaks
around the chasm area, and once past it, re-entered the
water and kept paddling. Mr Perman described the rocks at this point of the
river as being quite high (i.e. the water level was low), and that at that level
he wasn’t going to get through in a kayak.
the hearing, Mr Perman was also shown drone video of the river taken on 13 March
2024, when the river was closer to the June-July
Mr Perman watched the video
and said that he would have had ‘zero chance’ of paddling through
the chasm in those conditions.
(d) The Survivalist
Luckin is a survival expert. He too was part of the ‘gathering of the
experts’ that occurred during the hearing. He
told the inquest hearing
that he has been involved in search and rescue as a paramedic since 1974, and as
a medical doctor since
1982. He provides advice about survivability to police
and search and rescue authorities on average 90 times a year. His evidence
addressed a number of issues including whether it was likely that Nathan had
suffered the injury to his distal left fibula (identified
at autopsy) before it
became wedged between the rocks where he was found. He noted the significant
staining on the rocks underneath
Nathan’s body suggested his body had not
moved during the period of decomposition. As to the timing of the injury to
left fibula, Dr Luckin was of the view that it would have been
impossible to walk on that kind of fracture as the distal fibula was
displaced outwards and upwards involving a rupture of the entire ligamental
structure holding the ankle in its normal position.
concluded that the state of the ankle was not affected by the passage of time.
He saw no evidence that it could have moved, particularly
as it was wedged
underneath the rock. In his view ‘the position of the foot postmortem is
absolutely consistent with falling
and fracturing and remaining in that
position’. As to how that fracture occurred his opinion was:
That fracture of the ankle requires considerable force and the likely mechanism
that I see is that he stepped or jumped or fell from
a higher rock on to –
on to that rock and subsequently he slipped so that his foot went between the
rock that he was lying
on and the rock he was under - jammed under and fell
forwards. Now, that fracture may have occurred when he hit the rock. It may
occurred as he twisted underneath the rock. I think it more likely occurred as
he hit it, but either way, landing like that
he would then have fallen forwards,
face forwards on to – on to the rock.
was put to Dr Luckin, on behalf of the family, that it may have been possible
for Nathan to have been placed in the position he
was found, by another person
or persons. Dr Luckin replied from a commonsense perspective:
I think that that is so unlikely as to be something I would not consider a
possibility. To do so you would have had to pick him up,
take him, choose your
position, lie him down, jam his foot and his leg underneath the rock, position
his foot and then stand back
and say, 'Am I happy with the position', and apart
from the mechanical difficulty of doing that, I can see no conceivable reason
that one would wish to do that. If you were going to dispose of a body, you
would presumably dump the body in a convenient spot.
You would – I cannot
see any conceivable reason that one would – no, I cannot see any mechanism
by which one would position
the body in the position that Nathan was in to do
that, so I think the possibility of his being staged in that position, I would
discount that.
above evidence (including Professor Duflou’s findings on autopsy) suggests
with a high degree of probability that Nathan
walked to where he was found and
that he became trapped when his leg became wedged between rocks. It is also
likely that he broke
his distal fibula in the process.
Part 10 - Why was Nathan in the area where he was
second phase of the hearing (ultimately not conducted) was to be directed at the
question as to why Nathan’s body was found
where it was and why Nathan was
on the rock when his foot became wedged.
anticipate the conclusion reached below, on the available evidence, it is
impossible to say.
area where Nathan’s body was found was remote and difficult to access. It
is difficult to conclude that he got there in
any other way than walking
(probably with some rock climbing/scrambling) involved.
is not reasonably open to find that Nathan found his way to where he died in a
significantly impaired state. The toxicological
and hair analysis conducted in
the postmortem process and commented upon by Professor Drummer suggested that
methadone and methamphetamine
was present in his blood at the time of his death.
Professor Drummer was not able to say:
(a) when the methadone was consumed (from 2 days to a week);
(b) what the concentration was at the time of Nathan’s death; or
(c) whether his cognition or motor control would have been compromised by
methadone or methamphetamine intoxication.
was an experienced user of both substances. In respect of his methadone his
daily dosage was high (120 mg) but he was able
to live in the community between
doses. Therefore, it is equally likely that he was or was not suffering
impairment as he made his
way to the point in the river where he was found. It
was not easy to access the point in the river where his body was found, and
would have been much more difficult to get there if he was significantly
various theories and rumours that were circulating in the community after his
disappearance have been summarised above [51]. So
far as they involved an
assertion that he died as a result of being assaulted, shot or otherwise killed
by another person or persons,
they carry little weight given the evidence in the
first phase of the hearing.
do, however, have as a central theme that Nathan had wronged people in the drug
community. It is possible, for example, that
Nathan was seeking to ‘lay
low’ for a period to escape from people who may have wished to do him
harm. Why he would choose
the spot where he was found to effect that purpose is
less obvious. He may have been forced to go there by those who wished him harm.
However, why this difficult to access area would be chosen is not clear. How he
came to have his leg wedged in the rocks is also
not obvious in this scenario.
is equally difficult to provide a satisfactory and benign explanation for his
presence in the area. Whilst he was familiar with
the area in a general sense,
and there were tracks nearby that he may have walked in the past, as the family
have fairly asserted,
the evidence does
suggest that:
(a) he was a fisherman;
(b) he was fond of finding his way to the River around that area;
(c) he was a ‘bush’ person; or
(d) he went ‘bush’ when he periodically absented himself from his
was known to walk his dog towards Kambah Pool and the Murrumbidgee River, but
this dog had been impounded by the time he went missing.
is possible that he was walking to his home in Kambah from Tuggeranong where he
accessed most of his services and deviated from
the path. Why he would choose to
do so on his own on this day in a Canberra winter is again obscure. It would
involve making his
way through very difficult terrain and through (sometimes)
thick vegetation.
was, as his family submitted, a very social person, usually driven to seek out
the company of others rather than go for walks in
isolated areas.
I am not able to reach a standard of satisfaction as to the manner of
Nathan’s death. I will therefore not make findings as
to that issue.
Part 11 – The Cause of Death
Duflou found no evidence of inflicted injury (gun shot or knife wounds or trauma
causing bone fracture). Nathan was probably
affected by drugs but possibly not
intoxicated to a significant degree and certainly not to the point of causing
death (for example,
by respiratory depression following an overdose). Those
possible causes of death excluded, the only other explanations are environmental
- either drowning or hypothermia.
evidence of Professor Olley is important in considering the possibility that
Nathan drowned. His evidence was that the peak water
level between 27 June and
25 July 2019 was below the level of the rock on which Nathan’s body was
found. Given his foot was
wedged holding him in place, it would not have been
possible for his face to have been submerged in water. I therefore discount
as a possible cause of death.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia
occurs when core body temperature drops below 35 degrees Celsius (Normal body
temperature is around 37 degrees Celsius).
When body temperature drops, the
heart, nervous system and other organs can't work as well as they usually do. If
not treated, hypothermia
can cause the heart and respiratory system to fail and
eventually can lead to death. Dr Luckin described it this way:
So as soon as the core temperature starts to drop, the function of the brain
immediately starts to decrease. There is a progressive
decrease in blood flow to
the brain and oxygen consumption of the brain which reflects activity of the
brain. So all of the functions
of the brain progressively diminish and the first
ones are the higher things, that is the awareness of what's going on; one's
to make decisions; to remember one's training; understand the risks;
understand the situation that you're in; and to make appropriate
decisions to
take protective measures. And that progresses to a feeling of fatigue and
weakness; to a progressive decreased level
of consciousness; eventually to being
extremely sleepy; and to loss of consciousness; and eventually to death.
Bureau of Meteorology records indicate that between 27 June and 25 July 2015,
the average minimum temperature was about -3 degrees,
and the average maximum
was 15 degrees. The average water temperature was 6.85 degrees. These figures
reflect typical colder weather
patterns for the Canberra area in the winter
months. The place where Nathan was found is a natural wind tunnel. Nathan was
clothed, and his body was likely processing methadone and other
substances. It is a possibility that after he entered the river,
at least part
of his clothing may have become wet. All of these features would have rapidly
accelerated the development of hypothermia.
Dr Luckin’s evidence was that
the maximum period that he would have expected for survival would have been a
few hours after
temperatures dropped to these low levels.
with the evidence before me and the submissions received on this issue, I find
that Nathan died of hypothermia.
Part 12 – Answering The Questions the Family Have
3BA(2)(a)(i) of the Act obliges me, as far as is practicable, to conduct my
inquest in a way that recognises that Nathan’s
family and friends have an
interest in having all reasonable questions about the circumstances of his death
their submissions, they raised concerns as to the lack of clear communication
with the family during the missing persons investigation.
I address those issues
in my discussion of matters of public safety (Part 13).
family raised specific concerns about things that were done or not done in the
missing persons investigation and that various
lines of inquiry were not
sufficiently pursued, namely:
(a) not speaking to people who may have been at the methadone clinic at the time
Nathan attended on 27 June 2019;
(b) not making enquiries of, or delayed enquiries of, certain individuals who
were named as contacts on the phone found in the pants
Nathan was wearing.
family also submitted that the process of identification had been unreasonably
delayed. It is beyond the scope of the coronial
process to conduct a detailed
examination of the missing persons investigation given that ultimately that
investigation became part
of the coronial brief.
what was to be Part 2 of the hearing, a lengthy statement was prepared by Senior
Constable Cunningham that detailed every step
taken in that investigation. The
statement ran to 74 pages. It is apparent that considerable effort was devoted
to locating Nathan,
including speaking to a vast array of witnesses and
conducting covert surveillance (including telephone interception) of some of
them and searching out relevant documentation. Unfortunately, what is also
apparent is that the movement of the investigation into
the coronial
effectively pause. The sophisticated investigations
and analysis that were done
after June 2022 might have been undertaken at an earlier time. That delay is
symptomatic of the delays
that were evident in the coronial processes at the
time. I have commented in other cases that the effect of such delay is to cause
trauma to already distressed families. I apologise for that delay and its impact
on Nathan’s family and friends.
will address the specific questions or criticisms the family have made of the
missing persons process below.
Potential Witnesses at the Methadone Clinic
is called a ‘dose report’ was obtained from the TCH methadone
clinic. It is unclear from the evidence when (and indeed
how) this report was
obtained. Senior Constable Cunnigham was not able to say when asked during the
hearing. The dose report lists
those people who presented for dosing on a given
day. A person ‘A1’ was in attendance 9 minutes before Nathan
his dose. Another person ‘B2’ was in attendance at the
clinic for dosing 40 minutes after Nathan. There is no reference
in the brief to
A1 being spoken to by police. Person B2 was known to a family friend and they
(and a third person) had a discussion
hadn’t heard anything about his whereabouts.
Assisting has submitted that it would be reasonable to moderate expectations as
to the forensic significance of both the dose
report and speaking further to the
attendees at the methadone clinic on 27 June 2019. No person is recorded as
attending with Nathan.
If A1 and B2 are spoken to, they may or may not recall
details of Nathan’s visit to the clinic on that day, remembering that
person A1 attended 9 minutes before Nathan and B2 40 minutes after Nathan. It
is also noted that CCTV footage from the clinic was
overwritten by the time
Nathan was reported missing.
the conclusion of an inquest such as this, involving a death that may be
suspicious, the evidence that has been obtained (including
the evidence relevant
to his attendance at the methadone clinic) will be reviewed by the AFP. My
findings will be available to AFP
members involved in that review. The
‘methadone clinic evidence’ can be reviewed in that context.
Telephone evidence
evidence in relation to the phone found on Nathan’s person is complex and,
to assist the family, was addressed at length
by Counsel Assisting in his reply
submissions. The device was last used on 24 February 2019 (4 months before
Nathan’s attendance
at the methadone clinic) by a telephone number linked
to another person (B3). On 27 January 2019, the device was used by a number
associated with someone in NSW (B4) who is the mother of B3. Both people were
spoken to by Senior Constable Cunningham in the coronial
phase of the
investigation. As to the SIM card for that device, it was associated with person
B5 - a person who never lived in the
ACT and who had no connection to Nathan.
Evidence from relevant service providers was obtained within days of the phone
being found
so no evidence was ‘lost’. There were no
‘contacts’ in the phone as the family suggested in their
submissions.
I am satisfied that the missing persons team and Senior Constable
Cunnigham exhausted the phone’s evidential value. It was
not, and could
not, be useful in determining the manner and cause of Nathan’s
Delay in Identification
is acknowledged that the time taken to formally identify Nathan was delayed.
Police visited Nathan’s family the day after
his body was found and
indicated that it was the belief of investigators that Nathan’s body had
been found. The autopsy was
conducted on 3 December 2019. A request was made on
that day for dental records to be obtained to enable a process of odontological
comparison to be conducted for identification purposes. There was delay in
facilitating an examination of Nathan’s body by
a forensic odontologist
because at the time there was only one expert available in the ACT. An
identification by DNA was considered.
However, delays in processing DNA samples
were anticipated. The examination by the forensic odontologist was conducted on
18 December
2019 and his positive identification was accepted by the Coroner the
next day and communicated to the family.
Circumstantial
identification of Nathan was available within 24 hours of the discovery of the
body and was communicated to the family.
The delays experienced in the formal
identification were longer than is optimal. I apologise to the family for that
delay and for
the distress that it caused.
Part 13 – Matters of Public Safety
noted [8], section 52 of the Act obliges me to state whether a matter of public
safety arises in connection with the inquest, and
if it does, comment on
Family Submissions
family submitted that I should make a number of recommendations in respect of
four issues arising from the missing persons investigation.
(a) AFP Communication in Missing Persons Cases
respect of communication issues arising in missing persons cases, the family
submitted (in the following terms) that the AFP should
develop culturally
sensitive guidelines governing police interactions with Aboriginal families:
That, if one does not exist, a framework or set of guidelines should be
established for the AFP to guide their communication with
Aboriginal families of
individuals who are reported missing. This should include an understanding that
the Aboriginal concept of
‘next of kin’ does not necessarily
correspond the western understanding of this concept.
That when a person is reported missing, the family of that person is provided
with comprehensive information about the missing persons
process, including the
information that should be documented and provided to police, and what the
family can do to assist in the
locating of that person.
That police should be aware of cultural sensitivities during a missing persons
investigation of an Aboriginal individual. The family
reports that uniformed
police attended home visits to interview Nathan’s family members. Police
should be cognisant of Aboriginal
families’ cultural sensitivities about
police, and that uniformed police attendance upon a residence, for any purpose,
to raise angst and waryness (sic) amongst people within the residence.
(b) Culturally specific advertising as to missing person reports
Nathan’s family, noting their experience of uncertainty as to if and when
a missing persons report should have been made, submitted:
The family advocates for a culturally specific information campaign for the
Aboriginal community that encourages earlier reporting
of people who they
suspect may be missing or have not had contact with for an irregularly long
period of time.
suggestions warrant consideration by the AFP. I note that these issues were not
ventilated at the hearing and were not the subject
of specific evidence. The AFP
were not represented at the inquest. In those circumstances I do not find that a
matter of public safety
arises in respect of which it is appropriate for me to
comment or make recommendations. However, I will forward my findings to the
Chief Police Officer for consideration of these issues and, if appropriate, for
direct response to the family.
(c) Information about Coronial Processes
family made the following submission about information being available to
families in the coronial process:
Nathan’s family suggests that the process for seeking further review of
coronial findings should be made clearer to interested
parties, and that more
information about the coronial process should be provided to families at the
outset of investigations. To
that end, the Coroner’s Court may benefit
from a dedicated Aboriginal Liaison [officer] or similar to assist families
participating
in the coronial process.
have accepted [19] the family’s criticisms as to how the Coroner’s
investigation into Nathan’s death was progressed.
Any decision of a
Coroner to make findings without a hearing being conducted is appealable to the
Chief Coroner (section 34A of the
Act). However, it is acknowledged and accepted
that it is difficult for families to navigate the complexities of the coronial
particularly when unrepresented and when confronted with a lack of
information as to how the investigation into a loved one’s
death is being
progressed. Cultural or other considerations may also affect a particular
family’s interactions and engagement
with the coronial process.
general issue of communication with families has been a vexed one for the
Coroner’s Court. Historically, the Court was not
separately resourced to
employ what are now known as Family Liaison Officers. When Nathan’s death
came into the coronial system
on 1 December 2019, there were no formal processes
for communicating with families and no dedicated staff resources were in place
to facilitate that contact. Since that time, the Court has recruited two Family
Liaison Officers whose primary role is to communicate
with families who are in
the coronial process. The ability of the Court to keep families up to date with
developments in their loved
one’s inquest remains challenging given the
volume of cases at hand is very high (with over 400 active coronial cases at any
given time). It is hoped that the Booth family would have experienced a
different level of communication today.
specific recommendation is made in this respect. However, a recommendation
follows addressing making the processes of the Court
more open and, where
appropriate and practicable, more restorative.
(d) Alerts from the methadone clinic
family suggested that there should be a mechanism by which the methadone clinic
should raise alerts when someone doesn’t
attend for their regular dose:
There would be benefit in the implementation of a system that
‘flags’ when regular methodone (sic) program attendees
collect their dose at TCH after a prescribed period of time. Services such as
the methadone program are a regular point of
otherwise live a transient lifestyle or have no fixed place of abode.
proposal advanced by the family raises complex issues around patient
confidentiality. Whilst Nathan was open as to the role his
methadone dose played
in addressing his opioid addiction, there would be others who would be alarmed
by the suggestion that their
dosing practices would be communicated to anyone.
note that it would be open in all cases (as it was for Nathan) to consent to the
disclosure of such information.
issue was not considered at the hearing and was not the subject of any evidence
nor submission from Canberra Health Services.
In other coronial
proceedings
recommendations that this framework be reviewed. The Government has provided a
response to that recommendation.
will not make a recommendation as to this issue. I will forward my findings to
the Chief Executive of Canberra Health Services inviting
consideration of the
family’s proposal in light of any review of protocols surrounding the
disclosure of patient information.
Submissions of Counsel Assisting
Protocols for Coronial Engagement with Aboriginal
outlining the attempts made by the Court in this inquest to make the coronial
process a more welcoming space for the Booth family,
Counsel Assisting observed:
There is no regulation, practice note or protocol in the Territory that concerns
engagement with Aboriginal families in the coronial
proceedings. Other
Coroner’s Protocol in NSW
issued on 9 March 2022 and the Practice
Direction 6 of 2020 issued by the Victorian State Coroner on 22 September 2020)
generally for the adoption of more accessible and inquisitorial
measures (see for example in Queensland the practice notes that provide
pre-hearing conferences, concurrent evidence, and family statements). There is
also considerable guidance to be found within
coronial reform material from
Western Australia that is concerned with Aboriginal families.
submission is a reasonable one and one that the Booth family endorsed. However,
there are practical and procedural considerations
that arise in respect of this
submission.
(a) Report after an Inquest
the first instance there are some statutory constraints that impede me from
making the recommendation sought by Counsel Assisting
(or at least compelling
the Attorney General to respond to any comment).
recommendation urged upon me by Counsel Assisting and the family is a matter
concerning “the administration of justice”
for the purposes of
section 52(4)(b) of the Act The terms of section 52(4) of the Act require a
Coroner to state whether matters
involving public safety or the administration
of justice arise and if they do, comment on them. If a comment or recommendation
made by a Coroner about a matter of
public safety (section 52(4)(a)(i) of
, it invokes the process of a Governmental response set out in
section 57(4) of the Act. However, according to their terms, sections
(4) of the Act only require the Attorney-General or another Minister to respond
in the prescribed way in relation to matters
public safety
Correspondence from the then Attorney-General, Mr Rattenbury, regarding a
recommendation made by me in respect of a matter concerning
the administration
, suggested that he
was acting on the advice that he was not required to respond in the manner
contemplated by section 57 of the Act.
appears there was an error in the drafting of section 57 of the
. There is nothing intrinsic
to the operation of the Act or from the explanatory material relevant to the
terms of section 57, that
would justify a difference in approach as between
matters of public safety arising from an inquest and matters concerning the
administration
of justice.
I recommend that section 57(3) and
section 57(4) of the Act be amended so as to require the Attorney-General or
another Minister to
respond in respect of comments made by coroners in respect
of matters involving the administration of justice.
(b) Role of the Dedicated Coroner and General Procedural
fulfil the role of the dedicated coroner. No statutory recognition is given to
the role and the Chief Coroner remains the head of
the jurisdiction.
have no authority to make regulations or procedures as to how the Court should
generally operate in all inquests. That power is
reserved to the Chief Coroner:
section 51A of the Act. In the absence of a practice direction, I can, as I did
in this inquest, give
directions as to how an inquest conducted by me should be
undertaken: section 51A(2)(b) of the Act. It is not appropriate for
recommendations
to be made in findings by a Coroner other than a Chief Coroner,
that purport to persuade the head of jurisdiction to a particular
point of view
as to how the Coroner’s Court should operate. Nor would it be appropriate
for the Attorney-General in the context
of a response to any recommendation I
would make (section 57 of the Act) to suggest to the Chief Coroner that such an
approach be
findings will be referred to the Chief Coroner for her consideration in due
(c) Restorative Processes Generally
2015, the ACT Government committed to the idea of Canberra as a
‘Restorative City’ based on the principles of ‘restorative
practice’. In November 2021, the Attorney-General, Mr Shane Rattenbury,
advised that a pilot restorative reform process would
be trialled in the area of
coronial reform. The outcomes of that process were published in the
ACT Coronial Restorative Reform Process and
Summary Report (‘the Legge Report’)
in 2024. Specific
consideration was given in the
Legge Report
as to how the processes of
the Court could be modified to better accommodate the needs of Aboriginal
families involved in the coronial
Legge Report
contained detailed reference to the 2023 report of the
University of Western Australia Centre of Best Practice in Aboriginal and
Strait Islander Suicide Prevention entitled
Coronial Responses to Suicides of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People.
Legge Report
omitting references
This research has examined the current cultural capacity and safety of coroners,
court staff and coronial processes, and explored
ideas for improvement. It is
based on a review of published academic literature and other documentation, the
outcomes of a workshop
discussion with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people who have lost loved ones to suicide, and interviews with coroners, court
staff and others with a professional or occupational interest in Indigenous
people’s experience of the coronial process.
The preliminary report outlines research findings and includes State/Territory
and national directions for reform in these key areas:
coroners’ and court staff’s knowledge and understanding of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures, especially
kinship structures
and protocols after a passing.
responsive communication with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander family
members, including maintaining contact through
the coronial process and
providing appropriate documentation and information resources.
Accountability
to ensure coronial findings and recommendations are applied in Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander suicide prevention
policy, programs and investment.
identification of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in the coronial
culturally appropriate support for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
families, including through the creation of identified
roles in Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Engagement Units within coroners’ courts.
The report notes that:
The epidemiology, methods and preceding factors of suicide deaths among
Indigenous people are distinct from those present in suicide
non-Indigenous Australians, which may mislead coroners and their staff if they
are not alert to these issues.
This report [the Legge Report] aligns with issues identified in the restorative
reform process. Its recommendations should form the
basis of ongoing engagement
with First Nations people in the ACT, in order to ensure the ACT Coroner’s
Court operates in culturally
safe and responsive ways.
the Government nor the Coroner’s Court has responded to this
recommendation or generally to the
Legge Report
. It would be
inappropriate for a Coroner to urge the Chief Coroner or the Government to do
their merit, I decline to make the recommendations advanced by Counsel Assisting
and the family for the above reasons. I will
however, forward my findings to the
Attorney-General and the Chief Coroner for their consideration.
Part 14 – Formal Findings Required by Section 52(1) Of
find that between 26 June 2019 and 26 July 2019, Nathan Daniel Booth died at a
place on the Murrumbidgee River north of Pine Island
and south of Red Rocks
Gorge about 300 metres off the Centenary Trail (GPS co-ordinates were latitude
35.411037 longitude 149.043158)
of hypothermia. No make no further finding as to
the manner of his death.
the inquest process I thanked the family for their courage and their level of
engagement. I am heartened that the processes
adopted in the inquest did
something – even if done belatedly – to give them a level of comfort
as to how Nathan’s
death was investigated. It is not for me to say that my
findings will give the family ‘closure’ or that they have been
provided with definitive ‘answers’ as to the circumstances of his
death. They will still grieve, and they will continue
to speculate as to how he
came to be at the place where he died.
thank Counsel Assisting and those who instructed him for their hard work and
innovative thinking. I thank Senior Constable Cunningham.
Their collective
effort resulted in an investigation of great quality. I thank the
representatives of the Booth family and Sharelle
Charles for their assistance
and patience in a complex and uncertain coronial and court room
environment.
express my condolences to Nathan’s family. In so doing, I note with great
shame that after the hearing was completed, a commemorative
chair that had been
placed near where the inquest was opened at Pine Island was desecrated with
racist markings. The family responded
to that confronting circumstance with
demonstrable hurt but with great dignity.
I certify that the preceding one-hundred-and-fifty-nine [159] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Findings of his
Honour Coroner
Associate: Lucy James
Date: 30 April 2025
Dr Ian Freckleton;
Investigation, the coroner and therapeutic jurisprudence
Journal of Law and
Medicine November 2007 pp 9-10.
Part 3, Chapter 11, Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Report
Bringing them Home
Report of the National Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Children from Their Families April 1997.
A metabolite of
Diazepam is a
benzodiazepine and, relevant to Nathan’s circumstances, commonly used in
the context of addressing anxiety associated
with drug withdrawal.
Clonazepam is benzodiazepine
and, relevant to Nathan’s circumstances, used to address panic and
‘LiDAR’, which stands for Light Detection And Ranging, is a remote
sensing technique that uses light in the form of a
pulsed laser to measure
distance, in this case from an aircraft to the earth’s
A ‘discharge
rate’ is how much water passes through a point over a set period of time.
In this instance it was expressed
as cubic metres of water per
Once the discharge
rates for 27 June through 25 July 2019 were applied to the model of the river,
shallow areas could be identified.
The height was 1.75 metres,
and the discharge rate was 1.768 cubic metres per second. The river height on 25
July 2019, when the
aerial imagery first showed an object in the river, was
1.736 metres.
Inquest into the death of Joshua
[2023] ACTCD
Inquest into
the Death of Herman Holz
[2023] ACTCD
For example, contrast
the terms of
Coroners Act 2008
RTF format (14.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format