UD v Bishop [2021] ACTSCFC 1 (12 November 2021)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
UD v Bishop
[2021] ACTSCFC 1
Hearing Date:
Mossop J, Collier J and McWilliam AJ
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY – Criminal
responsibility of children aged between 10 and 14 years – whether a child
between the ages of 10 and 14 bears an evidential burden under the
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT) of denying that they
knew their conduct was wrong – interpretation of ss 26 and 58 of the
Criminal Code 2002
Legislation Cited:
Children and Young People Act 1999 (ACT), ss 7, 8,
Children and Young People Amendment Act 2000 (ACT)
and Young People Bill 1999 (ACT), clause 69
Children’s Services
Ordinance 1986 (ACT), s 27
Children’s Services Act 1986 (ACT), s
Children’s Services Amendment Act 2000 (ACT)
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Criminal Code Bill
Criminal Code 1983
(NT), ss 43AQ,
Criminal Code 1995
(Cth), Part 2.3, ss 7.1, 7.2, 7.3 13.1, 13.2,
Criminal Code 2001
(ACT), Part 2.3, s 25
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT), ss 6, 25, 26, 27, 28, 56, 57, 58
Legislation Act 2001
(ACT), Ch 14,
Supreme Court Act 1933
Cases Cited:
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
Baini v The Queen
[2012] HCA 59
Brennan v The King
[1936] HCA 24
(1936) 55 CLR 253
278 A Crim R 249
K-Generation Pty Ltd v Liquor Licencing Court
[2009] HCA 4
237 CLR 501
Lee v NSW Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 39
251 CLR 196
Mellifont v Attorney-General (Queensland)
[1991] HCA 53
(1991) 173 CLR
North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
Ltd v Northern Territory
[2015] HCA 41
256 CLR 569
Northern Territory
[2008] HCA 49
235 CLR 619
Pickett v Western Australia
[2020] HCA 20
94 ALJR 629
Plaintiff S157/2002 v Commonwealth
211 CLR 476
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
[1998] HCA 28
194 CLR 355
Re Bolton; Ex parte Beane
[1987] HCA 12
(1987) 162 CLR 514
RP v The Queen
[2016] HCA 53
259 CLR 641
(1977) 16 SASR 589
[2021] ACTSC 252
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] HCA 23
241 CLR 252
Williams v IM
[2019] ACTSC 234
14 ACTLR 147
Texts Cited:
Criminal Law Officers Committee,
Model Criminal Code Chapter 2: General
Principles of Criminal Responsibility
(Discussion Draft, July
Criminal Law Officers Committee,
Model Criminal Code Chapter 2:
General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
(Final Report, December
Explanatory Memorandum, Children and Young People Bill 1999
Explanatory Memorandum, Criminal Code Bill 1994 (Cth)
Explanatory
Memorandum, Criminal Code 2002 (ACT)
Explanatory Memorandum,
Children’s Services Amendment Act 2000
Explanatory Statement,
Children’s Services Ordinance 1986
UD (Appellant)
Andrew Bishop (Respondent)
Representation:
J White SC (Appellant)
T Hickey (Respondent)
Legal Aid ACT (Appellant)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
File Number:
SCA 7 of 2021
Decision under appeal:
Court: ACT Childrens Court
Before: Magistrate Cook
Date of Decision: 11 February 2021
Case Title: Bishop v UD
Court File Numbers: CH 1072 of
2020; CH 54
Introduction
1. The question in this appeal is whether under the Criminal
Code 2002 (ACT) (the ACT Code) a defendant aged 10 years or older but
years old bears an evidential burden of denying that he or she knew that his or
her conduct, the subject of a criminal charge,
2. The appellant
was charged with one count of minor theft in the Children’s Court. He was
13 years old at the time of the alleged
offence. He pleaded not guilty. At the
hearing a no case submission was made on the basis that a prima facie case that
the appellant
knew his conduct was wrong had not been established. The
submission was put that the ACT Code placed the burden of proving that the
appellant knew that his conduct was wrong upon the prosecution and that there
was no evidential burden upon the appellant. This submission
was contrary to the
decision of a single judge in Williams v IM
[2019] ACTSC 234
14 ACTLR 147
3. The accused did not seek to discharge the evidential burden and
accepted that the decision in IM was binding upon the magistrate.
circumstances the magistrate rejected the no case submission. There was no
defence case. The magistrate then found that
the elements of the offence were
established and that the charge was proved beyond reasonable doubt.
Notwithstanding the finding
of guilt, the charge was dismissed pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
4. The appellant appealed
to the Supreme Court. Because the appeal raised a significant point of statutory
interpretation in relation
to which there was a challenge to the correctness of
the reasoning in a decision of a single judge of the Supreme Court, the appeal
was referred to a full court pursuant to
Supreme Court Act 1933
Relevant statutory provisions
5. Whether or not the appellant bore an evidential burden in
relation to his denial that he knew that his conduct was wrong depends
relationship between
and s 58(2) of the ACT Code. The relevant
provisions of the ACT Code are as follows:
Circumstances where there is no criminal responsibility
Division 2.3.1
capacity—children
Children under 10
A child under 10 years old is not criminally responsible for an offence.
Children 10 and over but under
(1) A child aged 10 years or older, but under 14 years old, can only be
criminally responsible for an offence if the child knows
that his or her conduct
(2) The question whether a child knows that his or her conduct is wrong is a
question of fact.
(3) The burden of proving that a child knows that his or her conduct is
wrong is on the prosecution.
Proof of criminal
responsibility
Legal burden of
proof—prosecution
(1) The prosecution has the legal burden of proving every element of an
offence relevant to the guilt of the person charged.
See s 11 (Elements) on what elements are relevant to a
person’s guilt.
(2) The prosecution also has the legal burden of disproving any matter in
relation to which the defendant has discharged an evidential
burden of proof on
the defendant.
(3) In this Act:
legal burden
, in relation to a matter, means the burden of
proving the existence of the matter.
57 Standard of proof—prosecution
(1) A legal burden of proof on the prosecution must be discharged beyond
reasonable doubt.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if a law provides for a different standard
Evidential burden of
proof—defence
(1) Subject to section 59 (Legal burden of proof—defence), a
burden of proof that a law imposes on a defendant is an evidential
(2) A defendant who wishes to deny criminal responsibility by relying on a
provision of part 2.3 (Circumstances where there is no
responsibility) has an evidential burden in relation to the matter.
(5) The defendant no longer has the evidential burden in relation to a
matter if evidence sufficient to discharge the burden is presented
prosecution.
(6) The question whether an evidential burden has been discharged is a
question of law.
(7) In this Act:
evidential burden
, in relation to a matter, means the burden of
presenting or pointing to evidence that suggests a reasonable possibility that
matter exists or does not exist.
6. The issue that arises is whether the general provision in
s 58(2) of the ACT Code, which imposes an evidential burden on a defendant
where a provision of Part 2.3 (which includes s 26) is to be relied upon,
applies in relation to proof of knowledge that the conduct
was wrong, or whether
the specific provision in s 26(3) of the ACT Code excludes s 58(2) and
hence places the burden of proving that
the child knows that his or her conduct
is wrong entirely on the prosecution.
The arguments of the parties
7. The submission of the appellant was that to the extent that
there was any ambiguity in the operation of s 26 and s 58(2) of the
ACT Code, that ambiguity should be resolved by looking to the common law and
available extrinsic materials as to how much of the
common law the ACT Code was
intended to embrace. In the appellant’s submission:
to the ACT Code the prosecution bore the onus of proof and the child bore no
(b) the position reached in the December 1992 Final Report of the Crown Law
Officers Committee on the Model Criminal Code was that
it was for the Crown to
establish awareness of wrongdoing beyond reasonable doubt and that codified the
existing law;
(c) the introduction in the
Criminal Code 1995
(Cth) (the Commonwealth
Code) of a provision which placed an evidential onus upon an accused in relation
to knowledge of wrongfulness
was an afterthought and applicable to provisions in
Part 2.3 other than matters involving a lack of capacity;
(d) the Explanatory Memorandum for what became the ACT Code made it clear
that s 26 was intended to repeat the existing law and provided
“to establish criminal responsibility in these cases the onus will be on
the prosecution to prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the child knew that his
or her conduct was wrong”; and
(e) section 26 should be construed as standing on its own, unaffected by
s 58(2) of the ACT Code because it was a specific provision
which reflected
a continuation of the previous law.
8. The appellant also submitted that the decision in IM was
wrong and had failed to have regard to the statements of intention in
Explanatory Memorandum. The appellant also submitted that the decision of the
Northern Territory Court of Appeal in KG v Firth
[2019] NTCA 5
278 A Crim R 249
was consistent with the interpretation for which he contended.
respondent submitted that IM was correctly decided. It submitted that the
construction of the provisions of the ACT Code should
begin and end with
consideration of the text itself. Historical considerations and extrinsic
material could not be relied upon to
displace the clear meaning of the text:
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
239 CLR 27 (Alcan)
10. The respondent submitted that ss 26 and 58 of
the ACT Code may operate harmoniously together. The clear meaning of the text of
s 58(2) is that the evidential burden must be discharged before the
prosecution bears the legal burden of establishing beyond reasonable
the child did not know that the conduct was wrong. There is therefore no
ambiguity to resolve. To the extent that the
Explanatory Memorandum says that
the provision is a continuation of the existing law, then either it should be
understood as not
having addressed the interaction between the provisions
relating to the burden of proof or it is wrong.
11. The respondent pointed
to the purpose of Chapter 2 set out in s 6 of the ACT Code and submitted
that the intention was that the
provisions in Chapter 2 were self-contained and
were to be interpreted without the need to bring in the common law. The
relied upon statements in the High Court that emphasise the need to
focus on the text of the statute before turning to extrinsic
materials: Northern
Territory v Collins
[2008] HCA 49
235 CLR 619 (Collins)
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] HCA 23
241 CLR 252
Baini v The Queen
[2012] HCA 59
246 CLR 469 (Baini)
. Similarly, the
respondent submitted that it is not legitimate to resort to the previous common
law to create an ambiguity: Mellifont
v Attorney-General (Queensland)
[1991] HCA 53
12. The respondent submitted that the appellant’s
interpretation would leave s 58(2) with no work to do when it came to
Legislative context
Common law background
13. At common law there is a presumption that a child under 14
years of age lacks the capacity to be criminally responsible for his
14. In RP v The Queen
[2016] HCA 53
259 CLR 641
majority of the court said:
the age of 10 years until attaining the age of 14 years, the presumption
may be rebutted by evidence that the child knew that
it was morally wrong to
engage in the conduct that constitutes the physical element or elements of the
offence. Knowledge of the
moral wrongness of an act or omission is to be
distinguished from the child's awareness that his or her conduct is merely
or mischievous. This distinction may be captured by stating the
requirement in terms of proof that the child knew the conduct was
wrong" or "gravely wrong". No matter how obviously wrong the act or acts
constituting the offence may be, the presumption
cannot be rebutted merely as an
inference from the doing of that act or those acts. To the extent that the
decision of the Court
of Appeal of the Supreme Court of Victoria in
suggests a contrary approach, it is wrong. The prosecution
must point to evidence from which an inference can be drawn beyond reasonable
doubt that the child's development is such that he or she knew that it was
morally wrong to engage in the conduct. This directs
attention to the
child's education and the environment in which the child has been
(Footnotes omitted.)
15. The judgment in RP at [11] then referred to the judgment of
Bray CJ in R v M
(1977) 16 SASR 589 (R
v M), where an analogy was made with the
“M’Naghten rules” which require knowledge that the act is
wrong according
to the principles of the reasonable person. The judgment in RP
continued at [11] – [12]:
The analogy is apt insofar as
the knowledge in each case is of the wrongness of the act as a matter of
morality and not law. There
is, however, in the case of the child
defendant, the further dimension of proof of knowledge of serious wrongness as
distinct from
mere naughtiness.
What suffices to rebut the presumption that a child defendant is
will vary according to the nature of the allegation and the
child. A child will more readily understand the seriousness of an act
it concerns values of which he or she has direct personal experience. For
example, a child is likely better able to understand
control of his or her own
possessions and the theft of others' property compared to offences such as
damaging public property, fare
evading, receiving stolen goods, fraud or
forgery. Answers given in the course of a police interview may serve to
prove the child
possessed the requisite knowledge. In other cases,
evidence of the child's progress at school and of the child's home life will
required. It has been said that the closer the child defendant is to the
age of 10 the stronger must be the evidence to rebut
the presumption.
Conversely, the nearer the child is to the age of 14, the less strong need the
evidence be to rebut the presumption.
The difficulty with these statements
is that they are apt to suggest that children mature at a uniform rate.
The only presumption
which the law makes in the case of child defendants is that
those aged under 14 are
doli incapax
. Rebutting that
presumption directs attention to the intellectual and moral development of the
particular child. Some 10-year-old
children will possess the capacity to
understand the serious wrongness of their acts while other children aged very
nearly 14 years
old will not.
(Footnotes omitted.)
16. Gageler J’s concurring reasons in RP were consistent
with the majority reasons in that they indicated that the prosecution
beyond reasonable doubt that the child understood that child’s conduct
which constituted the offence was seriously
wrong by normal adult standards.
While the understanding cannot be inferred from the fact that the child engaged
in the conduct that
constituted the offence, the circumstances of the offence or
manner of the conduct may be taken into account: RP at [38].
Model Criminal Code July 1992 discussion draft
17. Both the ACT Code and the Commonwealth Code had their
genesis in the Model Criminal Code. The Model Criminal Code was the product
law reform process which started in 1987 with the establishment of the Review of
Commonwealth Criminal Law (known as the Gibbs
committee). After the Gibbs
Committee reported its findings in July 1990, the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General established
the Criminal Law Officers Committee which
subsequently produced reports on the Model Criminal Code.
18. In July 1992
the Criminal Law Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General published a discussion draft of
its Model Criminal Code which
included commentary on the drafted provisions.
19. Section 301 provided as
3 – Circumstances in which there is no criminal responsibility
301. Age of criminal responsibility
A child under the age of 10 years is not criminally responsible for an offence.
A child who is 10 years or over but under the age
of 14 years can only be
criminally responsible for an offence if he or she knows that his or her conduct
301.1 The question whether a child knows that his or her conduct is wrong is one
20. The commentary in relation to this provision was as
Provisions on the age of
criminal responsibility vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. The Committee
decided that there should be
two ages: one below which criminal responsibility
is precluded and a second which sets an age range within which a lack of
responsibility
may be found, depending on the knowledge of the child involved.
In the range of possible responsibility, the section casts an evidential
upon the accused to raise the issue, whereupon the Crown would have to establish
awareness of wrongdoing beyond a reasonable
21. The provision that dealt with burdens of proof was
s 601 which provided:
601. Burden of proof
The prosecution bears the legal burden of proving every element of an offence
relevant to the guilt of the person charged, including
any element in relation
to which the person charged discharged an evidential burden borne by him or her.
A burden in relation to
a matter imposed by this Code or another Act on a person
charged with an offence is an evidential one only unless the provision creating
the offence or providing the defence expressly
imposes a legal
burden on the person; or
defence for the person to prove the matter; or
presumption that the matter exists unless proof or evidence to the contrary is
22. The section then went on to explain the nature of legal
burdens and evidential burdens. In particular, s 601.3 provided:
defendant who wishes to rely on any exception, exemption, proviso, excuse or
qualification provided by the provision creating
an offence bears an evidential
burden in relation to that matter.
601.3.1 It does not matter whether the exception, exemption, proviso, excuse or
qualification does or does not accompany the description
23. The commentary to s 601 provided:
Section 601 establishes a
presumption that the prosecution bears the legal burden of proving every element
of the offence beyond reasonable
doubt (ss 601.1, 601.2). Where a burden in
relation to an aspect of the offence or a defence is cast on the defendant, that
is evidential (s 601.1) unless the statute imposes a legal burden on
the defendant or requires him or her to prove the matter. The
evidential burden
on the defendant may be discharged by pointing to evidence in the prosecution
case (s 601.3.2). A legal burden
on the defendant is on the balance of
probabilities (s 601.2).
24. Counsel for the appellant submitted that no weight should
be placed upon the commentary in relation to s 301 insofar as it indicated
that “the section casts an evidential burden upon the accused”
because it was inconsistent with the text.
Model Criminal Code Final Report December 1992
25. In December 1992 the Criminal Law Officers Committee of the
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General published a final report on
chapter 2 of
the Model Criminal Code. Once again, it took the form of draft provisions of the
Code along with commentary on those
provisions. The final report contained
s 301 as follows:
3 – circumstances in which there is no criminal responsibility
301. Age of criminal responsibility
A child under the age of 10 years is not criminally responsible for an offence.
A child who is aged 10 years or over but under the
age of 14 years can only be
criminally responsible for an offence if he or she knows that his or her conduct
301.1 The question whether a child knows that his or her conduct is wrong is one
of fact. The burden of proving this is on the
prosecution.
26. The reference to the burden being on the prosecution in s
301.1 was new.
27. The commentary then provided as follows:
on the age of criminal responsibility vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
The Committee decided that there should be
two ages: under 10 criminal
responsibility is precluded; between 10 and 14 responsibility may be found,
depending on the knowledge
of the child involved. In the 10-14 range, section
301.1 provides that the Crown has to establish awareness of wrongdoing beyond
reasonable doubt. This codifies the existing law.
28. Section 601 of the Model Code identified that the
prosecution bears the legal burden of proving every element of an offence and
legal burden of disproving any matter in relation to which the defendant has
discharged an evidential burden of proof. Section
602 identified that the burden
of proof on a defendant is an evidential burden only other than in certain
identified circumstances.
It identified that the evidential burden “is the
burden of presenting or pointing to evidence that suggests a reasonable
possibility
that the matter exists or does not exist”. Section 602.3
related to exceptions, exemptions, provisos, excuses or qualifications
in the same terms as s 601.3 in the July 1992 draft (see [
The Commonwealth Code
29. The relevant provisions of the Commonwealth Code remain the
same today as when they were enacted. When Commonwealth Code was enacted
schedule to the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth) it provided:
Circumstances
in which there is no criminal responsibility
Note: This Part sets out defences that are generally available.
Defences that apply to a more limited class of offences arc dealt
with elsewhere
in this Code and in other laws.
Division 7—Circumstances involving lack of capacity
7.1 Children under 10
A child under 10 years old is not criminally responsible for an
7.2 Children over 10 but under 14
(1) A child aged 10 years or more but under 14 years old can only be
criminally responsible for an offence if the child knows that
his or her conduct
(2) The question whether a child knows that his or her conduct is wrong is one
of fact. The burden of proving this is on the prosecution.
13.1 Legal burden of proof—prosecution
(1) The prosecution bears a legal burden of proving every element of an offence
relevant to the guilt of the person charged.
Note: See section 3.2 on what elements are relevant to a person's
(2) The prosecution also bears a legal burden of disproving any matter in
relation to which the defendant has discharged an evidential
burden of proof
imposed on the defendant.
(3) In this Code:
legal burden
in relation to a matter, means the
burden of proving the existence of the matter.
13.2 Standard of proof—prosecution
A legal burden of proof on the prosecution must be discharged beyond
reasonable doubt.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the law creating the offence specifies a
different standard of proof.
13.3 Evidential burden of proof—defence
(1) Subject to section 13.4, a burden of proof that a law imposes on a
defendant is an evidential burden only.
(2) A defendant who wishes to deny criminal responsibility by relying on a
provision of Part 2.3 (other than section 7.3) bears an
evidential burden in
relation to that matter.
(3) A defendant who wishes to rely on any exception, exemption, excuse,
qualification or justification provided by the law creating
an offence bears an
evidential burden in relation to that matter. The exception, exemption, excuse,
qualification or justification
need not accompany the description of the
(4) The defendant no longer bears the evidential burden in relation to a matter
if evidence sufficient to discharge the burden is
adduced by the prosecution or
by the court.
(5) The question whether an evidential burden has been discharged is one of
(6) In this Code:
evidential burden
in relation to a matter, means the
burden of adducing or pointing to evidence that suggests a reasonable
possibility that the matter
exists or does not exist.
30. Section 7.3 referred to in s 13.3(2) of the
Commonwealth Code creates a presumption that a person was not suffering from a
impairment which may only be displaced if it is proved on the balance of
probabilities (by the prosecution or the defence) that the
person was suffering
from such a mental impairment. Section 13.3(2) deals with the matters in Part
2.3 separately from exceptions,
exemptions, excuses, qualifications or
justifications which are addressed in s 13.3(3).
31. The Explanatory
Memorandum for the Criminal Code Bill 1994 (Cth) provided in relation to these
provisions:
section 7.1 - Children under 10
Proposed section 7.1 states that a child under 10 is not criminally responsible
for an offence. Provisions on the age of criminal
responsibility vary from
no child under 7 years can
commit a crime. Tasmania adhers [sic] to the common
law. In the Australian Capital Territory it is under 8 years and in other
it is under 10 years.
Proposed section 7.2 - Children over 10 but under 14
Proposed subsection 7.2(1) provides that a child aged 10 years or more but under
14 years old can only be criminally responsible
for an offence if the child
knows that his or her conduct is wrong.
Proposed subsection 7.2(2) provides that the question whether a child knows
that his or her conduct is wrong is one of fact and that
the burden of proving
this is on the prosecution.
(Emphasis added.)
32. The Explanatory Memorandum provided, in relation to
proposed section 13.3, as follows:
Section 13.3 - Evidential burden of proof - defence
Where a burden of proof is cast on the defendant, proposed subsection 13.3(1)
provides that it is an evidential burden only. Proposed
subsection 13.3(2)
provides a defendant who wishes to deny criminal responsibility by relying on
a provision of Part 2.3 (age, intoxication, mistake or ignorance, claim of
right, and defences such as duress and self-defence) other
than section 7.3
(mental impairment) bears an evidential burden in relation to that
(Emphasis added.)
33. This passage is significant because, by the reference in
the bracketed description of the provisions of part 2.3, it explicitly
recognises that s 13.3(2) applies to a situation in which a defendant is
seeking to deny criminal responsibility by relying on a
provision of Part 2.3
relating to age.
ACT law prior to the ACT Code
Children Services Act 1986 (ACT)
34. In 1981 the Australian Law Reform Commission published
“Report No. 18 Child Welfare” which was a review of child
laws in the Australian Capital Territory. The Commission’s report
included a draft Child Welfare Ordinance 1981 for the Australian
Territory. That draft ordinance formed the basis for the Children’s
Services Ordinance 1986 (ACT) which became the
Children’s Services Act
1986 (ACT) on self‑government.
35. In its report the Commission
explained (at [68]) the doli incapax rule and said “[i]t seems clear that
the common law presumption
forms part of the present law in the ACT”. The
Commission identified that the rule had been criticised on the grounds that
courts found difficulty in attaching practical meaning to it and referred to the
statement by Bray CJ in R v M at 595 that: “I
think it is hard to regard
this ancient rule about the capacity of a child ... as altogether satisfactory
or suited to modern conditions
36. The Commission concluded,
however, that the reform or abolition of the rule should be undertaken in the
context of a thorough-going
review of the relevant criminal law principles,
preferably on a national basis and that, for the time being, the doli incapax
should be retained in the ACT. The Commission recommended that in order to
remove any doubt about the application of the doli incapax
rule in the ACT, the
rule should be embodied in the new ordinance. The Commission identified that
there was some uncertainty as to
the whether the rule should be expressed in
terms of the child’s actual knowledge of the wrongness of his or her
in terms of the capacity to appreciate their wrongness. In the
interests of uniformity as between jurisdictions, the latter approach
recommended.
37. Taking up the recommendations of the Commission, the
Children’s Services Ordinance provided:
of criminal responsibility
27 (1) A child who has not attained the age of 8 years shall, for all purposes,
be presumed to be incapable of committing in the
Territory an offence against a
law in force in the Territory.
(2) There is a rebuttable presumption that a child who has attained the age of 8
years but has not attained the age of 14 years is
incapable of committing in the
Territory an offence against a law in force in the Territory by reason that the
child did not have
the capacity to know that the act or omission concerned was
38. The Explanatory Statement for the Children’s Services
Ordinance provided:
Clause 27 deals with the age of
criminal responsibility.
ꟷ Sub-clause
1 restates the common law rule that a child under 8 years is incapable of
committing an offence.
ꟷ Sub-clause
2 restates the common law presumption that a child between 8 and 14 years cannot
commit an offence by reason of
his or her incapacity to know that the act or
omission was wrong. This presumption can be rebutted by evidence that the child
that the act or omission was wrong.
39. The Children’s Services Act was amended by the
Children’s Services Amendment Act 2000 (ACT) to omit the references
years in s 27(1)-(2) and to replace those references with 10 years. That
amendment came into effect on 6 April 2000 and was
in force until the repeal of
the Children’s Services Act on 10 May 2000.
40. The Explanatory
Memorandum for the Children’s Services Amendment Act included the
Australia's
First Report under Article 44(l)(a) of the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child in December 1995 stated
that a Model Criminal Code would be
developed for application in all jurisdictions. Under the Model Code, the age of
criminal responsibility
was to be standardised at 10 years or more. The age of
10 years in relation to Federal offences came into effect on 16 September
In NSW, Qld, Victoria, Western Australia, South Australia and the Northern
Territory the age of criminal responsibility is set at
The Bill will change the age of criminal responsibility in the Australian
Capital Territory from 8 years to 10 years.
Children and Young People Act 1999 (ACT)
41. The provisions of the Children’s Services Act were
replaced by those in the Children and Young People Act 1999 (ACT). Section
the Children and Young People Act 1999 (ACT) was the provision relevant to the
criminal responsibility of children. In the
Act as notified, s 71 was consistent
with the Children’s Services Ordinance in that it referred to a child
under the age of
8 years or between the ages of 8 and 14 years. However, the Act
as notified had not come into effect by 10 May 2002. On that day
the Children
and Young People Act 1999 (ACT) commenced along with the Children and Young
People Amendment Act 2000 (ACT). The amending
Act substituted the references in
s 71 to a child aged under 8 years or between the ages of 8 and 14 years with
references to a child
aged under 10 years or between the ages of 10 and 14
42. As at 2002, s 71 of that Children and Young People Act
of criminal responsibility
(1) A child who is under the age of 10 years is, for all
purposes, presumed to be incapable of committing in the ACT an offence against
law in force in the ACT.
(2) There is a rebuttable presumption that a child or young person who is of or
over the age of 10 years, but under the age of 14
years, is incapable of
committing in the ACT an offence against a law in force in the ACT because the
child or young person did not
have the capacity to know that the act or omission
concerned was wrong.
43. Sections 7 and 8 of the Children and Young People Act
defined “child” and “young person” as follows:
For this Act, a
is a person who is under 12 years
Who is a young person?
(1) For this Act, a
young person
is a person who is 12 years
old or older, but not yet an adult.
(2) However, in chapter 6 (Young offenders), a reference to a young person
includes a reference to a child.
44. The Explanatory Memorandum for the Children and Young
People Bill 1999 (ACT) provided:
The Bill does not attempt to
reform the law relating to young offenders other than in a few minor areas and
for the purposes of bringing
terminology in that arena of the law up to date or
into line with other usage in the Territory. Chapter 6 of the Bill is therefore
almost identical to Parts IV and IVA of the CSA.
45. Clause 69 of the Bill repeated the terms of s 27 of the
version of the Children’s Services Act that was in force in July
the Bill was presented and for that reason clause 69 was not the subject of any
specific comment in the Explanatory Memorandum.
As noted at [
] above, s 27 of the Children’s
Services Act was amended on 6 April 2000, shortly before its repeal, to raise
the age of criminal
responsibility to 10 years. The same change was made to s 71
of the Children and Young People Act prior to it coming into force:
Criminal Code 2001 (ACT)
46. The Criminal Code 2001 (ACT) was enacted but never came
into force. It did not address the issue of the age of criminal responsibility.
However, it did contain a number of provisions and a structure which was
subsequently repeated in the Criminal Code 2002 (ACT). It
contained in Part 2.3
a number of circumstances in which there was no criminal responsibility: mistake
or ignorance of fact, mistake
or ignorance of statute law, claim of right.
Section 25 of the Criminal Code 2001 (ACT) was the equivalent of s 58
of the ACT Code.
It provided:
Evidential burden of proof—defence
(1) Subject to section 26 (Legal burden of proof—defence), a burden of
proof that a law imposes on a defendant is an evidential
burden only.
(2) A defendant who wishes to deny criminal responsibility by relying on a
provision of part 2.3 (Circumstances where there is no
criminal responsibility)
has an evidential burden in relation to the matter.
(3) Subject to section 26, a defendant who wishes to rely on any exception,
exemption, excuse, qualification or justification provided
by the law creating
an offence (whether or not it accompanies the description of the offence) has an
evidential burden in relation
to the matter.
(4) The defendant no longer has the evidential burden in relation to a matter if
evidence sufficient to discharge the burden is presented
by the prosecution.
(5) The question whether an evidential burden has been discharged is a question
(6) In this Act:
evidential burden
, in relation to a matter, means the burden of
presenting or pointing to evidence that suggests a reasonable possibility that
matter exists or does not exist.
47. When additional matters were proposed to be included in the
ACT Code it was thought more appropriate to repeal the Code and pass
in order to avoid “renumbering difficulties that would arise if the 2001
Code were amended section by section”:
Explanatory Memorandum for the
Criminal Code 2001 (ACT) at 1.
48. The relevant provisions of the ACT Code are in the same
form as they were when enacted. They are set out above.
49. The Explanatory
Memorandum for the Bill that became the ACT Code provides significant, if not
entirely consistent, indications
as to the intention of the legislature. In the
general outline of the purpose of the Bill, the Explanatory Memorandum referred
the Model Criminal Code developed by the National Model Criminal Code
Officers Committee established by the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General.
Bill comprises Chapters 1, 2 and 4 of the Model Criminal Code ... Chapter 2
incorporates the provisions of the 2001 Code together
with the remaining general
principles of criminal responsibility recommended in Chapter 2 of the Model
Criminal Code ...
Chapter 2 of the Bill sets out general principles of criminal responsibility,
which will eventually apply to all ACT offences. The
principles are contained in
Chapter 2 of the Model Criminal Code which has been endorsed by the Standing
Committee of Attorneys-General.
The Commonwealth was the first Australian jurisdiction to enact Chapter 2 of the
Model Criminal Code and the Bill is substantially
similar to that passed by the
Commonwealth in 1995.
50. In relation to clause 10, which identified provisions that
had immediate application, the Explanatory Memorandum made specific
reference to
the provisions concerning the criminal responsibility of children under the age
of 14 years. That was addressed further
in the opening explanation of Part 2.3
of the Bill which said:
Since the Code provisions on
children and intoxication are essentially a restatement of the current law in
the ACT they will take
effect immediately from the time the Code comes into
force on 1 January 2003.
51. That was contrasted with provisions in relation to mental
impairment which required careful consideration to be given to what
were required of the current law and hence were subject to the delayed
commencement provisions.
52. In relation to the provisions which became
ss 25 and 26 of the ACT Code, the Explanatory Memorandum provided:
2.3.1 Lack of capacity – children
Clause 25 Children under 10
This clause provides that a child under the age of 10 lacks criminal
responsibility and therefore cannot be convicted of a crime.
This is currently
the law in the ACT (section 71 of the
Children and Young People Act 1999
and is consistent with the position in all jurisdictions in Australia, except
Clause 26 Children 10 and over but under 14
This provision also repeats the law as it currently stands in the ACT and the
rest of Australia. It provides that a child aged 10
or more but under 14 is not
criminally responsible unless the child knows that his or her conduct is wrong.
To establish criminal
responsibility in these case [sic] the onus will be on the
prosecution to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the child knew that
her conduct was wrong
. Since this is essentially a question of fact, it will
ultimately lie on the jury to determine on the evidence whether the child
fact knew that the conduct was wrong.
(Emphasis added.)
53. So far as s 58 of the ACT Code is concerned the
Explanatory Memorandum included:
Clause 58 Evidential
burden of proof - defence
This clause explains that the general rule is that where a burden of proof is
cast on the defendant, it is an evidential burden only.
A defendant who
wishes to deny criminal responsibility by relying on a provision of Part 2.3
bears an evidential burden in relation
to that matter
. The general rule can
be displaced, as provided by clause 59, which is explained below.
(Emphasis added).
The decision in IM
54. The issue in IM was whether a child’s pleas of guilty
constituted both formal admissions of the elements of the offences
admission that the child was criminally responsible for the offences. A
magistrate had dismissed the charges in the case because,
notwithstanding the
plea of guilty, he held that the prosecutor had failed to displace the
“presumption of doli incapax”.
55. Murrell CJ did not ultimately
need to express a conclusion as to whether the child’s plea of guilty
“rebutted the
s 26 presumption of lack of criminal responsibility
beyond reasonable doubt”: IM at [60]. That was because her Honour
that there was an evidential burden under s 58(2) of the ACT Code
upon the child that had not been discharged. Therefore, the magistrate
not have addressed the matter.
56. This conclusion that there was an
evidential burden upon the child was reached by examining the provisions of the
ACT Code, the
Commonwealth Code, the provisions of the Model Criminal Code
released in July 1992 and the Explanatory Memorandum for the Commonwealth
Her Honour identified that commentary to the July 1992 draft of the Model
Criminal Code made reference to an evidential burden
being upon the accused but
that this was not present in the commentary in the December 1992 version of the
Code. Her Honour identified
that when the Commonwealth Code was introduced, it
reverted to a position that there was an evidential burden in relation to the
denial of criminal responsibility based upon the terms of the Explanatory
Memorandum, which made specific reference to denial of
criminal responsibility
based upon age: see [
57. Her Honour identified that, having regard to the fluctuating
position adopted over time in relation to whether an accused bore
an evidentiary
burden, “the introduction of s 13.3(2) reflected a deliberate
decision to change the common law position and
place an evidential onus on the
defence”: IM at [43]. Her Honour interpreted the ACT Code as being to the
same effect as the
Commonwealth Code in that s 58(2) placed an evidential
burden upon the child before the prosecution bore the legal burden of
establishing
beyond reasonable doubt that the child did know that the conduct
was wrong: IM at [46].
58. Her Honour pointed out that under the ACT Code
criminal responsibility was not dealt with as an element of the offence.
criminal responsibility was treated as “a largely independent
concept”: IM at [52].
59. Because the evidential burden was upon the
child but had not been discharged, the magistrate should not have addressed the
and hence was wrong to dismiss the charge in circumstances where there was
a plea of guilty.
60. Matters not referred to in the judgment in IM and to
which attention was drawn in the present case were:
state of the law in the Australian Capital Territory prior to the enactment of
the ACT Code; and
(b) the terms of the Explanatory Memorandum for the ACT Code.
The decision in KG
61. In the Northern Territory the terms of ss 43AQ and 43BU of
the Criminal Code 1983 (NT) are relevantly similar to the terms of
ss 26 and 58
of the ACT Code. In KG, there had been significant evidence devoted to the issue
of the appellant’s cognitive
capacity. There was therefore no issue before
the Court of Appeal as to whether the question of the appellant having knowledge
his conduct was wrong had been raised. The issue before the court was the
ultimate question of whether the prosecution had proved
beyond reasonable doubt
that the appellant was not doli incapax. It was in that context that the court
discussed the meaning of “wrong”
and said that the concept of doli
incapax was the same or very similar to that in the common law test articulated
in RP. In articulating
the burden that was upon the prosecution, the court said
the matter was sufficiently raised as an issue in the trial
, the burden was
on the prosecution to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant did know
his conduct was “wrong”
in the relevant sense.
(Emphasis added.)
62. Although the issue was not a contentious one in KG,
contrary to the submissions of the appellant in this case, the reasons of
court in KG are more consistent with there being an evidential onus upon a
defendant. The references to the common law test in
RP relate to what is meant
by “wrong” rather than to the existence or non‑existence of an
evidential onus under
the Criminal Code 1983 (NT).
63. In any event, nothing
in the case addresses the Australian Capital Territory-specific issue of what
the Legislative Assembly intended
when enacting the ACT Code. The case is
therefore not significant in determining the issue before this court.
64. Chapter 14 of the
Legislation Act 2001
(ACT) provides an
appropriate starting point for the interpretation of the provisions of the ACT
Code. It provides guidance about
the interpretation of Acts but is not intended
to be a comprehensive statement of the law relating to the interpretation of
and assumes that “common law presumptions” operate in
conjunction with its provisions: s 137(2)-(3).
65. Fundamental to the
interpretation of any Act is its text. That includes the words used and the
structure of the instrument as
a whole. Care must be taken to place sufficient
emphasis upon the text used when considering the weight to be given to extrinsic
indications of the purpose of the Act. This has been emphasised by the High
Court: Collins at [99], Alcan at [47] and Baini at [14].
Legislation
contains specific directions that reinforce or supplement common law
principles of interpretation. They include:
requirement that in “working out the meaning of Act” an
interpretation that would “best achieve the purpose
of the Act” is
to be preferred to any other interpretation: s 139;
(b) the requirement that in “working out the meaning of an Act”
particular provisions of an Act must be read in the context
of the Act as a
whole: s 140;
(c) provisions permitting material not forming part of the Act to be
considered in “working out the meaning of an Act”
subject to various
considerations, including the desirability of being able to rely upon the
ordinary meaning of the Act: s 141;
(d) providing specific permission in “working out the meaning of an
Act” to rely upon certain legislative material such
as material contained
in an authorised version of the Act, explanatory statements and presentation
speech for the Bill which became
the Act: s 142.
67. Central to the operation of these provisions is the concept
of “working out the meaning of an Act” which is defined
(a) resolving an ambiguous or
obscure provision of the Act; or
(b) confirming or displacing the apparent meaning of the Act; or
(c) finding the meaning of the Act when its apparent meaning leads to a result
that is manifestly absurd or is unreasonable; or
(d) finding the meaning of the Act in any other case.
68. Plainly enough, having regard to the terms of paragraph (b)
above, the process of “working out the meaning of an Act”
beyond cases where an ambiguity exists. Legislative purpose is central from the
beginning of the interpretive process.
69. In addition to these foundational
principles of interpretation of Territory legislation is the proposition that
what is being
interpreted is a code. In interpreting the ACT Code, it is
appropriate to have regard to the pre-existing common law but not in a
seeks “to see if the Code will bear an interpretation which will leave the
law unaltered”: Brennan v The King
[1936] HCA 24
(1936) 55 CLR 253
at 263; Pickett v
Western Australia
[2020] HCA 20
94 ALJR 629
, [92]. Rather, the
first loyalty must be to the code itself but that is to be understood in the
context of the law that existed
previously and interpreted in accordance with
the statutory commands in the
Legislation Act
just referred to.
Text and legislative context
70. In the present case, it is appropriate to start with the
text. The relevant text is not simply the text of
and s 58 of the ACT
Code but the statute as a whole.
71. There are a number of aspects of the
text that require specific consideration.
72. First, as emphasised by the
respondent, the clear language in s 58(2) that indicates that a person
wishing to deny criminal responsibility
by relying upon a provision of
Part 2.3 has an evidential burden in relation to that matter. That clearly
covers s 26. It provides
a strong textual indication that an evidential
burden is borne by the appellant.
73. Second, in contrast to the Commonwealth
Code, there is no exclusion from s 58(2) of the ACT Code in relation to
mental impairment,
yet that is a provision which contains provisions about the
burden of proof inconsistent with the unconstrained application of s
to it: see the discussion of the provisions in R v Yeaman
[2021] ACTSC 252
This undermines the contention that s 58(2) should be given
effect to according to its broad and unequivocal language.
s 26(3) contains a specific provision dealing with the burden of proof in
relation to proof of knowledge that the child’s
conduct is wrong. The
existence of that provision can be seen as putting s 26 in a similar
position to s 27 in that it has self-contained
provisions dealing with onus
which should be interpreted as excluding the undeniably broad language of
s 58(2) of the ACT Code.
75. Fourth, if the respondent’s
interpretation of the operation of s 58(2) of the ACT Code is correct then
s 26(3) is surplusage.
That is because if s 58(2) operates in relation
to s 26 then it is s 56(2) that places the legal burden upon the
prosecution of disproving
the matter where a defendant has discharged the
evidential burden. The existence of s 26(3) cannot be explained on the
it is necessary in order to place a burden on the prosecution in
circumstances where legal capacity of a child is not an element
of the offence,
because s 56(2) is not limited to elements of the offence, but instead
applies wherever an evidential burden of proof
has been placed on a defendant
and has been discharged. It must, however, be recognised that this surplusage is
also reflected in
the Commonwealth Code (s 7.2(2)), although not quite so
obviously as it is not a separate subsection.
Non-legislative context
76. In this case the most significant non-legislative context
is the Explanatory Memorandum. It is clearly a matter to which regard
had pursuant to s 142, table 142, item 4 of the
Legislation Act
. The terms
of the Explanatory Memorandum require specific consideration to be given to the
Commonwealth Code and the pre-existing
state of the law at the time when the
Bill for the ACT Code was presented because they are referred to in the
Explanatory Memorandum
to explain the intended effect of the proposed code. The
matters which arise from the terms of the Explanatory Memorandum include
77. First, it is clear that, in a general sense, the intention of
the legislature was to adopt the provisions of the Model Criminal
Code which had
been given effect in the Commonwealth Code. That is made clear by the explicit
statements emphasised in the quoted
passages at [
] above and the heavy reliance upon the
terms of the Explanatory Memorandum for the Commonwealth Code in the Explanatory
for the Bill for the ACT Code.
78. Second, in determining what
weight is to be given to the general notion that the ACT Code was mirroring the
general provisions
of the Commonwealth Code, regard must be had to the
difference between the language used in the ACT Code and that in the
Commonwealth
Code. That minor amendments to the language of the Commonwealth
Code can have significant consequences is illustrated by the decision
s 28 of the ACT Code in Yeaman at [103]-[123]. In the present case, the
provision of the Commonwealth Code which places
an evidentiary burden upon a
defendant in relation to the provisions of Part 2.3 specifically excludes s
7.3. By doing so, it recognises
that s 7.3 of the Commonwealth Code has
self-contained onus provisions and hence weakens the argument that
s 7.2(2), the provision
relating to children between 10 and 14 years,
should be seen as an equivalent, self‑contained onus provision. Given the
adoption of the provisions of the Commonwealth Code and the absence of
any explanation for the tinkering with this aspect of the
drafting, the failure
to include the qualification on the applicability of the evidential onus
provisions leaves more room for the
argument, set out above, that the reference
to the burden of proof in s 26(3) of the ACT Code is a self‑contained
which excludes s 56(2).
79. Third, the terms of the
Explanatory Memorandum make it clear that the understanding of the author of the
Explanatory Memorandum
was that the provision of the ACT Code relating to the
age of criminal responsibility reflected the existing law. That is illustrated
statement about the immediate as opposed to delayed commencement of the
provisions because they “are essentially a restatement
of the current law
in the ACT”; and
(b) the explanation that s 26 like s 25 “repeats the law as
it currently stands in the ACT and the rest of Australia”.
80. So far as the law stood when the Bill for the ACT Code was
presented, s 71 of the Children and Young People Act clearly placed
burden upon the prosecution to rebut the presumption that a person over the age
of 10 years but under the age of 14 years was incapable
of committing an offence
because the person did not have the capacity to know that the act or omission
concerned was wrong. This
also reflected the common law. However, it did not
reflect the Commonwealth Code and hence the statement in the Explanatory
that s 26 repeated the law in “the rest of
Australia” was not completely accurate.
81. While these statements in
the Explanatory Memorandum can be seen as strongly supporting the proposition
that there was to be no
evidential burden upon a child, it is a possible
interpretation of the Explanatory Memorandum that the statements about
consistency
with the existing law related only to the ultimate burden of proof
upon the Crown and said nothing about whether or not there was
an evidential
burden upon a defendant to raise the issue.
82. In light of these considerations, it is necessary to return
to the legislative command that an Act is to be interpreted in a way
would best achieve the purpose of the Act”. In so far as the purpose of
the Act as expressed in its text is concerned,
notwithstanding the absence of
any qualification in s 58(2) of the ACT Code that addresses mental
impairment, on balance, the purpose
appears to be to impose an evidential burden
upon a defendant to raise an issue under s 26 of the ACT Code. However, the
material indicates an intention to replicate the existing law which
did not impose any evidential burden upon a defendant. While
there is a possible
reading of the extrinsic material that would be consistent with imposing an
evidential burden even though none
existed under the pre‑existing law,
that would involve reading the Explanatory Memorandum in a way that was not
obvious and
in a way which would render it misleading to the average
legislator.
83. It is not a case in which it can be said that the drafter of
the Explanatory Memorandum simply got it wrong: cf Re Bolton Ex parte
[1987] HCA 12
(1987) 162 CLR 514
at 518. That is because:
is a structural assumption behind the immediate commencement provisions of the
ACT Code that s 26 of the ACT Code reflected
the existing law;
(b) in light of the text of ss 26 and 27, the drafting of s 58(2)
of the ACT Code is not so clear as to exclude the possibility of
having self-contained onus provisions; and
(c) the possibility that the Explanatory Memorandum intended to explain that
there was continuity in the law as between that which
was existing and that
which was proposed without regard to a newly introduced evidential burden is at
best, not obvious.
84. While it might be possible to place greater or lesser
emphasis upon one of the considerations outlined above in order to reach
but contestable conclusion as to the appropriate interpretation, it is best
resolved by what has become referred to as the
principle of legality.
85. The difference between the parties is whether or not the defendant bears
an evidential burden in relation to knowledge of wrongfulness.
The imposition of
such a burden is a qualification on the defendant’s entitlement to have
all aspects of the case against him
proved by the Crown beyond reasonable doubt.
Although a procedural provision, it is, to an extent, a burden upon him which
a corresponding qualification on a fundamental aspect of the criminal
process and hence upon his liberty.
86. The central idea behind the principle
of legality is that if the legislature intends to infringe or qualify
fundamental principles,
rights and freedoms then it should do so in a way that
is clear enough to indicate that it takes responsibility for, and hence is
politically accountable for, that infringement or qualification. This was
explained in R v Home Secretary; Ex parte Simms
[1999] UKHL 33
[2000] 2 AC 115
Parliamentary
sovereignty means that Parliament can, if it chooses, legislate contrary to
fundamental principles of human rights ...
The constraints upon its exercise by
Parliament are ultimately political, not legal. But the principle of legality
means that Parliament
must squarely confront what it is doing and accept the
political cost. Fundamental rights cannot be overridden by general or ambiguous
words. This is because there is too great a risk that the full implications of
their unqualified meaning may have passed unnoticed
in the democratic process.
In the absence of express language or necessary implication to the contrary, the
courts therefore presume
that even the most general words were intended to be
subject to the basic rights of the individual.
87. This explanation of the principle has been cited with
approval in judgments in the High Court: Plaintiff S157/2002 v Commonwealth
[2003] HCA 2
211 CLR 476
(Gleeson CJ); K-Generation Pty Ltd v Liquor
Licencing Court
[2009] HCA 4
237 CLR 501
(French CJ); Lee v NSW Crime
[2013] HCA 39
251 CLR 196
(Gageler and Keane JJ).
88. The principle has been taken by the High Court to be a working
hypothesis known to both legislatures and the courts: see North
Aboriginal Justice Agency Ltd v Northern Territory
[2015] HCA 41
and the authorities cited therein.
89. The corollary of the need
for sufficient clarity is that vague or ambiguous provisions are not to be
interpreted in a way that
infringes or qualifies fundamental principles, rights
or freedoms. The principle accommodates the reality that in the present-day
context, statute law which regulates and thereby infringes upon individual
liberty is both ubiquitous and necessary for legitimate
regulation of a modern
complex society. To adopt an approach that requires a legislature to identify
with sufficient clarity its
purpose, does not involve any judicial resistance to
the will of the legislature. Rather, in accordance with the statutory mandate
provisions such as
Legislation Act
, it is an approach which
gives effect to the will of the legislature if it is sufficiently clearly
expressed. It is an approach which
strengthens democratic institutions by
ensuring that those proposing legislation squarely confront potentially
difficult issues and
bear any political cost of the legislation that addresses
those issues.
90. Having regard to what has been said above, it cannot be
said that the legislative purpose to impose an evidential burden on an
in order to give rise to the legal burden on the prosecution to prove knowledge
of wrongfulness beyond reasonable doubt has
been sufficiently clearly expressed.
Rather, that legal burden is at all times on the prosecution.
interpretation is one which gives some effect to each of the statutory
provisions and no part of the language in the Act
is denied some useful
operation: Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Australia
194 CLR 355.
Section 58(2) of the ACT Code operates in relation to s 26 of
the ACT Code, other than on the issue covered by s 26(3). In other
there is evidential burden on a defendant in relation to a child’s age.
However, in relation to the knowledge that the
conduct is wrong, the specific
provision in s 26(3) applies to the exclusion of s 58(2) and places the
burden at all times on the
prosecution.
92. Having regard to the conclusion
that has been have reached, the approach taken by the magistrate consistent with
the decision
in IM was wrong and the appeal must be allowed. The magistrate was
obliged to consider whether, even though no evidential burden
discharged by the appellant in relation to knowledge that his conduct was wrong,
the Crown had proved beyond reasonable
doubt that the appellant knew his conduct
was wrong. As pointed out above at [
while that may not be established merely by reason of the establishment of the
elements of the offence, the circumstances of the
offending and the facts giving
rise to the offending are matters which may be taken into account in determining
whether the Crown
has discharged its burden of proof.
Disposition
93. There was a further ground of appeal which asserted that
the prosecution did not establish a prima facie case. This ground of
put forward on the basis that the Crown bore an onus to prove that the appellant
knew that his conduct was wrong and that
this onus had not been discharged.
Counsel for the appellant relied upon the absence of evidence specifically
addressed to that issue.
Counsel for the respondent referred to some of the
circumstances surrounding the offending which pointed to knowledge of
wrongfulness
on the part of the appellant. He also referred to a video of the
incident which was not before the court.
94. Having regard to the point of
principle which was raised by the appeal, the fact that the matter was disposed
of by the magistrate
by dismissal under
(Sentencing) Act
and the fact that some of the evidence before the Childrens
Court relevant to determining whether an inference that the appellant
his conduct was wrong could be drawn from the circumstances of the offending was
not before the court, the appropriate
course is to simply set aside the verdict
and the orders made by the Childrens Court and remit the proceedings to that
will be a matter for the Director whether it is appropriate to pursue
the matter further in the circumstances.
95. The orders of the Court are:
1. Appeal allowed.
2. The verdict of the Childrens Court and orders made
on charge CH2021/54 on 11 February 2021 are set aside and the proceedings are
remitted to that court to be determined according to law.
certify that the preceding ninety-five [95] numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Judgment of their Honours Justice
Mossop, Justice Collier and
Acting Justice McWilliam.
Date: 12 November 2021
RTF format (410 KB)
Signed PDF/A format