Agius v The Structural Design and Construction Company Pty Ltd [2025] ACTMC 20 (31 October 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Agius v The Structural Design and Construction Company Pty Ltd
[2025] ACTMC 20
Hearing Dates:
Decision Date:
Magistrate Temby
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL LAW
– Work Health and Safety – Category 2
offence – engineering services – guilty finding
Legislation Cited:
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
Health and Safety Regulation 2011
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT), ss 62, 63, 64
Cases Cited:
Bulga Underground Operations Pty Ltd v Nash
[2016] NSWCCA 37
Kirk v Industrial Court of New South Wales
[2010] HCA 1
Orr v Hunter Quarries Pty Limited
[2019] NSWDC 634
Jacqueline Agius (Informant)
The Structural Design and Construction Company Pty Ltd (Defendant)
Representation:
Macdonnells Law
File Numbers:
CC 41493 of 2024
MAGISTRATE TEMBY:
Defendant, The Structural Design and Construction Company Pty Ltd (
is charged with a Category 2 Work Health and Safety offence contrary to
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
). The offence is a
strict liability offence (s 12A, WHS Act).
charge arises from an incident which occurred on 6 August 2022 during the
construction of a large residential and commercial building
precinct in Phillip,
known as WOVA (
). On that day a section of the shoring wall at
the site collapsed.
was responsible for the design and associated drawings for the shoring wall. It
is alleged that, between 14 November 2019 and
7 August 2022, it failed to
provide an adequate design for the shoring wall at the site, and that that
failure meant that there was
a risk that the shoring wall would collapse. In
turn, this meant that there was a risk of anyone in the vicinity of the collapse
being exposed to the risk of death or serious
is the case in all criminal prosecutions, the Prosecution bears the onus of
proving the guilt of SDCC. While SDCC did not contest
the charge, it did not
have to prove that it did not commit the offence with which it was charged.
Similarly, while SDCC did not
give evidence during the hearing, no inference,
adverse to it, can be drawn from that fact. I have had regard to the statements
officers of SDCC gave during the WorkSafe ACT investigation.
standard of proof the Prosecution must meet is proof beyond reasonable doubt.
SDCC cannot be found guilty unless the evidence
which I accept satisfies me
beyond reasonable doubt of its guilt. If I am satisfied that there may be an
explanation consistent with
the innocence of SDCC, or I am unsure of where the
truth lies, then I must find that the charge has not been proved to the standard
of proof required by law.
is a corporation which, under the business name ‘PTC Consulting
Engineers’, offered engineering services, including
geotechnical and
structural engineering services. It was, at the relevant time, a person
conducting a business or undertaking (
). Its sole director and
principal engineer was Wen Lu Zhang.
SDCC’s involvement in the WOVA project
Constructions (ACT) Pty Ltd (
) was the principal contractor for the
WOVA construction project. Geocon engaged SDCC to provide a geotechnical
investigation report
for the Site, which SDCC finalised on 15 November 2019
Geotech Report
). It was prepared by a SDCC geotechnical engineer and
signed by Mr Zhang in his capacity as Principal Engineer and Head of Design
Engineering.
Geotech Report noted that SDCC understood (correctly) that the proposed
development would require excavation to a depth of 12.5
metres to 17 metres.
WOVA was to have three basement levels, requiring excavation to around 13 metres
below ground level.
report recognised the need for an excavation shoring system,
From a geotechnical perspective, it is critical to maintain
the stability of the adjacent structures and infrastructures during demolition,
excavation and construction works.
Unsupported vertical cuts of the soil profile are not recommended for this
site as these carry the risk of potential slump failure
especially after a
period of wet weather. Slumping of the material may result in injury to
personnel and/or damage to nearby structures/infrastructures
and equipment.
2021, SDCC prepared an initial design, and associated drawings, for the shoring
wall of the planned excavation at the Site. On
7 January 2022, Geocon entered
into a contract with Viking Civil Group Pty Ltd (
demolition and excavation of the Site. This work included the design and
construction of the shoring, piers and temporary
ground anchoring necessary to
support the excavation of the Site. Viking in turn engaged SDCC to complete the
design work.
finalised the design and associated drawings for the shoring wall around the
same time that construction of the shoring wall
commenced. The date of the last
revision, 4 March 2022, was the same day that concrete piles were poured in the
area where the wall
collapsed. The design was the responsibility of a SDCC
engineer and the drawings were prepared by a SDCC draughtsman. They were
by Mr Zhang.
The shoring wall system
shoring wall is a structural system (temporary or permanent) that stabilises the
walls of an excavation to prevent them from collapsing.
It is an important
element of the excavation process, including with respect to the safety of
workers and others in the vicinity
of the excavation site and with respect to
the structural integrity of the site itself and neighbouring buildings and
infrastructure.
construction of the shoring wall involved:
(a) inserting piles around the perimeter of the site by boring holes and filling
the holes with steel reinforcement and concrete;
(b) pouring a concrete beam across the top of the piles to tie the piles
together at ground level;
(c) excavating the ground to a specified depth (known as the
(d) inserting anchors in the piles at specified depths;
(e) constructing a shotcrete wall (non-structural facing) in the areas between
the piles by installing a steel mesh and spraying
concrete onto the mesh; and
(f) repeating the above process until the site had been excavated to the desired
depth (around 13 metres).
present purposes, the most significant of the drawings prepared by SDCC were the
drawings depicting the design for the location
and depth of the shoring wall
piles. The drawings for the western end of the southern wall of the excavation,
where the incident
occurred (sections ‘SW7’ and ‘SW8’),
showed that the piles were to extend around 7 metres below ground level
as already noted, the excavation was expected to be around 13 metres deep.
Shotcrete facing was to be used below the level
at which the piles terminated.
The piles were to be spaced 3 metres apart.
The construction
and collapse of the shoring wall
noted above, concrete piles in sections SW7 and SW8 (piles 193 – 208) were
poured on 4 March 2022. In accordance with SDCC’s
design, they were spaced
3 metres apart and they did not extend to the basement excavation level but
stopped at a depth of 6.6 metres
to 7.9 metres. Shotcrete facing was applied to
the area below the piles.
Saturday, 6 August 2022, at 2.30pm, the part of the shoring wall at sections SW7
and SW8 collapsed. It was about 35 metres in length
and at least 10 metres deep.
only took a few seconds for the shoring wall to collapse, with the Site fencing
and scaffolding and the edge barrier to the driveway
for the neighbouring
multi-storey car park (‘Sky Park’) also falling into the excavation.
The debris from the collapsed
part of the wall travelled around 15 metres from
the side of the excavation. In addition, about 5 minutes after the shoring wall
collapsed, a section of the Sky Park driveway collapsed into the
excavation.
Fortunately,
while several workers attended the Site in the week leading up to the incident,
no one was present at the Site at the
time the wall collapsed. If there had been
any workers near where the wall collapsed they would not have had time to evade
which fell into the excavation.
Park, however, was open and being used by the public. Video footage from Sky
Park shows that, during the 10 minute period starting
shortly before the shoring
wall collapsed:
(a) one car was parked on the driveway near the section of the driveway that
(b) one car left the car park (travelling over the section of the driveway that
collapsed) less than a minute before the shoring
wall collapsed; and
(c) another car left the car park between the shoring wall collapsing and the
driveway collapsing.
any of these cars (or any others) had been driving on the section of the
driveway that collapsed at the time that it did they would
have fallen into the
excavation. Further, as noted already, by the time the second car left the car
park, there was no barrier between
the driveway and the excavation, which
created a risk of someone driving into the excavation
accidentally.
Collapse of shoring wall likely contributed to
by inadequacies in shoring wall system
ACT engaged a number of geotechnical experts as part of its investigation of the
incident. Their evidence, which I accept,
is that the reason why the shoring
wall collapsed cannot be conclusively determined, however there are a range of
likely contributing
factors, being:
(a) adverse rock jointing (fractures) at the failure site;
(b) the level of rainfall that preceded the incident (the presence of services
trenches above the shoring wall contributed to the
injection of water into the
retained material and adversely affected rock defects) – albeit that the
design of the shoring
system should have included allowances for groundwater and
soil moisture and the volume of rainfall in the lead up to the incident
while wetter than average, not unprecedented or particularly adverse; and
(c) the inadequacy of the shoring wall system which, even in dry conditions, was
unable to resist expected ground forces due to the
presence of adverse rock
jointing. Specifically:
(i) the lateral pressure from the rock due to the adverse jointing was higher
than the design values provided in the Geotech Report;
(ii) the anchors’ capacities were exceeded;
(iii) the wide pile spacing made individual piles more sensitive to local
conditions and reduced the capacity for adjacent piles
to resist ground forces;
(iv) the termination of the piles above the excavation level (which was an
unconventional approach to shoring in the Canberra region)
resulted in limited
pile toe restraint, stressing load vertical components; and
(v) the absence of a socket at the base of the excavation, together with
insufficient reinforcement of the shotcrete below where
the piers terminated,
meant that there was insufficient resistance to lateral forces in the lower part
of the shoring wall.
failure of the elements of the shoring wall system is unlikely to have
contributed to the failure of the shoring wall.
Mr Zhang suggested to WorkSafe ACT investigators that the collapse may have been
caused by someone undertaking the excavation,
possibly by undermining the wall
at the toe of the pile, he noted that that was a guess and that he did not know
what caused the
on the expert evidence, I make the following findings in relation to the failure
of the shoring wall system.
Geotech Report identified considerable jointing and defects in the soil which
was removed from the borehole closest sections SW7
and SW8 (being BH-01).
However, the calculated (anticipated) loads on the shoring wall did not reflect
the nature of the soil. The
calculated loads were very low and appear to have
been premised on the soil acting as if would be stable without any support.
regard to the significant jointing at the Site, SDCC (as a professional services
company specialising in geotechnical and structural
engineering services) should
have appreciated that the excavated wall would not behave in a
‘massive’ way (that is, hold
itself up) and that some load would be
applied to the shoring system for the full depth of the excavation (requiring
support from
the shoring system). However, inadequate allowance for the defects
in the soil was made in the structural design and the design of
the shoring wall
was unable to support even very low pressures applied by the soil in the
excavated wall.
for an assumed minimum pressure of 0.2Ka from ground forces (an appropriate
assumption to use in Canberra construction projects
due to the presence of
defects and joints in the soil), the pier, shotcrete and lower anchor were all
overloaded. Except for the
upper anchor, the applied load exceeded the capacity
of the system to resist that load for all components of the shoring system.
shotcrete facing did not provide any overall stability to the excavation wall
and was unable to support even very low pressures
applied by the rock behind it.
design of the shoring system was, accordingly, non-compliant with clause 7.2 of
the Australian Standard AS1170.0, which required
that the design capacity of the
system be equal to or greater than the design action effect (shoring
pressures).
shoring system had low redundancy to any ground conditions that might vary
adversely from the design assumptions, arising from:
(a) truncation of the piles, with minimal lateral restraint to the pile toe;
(b) the shoring system functioning as only a facing system once excavation
progressed below the toe of the pile, which was inadequate
given the very low
reinforcement ratio (ratio of anchors to area of wall face) provided by the
design; and
(c) wide pile spacing, making localised adverse conditions focused on individual
piles rather than being spread along the system.
Risks arising from the collapse of the shoring wall
the volume of rock, soil, fencing and scaffolding at the Site which collapsed
into the excavation, the height from which those
materials collapsed into the
excavation, and the speed with which they did, I accept the expert evidence that
the severity of the
collapse posed a risk of death if workers had been within 15
metres of the wall face.
also accept that there was a risk of death to workers if the pavement slabs had
become unstable when a car proceeded over the concrete
driveway and a car fell
into the excavation onto a worker. I also find that there was a risk of death to
the occupants of any car
which fell into the excavation.
of a Category 2 offence
a PCBU, SDCC owed a ‘primary duty of care’ under s 19 of the WHS Act
to workers and others. One aspect of that duty
was the need to ensure, so far as
was reasonably practicable, that the health and safety of other persons was not
put at risk from
work carried out as part of the conduct of the business or
undertaking (s 19(2), WHS Act).
s 17 of the WHS Act, the duty imposed on SDCC to ensure the health and safety of
others required it to eliminate risks to health
and safety, so far as was
reasonably practicable and, if that was not reasonably practicable, to minimise
the risks so far as was
reasonably practicable. In determining what was
reasonably practicable, s 18 of the WHS Act required that regard be had to all
circumstances, including:
(a) the likelihood of the hazard or the risk concerned occurring;
(b) the degree of harm that might result from the hazard or risk;
(c) what the person concerned knows, or ought reasonably to know about the
hazard or risk and ways of eliminating or minimising the
(d) the availability and suitability of ways to eliminate or minimise the risk;
(e) the cost associated with available ways of eliminating or minimising the
risk, including whether the cost is grossly disproportionate
to the risk.
s 32 of the WHS Act, a person commits a Category 2 offence if the person fails
to comply with a health and safety duty (including
a duty under s 19 of the WHS
Act) and the failure exposes an individual to a risk of death or serious injury
or illness.
Accordingly,
the Prosecution must prove that:
(a) it was reasonably practicable for SDCC to ensure the health and safety of
the persons alleged to be at risk;
(b) SDCC failed to take reasonably practicable steps to ensure the health and
safety of those persons; and
(c) there is a causal connection between that failure and the persons being
exposed to a risk of death or serious injury. In this
respect, the Prosecution
must prove that the act or omission of the person was a significant or
substantial cause of the individual
being exposed to the risk (
Underground Operations Pty Ltd v Nash
[2016] NSWCCA 37
s 244A of the WHS Act, the conduct of SDCC’s officers and employees
(including both their acts and omissions) are taken
to have been engaged in by
SDCC with respect to the physical elements of the offence with which SDCC was
note that it is not necessary for the Prosecution to establish that a person has
suffered harm, or that a person has been exposed
to a risk of harm, for a PCBU
to have breached the duty identified in s 19 of the WHS Act (
Industrial Court of New South Wales
[2010] HCA 1
). It is the
existence of the risk, and the failure to take reasonably practicable steps to
eliminate (or, if that is not reasonably
practicable, minimise) the risk that
constitutes a breach of s 19 of the WHS Act.
while an incident causing harm may be evidence of the presence of a risk, it is
not necessary that there has been an incident
in order to establish a breach of
s 19 of the WHS Act. A distinction must be drawn between the specific risk that
manifested in the
incident and the general class of risk on which the analysis
must focus. Risk in this context means the possibility of danger and
necessarily actual danger (
Orr v Hunter Quarries Pty Limited
[2019] NSWDC
– [16]) although the likelihood of the danger arising is a
relevant consideration under s 18 of the WHS in determining what
measures were reasonably practicable in the circumstances.
reasonably practicable for SDCC to ensure the health and safety of persons in
the vicinity of the Site
order to establish that it was reasonably practicable for SDCC to ensure the
health and safety of persons in the vicinity of the
Site, the Prosecution must
identify the relevant risk with sufficient precision to determine if it was
reasonably practicable to
eliminate the risk or, if not, if it was reasonably
practicable to minimise it (
Orr v Hunter Quarries Pty Limited
this case, the Prosecution has identified the relevant risk as being the risk to
the health and safety of persons in the vicinity
of the Site (specifically that
there was a risk of their death or serious injury) as a result of the shoring
wall collapsing.
Likelihood of risk occurring
the absence of an adequate engineering control, the likelihood that the
excavation would collapse was significant.
Australia’s ‘Model Code of Practice: Excavation Work’ notes
that excavation work is ‘high risk construction
work’. The risk of a
person being trapped by the collapse of an excavation or a person working in an
excavation being struck
by a falling object are known risks for any excavation
of the size involved in the WOVA project. Those risks are identified in
Work Health and Safety Regulation 2011
circumstances where the soil at the Site contained fractures and defects, the
likelihood of the risk eventuating at the Site without
adequate engineering
control was obvious.
Degree of harm that might result from the
accept the Prosecution submission that the degree of harm that might have
resulted from the risk was potentially catastrophic. As
I have found earlier in
these reasons, there was a risk of death if workers had been within 15 metres of
the collapsed wall face
and a risk of death to the occupants of any car which
fell into the excavation. As the Prosecution note in their submissions, numerous
workers were present at the Site on any given day and Sky Park was used by
members of the public. In that context, I accept the Prosecution
submission that
multiple fatalities were a very real possibility.
knowledge of the risk and ways of eliminating or minimising the risk
noted earlier in these reasons, SDCC stated in the Geotech Report that
unsupported cuts of the soil profile were not recommended
as they carried the
risk of potential slump failure, especially after a period of wet weather, which
may result in injury to people
and damage to nearby infrastructure. SDCC thus
knew of the risk to be guarded against. It was also engaged by Geocon and Viking
address that risk through engineering controls which, as a professional
engineering services company, it ought to have been able
Availability and suitability of ways to eliminate or
minimise the risk
is clear from the expert evidence that it is possible to design an engineering
control which eliminates the risk of an excavation
collapsing.
Cost associated with available ways of eliminating
is no evidence as to the cost of designing an adequate shoring wall system
however three points may be made.
first is that the cost would not have been borne by SDCC. SDCC was paid by
Geocon and Viking to prepare the Geotech Report and
to design the engineering
second is that, as the Prosecution submits, the time required to design an
adequate shoring system is unlikely to have differed
materially (if at all) from
the time taken to design the shoring system that SDCC developed. The Site had
been mapped, drawings had
been prepared and relevant control mechanisms
identified. SDCCs principal failure was that it did not stipulate a sufficient
or length of piles for the soil conditions. Addressing that failing would
not have required much additional time, if any, beyond
the time required to
prepare the design it created.
third point is that, while the additional cost of constructing a stronger
shoring wall may have been significant, that cost was
also not borne by SDCC
and, in any event, could not be considered disproportionate (let alone grossly
disproportionate) to the risk
to be guarded against.
while Mr Zhang told WorkSafe ACT investigators that the advantage of a shoring
wall design with piles that do not extend
the full depth of the excavation is
that it is quicker, more efficient and less costly to construct, he did not say
that Geocon or
Viking had instructed SDCC to take the cost of the works into
account in designing the shoring wall system. Nor was that a consideration
Geocon required Viking to take into account in the work it was contracted to
perform for Geocon. Importantly, Viking was required
to adhere to all relevant
legislation and Australian Standards.
regard to the above considerations, I am satisfied that it was reasonably
practicable for SDCC to ensure the health and safety
of persons in the vicinity
of the Site. In order to discharge its duty under s 19 of the WHS Act, SDCC was
required to design a shoring
wall system that eliminated the risk of the
excavation at the Site collapsing.
so was reasonably practicable and it is what it had been paid by Geocon and
Viking to do.
SDCC failed to take reasonably practicable steps to
ensure the health and safety of persons in the vicinity of the Site
the reasons I have articulated earlier in this decision, I am satisfied that
SDCC failed to provide an adequate design for the
shoring wall system. The
Geotech Report failed to adequately account for the lateral pressure likely to
be exerted by the soil in
the calculated loads on the shoring wall and
critically, as the Prosecution submits:
(a) the design capacity for the shoring wall was not equal to or greater than
the design action effect, as required by clause 7.2
of the Australian Standard
AS1170.0; and
(b) the design of the shoring wall was incapable of supporting the ground forces
when a minimum pressure of 0.2Ka was applied.
the cause of the excavation collapse cannot be stated with certainty, the fact
that the inadequacy of the shoring wall design
was a likely contributor to the
collapse demonstrates that the inadequacy in the design gave rise to a risk of
am therefore satisfied that SDCC failed to take reasonably practicable steps to
ensure the health and safety of persons in the vicinity
of the Site and,
accordingly, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that SDCC, through its
officers and employees, failed to comply
with its duty under s 19 to ensure, so
far as was reasonably practicable, that the health and safety of other persons
in the vicinity
of the Site was not put at risk from the work it carried out as
part of the conduct of its business in preparing the shoring wall
system for the
Site excavation.
Prosecution alleges that the failure occurred between 14 November 2019 and 7
August 2022. They submit that it is difficult to
pinpoint any specific dates
upon which the relevant acts or omissions occurred.
my view, the breach of SDCC’s duty occurred on 4 March 2022. It was the
design revision that was produced on that date that
Viking used to construct the
shoring wall when it excavated the Site. As the Prosecution submits, the risk to
individuals at or around
the Site materialised once the excavation progressed
below the base of the piles, which occurred at some point between 4 and 6 March
it is possible that the offending conduct (the preparation and submission of the
inadequate shoring wall design) occurred outside
the ACT (given that
SDCC’s office was located in Silverwater, NSW), I accept the
Prosecution’s submission that the implementation
of the design (through
the construction of the shoring wall) and the consequent risk to persons in the
vicinity of the Site occurred
in the ACT (at the Site).
Accordingly,
even if the physical elements of the offence all occurred (and the offence was
therefore committed) outside the ACT (s
Criminal Code 2002
Criminal Code
)), I am satisfied that the place where the offence had
an effect was in the ACT (s 63,
Criminal Code 2002
) and that a
geographical nexus therefore exists between the ACT and the offence (s 64,
Criminal Code 2002
). I am thus satisfied that the offence created by the
WHS Act extends beyond the territorial limits of the ACT to the offending
(s 11, WHS Act; s 62(2),
Criminal Code
SDCC’s failure to comply with its primary duty
of care exposed individuals to a risk of death or serious injury
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that SDCC’s failure to comply with
its primary duty of care exposed individuals to a
risk of death or serious
injury. SDCC’s failure to comply with its duty resulted in a shoring wall
being constructed at the
Site that was inadequate to prevent the excavation
collapsing, as ultimately occurred, at least once the excavation progressed
the depth of the piles.
as I have found earlier in these reasons, the collapse of the excavation risked
the death of any workers who were within
15 metres of the collapsed wall face
and the death of the occupants of any car which fell into the excavation. Given
the regular
attendance of workers at the site and the use of Sky Park by members
of the public, multiple fatalities were a very real possibility
as a result of
the inadequate shoring wall design that SDCC prepared.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that SDCC’s failure to provide an adequate design for the
shoring wall exposed persons in the vicinity
of the Site to the risk of
find The Structural Design and Construction Company Pty Ltd guilty of committing
a Category 2 offence, contrary to
Work Health and Safety Act
I certify that the preceding sixty-four [64] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Decision of his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Noelle-Alexis Bowles
Date: 31 October 2025
RTF format (268 KB)
Signed PDF/A format