BA and Community Services Directorate [2020] ACTOFOI 26 (16 December 2020)
and Community Services Directorate
ACTOFOI 26 (16 December 2020)
and reasons for decision of
Senior Assistant Ombudsman, Louise Macleod
Application
AFOI-2020-10037
[2020] ACTOFOI 26
Community Services
Directorate
of Information Act 2016
(ACT) – deciding access – whether
disclosure of information is contrary to the public interest –
individual’s
right to privacy - advance the fair treatment of individuals
– third party consultation
the purposes of
Information Act 2016
), I am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman.
s 82(2)(a) of the FOI Act, I
the decision of the
Community Services Directorate (CSD), dated 16 April 2020.
Background of Ombudsman review
21 November 2019 the applicant applied to CSD for access
The exact dates that I was in ..[juvenile detention centre].
Material prepared by community services for the ACT Children’s
Material that confirmed that I was a victim of childhood domestic
Material from psychiatrist... [named psychiatrist] that I had been diagnosed
in relation to childhood domestic violence.
Documents or case work that listed that I had previously been known as... [name
Any material in your possession relating to me and the ACT Supreme
overturned conviction and released me from (juvenile detention
Health Records in relation to point (2b)
12 January 2020, the applicant applied to the respondent for access
seek all materials held by your department in relation to me since I applied for
housing in 2017 (with the standard exception of
the names of junior staff). I
especially seek all material relating to the decision to classify me as high
needs such as support
letters and all case officer notes/comments in my
24 January 2020, CSD requested the two FOI requests be combined and sought an
extension of time from the applicant to 16 April
29 January 2020, the applicant agreed to combine his two applications and agreed
to the extension of time for processing his request.
11 February 2020, CSD contacted the applicant regarding releasing information in
two stages in response to the combined FOI request,
to which the applicant
17 February 2020, CSD advised the applicant that information contained in stage
2 involved third parties and the timeframe for
processing stage 2 would be
extended to 7 May 2020 under s 40 of the FOI Act.
18 February 2020, CSD advised the applicant it had identified two files falling
within the scope of the access application under
stage 1. It is not clear from
the documents provided to our Office, how many documents were captured by the
two files. CSD refused
access, in part, to several documents. In making its
decision, it relied on ss 1.3 and 2.2(a)(ii) of the FOI Act.
16 April 2020, CSD advised the applicant it had identified four files falling
within the scope of the access application under
stage 2. It is not clear from
the documents provided to our Office how many documents were captured by the
four files. CSD refused
access in part to several documents. In making its
decision, it relied on ss 1.3 and 2.2(a)(ii) of the FOI Act.
27 July 2020, the applicant sought Ombudsman review of CSD’s decision
s 73 of the FOI Act.
1 December 2020, I provided my preliminary views about CSD’s decision to
the parties in a draft consideration.
applicant provided the following submissions in response to my draft
consideration:
My most important and
repeated submission that I was a 'named recipient' of the original document
and hence there can be no unlawful
has not been mentioned, much less addressed in the draft decision. The
fact that I had
full and lawful access, not in an arbitrary way but as a named
recipient, was my main submission and a point that I repeatedly made.
also considered the applicant’s submissions dated 28 July 2020 (a) and 30
August 2020 (b)
respectively:
to the pre-sentence report, it is a document prepared for a court in relation to
me. It was available to me 20 years ago. I
find it inexplicable and contrary to
the public interest that they would make redactions...
issue may arise under the s138c of the Legislation Act? It applies when working
out the meaning of legislation and when its
apparent meaning
leads to a result
that is manifestly absurd or is unreasonable
would strongly contend that a mandatory consultation provision that prevents
full access to a document to a named recipient of a
document who had full and
lawful access to it at the time is a result that is both manifestly absurd and
unreasonable...
would respectfully suggest that redacting information to a named recipient of a
document who had full and lawful access to it
at the time is not consistent with
the purposes of the FOI Act 2016. Such an outcome would be contrary to the Acts
purposes which
are to regulate access to information and protect privacy in the
first instance, not to retrospectively impose hurdles when none
existed at the
time of the document's creation.
discuss the applicant’s submission in further detail
Preliminary
response to my draft consideration, the applicant has reiterated they were a
‘named recipient’ to the documents at
issue and as such, there can
be no privacy violation by virtue of disclosure of the information at issue.
They also claim in this
matter, the third party consultation provisions of the
FOI Act are manifestly absurd and unreasonable and inconsistent with the purpose
of the Act.
appreciate the documents were prepared for the ACT Children’s Court to
which the applicant was named. This however, does not
mean the applicant can
automatically access all the redacted information at issue. The third party
consultation provision in the
FOI Act does not explicitly prevent
to information, but it
is a requirement that gives third parties the opportunity to make submissions
prior to the release of their
own personal information. I do not consider that
consulting third parties who are named in court documents amounts to a
manifestly absurd or
unreasonable
interpretation of the consultation requirements under
the FOI Act or is inconsistent with the objects of the FOI Act.
primary objective of the FOI Act is to provide a right of access to government
information unless access to the information would,
on balance, be contrary to
the public interest. The respondent’s decision rests upon the redacted
material being information
that would be contrary to the public interest to
disclose. As such, I do not consider CSD’s decision to be inconsistent
the objects of the FOI Act.
The contentions of the parties
its decision notice, CSD
reason for not granting access to information contained in documents identified
in the Table of Contents and Attachment B is that
I find the information, on
balance, to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under the test set
out in section 17 of the
example, information referenced at 68-69 in the enclosed Table of Contents 3
relates to young detainees from (juvenile detention
centre). It is an offence
under section 712A of the Criminal Code 2002 to publish information that
identifies or allows the identity
of the person as a young person subject to
children’s proceedings to be worked out.
is my decision that disclosure of any information that would identify these
individuals would constitute an offence under section
712A of the Criminal Code
2002 and therefore is contrary to the public interest to disclose to
Section 38 of the Act applies because the disclosure
may reasonably be expected
to be of concern to the individuals as the information is their own personal
information.
were no factors favouring disclosure of this information identified. As there
are no restrictions on what an applicant can do
with information received under
the FOI ACT, I, as the Information officer need to take into consideration
whether the release of
information to the world at large, would be an
unreasonable disclosure of personal information and in this instance, I am
it would be an unreasonable disclosure.
the application for Ombudsman review, the applicant
sought my youth justice file from... [juvenile detention centre] from 1999. I
was a detainee but my conviction was quashed by the
ACT Supreme Court. In the
pre-sentence report for the ACT Children's court multiple important elements
were redacted. Most importantly,
an admission from my mother that I had suffered
violent bashings from my father was entirely redacted. As this is a pre-sentence
report for me that I also had access to at the time of the Children's court
proceedings, it is incomprehensible why this material
is redacted. I need the
information as corroboration that I suffered childhood abuse for other
also requested other materials in the form of records that the directorate held
that confirmed this but these were not provided.
submissions are discussed in more detail
Information
information at issue in this Ombudsman review is the pre-sentence report and
sentencing remarks, specifically the information
that was redacted in these
documents by virtue of CSD’s decision to partially release each
issue to be decided in this Ombudsman review is whether giving the applicant
access to the information at issue would be contrary
to the public
making my draft consideration, I had regard
applicant’s access application and review application
respondent’s decision
FOI Act, in particular ss 2.2(a)(ii)
United Nations
Convention on the Rights of
particular Article 3(1),
Human Rights Act 2004
Information Privacy Act 2014
respondent’s FOI processing file relating to the access application
Minister of State for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v. Teoh (1995)
unedited copy of the information at issue.
Relevant law
7 of the FOI Act provides every person with an enforceable right of access to
government information. This right is subject
to other provisions of the FOI
Act, including grounds on which access may be refused.
to the public interest information is defined in s 16 of the FOI Act
information—
is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under schedule 1;
disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest under
the test set out in section 17.
public interest test set out in s 17 of the FOI Act involves a process of
balancing public interest factors favouring disclosure
against public interest
factors favouring nondisclosure to decide whether, on balance, disclosure would
be contrary to the public
35(1)(c) of the FOI Act provides that an access application may be decided by
refusing to give access to the information sought
because the information being
sought is contrary to the public interest.
50 of the FOI Act applies if an access application is made for government
information in a record containing contrary to the
public interest information
and it is practicable to give access to a copy of the record from which contrary
to the public interest
information has been deleted.
72 of the FOI Act provides that the person seeking to prevent disclosure of
government information has the onus of establishing
the information is contrary
to the public interest information.
2 of the FOI Act sets out the public interest factors that must be considered,
where relevant, when determining the public
Considerations
carefully considered an unedited copy of the information at issue together with
the information provided by the applicant and respondent.
Information
that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under Schedule
party to this Ombudsman review has suggested the information at issue contains
information that is taken to be contrary to
the public interest to disclose
under Schedule 1 of the FOI Act. Therefore, for the information sought to be
contrary to the public
interest, disclosure of the information sought must, on
balance, be contrary to the public interest under the test set out in s 17
interest test
determine whether disclosure of information is, on balance, contrary to the
public interest, s 17(1) of the FOI Act prescribes
the following five
(a) identify
any factor favouring disclosure that applies in relation to the information (a
relevant factor favouring disclosure),
including any factor mentioned in
schedule 2, section 2.1;
(b) identify
any factor favouring nondisclosure that applies in relation to the information
(a relevant factor favouring nondisclosure),
including any factor mentioned in
schedule 2, section 2.2;
(c) balance
any relevant factor or factors favouring disclosure against any relevant factor
or factors favouring nondisclosure;
whether, on balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the
public interest;
(e) unless,
on balance, disclosure would be contrary to the public interest, allow access to
the information subject to this Act.
addition, there is an initial step of ensuring that none of the irrelevant
factors listed in s 17(2) of the FOI Act are considered.
note the irrelevant factors listed is s 17(2) of the FOI Act and I do not
consider that any irrelevant factors arise in this Ombudsman
favouring disclosure
2, s 2.1 of the FOI Act contains a non-exhaustive list of public interest
factors favouring disclosure.
Additionally,
the FOI Act has an express pro-disclosure bias which reflects the importance of
public access to government information
for the proper working of representative
This concept is promoted through the objects of the FOI
the factors favouring disclosure listed in Schedule 2, s 2.1 of the FOI Act, I
consider that factor 2.1 (vii) is relevant - disclosure
of the information could
reasonably be expected to advance the fair treatment of individuals and other
entities in accordance with
the law in their dealings with the government.
applicant has expressed their intent to use the documents as evidence of
character in a current citizenship application. It is
reasonable to expect the
documents will advance the fair treatment of the applicant with the Australian
Government department responsible
for the applicant’s citizenship
application.
discussed in further detail below, the actual information at issue (being the
redacted material), comprises only a small percentage
of the overall documents.
In my view, the redacted material would not increase the value of the documents
in the context of providing
them as evidence. For this reason, I afford factor
2.1 (vii) minimal weight.
favouring nondisclosure
the factors favouring nondisclosure listed in Schedule 2, s 2.2, I consider that
one is relevant to the information at issue.
2.2(a)(ii) – Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to
prejudice the protection of an individual’s
right to privacy or any other
right under the
Rights Act 2004
Section 38 of the Act applies because the disclosure
may reasonably be expected
to be of concern to the individuals as the information is their own personal
information.
applicant stated:
Convention on the rights of the child in an international treaty ratified by the
Australian Parliament. In Minister of State for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
v. Teoh (1995)183 CLR 273 the majority High Court judgement said (at
a statute or subordinate legislation is ambiguous, the courts should favour that
construction which accords with Australia's
obligations under a treaty or
international convention to which Australia is a party, at least in those cases
in which the legislation
is enacted after, or in contemplation of, entry into,
or ratification of, the relevant international instrument. That is because
Parliament, prima facie, intends to give effect to Australia's obligations under
international law.
relevantly, Article 3(1) of the Convention states
In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private
social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative
authorities or
legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary
consideration.
the redacted statements in both documents in question concern matters
Were the subject of statements made by my mother/parents to ACT Juvenile Justice
when I was not an adult (a child for the purposes
of the convention)
Were fundamentally for the for the purposes of the ACT Children's
Related to incident(s) that happened when I was a child
would fall squarely within the scope of Article 3 (1). As such I would contend
that my best interest must be a primary consideration
in how they are dealt
with, whether for the FOI Act or for any other purpose.
I respectfully contend that any public interest points in favour of redaction
secondary to the best interests of the child.
12(a) of the HR Act provides that everyone has the right ‘not to have his
or her privacy, family, home or correspondence
interfered with unlawfully or
arbitrarily’.
It does not provide a general right to privacy, but can essentially be
viewed as the right of an individual to preserve their personal
sphere from
interference from others.
IP Act identifies the circumstances in which the disclosure of information may
constitute a breach of an individual’s privacy.
An individual’s
personal information can only be disclosed in accordance with the Territory
1 of the IP Act.
Personal information is defined in s 8 of the IP Act
information or an opinion about an identified individual or an individual who is
reasonably identifiable
(i) whether the information or
opinion is true or not; and
(ii) whether the information or
opinion is recorded in a material form or not.
reviewed a copy of the un-redacted documents. They contain the names and other
information of third parties who provided information
Children’s Court in relation to the applicant’s sentencing in July
the course of this review, the applicant has made it apparent they are
specifically seeking information in the documents
provided by their parent/s.
respondent advised the applicant of the requirements under the FOI Act to
consult with third parties, at which time the applicant
requested the respondent
not contact their parents for third party consultation. The respondent advised
the applicant that information
relating to their parent/s would not be released
if third party consultation was not undertaken.
38 of the FOI Act relevantly
This section applies if the respondent to an access application considers
some or all of the government information applied for is not contrary to the
public interest information; but
disclosure of the information may reasonably be expected to be of concern to a
person or another entity other than the Territory
(a relevant third
(2) The respondent must take reasonable steps to consult with the relevant third
party before deciding to give access to the information.
considered the applicant’s submissions about any potential ambiguity as to
the requirements of s 38 of the FOI Act. In particular,
the applicant relevantly
is a zero sum where my best interests directly conflict any privacy rights my
parents may have. I respectfully contend however
that there can simply be no
comparison on whose conflicting rights ought to prevail.
is reasonable to expect that information provided by third parties to the Courts
would be of concern to those individuals, irrespective
of the passing of time.
This includes both the names of third parties and any statements made by them to
the Courts. Section 38 of
the FOI Act is clear insofar as requiring consultation
in this instance, as such there is little to no ambiguity.
the extent there is any ambiguity, the applicant is no longer a child and the
information relates to their interests as an adult.
As such, Article (3)(1) of
the Convention is not relevant in this matter.
the respondent is unable to meet their obligations under s 38(2) of the FOI ACT
(at the applicant’s request), then it is
reasonable for the respondent to
withhold the personal information of the applicant’s parents contained in
the documents.
further note the applicant’s submissions that they want to obtain the
un-redacted documents to help them with character considerations
for a current
citizenship application and potential future membership of professional bodies,
and ‘the administration of justice
is ill-served if these bodies are only
able to read redacted information’.
discussed above, I agree the documents are likely to assist the applicant in
forthcoming dealings with Australian Government Agencies
and other various
professional bodies. However, I do not agree the redaction of third party
personal information is likely to hinder
the value of the documents.
I do not consider the natural administration of justice to be ill-served by
virtue of the respondent’s decision and
I do not consider this a relevant
consideration in terms of whether or not to grant access to the information at
the reasons listed above, I am satisfied the information at issue could
reasonably be expected to prejudice the protection of
an individual’s
right to privacy. Based on the nature of the information and the
applicant’s refusal to allow third party
consultation, I afford this
factor significant weight.
the factors
factor in this review favoured disclosure of the information at issue while
another favoured non-disclosure. Section 17 requires
me to balance the competing
public interest considerations raised by these factors.
information at issue could reasonably be expected to prejudice the protection of
an individual’s right to privacy. Having
considered the applicant’s
submissions and the nature of the material, my decision is to afford this factor
significant weight.
information at issue could reasonably be expected to advance the fair treatment
of individuals and other entities in accordance
with the law in their dealings
with the government. For the reasons discussed above, my decision is to afford
this factor minimal
am satisfied that, on balance, the public interest factors favouring
non-disclosure outweigh the public interest factors favouring
disclosure for all
of the information sought.
s 82(2)(a), I confirm the CSD’s decision to refuse access to the
information at issue under s 35(1)(c) of the FOI
Senior Assistant
16 December
See s 17 of the FOI Act.
See s 6(b) of the FOI Act.
See s 12(a) of the HR Act
RTF format (922 KB)
Signed PDF/A format