DPP v Smith (a pseudonym) (No 2) [2025] ACTSC 501 (14 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
DPP v Smith (a pseudonym) (No 2)
[2025] ACTSC 501
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
(1) On count CAN 875/2025, the offender is convicted and sentenced to
imprisonment for 12 years and six months, commencing on 1 October
ending on 31 March 2038.
(2) The non parole period is a period of eight years, commencing on 1
October 2025 and ending on 30 September 2033.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – persistent sexual abuse of
child or young person under special care – offending occurred over three
years – numerous instances of sexual intercourse
– offending did not
involve violence or abuse (beyond the acts themselves) – victim taken
advantage of – foster
care system exploited – personal circumstances
make specific deterrence less significant and offender has recognised
disgraceful
nature of conduct
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes Act 1900
Cases Cited:
DPP v Smith (a pseudonym)
[2025] ACTSC 500
Porter v The Queen
[2024] ACTCA 9
21 ACTLR 122
R v Ashton (a pseudonym)
[2022] ACTCA 45
R v Kellan (a pseudonym)
[2021] ACTSC 314
[2022] ACTCA 20
367 FLR 122
R v Ware (a pseudonym)
[2022] ACTCA 14
17 ACTLR 273
Director of Public Prosecutions
Jeremiah Smith (a pseudonym) (Offender)
Representation:
S McFarland (DPP)
R El‑Choufani (Offender)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Hugo Law Group (Offender)
File Number:
SCC 86 of 2025
Introduction
offender, who is identified by the pseudonym “Jeremiah Smith”, has
pleaded guilty to maintaining a sexual relationship
with a young person under
his special care (CAN 875/2025). He is identified by a pseudonym in order
to protect the identity of the
victim of the offending.
charge to which he pleaded guilty was a contravention of
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT), which criminalises persistent sexual abuse of a
child or a young person under special care. There was a dispute between the
parties as to the maximum penalty under that provision applicable to the
offender. Immediately prior to delivering these reasons,
I published my reasons
for determining that the applicable maximum penalty for the offence for which
the offender is to be sentenced
is 25 years’ imprisonment: see
Smith (a pseudonym)
[2025] ACTSC 500.
offending occurred between March 2013 (when the victim of the offending was 14
years old) and November 2016 (when the victim turned
18). During this period,
the offender was between 32 and 36 years old.
the period of the offending, the victim was both a “child” and
“a young person under [the offender’s]
special care”. In
response to an enquiry from the court following the sentencing hearing, the
offender expressly accepted that
he was to be sentenced on the basis that the
offending covered both the period during which the victim was a child and the
during which she was a “young person under [the offender’s]
special care”, notwithstanding that the charge to which
the offender
pleaded guilty only referred to the victim being a “young person under the
special care of [the offender]”.
Further, he expressly accepted that, in
the period when the victim was between 16 and 18, she was a “young person
offender’s] special care” when the offending occurred,
notwithstanding that, during part of that period, she was in the
foster care of
another person.
parties agreed the factual basis upon which the offender was to be sentenced. I
find the facts in accordance with the agreed statement
of facts which was
included in the prosecution tender bundle. The agreed statement of facts is very
detailed. What follows is a summary
of the circumstances involved in the
the end of 2011, the offender and his then wife received an offer to become
foster carers for the victim, who was then 13 years
old. This placement was
arranged through the Marymead Foster Care Program. The offender and his wife had
two other children who,
in 2012, were aged six and four years old.
victim first met the offender and his family in April 2012 and subsequently
moved in with them. In 2012 and 2013, the offender
developed a particularly
close and affectionate relationship with the victim. His wife raised some
concerns about the victim being
attached and physically affectionate towards the
offender. The offender engaged in what, in retrospect, can be seen as grooming
which are described in the agreed statement of facts.
first sexual acts occurred in March 2013 on a camping trip at the Cotter
Campground. While sleeping in conjoined swags, the offender
touched the victim
indecently, and then took a hold of her hand and dragged it down toward his
pants. At that stage, the victim was
14 years old and the offender was 32 years
the week following this incident, back at the offender’s home, the victim
was woken one night when the offender approached
her bed. He climbed part of the
way up the ladder to her bunk, moved his hand to her pants and began rubbing her
vagina through her
pyjama shorts. He then took her hand and moved it until it
was underneath his shorts. He guided her hand up and down on his penis
ejaculated.
few days later, he came into her bedroom at night again. He woke her up. He
pulled his pants off and told her to take hers off.
He lay down on the floor and
had penile–vaginal intercourse with her to the point of ejaculation.
next day, the offender and the victim had a discussion. The victim told him he
needed to get her the morning after pill, which
he did. She was 14 years old at
the following two years, the offender treated the victim like a girlfriend. He
told her he wanted to marry her and saw a future
for them together. They would
have sexual intercourse weekly.
July 2013, the family moved into a new house. The offender told the victim that
he wanted to marry her and start a family but would
have to wait until she
turned 18. He indicated that he knew that the relationship was illegal. The
victim was 14 years old. The offender
and the victim were having sexual
intercourse nearly every day. The offender bought sex toys for the victim.
one occasion, when the victim was 15 years old, the offender’s wife went
away for the weekend. On one of the evenings, the
offender had sexual
intercourse with the victim on multiple occasions. The offender did not use
protection at any time, and told
the victim this was because he had a vasectomy
(an inpatient summary tendered by the offender indicated that this had occurred
late 2009).
another occasion, in the second half of 2014, when the victim was either 15 or
16 years old, the offender, a friend of his and
the victim stayed at a hotel in
Campbelltown. The three of them shared a room. The two beds were pushed together
to form a single
bed. The offender and his friend had been drinking. While the
victim was attempting to sleep, the offender began touching her. He
of her and then had penile–vaginal intercourse with her. After that, his
friend also began penile–vaginal
intercourse with the victim but could not
continue as he could not maintain an erection.
another occasion, when the victim was 16, the family was visiting a property in
Burra, NSW. The victim slept in the same bed as
the offender and, when she woke
up, he engaged in penile–vaginal sexual intercourse with her.
the time, the victim felt that she was loved, a feeling that she had not felt
offender’s marriage to his wife broke down and they separated at the end
of 2014. Following the breakdown of the marriage,
the victim lived with another
foster family from January to December 2015. The offender was living in
offender and the victim communicated electronically. The offender encouraged her
to send photographs of herself in various states
of undress. She was 16 years
old at the time. While living with the new foster family, she would visit the
offender at his apartment
in Maroubra, NSW. When the victim was visiting the
offender during this time, the offender engaged in sexual activities with her
almost every night, sometimes initiated by him, sometimes initiated by her.
late 2015, the offender was approved as a kinship carer for the victim. He moved
a “domestic couple”.
The victim also took responsibility for looking after the offender’s
children when they stayed
over, but hid from them the fact that she and the
offender were living as a “couple”. The offender had sex with her
victim turned 18 in November 2016. After this occurred, the offender took her on
a trip to Sydney and proposed to her. Sometime
after the victim’
birthday, a friend of the offender told the victim that she
“needed to get out” and dropped the victim off at her biological
mother’s house. The victim had no further sexual contact with the offender
after that time.
July 2023, the victim reported the abuse to police.
Victim impact
victim has provided a victim impact statement. The victim said that she grew up
without safety and stability because her mother
could not take care of her and
her father died when she was two years old. She described herself as a little
girl searching for someone
to keep her safe, but instead, she was taken
advantage of. She said that the years of abuse have changed everything about
said that the damage did not end when the abuse stopped and it affects
how she sees herself and how she sees others. It has affected
her capacity to
trust people, often assuming the worst about them. This affects her capacity to
have relationships with people.
is now a mother, but lives in constant fear that someone could harm her daughter
just as she was harmed. She wants the court to
understand that what happened to
her as a child has changed her forever.
Objective seriousness
offending is very serious. The sexual intercourse did not involve any
significant risk of pregnancy as the offender had a vasectomy.
The relationship
did not involve any violence or physical abuse beyond the sexual acts
themselves. However, the relationship was
a long-term sexual relationship with a
young person to whom the offender owed parental duties. This involved a gross
breach of trust
and abuse of a parent‑like relationship.
sexual acts occurred during the relationship over the whole of the period
charged. Those acts are identified as having occurred
on specific occasions as
well as by reference to periods when sexual acts occurred on a weekly or daily
basis. In particular, the
statement of facts records the offender having sex
with the victim on a weekly basis from the age of 14. From July 2013, when the
family moved into a new house, sexual intercourse was occurring “nearly
every day”. This was in addition to the specific
occasions of sexual
intercourse recorded in the facts, including the events which occurred in the
hotel in Campbelltown, where the
offender had intercourse with the victim, and
after the offender had finished, the offender’s friend (who was staying in
same room and sleeping in the same joined bed) engaged in
penile–vaginal intercourse with the victim.
is possible to give some numerical basis to the offending involving sexual
intercourse disclosed in the agreed statement of facts.
Even if, contrary to the
agreed statement of facts, intercourse only occurred weekly — over the
period from 30 July 2013 (when
the family moved into a new house) up until
November 2016 (when the victim turned 18), a period of three years and three
and excluding entirely the 11‑month period when the victim
was in the foster care of another person (January 2015 until December
then the total number of weeks during which intercourse with the victim occurred
would be approximately 125. Thus, on this
estimation, the
“relationship” would have involved 125 incidents of sexual
intercourse alone, and, as I have observed,
that figure does not account for the
periods where intercourse occurred more frequently or occurred prior to the
family moving into
the new house. This estimate assists in assessing the scale
of the sexual misconduct over the period.
offending is in the high range of objective seriousness for this
Subjective circumstances
subjective circumstances of the offender are disclosed in a pre‑sentence
report, psychological assessment report of Andrew
Wong, a letter of apology and
various other records tendered on his behalf.
offender is now 45 years old. In April 2012, when the victim moved in with his
family, he was 31 years old. When the victim left
in 2018, he was 38 years
offender was born in Tasmania. He had a positive upbringing notwithstanding that
his family did not have much money. He has an
older brother and younger
offender had done well at school but developed antisocial associations at about
14 or 15. He joined the Army at the age of 17
after completing Year 11 at
school. He was deployed overseas in 2004, 2008 and 2020, achieving the rank of
Warrant Officer, Class
Two. He was involved in administrative work and was never
in direct combat. He worked long hours and his strong attention to detail
high performance resulted from his perfectionist personality traits. He was
voluntarily discharged from the Army in May 2025.
met his first wife at the age of 22. They separated in 2014. Their two children
are now 19 and 17 years old. Following their separation,
he and his first wife
shared equal custody of their biological children, and the victim was placed
with another foster carer (until
the offender became her kinship carer).
offender met his second wife online, and she travelled to Australia from Kenya
to continue their relationship in 2018. In 2022,
the offender sponsored his
wife’s seven-year-old nephew to come to Australia on a student visa. The
offender and his second
wife had a daughter in April 2024 but separated the
following month.
offender maintains positive relationships with his parents, siblings and his
adult daughter. Prior to the sentencing hearing,
he was living with his parents
in Tasmania. His bail was revoked at the sentencing hearing and he has been in
custody since that
has no current problems with alcohol or illicit drugs. In his early years in the
Army, he participated in the strong drinking culture,
only slowing down six or
seven years ago. In his early years in the Army, he would spend his whole
paycheque on gambling, alcohol
and cigarettes. He has tinnitus and some hearing
loss arising from his employment in the Army. He suffers occasional sciatic
has suffered periods of stress, depression and anxiety over the past 13 years.
He began having panic attacks as early as 2000.
In 2012, he attempted suicide.
In 2013, he suffered an emotional breakdown due to marital issues, financial
stresses, moving house
and a poor work–life balance. He was treated by
psychologists and psychiatrists. His obsessive personality traits and
perfectionism
have continued to affect him and he received treatment in 2016,
2018 and 2024. He is diagnosed by Andrew Wong, a clinical and forensic
psychologist, as currently suffering from obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder, generalised anxiety disorder and persistent
depressive disorder.
offender considers that his behaviour in relation to the victim was disgraceful
and has expressed as much on multiple occasions,
including to the victim
herself. He has repeated that in his letter of apology to the court and to the
victim. I accept that he feels
remorse for his conduct and that his expressions
of remorse are not merely self‑interested expressions for the purpose of
sentencing process.
is assessed by the authors of the pre‑sentence report as being at a low to
medium risk of general reoffending and a below
average risk of sexual
reoffending. His main criminogenic risk is identified as a history of somewhat
poor mental health.
has no criminal history.
Plea of guilty
offender entered a plea of guilty in the Magistrates Court on 8 April 2025,
after a brief of evidence had been prepared. In those
circumstances, a reduction
in sentence of between 20 and 25 percent is appropriate.
the prosecution case was strong, I do not consider that it was
“overwhelmingly strong” for the purposes of
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act
). Although
counsel for the prosecution referred to the decision in
367 FLR 122
, the details of the prosecution case considered in that
decision were very different to those in the present case. The description
that case of an acquittal being “realistically unlikely” (at [31])
needs to be read in the context of the facts of
that case and cannot be
substituted for the words in s 35(4). As a consequence, it is open to
reduce the sentence under s 35 in a
manner that I have indicated.
Time in custody
to the sentencing hearing, the offender had spent no time in custody. Bail was
revoked at the sentencing hearing and therefore
the offender has been in custody
since 1 October 2025. The sentence imposed will be backdated to take this time
into account.
Comparable cases
prosecution provided a table of cases involving sentences for offences under
. I have had regard to those decisions, in
particular the decisions of the Court of Appeal in
R v Ashton (a
[2022] ACTCA 45
R v Ware (a pseudonym)
[2022] ACTCA 14
17 ACTLR 273
Porter v The Queen
[2024] ACTCA 9
21 ACTLR 122
, and my own
decision in
R v Kellan (a pseudonym)
[2021] ACTSC 314
(although noting
that the methodology adopted in that case was disapproved in
Consideration
pointed out earlier, this is very serious offending over a long period involving
the gross abuse of a parent‑like relationship
with a vulnerable child. The
offending during the victim’s formative teenage years was life
transforming for her. The offender
was clearly conscious of his conduct being
wrong. It was a manifestation of a commonly understood risk of placing
vulnerable children
with foster carers.
is conduct which must be denounced, for which the offender must be held
accountable and for which general deterrence must be a
significant sentencing
consideration. The sentence imposed must recognise the harm done to the victim
and, through the offender’s
abuse of the foster care system, to the
community. Specific deterrence and rehabilitation are less significant
sentencing considerations
because the offender has recognised the disgraceful
nature of his conduct and the risk of reoffending is low.
to s 34A of the
Sentencing Act
, it is not open to reduce the
sentence that would otherwise have been imposed because the offender has good
character to the extent
that the offender’s good character enabled the
offender to commit the offence. I infer that his good character was one reason
why the offender was identified as a suitable person to be a foster carer for
the victim. However, I have taken into account his
lack of other offending in
assessing the risk of reoffending in future.
accept that, as a result of his obsessive personality traits and other mental
health conditions described in the report of Mr Wong,
the offender is likely to
find incarceration more burdensome than a person without those traits.
the maximum penalty is 25 years’ imprisonment, the starting point is 16
years’ imprisonment, reduced to 12 years
and six months on account of the
plea of guilty. The non-parole period will be eight years, which is
64 percent of the head sentence.
orders of the Court are:
(1) On count CAN 875/2025, the offender is convicted and sentenced to
imprisonment for 12 years and six months, commencing on 1 October
ending on 31 March 2038.
(2) The non parole period is a period of eight years, commencing on 1 October
2025 and ending on 30 September 2033.
I certify that the preceding fifty [50] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Sentence of his Honour Justice
RTF format (225 KB)
Signed PDF/A format