CANBERRA INSULATION SPECIALISTS PTY LTD v DEVARAPALLI & ANOR (Civil Dispute) [2025] ACAT 81 (13 November 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
INSULATION SPECIALISTS PTY LTD v DEVARAPALLI & ANOR (Civil Dispute) [2025]
XD 1090/2024
CIVIL DISPUTE
– Contractual dispute –
when contract was formed between parties – what constituted terms and
conditions of contract
– whether services performed by contractor caused
damages – delays in filing response and counterclaim – failure
file causing extensive delay to final hearing - exceeding ACAT statutory limits
of $25,000 in civil proceedings – costs
in a matter in the ACAT - relation
of costs to unforced delays by a party - when indemnity costs may be
Legislation cited
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
ss 6, 7, 21, 48, 49
Subordinate
Legislation cited
: ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedures
Rules (2020) rules 107,112
Cases cited
Canberra and Goulburn as Trustee for St Mary Mackillop
College Canberra v Kenningham
[2017] ACAT 97
CIC Australia Ltd v ACT Planning and Land Authority; Mainore Pty Ltd and
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal
[2013] ACTSC 96
Credit Corp Services Pty Ltd v Adam
[2024] ACAT 85
Goldsmith v Sperrings Ltd
[1997] 1 WLR 478
Jarrad v Santamaria
Mainore Pty Ltd and ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal
[2013] ACTSC
Performing Right Association
[1973] HCA 36
(1973) 129 CLR 99
Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Archdiocese of
Trpkovski v Williams Love Nicol Lawyers Pty Ltd
[2024] ACAT
White Industries (Qld) Pty Ltd v Flower & Hart
[1998] FCA806
Texts/Papers cited:
David Bamford, Principles of Civil Litigation,
(Lawbook, Co 2010)
JRS Forbes, Justice in Tribunals, Third Edition, The Federation Press,
Member M Hanna
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
Corrected under Section 63 of the ACT Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2008 on 7 November 2025
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) XD 1090/2024
CANBERRA INSULATION SPECIALISTS
KlRAN KUMAR DEVARAPALLI
First Respondent
KRISHNA KANTHI DEVARAPALLI
Second Respondent
Member M Hanna
CORRECTED ORDER
The Tribunal orders that:
28 days of these orders, the respondents are to pay to the applicant the sum of
$5,165.45 which consists of:
(a) $4,765.45 for goods and services received from the applicant.
(b) ACAT Filing fee of $366
(c) Search fees of $34
respondents are to pay, on an indemnity basis, the following costs of the
(a) 100% of the costs arising from the conduct of the hearing on
(b) 100% of the costs arising from the hearing conducted on 4 April 2025.
are to be calculated at the Supreme Court scale.
should be agreed.
the parties are unable to reach agreement as to costs within 28 days of the date
of this order:
(a) the applicant is to file and serve a bill of costs using the form provided
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(b) the respondent is to file and serve a document setting out any objections to
the bill within 7 days of service of the bill;
(c) the parties are to participate in a conference at a time and place directed
by the ACAT Tribunal Registrar;
(d) the Tribunal Registrar is to consider the bill and any objections and make a
recommendation to the original Tribunal about the
amount of costs to be paid
under Order 2 of these Orders. The original Tribunal shall consider the
recommendation of the Tribunal
Registrar and make an order as to the amount of
costs to be paid under order 2 of these orders; and
(e) in the event that the Tribunal Registrar’s conference fails to achieve
a recommendation, the matter is to be relisted before
the original Tribunal,
which will consider the information provided pursuant to orders 4(a) and (b)
above and make an order as to
the amount of costs to be paid under order 2 of
these orders.
......................................
Member M Hanna
REASONS FOR DECISION
matter concerned a contractual dispute whereby the applicant claimed the
respondent had failed to pay in full the sum it owed
for goods and services
applicant filed a Civil Dispute Application on 29 August 2024 seeking payment of
respondents ultimately counterclaimed that the services were not performed
properly, that they should be refunded in full and
compensation granted for
damages they say were caused by the applicant in the course of delivering the
services should also be awarded
to them in a claim amounting to nearly
being filed on 29 August 2024, the matter did not ultimately make it to final
hearing effectively until 4 April 2025. This
was at least partly due to issues
related to the response and delays as to whether a counterclaim was going to be
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedures Rules 2020
") states that “a respondent must lodge a response
to a civil dispute application within 21 days after the application is
Rule 112 (2)(d) requires any counterclaim to be lodged at
the same time as the response (or at another time allowed by the Tribunal).
respondents filed a response within the prescribed time limit but did not file a
counterclaim.
23 October 2024, the Tribunal made orders including an order granting leave to
file a counterclaim out of time (emphasis added):
The Respondent
must give to the Tribunal and to the applicant, by Wednesday 20 November 2024 at
a) An updated response that replies to the amended application, includes any
counterclaim (pay the filing fee) and setting outlining
the orders the
respondents seek;
b) If the respondents file a counterclaim, a written submission setting out
the factual and legal basis for the counterclaim by reference
to the contract
terms and other relevant material.
20 November 2024, the respondents filed an updated response but did not file a
counterclaim. The respondents submitted that they
did not intend to file a
counterclaim with the Tribunal, stating the following at paragraph 51(g)(viii)
of their submissions filed
Respondents will lodge a
claim in the Magistrate court as was advised by the applicant's lawyer in his
email correspondence dated
8 Dec 2023.
26 November 2024, following a conference between the parties, the Tribunal made
orders setting the matter down for a final hearing
on 28 February 2025. The
Tribunal did not grant further leave to file a counterclaim.
17 December 2024, the applicant’s legal representative wrote to the
Tribunal and to the respondents to seek clarification
whether a counterclaim was
no longer in issue. The respondents did not reply to this email nor provide any
clarity to the applicant
or the Tribunal. The respondents did not advise the
applicant or the Tribunal whether they intended to file a counterclaim. The
has submitted it relied on the respondents’ submission of 20
November 2024 that the respondent would file a claim in the Magistrate’s
Court and therefore was misled and forced in this matter to ultimately incur
costs it would not have otherwise.
17 February 2025, six months after the application had been filed in
August 2024, the respondents filed a counterclaim seeking
compensation
totalling $28,423.85. The counterclaim comprised approximately 180 pages of
substantially new material and since that
date the respondents filed further
material with the Tribunal totalling approximately 400 pages.
on 17 February 2025, the applicant wrote to the Tribunal seeking orders be made
in chambers to dismiss the counterclaim and/or
to vacate the existing listing
date, citing a denial of procedural fairness. On 18 February 2025, the Tribunal
declined to make any
orders in chambers.
28 February 2025, the final hearing initially commenced before this Tribunal.
The Tribunal sought clarification from the parties
as to whether they agreed to
proceed in the matter exceeding the ACAT Civil limit of $25,000 in accordance
with Section 21 of the
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
applicant submitted it had relied on the respondents’ submission of
20 November 2024 that the respondent would file a claim
Magistrate’s Court, had therefore been misled and forced to ultimately
incur costs it would not have otherwise.
applicant made a verbal application for costs of the proceedings pursuant to
section 48(2)(b).
proceedings continued it became evident that the respondents were unaware of
legal cost implications being put to the Tribunal
by the applicant in light of
the counter claim and the respondent’s delays, especially as to how this
could affect them should
they lose the proceedings. The Tribunal adjourned
proceedings to allow the respondents, who were unrepresented legally, to seek
advice on both costs and whether they intended to continue with their
counterclaim exceeding the ACAT civil threshold of $25,000.
A decision on the
applicant’s cost application was reserved.
should also be noted that I gave the parties another chance to settle the matter
on 28 February 2025 when the applicant suggested
it was prepared to and made an
offer. Despite discussions at that time, no settlement was reached and the
matter was adjourned so
that the respondents could get legal advice and for the
applicant to be able to fully prepare for a final hearing based on all the
material before it.
Final Hearing resumed on 4 April 2025.
respondents confirmed they had sought legal advice. The parties confirmed that
they agreed to run the proceedings on the basis
of an agreement under Section 21
of the ACAT Act to proceed in excess of the civil limit of $25,000.
fundamental issues in dispute were:
a) When was the contract formed between the parties?
b) Were the terms and conditions of that contract part and parcel of the
original quotation given to the respondent?
c) Did the respondents owe a debt to the applicants as a result of the work
undertaken by the applicant on site?
d) Did the applicant in the course of delivering the goods and services
contracted, cause damage to the respondents by leaving defects
and does that
allow the respondents to not make payment for the contract in full and receive
further compensation?
e) If the counterclaim fails, does the applicant have a claim for legal costs
and if so, should they be awarded indemnity costs as
the applicant claims?
addition to the detailed written submissions, the parties called Mr. J Watson
(for the applicant) and Mr Kiran Kumar Devarapalli
(the first respondent) to the
stand to give sworn evidence and be cross-examined.
The Contract and terms of contract
first issue was to determine the date, nature and terms of the contract the
parties agreed on. Both parties agreed that the respondents
first contacted the
applicant and sought a quote on 17 February 2022 and that the applicant supplied
a detailed quote with terms
and conditions attached on 24 February 2022. Both
parties agreed that the ultimate scope of works agreed on was supplied by the
on 29 July 2022.
applicant’s position was that the terms and conditions first supplied on
17 February 2022 were part of the ultimate contract
despite not being
literally attached to the final amendment of the scope of works given and
accepted by the respondents. In the words
of the applicant:
was a quotation issued on 24 February. The applicant honoured the prices
contained in that quote throughout a series of amendments.
There was no material
variation to the price of the works. The only variations were made to the change
of the scope at your request,
and that the original quote provided to you on 24
February 2022 clearly contained the terms and conditions of trade and that each
subsequent quote provided to you either those terms and conditions attached or
referenced those terms and conditions where it stated
that you agree to make
payment in accordance with the conditions contained in the original
applicant pointed out that at clause 2.1 of the terms and conditions it
The client is taken to have exclusively accepted and is
immediately bound jointly and severally by this terms and conditions if the
client places an order for or accepts delivery of any works.
that at 2.3 it reads:
Any amendment to the terms and conditions
contained in those contract may only be amended in writing by the consent of
both parties.
respondents argued that the various changes in the scope of works meant that
only the terms attached to the ultimate scope of
works accepted were valid.
Consequently, because the ultimate scope of works which the parties agreed on,
on 29 July 2022, did not
have the attached terms and conditions to the updated
scope of works document, that the terms and conditions that had been expressly
supplied at the start of the quotation were null and that the only terms that
were connected to the contract were those implied terms
contained in
the view of the Tribunal, the respondents’ argument fails because it
specifically ignores:
(a) the fact that the same terms and conditions were supplied on at least two
(b) that the document that formed the final contract was materially similar to
the proposal first sent on 24 February 2022 (which
contained the written terms
and conditions) except that on the request of the respondents, an updated quote
with a revised scope
of works, responding to a request for such a discount from
the respondents, was supplied;
(c) whilst the scope of works did change, the number on the quotation remained
constant throughout the process;
(d) there was no discussion whatsoever of any other terms or conditions by
either party;
(e) Terms 2.1 and 2.3 of the Terms supplied at the very origin of the contract
formation make it clear that the terms supplied then
are the terms for any works
undertaken.
(f) At page 38 of the quote that the respondents indicate is the quote they
accepted and which forms the contract states: “Conditions
provided for on
the original quote”
applicant submitted that the terms were expressly part of the agreement between
the parties. It would seem based on the evidence
that this is the case, but even
if the argument was made that the terms and conditions were implied to be part
of the contract, this
Tribunal finds it impossible to resist the argument that
the terms and conditions, first enclosed within the quotation and scope
of 24 February 2022, did form part of the varied contract ultimately formed on
29 July 2022 and were that contract’s
terms and conditions.
Sum owed on contract not paid
the respondents had failed to pay the final sum of $4,765.45 to the applicant
was not in dispute. The respondents however argued
that it should not be paid as
the applicant had left defects in their work which meant that they had failed to
fulfil their contract
and that therefore the respondents should be refunded and
paid compensation.
applicant argued that even if there had been defects, where services are
rendered subject to consumer guarantees, such guarantees
oblige the applicant
not to waive any part of the contract sum but to remedy any defect associated
with the works or services provided.
They argued that the respondents’
claim is contingent on the respondents having complied with the requirements of
the Australian
Consumer Law (“
”) by giving the
applicant reasonable opportunity to remedy any defects associated with the goods
or services. Contrary to the
ACL, the applicant argued they had not been
provided the opportunity to rectify any defects associated and that there are no
within the ACL that allow for the respondents to seek damages or
financial recompense where the applicant has not been give satisfactory
opportunity to address the concerns.
to those submissions, the applicant argued that the alleged defects were not
defects at all and that the respondents were
attributing fault to the applicant
for a number of works that weren’t carried out by the applicant.
of the primary defects alleged was the applicant was responsible for
“nuisance tripping” in the respondents’
works undertaken.
the course of giving evidence however, the first respondent was
I’m asking you were you
aware on 24 February, were you made aware that the derating of circuits in your
premises, which is
a requirement of the insulation refit...that this would
increased the risk of nuisance tripping in the premises? Yes or no.
Witness K Devarapalli
first respondent goes on to allege that they were not made aware that nuisance
tripping will only be handled at an additional
cost. However, the applicant
refers him to the retrofit guide supplied on 24 February and puts it to Mr
Devarapalli that,
“You were made aware of
that on the 24 February. Is that right?”
witness replied:
“Through the retrofit guide, yes.”
applicant continued to press the point. He highlighted that a video had been
linked to the original offer which further dealt
with issues of nuisance
tripping and compliance which formed a second document providing the applicant
with the data on electrical
compliance and cost involved. The first respondent
admitted this was so.
applicant pressed the issue further:
Devarapalli I don’t want to labour the point too much but let me take you
to page 24 of the retrofit guide annexed to your
witness statement.
You’ve just given evidence to the Tribunal that the retrofit guide stated
that nuisance tripping would
be avoided when in actual fact the guide states
that the likelihood of nuisance tripping would be increased as a consequence...
advises you that nuisance tripping – the likelihood would be increased.
Is that correct?
Mr Bryant puts it to the first respondent:
Mr Devarapalli I will put it to you that there is a series of
multiple oversights by you in which you failed to read the information
retrofit guide concerning the derating of circuits and the increased likelihood
of nuisance tripping. That is correct, isn’t
the first respondent admits:
Mr Devarapalli:
Details of invoice, I have read them – what do you call – the lines,
but I didn’t compare it with the previous
quotes. That was my mistake.
That why I said – like, I partially admitted because it’s partially
the basis of the above data, the Tribunal finds that the contract was formed as
submitted by the applicants and that the respondents
owed the applicant
$4,765.45 for services rendered.
The Counterclaim
basis of the counterclaim filed was that defects existed that were not corrected
and on that basis the fees paid should be refunded
and compensation should also
be paid to the respondents.
applicant asked the respondents:
Devarapalli, do you understand the difference between works that are incomplete
and works that are defective?
examined the difference, the applicant confirmed with the first respondent that
the primary defects that the respondents relied
on were as at page 32 of his
witness statement namely, “a damaged duct, bulb is pending and power
trip-offs”.
the course of the cross examination of Mr Devarapalli, the applicant effectively
puts it to the respondents that these three
issues were either fully rectified
by the applicant or that arrangements were repeatedly made by the applicant to
“the efforts were rejected because you felt the proposed
solution was not to your satisfaction.”
first respondent admitted that he “rejected [repairs] it a third
Ultimately,
the applicant put to the witness:
put it to you Mr Devarapalli we’ve just gone over a reasonable amount of
evidence that the indicates that the applicant
made every endeavour not only to
repair your air conditioning unit or the damaged duct which was one of the three
main concerns you’ve
raised but they were also willing to use your
preferred supplied and repairer at their cost in order to ensure that you were
with the outcome. Do you accept that?
Mr Devarapalli:
the first respondent admits that the three defects the respondents had claimed
compensation for were either repaired or
that the applicant had sought to make
appointments to have the matters repaired and that ultimately the problems with
the tripping
circuits was caused by shoddy electrical work prior to the
engagement of the
questioning from the Tribunal, it became clear that the respondent made repeated
assumptions regarding what he had read and
misunderstood in the
applicant’s documents.
first respondent gave examples to the Tribunal from the retrofit guide –
such as “where tripping occurs, we simply
run a new cable with a higher
temperature rating to the kitchen power points. That allows us to install a
larger fuse on that
the basis of statements such as these he testified that he relied on the
applicant doing this for free. Yet he could point to nothing
documentation or any statement from an applicant representative where this had
been promised or even implied. When, as it
has already been pointed out by the
applicant, the tripping was being caused by work not done by the applicant but,
it is hard to
see why such work would be free unless stated to be so.
Tribunal is forced to conclude then that the cross claim filed by the
respondents is based on misunderstandings and assumptions
of the contract, the
actual circumstances they found themselves in and the law. The relief under the
ACL that the respondents sought
may well be accessible if the applicant had
refused to fix its work and had left defects in place. The evidence before the
indicates this is not the case.
General Principles as to Costs
are intended primarily as compensation for the successful party, not punishment
for the unsuccessful party.
awards are said to rely upon the principle that a successful party is entitled
to compensation for at least some of the expenses
to which they have been put by
reason of the litigation.
award of costs is not intended to be a comprehensive compensation for all costs
incurred by the successful party: what is compensated
are the legal costs
including disbursements incurred by the successful party in vindicating its
legal rights. It does not compensate
for the disruption, distress or other
financial costs that may have been associated with the
litigation.
there is a statutory conferral of the power to award costs, courts and tribunals
exercise discretion. That discretion is absolute
and unfettered unless
constrained by statute. It must be exercised judiciously, not
arbitrarily.
Costs in ACAT
48 and 49 of the ACAT Act
of proceedings
(1) The parties to an application must bear their own costs unless this
Act otherwise provides or the tribunal otherwise orders.
(2) However—
(a) if the tribunal decides an application in favour of the
applicant—the tribunal may order the other party to pay the applicant
filing fee for the application; or
(b) if the tribunal considers that a party to an application caused
unreasonable delay or obstruction before or while the tribunal
was dealing with
the application—the tribunal may order the party to pay the reasonable
costs of the other party arising from
the delay or obstruction; or
(c) subject to section 49, if a party to the application contravenes an order
of the tribunal—the tribunal may order the party
to pay the costs or part
of the costs of the application to the other party; or
(d) if the application is an application for review of a decision under the
Heritage Act 2004
Planning and Development Act 2007
Tree Protection
, and the tribunal makes an order under
(2) (Frivolous and
vexatious applications)—the tribunal may order the applicant to pay the
reasonable costs of the other party
arising from the application.
(3) For subsection (2) (d),
reasonable costs of the other party arising
from the application
include reasonable legal costs but do not include
holding costs.
Examples—holding costs
interest and lender imposed charges associated with a loan
costs of engaging workers and subcontractors and hiring equipment for a
development
Note An example is part of the Act, is not exhaustive and may extend, but
does not limit, the meaning of the provision in which it
appears (see
Legislation Act, s 126 and s 132).
Costs for contravening an
(1) The tribunal may award costs against a party for contravening an order
under section 48 (2) (c) only if satisfied that it is in
the interests of
justice to do so.
(2) In deciding whether it is in the interests of justice to award costs,
the tribunal must consider the following:
(a) whether the contravention was deliberate or could easily have been
(b) whether (and if so, the extent to which) the contravention has affected
the tribunal’s ability to hear the application promptly;
(c) the importance to the community of people being able to afford to bring
applications to the tribunal.
(3) The tribunal may consider any other relevant matter.
(4) Costs are payable in accordance with the scale of costs in the rules
under the Court Procedures Act2004 applying in relation to
the Supreme
48 (1) of the ACAT Act provides the Tribunal with a starting point or
presumptive rule that each party must bear their own
costs. That presumptive
rule is qualified by the proviso unless this Act otherwise provides. The ACAT
Act does otherwise provide
in section 48, subsection (2) and section 49. The
departure from the presumptive rule permitted in subsection (2) and section 49
is prescribed, limited and, for the most part, generally speaking, relates to
the conduct of a party to the proceedings. The concluding
words of section 48
(1), or the Tribunal otherwise orders, confers upon the Tribunal a discretion
which may be exercised in accordance
with section 48 (2) and section 49 of the
CIC Australia Ltd v ACT Planning and Land Authority; Mainore Pty Ltd and ACT
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
[2013] ACTSC 96
Justice Penfold considered
the interpretation and application of section 48 of the ACAT Act. Her Honour
concluded that section 48
confers a narrow costs power on the Tribunal, being
the power to make the order specified in section 48 (2) and only in the
circumstances
specified in that
Tribunal must then determine what is meant by section 48(2)(b): if the Tribunal
considers that a party to an application caused
unreasonable delay or
obstruction before or while the Tribunal was dealing with the application, the
Tribunal may order the party
to pay the reasonable costs of the other party
arising from the delay or obstruction.
Legislative
provisions of this kind cover the manner of pursuit of the litigation and the
conduct of the matter, including persistence
in a hopeless line of argument, a
refusal to make a concession that clearly should be made, or deliberate failure
to comply with
procedural directions. Such provisions do not contain a power to
award costs to successful parties as a matter of course, nor do
they contain a
power to award indemnity, as distinct from party and party
award of costs does not automatically follow an outcome in the tribunal. There
must be factors evident in the matter, or in the
manner in which the matter was
conducted, which would justify the Tribunal moving from the presumption that
each party bears their
Unreasonable delay or obstruction before or while the Tribunal
was dealing with the application
ACAT Act does not provide guidance as to what type of conduct would fall within
‘under reasonable delay or obstruction’.
Neither the second reading
speech nor the explanatory memorandum for the ACT Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Bill 2008 provide
any guidance to Tribunal members in the determination
of whether an award of costs should be made. The Tribunal therefore examines
case law which may assist in making such a determination.
Jarrad v Santamaria
[2005] SASC 196
the court, considering a provision
which allowed an award of costs where one party had acted ‘in bad faith or
unreasonably’
costs against an unsuccessful applicant where the evidence did not support the
assertions made in the application, the affidavits
contained significant hearsay
and the unsatisfactory and misleading nature of the evidence was such as to lead
to the conclusion
that the proceedings were brought unreasonably.
White Industries (Qld)
Pty Ltd v Flower & Hart
[1998] FCA 806
the Federal Court considered the
issue of whether solicitors acting for a party where proceedings were commenced
with no or substantially
no prospects of success, should be liable for costs.
The court noted that the courts must be open to any party who claims that he
she has been wronged and seeks to vindicate a right to compel the enforcement of
an obligation. The court noted that:
the authorities do not
support the proposition that simply instituting or maintaining a procedure on
behalf of a client which has
no or substantially no prospect of success would
invoke the jurisdiction [to award costs]. There must be something more namely,
on that conduct reasonably. It is not clear what is encompassed by
“unreasonably” initiating or continuing procedures
if they have no
or substantially no chance of success. It seems to me that it involves some
deliberate or conscious decision taken
by reference to circumstances unrelated
to the prospects of success with either a recognition that there is no chance of
but an intention to use the proceedings for an ulterior purpose or with
a disregard of any proper consideration of the prospects
court also noted that bringing litigation in relation to the same matter on
several occasions is potentially vexatious and may
amount to an abuse of
process. The court stated:
the concept of “abuse of
process” in this context involves a party using court proceedings and
procedures for a purpose
unrelated to the objectives which the court process is
designed to achieve. The concept of “abuse of process” was
by the High Court in
Williams v Spautz
[1992] HCA 34
(1992) 174 CLR 509.
decision makes it clear that: “central to the tort of abuse of process is
a requirement that the party who has instituted
the proceedings has done so for
a purpose or to effect an object beyond that which the legal process offers....
It is the predominant
purpose of the litigation which is the relevant criterion
and it is not necessary for the improper purpose to be the sole purpose
litigation before abuse of process can be established.
Federal Court noted the case of
Goldsmith v Sperrings Ltd
[1997] 1 WLR
, where it was stated that court proceedings may not be used for the purpose
of obtaining some collateral advantage to the applicant.
It was noted, however,
that if it could be shown that a litigant was pursuing an ulterior purpose
unrelated to the subject matter
of litigation and that, but for his ulterior
purpose, he would not commence proceedings at all, then this is an abuse of
Application of discretion in this matter
is primarily a ‘no cost’ jurisdiction. This is consistent with the
stated purposes of ACAT set out in sections 6
and 7 of the ACAT Act: that the
procedures of ACAT should be as simple, quick, inexpensive and informal as is
consistent with achieving
natural justice and observing procedural fairness.
Section 48 makes it clear that parties in ACAT should bear their own costs
the Tribunal orders otherwise; where one party has caused unreasonable
delay or obstruction before or while ACAT is dealing with
the matter, then ACAT
may make an order for costs. It should be noted that such a costs order is
confined to those costs which arise
from the unreasonable delay or obstruction
or where a matter is considered frivolous or vexatious.
Unreasonable
delay or obstruction can arise from the manner in which the party conducts their
case and would encompass bringing an
unmeritorious action, where the bringing of
an action amounted to bad faith or abuse of process. Bad faith may be
demonstrated by:
(a) unsatisfactory evidence, that is where the assertions of the party are not
supported by any evidence which is relevant, reliable
or probative;
(b) where a party commences an action for a primary motive not related to the
legal issues;
(c) where a party commences multiple actions based upon the same or largely
similar facts;
(d) where the proceedings had no chance of success, and the applicant knew that;
(e) conduct of a party during the time the Tribunal is dealing with the matter
where that conduct is not properly related to the
progress of the matter.
Applicant’s submissions on costs
noted those factors in costs, it is hard to ignore the submissions of the
applicant in relation to costs arguing that the Tribunal
justify a departure
from the presumptive rule that each party bear their own costs.
applicant submitted that the Tribunal ought to make the orders sought under
section 48(2) of the Act on the basis that the respondents:
(a) failed to comply with the rules and the tribunal's orders with respect to
the time for lodgement of the counterclaim;
(b) misled the applicant and the tribunal by making submissions that a
counterclaim would be filed in another jurisdiction;
(c) failed to take the opportunity to advise the applicant and the tribunal that
a counterclaim would be filed in the tribunal, when
the applicant had emailed
all parties on 17 December 2024 seeking clarification;
(d) caused the applicant to throw away substantial legal costs; and
(e) caused the tribunal to waste valuable taxpayer resources in convening a
final hearing that could not proceed.
(f) that on 29 July 2022, the applicant and respondents entered a binding
contract for the provision of goods and services. The conditions
of the contract
are particularised in the document entitled
"Canberra Insulation Specialists
Pty Ltd T/A Alexander Watson Insulation
Contract Terms
(g) that Clause 17.2 of the contract terms provides an enforceable basis for
legal costs to be recovered on an indemnity basis, as
the respondents have
failed to make payment of the contract sum and the applicant has incurred costs
and disbursements in recovering
17.2 If the Client owes AWi any money the Client shall indemnify AWi from
and against all costs and disbursements incurred by AWi
in recovering the debt
(including but not limited to internal administration fees, legal costs on a
solicitor and own client basis,
AWi's contract default fee, and bank dishonour
applicant argued that by operation of clause 17.2 of the contract, the
respondents are required to indemnify the applicant against
all costs and
disbursements incurred by the applicant in recovering the debt subject of these
proceedings (including but not limited
to internal administration fees, legal
costs on a solicitor and own client basis).
applicant submitted that it had incurred $40,920 in legal fees directly related
to the recovery of the debt of $4,765.45, an enormous
sum in comparison to the
original debt.
applicant attributed the intensification of legal fees to the
respondents’ delay in filing a counter claim, filing it days
final hearing was due to commence on 28 February 2025, the respondents’
unpreparedness for the final hearing on
28 February as well as the substantial
(and in its view unnecessary) volume of documents filed by the respondents in
what the applicant
submitted should be considered a frivolous counterclaim.
applicant relied on
Credit Corp Services Pty Ltd v
to support its
application to recover interest and fees. The applicant continues to rely on
Credit Corp Services
the extent that it establishes good authority for the Tribunal to make orders
for the recovery of those amounts separately to
the entitlement to recover the
primary debt. Also, as recent authority confirming the below cases.
the applicant submitted that the present case can be distinguished from
Credit Corp Services
on the basis that on 28 February 2025, the Tribunal
made orders by consent of the parties such that the jurisdictional thresholds
don't apply in any event; and that the terms of the contract in this matter
provide a much broader indemnity than those considered
Credit Corp
permitting the recovery of legal fees on a solicitor an own client
basis without the requirement to assess reasonableness.
applicant also relied on the decision in
Trustees of the Roman Catholic
Church for the Archdiocese of Canberra and Goulburn as Trustee for St Mary
Mackillop College Canberra
v Kenningham,
recognised that a party to
a civil dispute in the Tribunal may recover legal costs and disbursements as a
contractual debt. In that
case, Presidential Member Symons made orders for the
recovery of
legal expenses, having regard to the following
a) Matters going to the enforceability and content of the expenses clause,
(i) Whether the Clause is sufficiently clear and particular to be
enforceable,
(ii) Is it clear and particular enough to include legal costs incurred in
tribunal proceedings,
(iii) Is it clear and particular enough to include costs on an indemnity
(iv) If not on an indemnity basis, is the Clause subject to a dual
'reasonableness' limitation and if so, would this require the Tribunal
impermissibly trespass on the Supreme Court jurisdiction to assess
reasonableness of legal costs
applicant submitted that, having regard to the considerations above, there was
clear evidence before this Tribunal to determine
that clause 17.2 of the
contract terms is:
a) Sufficiently clear and particular;
b) Is clear and particular enough to include legal costs incurred in tribunal
proceedings; and
c) Is clear and particular enough to include costs on an indemnity basis.
Presidential
Member Symon's decision in
Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church
clear that in considering such matters, the Tribunal must distinguish between
contracts that provide a basis for the recovery
fees and/or
costs, and those contracts that provide an unambiguous right to recover legal
fees on an indemnity basis. In that case,
the relevant clause
Each person signing below agrees:
agree jointly and severally to pay all school fees, levies and charges incurred
while my child is enrolled, including any expenses
incurred by the School as a
result of late or
non-payment.
applicant submitted that Presidential Member Symons referred to the High Court
decision of
Australian Broadcasting Commission v Australasian Performing
Right Association
in which their Honours considered the proper
construction to be given to the proviso to a clause in an agreement between the
The Presidential Member observed that this required construing a
written contract and whether the words used were ambiguous. By a
majority of 2:1
Barwick CJ and Stephen J found that the language was plain and unambiguous.
Stephen J said:
The approach of courts to the construction of
such documents, when they contain no ambiguity nor any other patent error or
cannot be other than that of an uncritical rendering of the meaning of
applicant noted that Presidential Member Symons also had regard to an earlier
tribunal decision of
Trpkovski v Williams Love Nicol Lawyers Pty
(Trpkovski),
Having reached that conclusion the tribunal noted
that costs are always a matter for the court or tribunal's discretion. That
may be a contractual basis for engaging a costs entitlement and an
agreement to pay costs is a factor in informing the exercise of
the tribunal's
discretion but such an agreement cannot require the exercise of that discretion
in a particular way.
tribunal decided that the tribunal's jurisdiction did not provide a basis for
assessing the reasonableness of the fees charged
and that the tribunal's
submissions continued, “Although recognising Trpkovski as good law,
Presidential Symons ultimately determined that the
clause in question in
was not sufficiently clear that legal costs could be recovered
on an indemnity basis, finding that:
Tribunal finds that the Clause in the present matter does not entitle the
applicant to recover expenses that have not been properly
incurred and are not
reasonable in amount. The Tribunal will consider this 'dual reasonableness'
limitation below.
the clause does not include costs on an indemnity basis, the applicant accepts
that any legal costs to be awarded must have been
reasonably incurred and be of
a reasonable amount that is the dual 'reasonableness'
limitation.
applicant concluded that the same ambiguity is not present in this matter and
that clause 17.2 of the contract terms is clear
and that the Tribunal ought to
award legal costs on an indemnity basis or a solicitor/ own client basis.
Whereas the subject clause
Trustees of the Roman Catholic
referred to
"expenses" in a general sense, the wording of the relevant provision in this
case specifically and clearly states that
an indemnity is created and that legal
fees may be recovered on a solicitor an own client basis. Following
the applicant submits that the Tribunal ought to follow the ordinary
meaning of the terms.
Conclusions
respondents’ submissions on costs can be crystallised to “Legal
costs are not applicable for the below two reasons:
(a) In the Tribunal, each party bears their own costs.
(b) As mentioned in the submissions and during the hearing, there are no
specific contractual terms or terms of trade in the agreed
have dealt with the first submission that each side bearing their costs earlier
in these reasons in detail. I have also reviewed
the arguments as to why this
matter can be an exception to the norm.
respondents were self-represented and were allowed a great deal of latitude in
the evidence, manner of presentation of their case
and filing of material.
However the Tribunal notes that a considerable deal of time was wasted bringing
the matter to hearing considering
that the application was originally filed on
29 August 2024 and it was only six months later that the respondents
finally filed a
counter claim. It is hard not to agree with the applicant that
the respondents submitted largely unmeritorious arguments, irrelevant
non-probative evidence and accusations of wrongdoing against the applicant that
did not stand the weight of evidence.
agree with the applicant’s submissions on costs. The weight of case law
supports them, as does the contract that the parties
signed. In the
circumstances, I am satisfied that there are circumstances or matters of
sufficient weight which justify a departure
from the presumptive rule that each
party should bear their own costs. In all the circumstances, it is reasonable
that the applicant
should pay those costs of the respondents which arise from an
unreasonable delay or obstruction caused by the applicant.
the applicant’s submissions lack a breakdown outlining how the costs were
accrued, the hourly cost charged and a full
breakdown so that the reasonableness
of these costs can be assessed. The orders made seek to deal with that so that
reasonable costs,
can be properly assessed and awarded.
CORRECTED ORDER
The Tribunal orders that:
28 days of these orders, the respondents are to pay to the applicant the sum of
$5,165.45 which consists of:
a) $4,765.45 for goods and services received from the applicant.
b) ACAT Filing fee of $366
c) Search fees of $34
respondents are to pay, on an indemnity basis, the following costs of the
a) 100% of the costs arising from the conduct of the hearing on
b) 100% of the costs arising from the hearing conducted on 4 April 2025.
are to be calculated at the Supreme Court scale.
should be agreed.
the parties are unable to reach agreement as to costs within 28 days of the date
of this order:
a) the applicant is to file and serve a bill of costs using the form provided in
Court Procedures Rules 2006
b) the respondent is to file and serve a document setting out any objections to
the bill within 7 days of service of the bill;
c) the parties are to participate in a conference at a time and place directed
by the ACAT Tribunal Registrar;
d) the Tribunal Registrar is to consider the bill and any objections and make a
recommendation to the original Tribunal about the
amount of costs to be paid
under Order 2 of these Orders. The original Tribunal shall consider the
recommendation of the Tribunal
Registrar and make an order as to the amount of
costs to be paid under order 2 of these orders; and
e) in the event that the Tribunal Registrar’s conference fails to achieve
a recommendation, the matter is to be relisted before
the original Tribunal,
which will consider the information provided pursuant to orders 4(a) and (b)
above and make an order as to
the amount of costs to be paid under order 2 of
these orders.
.............................
Member M Hanna
Date(s) of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Mr M Bryant, Bryant & Co Lawyers
Respondent:
Mr K Devarapalli (in person)
Ms K Devarapalli (remote)
******************************************
Order 2 (a) Replacing “April” with “February”
Page 22 Replacing “authorised representatives” for
“Solicitor for the Applicant”
Adding “Bryant & Co Lawyers”
Transcript of hearing dated 4
April 2025, page 40
Transcript of hearing dated 4
April 2025, page 28
Transcript of hearing dated 4
April 2025, page 29
Transcript of hearing dated 4
April 2025, page 34
Transcript of hearing dated 4
April 2025, page 46
Transcript of hearing dated 4
April 2025, page 47
Transcript of hearing dated 4
April 2025, page 49
Transcript of hearing dated 4
April 2025, page 50-65
Transcript of hearing dated 4
April 2025, page 60, line 9
Transcript of hearing dated
4 April 2025, page 65
Transcript of hearing dated
4 April 2025, pages 71-76
Transcript of hearing dated
4 April 2025, pages 83-84
Transcript of hearing dated
4 April 2025, page 83, line 44
David Bamford, Principles
of Civil Litigation, (Lawbook, Co 2010)
David Bamford, Principles
of Civil Litigation, (Lawbook, Co 2010)
CIC Australia Ltd v ACT
Planning and Land Authority; Mainore Pty Ltd and ACT Civil and Administrative
[2013] ACTSC 96
JRS Forbes, Justice in
Tribunals, third edition, The Federation Press, 2010
Section 189 (2a) of the
Summary Procedure Act
White Industries (Qld)
Pty Ltd v Flower & Hart
[1998] FCA 806
(14 July 1998), at page 76
Credit Corp Services Pty
[2024] ACAT 85
Credit Corp Services Pty
[2024] ACAT 85
Trustees of the Roman
Catholic Church for the Archdiocese of Canberra and Goulburn as Trustee for St
Mary Mackillop College Canberra
v Kenningham
[2017] ACAT 97
Trustees of the Roman
Catholic Church for the Archdiocese of Canberra and Goulburn as Trustee for St
Mary Mackillop College Canberra
v Kenningham
[2017] ACAT 97
Trustees of the Roman
Catholic Church for the Archdiocese of Canberra and Goulburn as Trustee for St
Mary Mackillop College Canberra
v Kenningham
[2017] ACAT 97
Australian Broadcasting
Commission v Australasian Performing Right Association Ltd
[1973] HCA 36
(1973) 129 CLR
ABC v APRA, page 115
Trpkovski v Williams Love
Nicol Lawyers Pty Ltd
[2014] ACAT 13
Chen v Kevin McNamara
& Son Pty Ltd
[2012] VSCA 229
Trpkovski v Williams Love
Nicol Lawyers Pty Ltd
[2014] ACAT 13
Trustees of the Roman
Catholic Church for the Archdiocese of Canberra and Goulburn as Trustee for St
Mary Mackillop College Canberra
v Kenningham
[2017] ACAT 97
RTF format (400 KB)
Signed PDF/A format