Inquest into the death of Luke Anthony Rich [2024] ACTCD 3 (22 August 2024)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Matter Title:
Inquest into the death of Luke Anthony Rich
[2024] ACTCD 3
Decision Date:
Coroner Archer
See [248], [249]–[254], [255]–[300], [301]–[308]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– death in custody – manner and cause of
death – suicide by hanging – matters of public safety – mental
health assessment processes – COVID-19 arrangements – inadequate
observation processes – ligature points in cells
– absence of
Hoffman knives – collaborative suicide prevention framework – issues
of parliamentary privilege –
shortfalls in the care, treatment, and
supervision of detainees
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
Corrections Management (Correctional Centres) Declaration (No 2)
Corrections Management Act 2007
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
Inspector of Correctional Services Act 2017
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987
Representation:
Counsel Assisting the Coroner
Counsel for the Family
J Ronald (instructed by Ken Cush & Associates)
Counsel for the
Australian Capital Territory
K Musgrove (instructed by ACT Government Solicitor)
Counsel the
Australian Federal Police
J Nottle (instructed by MinterEllison)
Counsel for Mr Daniel
D Shillington (instructed by Snedden Hall & Gallop
File Number:
CD 29 of 2022
CORONER ARCHER:
INTRODUCTION
Anthony Rich died at the Alexander Maconochie Centre (“AMC”) on 1
February 2022. I will, with respect, refer to him
as Luke. He took his own life
by hanging himself from a ligature in the form of bed sheet secured to a rear
door in his cell. He
had been remanded in custody only the day before. Before he
took that step, there were no overt signs that were observed that would
given rise to a suspicion that he was contemplating committing an act of
was a person of considerable capacity. His sudden death was tragic and has been
felt keenly by his friends and family.
repeat the expression of condolence I made to Luke’s family during the
proceedings.
follows is an analysis of the evidence that was placed before me in the course
of my investigation into Luke’s death.
make formal findings that are required by the
Coroners Act 1997
(“the Act”) and recommendations as to issues of public safety. I
also include in these reasons, findings about
aspects of Luke’s care and
supervision during his short period of incarceration at the AMC that, in my
opinion, contributed
to the cause of his death.
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
31 January 2022, Luke was arrested and remanded in custody following allegations
of domestic violence made by his (possibly) ex-partner.
In November 2020, he had
been arrested and remanded in relation to allegations of violence against the
same person.
was assessed at the ACT Watch House, and, at the time of his admission to the
AMC, he was found to be a low suicide risk (that
is, no acute risks regarding
self-harm or suicide, but with a history of self-harm or suicide).
was remanded in custody at a time when COVID-19 arrangements were in place at
the AMC. He was accommodated in a form of quarantine
in the “Management
induction assessment conducted at the AMC was thorough. However, expert evidence
received during the inquest suggested that suicide
risk assessment tools are of
low predictive value.
Statistically,
acts of self-harm are more likely to occur soon after admission into a custodial
environment. Mitigation measures to
address those known risks were not
effectively implemented.
rear doors of the Management Unit were known to be used as a ligature point for
those detainees minded committing acts of self-harm.
In 2020, they had been
identified as needing urgent replacement. They were not replaced.
died by suicide on 1 February 2022, the day after his admission. During that
day, the observation regime was inadequate. In-person
observations that were
required were almost always not done. He was sighted in the hour before his
death through a hatch in the cell
was relied upon as a form of observation because of a lack of staff resources.
Luke rendered that form of observation ineffective
by placing a sticker over the
lenses of cameras located in his cell and in the yard. That practice was common
amongst experienced
Observations
were poorly recorded in a form that was tolerated, if not officially condoned by
ACT Corrective Services (“ACTCS”)
Management.
numbers at the Management Unit on 1 February 2022 were insufficient to address
the duties (including observations) that Correctional
Officers were required to
to the rear doors. The opinion of the nurse, who
was the first responder, was
that Luke had been in that position for some time.
members were hindered in their attempts to remove Luke from the ligature by the
absence of a Hoffman knife (a cutting instrument
designed for that purpose).
do not find the absence of the knife to have contributed to Luke’s cause
of death. However, its absence was not explained
during the inquest, or, despite
requests, after the hearing had concluded.
at CPR were competently attempted. Luke could not be revived.
Recommendations
make the following recommendations in respect of public safety issues that arise
from the inquest:
(a) Observations
recommend that ACTCS publish guidance to staff, pursuant to
Corrections Management Act 2007
that addresses, in light of
the findings of this inquest:
(a) the purposes of detainee observations;
(b) how observations are to be recorded;
(c) the role that CCTV is to play in the observation process; and
(d) what is to be done when cameras are intentionally covered by detainees.
(b) Dangers represented by Rear Cell doors of the Management Unit
recommend that:
(a) external consultants be engaged to assess the safety of the rear doors in
the Management Unit in light of the evidence in this
inquest; and
(b) the outcome of that review be published.
(c) The Absence of a Suicide Prevention Strategy
recommend that:
(a) a Suicide Prevention Framework for ACTCS be developed as a priority;
(b) it gives expression to the need for suicide prevention to be accepted as
shared responsibility at the AMC;
(c) the terms of the Victorian Framework be considered in that process; and
(d) an attempt be made as to assess the efficacy of the introduction of the
Framework in the Victorian Prison system and reflect
those learnings in the
process of developing the framework document to apply at the AMC.
the purpose of this section, I reflect the findings made above. At the time of
Luke’s death, the Territory chose to accommodate
newly arrived detainees
in a physical environment they knew to be, in one important aspect, unsafe. The
rear doors of the Management
Unit cells were known to offer ligature points. The
class of detainees that were to be accommodated in those cells were at greater
risk of self-harm than general detainees. The length and nature of the period of
COVID-19 isolation meant that new detainees were
held in what amounted to a form
of solitary confinement. That form of isolation may have been justified on
grounds of public health.
However, that did not obviate the need to take
reasonable steps to ensure the isolation was as safe as it reasonably could
suicide, as with suicide generally, could not be reliably predicted. In light of
that difficulty of prediction, Luke’s
assessment as being of generally low
suicide risk did not mean that such risk could be ignored. The reasonableness of
the arrangements
that were put in place is to be assessed against known risks
associated with the physical environment of the cells in the Management
with detainees of particular profiles, and the risks arising from remandees
being placed in a form of health segregation for
an extended period. Measures
that were said to have been designed to mitigate some of those risks were not,
in Luke’s case,
implemented.
observation regime in place was inadequate. Staff resources were insufficient to
address the safety needs of detainees. Staff
members with responsibility for
caring for Luke were not briefed as to Luke’s mental health history, and
known risks associated
with the physical environment in the Management Unit
cells. This is so both in relation to Custodial Mental Health Services
staff and Correctional Officers, who were on the ground
discharging responsibilities in this respect of Luke’s care and
supervision.
cameras were used as form of observation, rather than detainees being observed,
and engaged through personal contact. The reliance
on CCTV cameras was an
inevitable consequence of inadequate staffing resources to perform observations
in person. Luke’s decision
to cover the cameras in his cell gave rise to
greater safety concerns as a result. Those concerns were not identified nor
acted upon.
failures in the care and supervision of Luke – that is, the failure to
address or to mitigate risks associated with the
rear doors of the Management
Unit cell in which he was accommodated – contributed to his death.
- JURISDICTION
death was referred to the ACT Coroner’s Court pursuant to
as it occurred at the AMC when he was “in custody”.
Section 3C of the Act defines “death in custody” to mean
that occurs at a “corrections centre”.
Corrections Management Act 2007
(ACT) empowers the Minister to declare a
place to be a corrections centre. Through the
Corrections Management
(Correctional Centres) Declaration (No 2) 2009
(ACT), the Minister for
Corrections made such a declaration in respect of the AMC.
PART 2 - REQUIRED FINDINGS
2.1 – Section 52 of the Act
assumed jurisdiction in relation to Luke’s death, I was required to hold
into the manner and
cause of Luke’s death and make findings that are required by s 52 of the
Act. That section of the Act relevantly
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find,
if possible—
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the person has
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
(i) state whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection
with the inquest or inquiry; and
(ii) if a matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the matter.
arriving at the findings a coroner is required to make, I was obliged to hold a
– Section 74 of the Act
74 of the Act requires me to include, in the record of the proceedings, findings
supervision of the deceased that, in my
opinion, contributed to the cause of death.
PART 3 - THE
COURSE OF THE INQUEST
3.1 – The Investigation
my direction, the Australian Federal Police (“AFP”) investigated
Luke’s death. The office of the ACT Government
(“ACTGS”) facilitated the provision of statements from Territory
employees. Relevant records were subpoenaed
by the Court.
the time the hearing for the inquest had begun, the ACT Inspector of
Correctional Services (“the Inspector”) had conducted
a review of
Luke’s death as a “critical incident” for the purposes of
Inspector of Correctional Services Act 2017
Act”). Material in the form of statements and documents, and a report of
his findings were obtained from the
Inspector. That material was supplied to the
coroner pursuant to s 35 of the ICS Act. In circumstances that are elucidated
I decided not to rely on this material for the purposes of arriving at my
3.2 – The Pre-Hearing Process
3.2.1 – Chronology
my investigation concerned a death in custody, the terms of s 72 of the Act
required me to appoint a lawyer as counsel assisting.
By instrument dated 25 May
2022, Mr Dan Crowe of Counsel, was appointed as Counsel Assisting.
hearing of the inquest was subject to a preliminary case management process.
Directions hearings were conducted on 1 August 2022
and 1 December 2022.
was granted to the Australian Capital Territory, the AFP, and Luke’s
family to appear at the inquest. A hearing date was
set for 12 to 16 December
2022. A timetable was set for the provision of the coronial brief and the
serving of an issues list by
the coroner.
3.2.2 – The
Parliamentary Privilege Issue
28 September 2022, the Territory indicated that an issue would be raised in
relation to the material received from the Inspector.
It was foreshadowed that,
as that material amounted to “proceedings in parliament” within the
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987
Cth), it was
subject to parliamentary privilege and could not be tendered, received, or
otherwise considered in the inquest. Submissions
were invited and received on
that issue.
indicated that it was not my intention to resolve that issue, and the Territory,
through ACTGS, was requested to take statements
from witnesses who had already
been interviewed by the Inspector.
parliamentary privilege issue raised by the Territory;
the delay in
getting fresh statements from the Territory to replicate the interviews taken by
the Inspector; and
provision of witness statements and the expert report of Professor
the family made an application for the hearing to
be adjourned.
the directions hearing of 1 December 2022, orders were made to grant leave for a
Correctional Officer, Mr Daniel Knight, to
be separately represented. Orders
were also made to vacate the hearing date.
subsequently made in chambers allocated 22 May 2023 as the commencement date for
a five-day hearing.
3.2.3 – The Issues List
issues list was distributed to the parties on 27 and 28 October 2022. The
purpose of that list was not to bind the Court as to
matters relevant to the
findings I was required to make pursuant to ss 52 and 74 of the Act. Rather, the
purpose of the list of issues
was to signal to the parties the scope of the
material in the brief that was likely to be considered in making those findings.
issues were the :
(a) mental health assessment processes at the ACT Watch House;
(b) mental health assessment processes at the AMC;
(c) adequacy of the way the processes were followed in relation to Luke,
including the communication of any information obtained
at the ACT Watch House
to relevant personnel at the AMC;
(d) adequacy of the observations made of Luke while he was at the AMC on 31
January and 1 February 2022;
(e) presence and identification of ligature points in the cells in the
Management Unit at the AMC; and
(f) availability of Hoffman knives to Correctional Officers at the AMC.
approach taken in my findings is to adopt these issues as a structure to analyse
whether, for the purposes of s 52(4) of the Act,
public safety issues arise from
the inquest. This accords with the approach taken in submission by Counsel
Assisting and those granted
leave to appear.
3.2.4 - The
hearing was conducted from 22 to 26 May 2023.
the conclusion of the hearing, the Court wrote to the Territory to seek further
evidence in respect of a number of specified issues.
Witness statements and
other documents were produced and received as exhibits, without the need for the
deponents to that material
to be called and cross-examined.
3.2.5 – Views of the Family and Submissions
(a) Views of the Family
the beginning of the hearing for the inquest, Mrs Karen Reid and Mr Gary Reid,
Luke’s mother and stepfather, were invited
to make a statement about the
inquest process. Karen spoke, and she said this:
My goal and my prayers are that the whole truth is revealed. That God's plans
will come to pass. That those responsible for looking
after and keeping my son
safe acknowledge their faults, and, above all, fix the doors so that no other
mother and family has to go
through this pain, heartbreak, anguish, and most
importantly, separation from her child.
family was represented at the hearing, and engaged actively in the questioning
of the witnesses that were called.
family made submissions. The alleged failure of ACTCS to mitigate the risks
presented by the cell doors in the Management Unit
remained a central concern.
other issues addressed by the family as warranting adverse findings
(a) the use of CCTV as a form of observation;
(b) the lack of action to remove items placed on the camera lens;
(c) the lack of briefing to custodial staff about the risks associated with the
isolation of new arrivals and the doors;
(d) the failure to implement proposed mitigation measures;
(e) the inadequacy of the observations that were conducted; and
(f) the unexplained absence of the Hoffman knife.
relation to the observation regime, the family invited a finding that, if the
observation conducted at 1800 hours on 1 February
2022 had been done in-person,
and not through a portal, it may have been that preparatory steps taken by Luke
to commit an act of
self-harm may have been discovered.
family expressed support for a recommendation proposed by Counsel Assisting
that would apply at the AMC.
They also suggested that a specific recommendation be made about training in
observation practices and
procedures, with emphasis being placed on the
importance of in-person observations. Finally, the family submitted that there
be compulsory drug and urine testing of remandees to ensure proper
medical assistance, psychiatric support, and drug withdrawal treatment
(b) Submissions of other Parties
Submissions
and submissions in reply were received from the Territory. The AFP and Mr Knight
declined to make submissions. The process
of submission concluded on 26 April
3.2.6 – Section 55 Notice
findings contain a comment adverse to a person, namely the Territory and Mr
Knight. Consistent with my obligations under s 55 of
the Act, I provided both
the Territory and Mr Knight with a copy of the proposed comment, with advice
consistent with that section
as to how they may respond. Notice was served on
the Territory and Mr Knight on 11 July 2024. A response was received from the
on 8 August 2024 in the form of a statement from Mr Jordan Russell,
Assistant Commissioner, Custodial Operations at the AMC. That
statement is
attached to these findings. Mr Knight indicated through his legal
representatives that he did not want to respond to
the provisional
- THE EVIDENCE
4.1 – Luke Rich – Relevant Personal History
was 27 years old at the time of his death. He was born on 15 October 1994, in
Gosford NSW. He had three siblings – two
brothers and a sister. In 1996,
when Luke was about two years old, his parents separated due to his
father’s gambling and alcohol
misuse. Luke’s father was abusive, and
violence had unfortunately permeated the life of the family.
the separation, Luke’s mother relocated with her children to Newcastle NSW
and later re-partnered with Mr Gary Reid,
who became Luke’s stepfather. In
2020, Luke described himself as having a “distant relationship” with
but had remained very close with his mother, by whom he felt loved and
supported. He also reported to have maintained frequent contact
siblings, in particular his eldest brother, Joshua.
Luke was about sixteen years old, his parents asked him to move out of home, as
his behaviour had started to become “destructive”
and was straining
their relationship. Having been on his own for a short period of time, Luke
asked to move back in with his parents.
To support Luke, Karen and Gary helped
him move to Lithgow NSW instead, where Gary was working at the time and became a
influence in Luke’s life. Whilst in Lithgow, Luke completed a
carpentry apprenticeship and a Certificate IV in Building and
Construction. He
became a qualified carpenter and lived with his boss for some time, before
moving with his family to Taree, NSW.
and friends would remember Luke as a hard worker. Prior to his passing, Luke was
working as a site foreman at a construction
company, and he had worked ‘as
hard as [his] body would let him’. Luke’s position required him to
relocate frequently,
and he had worked in various locations across NSW,
including Linfield, Oran Park and Wollongong.
around 2017, Luke met WT in Lithgow NSW. The two started seeing each other and
moved in together shortly thereafter. The couple
eventually moved to Canberra in
met NE a week or so before his death.
4.2 – Domestic
was received during the inquest in relation to the nature of the relationship
between WT and Luke. WT maintained that, at
times, Luke was violent towards her.
The truth of those allegations was not accepted by Luke’s mother and
stepfather. For present
purposes, it is not necessary to resolve that conflict,
other than to observe that allegations of domestic violence made by WT had
to Luke being arrested and incarcerated on remand twice (the last time being the
occasion on which he took his own life). Those
periods of remand, and the
reasons for them, form part of the factual matrix in respect of which
Luke’s decision to take his
own life falls be
4.3 – Luke’s 2020 Arrest and
the morning of 7 November 2020, WT, concerned about the amount of drugs Luke had
consumed the previous evening (according to her,
cocaine, and Xanax) and after
he made threats of self-harm, called for an ambulance. The AFP and ACT Mental
Health Services (“ACTMHS”)
were involved in the response to her
call. WT was allegedly assaulted by Luke shortly after making the call.
was arrested and charged with offences of damaging property and assault. He was
remanded in custody and remained at the AMC until
he was granted bail on 10
December 2020.
is no indication in the evidence before me that during his remand period, any
issues concerning Luke’s mental
or his general behaviour
were raised. CMHS closed Luke’s file on 16 November 2020, as no mental
health issues or suicide risks
identified.
did not return to custody in respect of those offences after he was granted
bail. He was sentenced on 15 December 2020. The Court
Duty Report prepared in
respect of that sentencing process noted that Luke had talked of escalating drug
use before his arrest, which
he said was a means of dealing with the stress
associated with his relationship and work. A medical report cited by the author
that report recorded “depression” and “anxiety”
diagnoses for the offender, who advised he was not medicated
conditions.
sentence, he was convicted of common assault and two damage property charges,
and he was placed on a Good Behaviour Order with
conditions. Those conditions
included that he be supervised on probation for 9 months, or any such lesser
time directed by the
Director-General.
– Luke’s 2022 Arrest
evidence before me suggests that, but for the period in the three months or so
before his incarceration in 2022, Luke achieved
some stability in his life. He
remained in a relationship with WT. The relationship with his family improved,
although there was
a level of estrangement following his first arrest. Whilst he
had lost his employment after his arrest, he found a new and demanding
site foreman in the building industry and had made a concentrated effort to lose
weight and improve his fitness. He spent
some time in Wagga Wagga during the
year for his employment.
period of ACTCS supervision under the Good Behaviour Order expired on 14
September 2021. The notes made by his case officer at
the time of his discharge
from supervision in September 2022 painted a positive picture of his
he had complied
with the terms of his supervision;
a single drug
screen was negative;
he engaged with
counselling service, initially an online provider and then Relationships
Australia; and
he remained in
employment.
of self-reflections at that time as to what he had learnt, Luke was recorded to
have said the following (errors included):
He can't address
life’s problems with drugs or alcohol. He said he was previously
self-medicating with alcohol and cocaine.
He claimed he always knew it was
wrong, but now he can really see that is it, because he has experienced the
negative side effects
(i.e. getting a criminal charge and being incarcerated in
He claimed it's
better to reach out for help through counselling or psychology sessions.
Luke talked
months. He talked about how he is not a
person who commits crimes and that he is
so much better than that. CCO (Community Corrections Officer) supported this
chain of thoughts.
Luke then talked about how jail and attending the Corrections
office had been a massive eye opener for him, and he never wants to
find himself
in that position again. He said it was embarrassing to attend our office in his
work uniform, and to be around other
Luke said jail
was 'rubbish' and 'embarrassing'. He also talked about how it negatively
affected his family and his career. He said
he felt bad the way that he had left
his previous employer and noted it “burnt” potential references.
Luke then talked
his criminal charges have not affected his position there.
Luke talked
like that again, he would admit himself
into a behavioural change program (like
the one with Everyman). He claimed that if he did it again, it would show he had
and he would be inclined to reach out for more intense
these aspirations, in the period immediately before his arrest on 31 January
2022, aspects of Luke’s life circumstances
deteriorated significantly. In
the early hours on 31 January 2022, the AFP responded to a 000 call and went to
his Waramanga home.
Luke, WT, and another woman, NE, were present. WT told the
attending officers that she had been assaulted by Luke on 26 January 2022
their home. She alleged that she had attempted to hide an amount of cocaine
belonging to Luke. She alleged that he then assaulted
her, and she
said that she returned to the house in the early hours on 31 January 2022 to
collect some of her possessions. She saw NE there.
An argument developed with
Luke. She alleged that she was forcefully thrown out of the house, causing minor
to her feet, ankle and
She called the police.
was taken into custody and taken to the City Police Station.
video from the body-worn cameras of the arresting officers does not suggest Luke
was in an abnormal level of emotional
Clearly, he was
frustrated with being taken into custody. The footage did not obviously show
that his physical movement was compromised
by a level of intoxication.
Luke’s death, WT was interviewed again. Apart from giving an account of
the events surrounding Luke’s arrest, she
also described his behaviour
over the month before then. She indicated that his drug and alcohol use had been
escalating because
of what she said was related stress. She said, “it just
got really out of
set out below, and as to the issue of drug use, there is evidence that tends to
corroborate this account.
was also interviewed after Luke’s death. She indicated that she had known
Luke for a week or so prior to his arrest. As far
as she (and Luke) was
concerned, the relationship between Luke and WT was at an end and had been
“for days”. Relevantly,
she indicated that on the night of his
arrest, they took cocaine and “did some
She described what
happened when WT arrived, and said the only contact involved him grabbing her by
the shirt in the bedroom and
later pushing her outside where she fell backwards.
Once the door was closed, and before the police arrived, she said he (Luke)
said he was “going to
her conversation with the police, NE indicated that, at some point in time, she
and Luke had discussed acts of self-harm (arm cutting)
– Charge and Remand
Luke was at the City Police Station, he was lodged in the ACT Watch House at
0556 hours. A CCTV footage of his time in the Watch
Largely, Luke slept,
and he appeared sleepy when
He was given food and
drink, but he did not consume them.
the intake process, when he was asked questions about thoughts of self-harm, he
indicated “no”. He denied the use
of alcohol and illicit substances
in the last 24 hours.
for concern was identified either in respect of his physical or mental health,
and no referral was made to clinicians to
The officer
undertaking the review did not recall that anything out of the ordinary was
indicated by Luke’s responses or
presentation.
at the Watch House, he was provided with a copy of the audio recording of
WT’s Family Violence Evidence in Chief interview
with the police. He was
charged in his absence, and bail was refused by the duty
brief of materials was emailed to the DPP and the Court registry. That included
a statement of facts, and charge sheets. That material
was also included in the
Detainee (Custody) File (“the BART file”), which, in any particular
case, might also include
any court orders (e.g. family violence orders), a
property sheet, and a prisoner history form, which provides an account of the
history while in custody.
was taken to the ACT Magistrates Court at 1043 hours. He spent approximately
four hours at the Court, mostly in the cells. He
appeared before a Magistrate
briefly at about 1300 hours. He was charged with the offences of assault and
assault occasioning actual
bodily harm. Those charges addressed both the events
of 26 and 31 January 2022.
was represented, on a duty basis, by a solicitor from the ACT Legal Aid Office.
As part of the process of giving instructions
to his solicitor, Luke would have
been made aware of the allegations that had been made against him. He appeared
by audio-visual
link from the court cells. He made no application for bail and
was remanded in custody.
mental health issues or matters going to his safety in custody were raised with
at the Court, he was in the custody of ACTCS’ Court Transport Unit. An
Initial Assessment form was completed, which did
not identify any self-harm
risks. A Return and Transport Risk Assessment Form was also completed. This form
was directed at identifying
risks that might arise in respect of Luke’s
custody at the Court and when he was being transported to the AMC. Again, no
were identified.
was taken from the court building at about 1500 hours and arrived at the AMC at
1520 hours.
That conversation was recorded in accordance with
the law and standard practice.
Both parties were aware that the conversation was being recorded. Substantially,
the content of the
call revolved around NE being at the house and the distress
that had caused. WT did say that she would help
Practicalities were
discussed about money and Luke’s employment. The only part of the
conversation dealing with what confronted
him at the AMC was in these terms:
No. I’m here until the twenty-first of next month. And then
I’ll probably get two years or so.
expressed their love for each other in concluding the
What that meant, so far as
Luke’s state of mind and future focus was concerned, is difficult to say.
As is noted elsewhere,
on his telephone list NE was a named as a
“friend” and WT as his “partner”.
4.6 – Induction at the AMC
4.6.1 – General Issues
quality of the process of Luke’s induction at the AMC, particularly in
relation to the assessment of his mental health,
is analysed below.
emerges from the evidence is that, in broad terms, the purpose of the induction
process was to:
Identify any
health, mental health and social issues that might affect a prisoner’s
safety or the safety of others;
ensure that,
subject to operational considerations, appropriate accommodation and support
arrangements were put in place; and
any security and
safety concerns for Luke, the AMC and its staff, and other detainees were
responsibility for conducting the induction process was shared between ACTCS and
Justice Health. Within Justice Health, there
was a co-ordinated response between
Primary Health (tasked with addressing general health issues), and CMHS, whose
primary focus
was on mental health issue or concerns.
induction adhered to the standard structure. The induction process began at
– Corrections
was interviewed by ACTCS staff, who asked a series of standard questions. His
answers were recorded in a tick box form. An objective
assessment was also
undertaken. Relevantly, the induction form indicated that Luke was not a known
drug user. Based on that assessment
and the health assessment detailed below, he
was classified as medium security, which was the default
classification.
the time, specific COVID-19 arrangements were in place at the AMC. Consequently,
Luke, like all new arrivals, was accommodated
in the Management Unit. Those
arrangements are addressed at length below.
Justice Health Assessment
health assessments were undertaken concurrently by Nurses Neelu Vinod (Primary
Health) and Isabel Manzano (CMHS). Each
clinician separately recorded their own
observations and the information Luke provided.
(a) Primary Health
Vinod qualified as a registered nurse in 2008 and had been employed at the AMC
since May 2019. He had been trained in undertaking
primary health assessment at
the AMC. Nurse Vinod provided a
and gave evidence. He
found Luke to be co-operative and gave information clearly and coherently. His
conclusion was that Luke “had
no primary health concerns and had
“normal vitals”.
recorded Luke as indicating that he drank “6 beers”
“weekly”. He denied benzodiazepam and opioid use.
In respect of
“stimulants”, he was recorded to have said he used cocaine by
smoking it “7gm” “daily”.
He indicated his last use was
“30/1/22” and the duration of use was “6-7
Luke told Nurse
Vinod that he was currently taking Seroquel for insomnia, and he had been using
100 mg each night for the last 6
The last dose was 5 days
evidence, Nurse Vinod said that the use of cocaine Luke had indicated (7 grams a
day) would indicate a very high level of use.
However, he qualified that
evidence by saying that Luke’s indication was “like for the last few
days he’s been
using this much
He confirmed, as
he had noted at that time, that Luke did not display signs of alcohol or drug
withdrawal.
He told the Court
that he had later contacted the prescriber Luke had identified in respect of the
Seroquel, who denied in writing
they had dispensed such a medication to
COVID-19 PCR test was completed.
a pattern of (perhaps considerably recent) cocaine use was identified, no plans
were made to address withdrawal issues that
might arise.
(b) Custodial Mental Health Services
Manzano completed her undergraduate degree in 2017. She started working in
“mental health” in
She had undergone formal
training in administering the Suicide Vulnerability Assessment Tool
(“SVAT”), which is a suicide
vulnerability tool used by CMHS.
started her role at the AMC in February 2021, and described herself as being, at
the relevant time, a clinician with the Assertive
Response Team
to her statement, ART was responsible for assessing the mental health of all new
inductees into custody at the AMC. Her
process was to first conduct a file
review of the client’s mental health records held on the Mental Health,
Alcohol and Drug,
Justice Health Integrated Care eRecord
(“MAJICeR”). Those records only include Canberra Health Services
records and not
those of private health practitioners. In conducting that
assessment, she would consider the client’s:
psychiatric
their level of
engagement with community teams;
any history of
self-harm or suicide attempts;
substance use;
involuntary
treatment; and
medications.
induction, her practice was to conduct an in-person assessment of their
“current mental health presentation”. Normally,
this occurs at the
same time as the assessment done by the Primary Health
assessment process would also include a consideration of the need for ongoing
ART involvement. ART would
be involved, unless there:
were acute risk
factors; or
the client has a
diagnosed or suspected mental illness that is assessed as moderate or
neither of these considerations applied, a conversation would take place with
the client about the “process for self-referral
Her practice was to
“advise clients that if they were feeling unsafe, had thoughts, plans, or
intent of self-harm or suicide,
they could tell Custodial Officers who would
indicated that she would include a summary of relevant matters arising from the
assessment in appropriate forms, including any
Manzano assessed Luke at his induction. Nurse Vinod was present. A Custodial
Mental Health Notification Form (“the CMH
form”), a Custodial Mental
Health Induction Form (“the CMHI form”), as well as a SVAT were
completed by her. The
CMH form was used to inform ACTCS of the outcomes of the
mental health assessment that had taken place at induction. The other two
were used internally by Justice Health to inform any future care and treatment
of Luke. Those forms and their content could
not be accessed by ACTCS. Some of
the information from the CMHI form, for example, the “S” and
“P” ratings
and triage outcome, were used on the CMH form.
her statement, Nurse Manzano described Luke to be “irritable” during
the assessment.
significant entries made in the CMHI form were (in the terms used):
Identified WT as
his “partner” and next of kin;
Denied having a
regular GP (but referred to a GP at the Tuggeranong Hyperdome in relation to
prescription medication);
Denied a medical
or allergy history;
Said he had been
taking Seroquel (100mg each night for six months) to assist with sleeping;
history of substance use, including:
per week (last used 30/01/22); and
cocaine per day from ‘five days ago’ until
Denied current
withdrawal symptoms;
Denied a current
or previous mental illness diagnosis or family history of mental illness;
Denied having
ever felt he had excessive energy, special abilities, excessive spending or
promiscuity or having experienced voices,
hallucinations, paranoia, etc;
Described his
mood over the preceding two weeks as “depressed”, and his sleep over
that time as “not the best”,
detailing only two hours per night for
the past six
the CMH form, in the section entitled “Assessment – Case
Formulation”, Nurse Manzano noted:
Superficial engagement on review. Nil evidence of a major mental illness on
review. Luke denied all thoughts, plans, & intent
of self-harm or suicide.
Nil CMHS follow up indicated.
“Recommendations” section of the CMH form contained ratings of
psychiatric health and suicide risks according to different
assessment criteria.
Psychiatric
health was rated within a (P) range of P1 to P4:
Psychiatric Ratings
P1 – Serious psychiatric condition requiring intensive and/or immediate
P2 – Significant ongoing condition requiring psychiatric treatment
P3 – Stable psychiatric condition requiring psychiatric treatment
PA – Suspected psychiatric condition requiring ongoing assessment
NiI P rating required
ratings and some of the practical aspects of them were explained by Nurse
Manzano in these terms:
All right. That is very helpful, thank you. And would you mind going through the
same exercise with me for the P rating?---Sure.
'P Nil' means that there
is no history or diagnosis of major mental illness. .......
P1 means that the detainee is presenting as acutely mentally unwell
are very difficult to manage within the AMC environment, so if we're reading
somebody a P1 we're leaning more towards hospitalisation
of that client.
Yes, yes?---
P2 means that that person is currently mentally unwel
we think that we can manage them at the AMC with some extra input from our team,
as well as supports that can be provided by
Corrective Services.
P3 means that the client has a diagnosed major mental illness
is presenting quite stable, and we believe that they're suitable for the general
areas of accommodation within the AMC.
I should have mentioned before with the S1 – the S ratings and the P
ratings – they also give our team an indication
for how often we need to
assess that client. So, for S1 and S2 ratings, someone from our team would have
to see that person daily.
For S3, it's sort of three times a week, and then S
Nil means no follow up from our team. P1 means no follow up – sorry, P1
means daily contact, as is P2. P3 is fortnightly and PA is determined by how
unwell we think that client is presenting. [Emphasis
At any given time?---Yes.
was given a “Nil” P rating.
and Self Harm Risk recommendations were determined within the following (S)
Suicide and Self Harm Risk Recommendations
S1 15/60 observations - Immediate risk
S2 30/60 observations - Significant risk
S3 60/60 observations - Potential risk
S4 – Past history
Nil Obs Rating
to what the various “S” ratings meant in practice, Nurse Manzano
explained that “S1 15” would indicate
a client at a high risk of
suicide, who would be on 15-minute observations, smocked and placed in the High
Dependency Unit
S2 would be
a high-risk client (again, in the HDU with 30-minute observations, and would
wear their own clothing).
a rating of 60-minutes observations, where someone was accommodated in a
mainstream unit who “might need a little bit
of extra support or
monitoring”.
Obs” means there is a history of self-harm or suicide, but there are
currently no concerns.
was initially rated as “Nil” on this scale. Nurse Manzano indicted
that this rating was given on Luke’s self-report
of no previous attempts
of suicide. She went on to say:
16. I recall Mr Rich being a little reluctant to engage during my in-person
assessment. I found Mr Rich to be irritable during
the assessment. When I asked
him about any history of suicide attempts, he reported that he had none.
However, on reviewing his fie,
I had noted that Mr Rich had a previous history
of drug overdose. It was not clear from his medical records whether that was a
attempt or accidental. I recall amending my initial assessment of 'S
nil' to 'S4 nil' because of the notes relating to a drug overdose.
17. An 'S nil' rating means that there is no history of self-harm or suicide
attempts and no current concerns about acute risks.
An 'S4 nil' rating means
that while there are no acute risks regarding self-harm or suicide, there is a
history of self-harm or suicide.
The change in assessment rating would not have
resulted in any change to Mr Rich's care or recommended observation
requirements.
her evidence, Nurse Manzano explained this change further. In respect of the
history of drug overdose, she said that because “our
previous notes”
were ambiguous as to whether the drug overdose had been
intentional:
I erred on the side of caution and changed the rating. Also because he had a
history with our team, and he had been put on observations
the last time he was
in custody, that S4 is also to reflect
mental health examination conducted in the context of Luke’s assessment
involved consideration of 24 different factors to
be considered in
characterising his presentation. The factors ranged from “anxiety”
and “suicidality” to
“excitement”,
“distractibility”, and “mannerisms/posturing”. The tick
box structure of that part
of the CMHI form allowed for each factor to be
assessed as “Present”, “Possible”, or
Three factors were ticked as “Possible”
– “Depression”, “Hostility”, and
“Uncooperativeness”.
The remaining factors were ticked as
available triage categories were:
Triage Rating
A – Crisis requires immediate management
B – Crisis requires assessment within 2 hours
C – Priority requires assessment within 24 hours
D – Priority requires assessment within 72 hours
E – Deferred non urgent assessment within 14 days
F – Referred to other agencies, nil CMHS Involvement required
G – Advice or information 1111 further Involvement from CMHS required
was rated as “F”.
SVAT was also completed for
The SVAT required the
information that had been collected to be analysed in the context of potential
suicidality. Significantly,
the SVAT form was headed with this qualification:
The goal of assessing suicide vulnerability is NOT to predict suicide, but
rather to appreciate the
of current or potential suicidality for
that individual and allow for informed intervention and management of
vulnerability factors.
summary of “current vulnerabilities” section of the SVAT distilled
the factual findings of the assessment process,
poor mood and
sleep patterns;
“depressed”;
being prescribed
Seroquel by a doctor;
denied a history
of suicide; and
history of OD in
the context of situational stressors
section concluded:
On review today, nil evidence of major mental illness or mood disorder. Luke
denied all thoughts (sic), plans, and intent of self-harm
or suicide. Nil CMHS
follow up indicated at this time, Luke may benefit from GP review to discuss
depressive symptoms. Luke is aware
of self-referral
vulnerability factors, which were described in the SVAT as “fixed and
historical in nature” were:
27-year-old
crisis contact with ACT MHS;
History of OD in
incarceration; and
substance use.
vulnerability factors, being factors “which fluctuate in duration and
intensity, and are present for an unknown length
of time” were:
Substance use;
vulnerability factors, “which can be anticipated to a certain
degree”, were:
21/02/2022.
and support were listed as:
Partner of 4
Presented as
future focused on induction to custody;
thoughts, plans, and intent of self-harm or suicide on review; and
Is aware of
self-referral process.
noting the “S” and “P” ratings and triage category, the
plan for his mental health care was:
follow up indicated at this
to Primary Health’, “who will follow up with GP ROI re Seroquel
prescription”; and
aware of the process of self referral”.
Manzano re-iterated that Luke was told that he could seek out mental health
assistance if required.
also told that because of COVID-19 restrictions, he would be remanded in an
environment in which he would be isolated (on
his own) for a period of
documentation was uploaded and available for interrogation by Justice Health
However, as noted above,
only the CMH Form was available to ACTCS.
all new inductees, Luke was subject to 60-minute observations.
the outcome of the induction process was that no special arrangements were put
in place in respect of any health or mental
health issues.
4.6.4 – Accommodation within the Management
the ACTCS and Justice Health assessments, Luke was taken to the Management Unit.
(a) COVID-19 Arrangements
the time of Luke’s admission, due to the introduction of COVID-19 pandemic
procedures, new remandees were housed on their
own in a single cell in the
Management Unit. That process had been in place since September 2021, for
reasons that are analysed more
fully below.
day one, remandees were subject to a COVID-19 test, as Luke was. If they were
“COVID free”, and remained “COVID
free” at the end of
day five, they were then transferred out of the Management Unit. If they tested
positive on the “day
one” test or at a later time, or if they refuse
to undertake a test, that confinement period could be extended to up to 14
in the Management Unit, remandees were subject to COVID-19 contact restrictions,
which were designed to minimise close contact
between detainees, and between
detainees and staff. This meant that when staff members did interact with
detainees in-person, they
wore personal protection equipment, including masks.
(b) Physical Environment
COVID-19, the Management Unit was a unit within the AMC that is used to
accommodate and segregate detainees, who, for a variety
of reasons, may present
with greater behavioural
challenges.
There were 14 cells
(seven on each side), and each accommodates a single detainee. There is an
enclosed officer’s station between
the two blocks of cells, where a
Correctional Officer in the station can look out at the cells.
cell was divided into two parts. The front cell area was a room with a shower, a
toilet, and a basin in one corner. A single
bed was on the right as you entered
the cell. The bed consisted of a single bed mattress, a fitted sheet, and a top
sheet. Blankets
were available. A closed-circuit television (CCTV) camera was
fitted in one corner of the room, and footage produced by it can be
viewed from
the officer’s station. On the front door of the cell, there was a small
observation window/portal, orientated vertically,
and a hatch below and to the
left, orientated horizontally. Both the window and the hatch could be opened
from the outside, but not
from the inside.
the rear of the room was a wall with a door. The door was metal with a large
polycarbonate (the product was called “Lexan”)
window. Metal bars
were fixed horizontally across the width of the window. The bars were fitted
closely to the Lexan, although, as
it was tragically demonstrated, it was
possible to create a small space between the bars and the Lexan. The door opened
into a small, encaged recreation area (about 2.5m wide x 3.5m long).
That recreation area also had a CCTV camera, footage from it
could also be
viewed from the officer’s station. The door to that area could be opened
by the detainee when unlocked. Once
unlocked, the door could not be secured in
an open position against the adjoining
safety history of the cells in the Management Unit is addressed below.
4.7 – Luke’s Movements after
movements and interactions with AMC staff, between the time he entered his cell
and when he was found hanging at approximately
1855 hours the next day, have
been reconstructed from the CCTV footage, recording of intercom conversations,
observation records,
and the observations of Custodial and Primary Health staff.
entered Cell 3 of the Management Unit at 1718 hours on 31 January 2022.
Correctional Officer, Mr Daniel Knight (“CO Knight”)
was on duty at
the time. His recollection is that, on that day, he spent “quite a bit of
time” talking to Luke.
described that interaction as occurring either as Luke entered the cell and
whilst the cell door was still open or at some later
He recalled Luke being
polite and respectful and quite happy to engage with Corrections
Luke was seen on CCTV entering the cell, he was carrying objects with him,
including documentation that contained information
During that evening, Luke read some of that material.
was visited by CO Knight at about 1730 hours. During that visit, he was provided
with a meal by CO Knight. CO Knight was in the
room for about two minutes. Luke
and CO Knight “fist bumped” when he left. After that, Luke smoked a
cigarette at 2042
hours, and he laid on the bed and remained there until 0921
hours on 1 February 2022.
Knight and CO1 Mitchell McAppion were the Correctional Officers on duty in the
Management Unit the next morning. Their shift started
at 0730 hours.
activity within the cell until 1731 on 1 February 2022 is remarkable for how
limited the contact between him and custodial
or nursing staff was. He was
provided with breakfast and lunch at 1005
Both meals were provided
through the hatch in the door.
McAppion was also on shift at that time. He recalls being involved in providing
Luke with the meals in the morning. In a statement
signed on 22 November 2022,
I recall Mr Rich jokingly asking whether that food was all that he would receive
for his meal.
staff came to the cell at 1022 hours to do their rounds. They were captured on
CCTV talking to Luke through the hatch. Given
that no medical or mental health
issues had been identified at induction, the contact was both COVID-19 -related
(asking about symptoms,
blood pressure check, and so on) and in the nature of a
welfare check.
At 1042 hours,
Luke spoke to CO1 McAppion over the intercom. That conversation was recorded. He
asked about providing his phone number
list, and was told that he (CO1 McAppion)
would collect his “in a
Luke’s phone number list was not collected. A similar call was made at
1333 hours,
and Luke was told to
put the list under the door. In neither call (they were only seconds long) did
Luke sound distressed or annoyed.
Shortly after, at 1333 hours, Luke could be
seen pushing a completed telephone contacts list under the
and it was collected by CO
The numbers of WT
(identified as “partner”) and NE (identified as
“friend”) were on the list.
A conversation with Luke
occurred at this time, and CO Knight could be seen refilling Luke’s
some time in the afternoon (the time was not identified with precision and the
moment was not captured on CCTV ), Luke covered
the viewing portal in his cell
door. CO Knight said that whilst that was not unusual behaviour by detainees who
were “regulars”
and those who had been in the AMC “a few times
before”, he thought that Luke doing that was “unusual”. The
result of that action was that when the door was closed, Luke could only be
visualised in-person by someone bending down and looking
through the hatch.
1702 hours, CO Knight could be seen by camera as approaching the door of Cell 3.
He did not interact with Luke.
1635 and 1641hours, Luke could be seen going into the recreation yard and having
a cigarette before returning inside. At 1716
hours, Luke was seen on the bed. He
sat up and looked at the camera in his room. He peeled off a label on a water
bottle, stepped
onto the bed, and placed the label over the camera. Nothing
further could be seen from that camera until after his death. At 1723
Luke could be seen as going into the recreation yard again. He sat down and
smoked another cigarette. He looked up into the
corners of the yard, went into
the cell and returned at 1731 hours to cover the camera there with a label. That
is the last vision
from that camera until after his death.
1803 hours, footage from a CCTV camera in the Management Unit (outside the cell)
showed that staff went to the door of Cell 3.
CO Knight could be seen speaking
to Luke. By that time, the portal had been covered. CO Knight described that
interaction in the
following terms:
So, I remember I couldn't see him through his window so I said to him through
his door, 'Hey, Luke, how you going in there, mate?'
and his response was, 'Nah,
I'm good, chief. I'm all good'. And I said, 'Anything you need? Anything I can
do?', and he said, 'Nah,
1900 hours, CO Knight came to the door with nursing staff, including Nurse
Vinod. When Luke did not respond, he opened the hatch
and saw Luke hanging from
a sheet attached to one of the horizontal bars in front of the Lexan backing.
The sheet had been inserted
between one of the bars and the Lexan backing and
then tied into a knot. His feet were extended towards the cell door, and both
were touching the floor, with his hips suspended “a few
centimetres” from the
Knight called a “Code Pink” for the Management Unit. He motioned to
CO1 McAppion to open the door to Cell 3. He did
so within a few
and then went to the
cell. CO Knight went to the officer’s station to retrieve a Hoffman knife
to enable him to cut Luke down.
He was unable to find one. He returned to the cell, and while CO1 McAppion
lifted Luke, he removed the noose from around his neck.
Possibly 30 to 60
seconds elapsed between discovery and the removal of the
Nurse Vinod observed that
Luke’s lips were already cyanotic when he first saw
He was not able to say how
long Luke may have been in that position before he was
discovered.
commenced immediately, and although competently performed by nursing and
custodial staff, Luke could not be revived. An ambulance
was called at 1900
hours, with a second call made at 1911 hours. An ambulance was dispatched at
1901 hours, and a second ambulance
at 1912 hours. The first ambulance was on
scene at 1915 hours, and the CPR effort was taken over by paramedics at 1917
CPR and resuscitation
efforts, including intubation and the administration of adrenaline, were
unsuccessful. CPR and resuscitation
were discontinued at 1943 hours.
arrived at the AMC at 2035 hours and began their
investigation.
Medical Officer examined Luke from 2140, and declared life extinct at 2230
Johan Duflou, forensic pathologist, conducted a post-mortem examination of
Luke’s body on 3 February 2022. Professor
Duflou identified injuries
consistent with the apparent mechanism of hanging and the attempts at
resuscitation.
Toxicological
testing was undertaken. It revealed the presence of diazepam and nordiazepam
(the breakdown product of diazepam) at
levels consistent with therapeutic use.
Cocaine was found at low levels (0.02 mg/L). Professor Duflou’s opinion
was that such
a level could be the result of consumption of the drug prior to
arrest or the result of consumption of the drug after being
He opined that
“if it was the former, it would indicate that a high to very high level of
cocaine would likely have been present
in the blood of the deceased at the time
of arrest, given the relatively short half-life of the drug (0.7 to 1.5 hours)
and its expected
persistence in blood following last
consumption”.
5 – EXPERT EVIDENCE
Matthew Large, psychiatrist,
provided an expert opinion dated 8 November
He was briefed with a
large collection of documents, including relevant medical, AFP and custodial
records and Professor Duflou’s
autopsy report. He was briefed to give an
opinion as to:
(a) the adequacy of the mental health assessment and monitoring of Mr Rich,
carried out at:
(i) The ACT Watch House; and
(ii) The AMC;
(b) whether the assessment tools used were properly applied, and whether they
are considered best practice in a custodial setting;
(c) whether there was anything arising from the mental health assessments that
indicated Mr Rich required a level of monitoring different
than what he had
was also invited to comment on the use and suitability of suicide risk
assessment tools generally and in custodial settings, and
to give an opinion as
to whether there are alternatives available which might better or more
accurately screen for potential suicidality.
Large was called as a witness at the hearing.
opinions given in his report were the subject of elaboration during his
evidence. Those opinions were not subject to any real
challenge during
examination by Counsel Assisting, or during cross-examination by Counsels for
those given leave to appear. Submissions
received from parties given leave to
appear, including the Territory, did not raise challenges to Professor
Large’s opinions.
5.1 – Predictability of Suicide
& Risk Assessment Tools
Large’s central thesis was that “suicides of any sort, including
suicides in custody, are not amenable to meaningful
risk assessment. This is
particularly so when the patient does not appear to have an obvious mental
illness and when they deny experiencing
suicidal ideas or
In his opinion, a
restriction on the efficacy of suicide risk tools is that:
[i]nquiry about the presence or absence of suicidal ideas, which is the basis of
most assessments of suicide risk, provides very
little indication about future
suicide behaviour. The largest review of this question to date found that only
40% of those who suicide
had disclosed suicidal ideation and as few as 2% of
those with suicidal ideation die by suicide in the following decade. This study
suggested that the proportion of suicide descendants disclosing suicide ideas
and the proportion of those with suicide ideas who
die of suicide are even lower
among people like Mr Rich who do not have a major mental
respect of predicting suicide in a custodial setting, he opined that:
It is the case that suicide risk assessment tools are used in a variety of
settings in Australia. However, suicide risk models do
not provide enough
information to be clinically useful. There is no reason to believe that such
tools perform differently in correctional
settings and there are no meaningful
alternatives that might better or more accurately screen for potential suicide
and self-harm
in correctional
Large was generally of the view that rather than concentrating on suicide
prediction, the focus of care should be on ensuring
there are positive steps
taken to address a person’s distress and suffering by sympathetic human
interactions,
to reduce a sense
of isolation, to increase feelings of hope, and to ensure that other therapeutic
needs, such as other illness and
drug withdrawal, are properly addressed.
Medication and counselling can help, but they “only reduce suicide by
probably only
Increasing the
level of observations had little discernible effect. He concluded that:
Restriction of lethal methods, including the reduction of ligature points, is
one of the few measures that can reduce suicide in
institutional
5.2 – Luke’s Decision to Take his Own
respect of Luke’s decision to take his own life, Professor Large offered
this observation:
In retrospect, a number of factors can be seen as contributing to the death of
Mr Rich. These include the likely loss of his relationship
and job, strained
family relations, his likely coming down from cocaine use, the persistence of
diazepam and metabolites, the fact
of his incarceration, COVID isolation, and
likely aspects of his personality and decision making. No hierarchy of
importance should
[be given] to these factors, and nor should it be concluded
that these factors were predictive of suicide. The vast majority of people
similar or more significant suicide risk factors would not
Large also offered opinions in respect of the specific features of Luke’s
mental health assessments and his period
of incarceration, which are addressed
ANALYSIS OF THE
6.1 – Background
6.1.1 – Statistical Risks – Suicide in Prison
witnesses who were called acknowledged that the risks of suicide were
significantly elevated for prisoners, when compared to
the general
population.
When describing
why suicide rates are elevated in a custodial setting, Professor Large noted the
high rate of mental illness amongst
detainees and the stresses of incarceration,
namely separation from social supports, loss of a social role, loss of status,
and loss of the use of
The risks are higher
amongst younger inmates, particularly during the first 24 hours of
incarceration, whilst on
and whilst confined
in isolation.
Hanging is a
very common means by which people commit suicide in
6.2 – COVID-19 Arrangements at the AMC
mid-August 2021, the ACT went into COVID-19 lockdown. Ms Natalie Adams was the
Senior Director of Detainee Services at the AMC.
She had been acting in that
role since May 2021. In that role, she was responsible for developing
arrangements for the isolation
and testing of newly admitted detainees. On 6
September 2021, the isolation processes were enacted by the AMC shortly after
COVID-19 case was identified in the ACT. In a statement tendered in
proceedings, Ms Adams outlined why the Management Unit was chosen
preferred isolation unit:
16. The AMC does not have purpose-built units that could be used to isolate
detainees from risks of COVID-19. Mr Batten and I considered
whether a new
admission could be placed within a unit in general population, however the units
are constructed so that two cells
at the bottom of the unit share air with two
cells above. In effect, to safely isolate one detainee all four cells would need
be offline.
17. The option of the Management Unit for COVID isolation was proposed based on
(a) The Management Unit airflow meant that detainees in cells did not share air
between them or the Officers Post;
(b) The unit had two entry points to allow a specified entry and donning station
and exit and doffing station;
(c) The Cells had a rear yard allowing detainees to have outside air and ability
to smoke (not available in any other cell within
(d) The Management Unit had a room that was set up as a Health assessment room
without the need to move detainees past other accommodation
areas of AMC;
(e) The Management Unit was next to the Health Centre and the closest
accommodation unit to Admissions; and
(f) The Management Unit cells had their own showers and toilets.
her statement, Ms Adams acknowledged that “newly received detainees were
at a higher risk of self-harm or suicide, and that
extended quarantining may
increase this risk”.
was no material produced that suggested that this heightened risk was addressed
as part of a co-ordinated policy-development
process. Justice Health was
consulted in relation to the decision to use the Management Unit for COVID-19
purposes, as far as it
can be gleaned from the evidence before the inquest, in
respect of public health related issues only.
in relation to how that decision was to be implemented was not formulated or
published by the time of Luke’s death.
Identified Issues
structure of the findings that follow addresses the matters identified in the
issues list that was distributed to the interested
parties. Each issue is
assessed to determine what the answer to the question asked was, and whether the
evidence suggested that:
(a) there was a co-ordinated approach to mental health care in respect of
accused persons like those who were entering custody; and
(b) significant decisions involving health care, the circumstances of custody,
and accommodation were taken in a way that demonstrated
a co-ordinated concern
for the potential for self-harm or suicide in custody.
6.3.1 – Mental Health Assessment Processes at the Watch House -
Issues List (a) & (c)
relatively close association in time between Luke’s arrest and his suicide
in custody raised the question as to whether
the AFP conducted adequate mental
health assessment of Luke.
process of assessment that was undertaken at the ACT Watch House has been
detailed above.
Luke’s case, there was a structured attempt made to elicit a history that
may have informed any risk of self-harm. There
were no demonstrated signs of
mental illness or signs of recent self-harm. Whilst there was information
available to the AFP to raise
questions about Luke’s self-reported history
of drug use, an assessment was made that he was not presently intoxicated and
not exhibiting signs of drug withdrawal. CCTV footage confirmed that he appeared
to be sleepy at times. He did not show outward signs
of distress, intoxication,
or cognitive disturbance. It is possible that his tolerance levels for the drug
disguised how much of
the drug had likely remained in his system.
information gleaned during the assessment process was appropriately disclosed to
information arising from an ongoing criminal investigation was shared with ACTCS
through the BART file process. The circumstances
of his arrest threw some light
on Luke’s alcohol and drug use. The statement of facts referred, amongst
other things, to WT’s
attempts to limit Luke’s drug consumption and
his consumption of drugs on the day of his arrest.
Large examined the process of assessment carried out by the AFP. He opined that
there was no discernible shortfall in the
assessments made by the AFP.
find that the mental health assessment processes adopted at the ACT Watch House
were adequate.
6.3.2 – The Mental Health Assessment
Processes at the AMC - Issues List (b)
process of the assessment is detailed above. The process was undoubtedly
thorough. The SVAT was not the only source of information.
Generally, Mental
Health records held by the Territory were available through the MAGICeR records
system. This included records arising
from Luke’s first admission. It was
also possible (as was the case here) for request to be made to the
detainee’s GP
for further or additional information.
the basis of the information obtained, it was accurately identified that Luke
did not exhibit signs of mental illness. If he did,
consideration could have
been given to providing mental health support either in the Crisis Support Unit
(“CSU”) (if
his needs were assessed as acute with an immediate
threat of self-harm), or with a higher level of medical intervention and
observations
while he was accommodated in his cell.
S & P ratings that were arrived at meant that Luke was to be treated as a
remandee with no requirements that justified additional
clinical attention, or a
greater level of observations.
Large concluded that ACTCS staff members “conducted reasonable assessments
in line with the relevant policies”,
noting that the assessment process
was designed to identify a range of medical needs, not just those relevant to
mental health, and
that the results were discussed with peers and a medical
In his view, the
SVAT form “adequately captured ascertainable information about suicide
ideas and suicide risk” and Luke’s
mental health more
I agree with his
conclusions. I find that it is likely Luke may have concealed the extent of his
depression during the assessment
observed above, suicide risk assessment tools do not work as a predictor of
suicide and the SVAT, on its face, indicated that was
so. That was also
acknowledged by other witnesses. Nurse Manzano indicated that she was aware of
the limitations of risk assessment
tools. Ms Leigh Thomson, who was, at the time
of Luke’s death, the Team Manager at CMHS, agreed that Professor
opinions as to the lack of predictive value of suicide risk
assessment tools accorded with her understanding of current
the risks that existed in Luke’s case, namely his mental health history,
age, status as a recent inductee, remandee,
and the fact that he was isolated on
his own for an extended period, had to be addressed by the provision of a
custodial environment
that appropriately addressed general and known risks of
self-harm. The fact that Luke had been assessed as a low risk of self-harm
not obviate the need to ensure that known risks personal to Luke (notably,
possible past threats of self-harm and recent heavy
drug use) were addressed as
part of a shared and collective response of all operational areas at the AMC. As
much was acknowledged
during the inquest
6.3.3 – The Management Unit – Issues List (c) and
6.3.3.1 - Introduction
decision to accommodate remandees in the Management Unit was a decision taken to
address public health issues arising from the
COVID-19 pandemic. Specifically,
there was an identified need to isolate new admissions at the AMC from the wider
prison population.
that decision was sound falls outside the scope of the inquest. Rather, the
inquest considered whether:
the risks (if
any) associated with accommodating remandees within the Management Unit
(including the presence of ligature points therein)
were considered; and
any identified
suicide risk was appropriately mitigated (through observations and other
6.3.3.2 - Issues with Door Safety in the
Management Unit
(a) General Maintenance Reviews
concerning the safety of the rear Management Unit doors had been identified as
part of ongoing maintenance of infrastructure
reviews conducted before
Luke’s death.
Craig Batten, Director of Facilities Management at the
provided a statement and
gave evidence as to that history. Prior to April 2015, the window in the rear
door was made either of Perspex
or glass that was around 4mm
It was susceptible to
damage caused by detainees and could easily break or shatter (with the shards
being available as weapons).
A contractor was engaged to provide recommendations for a replacement material
and the Lexan panels were recommended. They were thicker
and stronger, much more
resistant to breakage, and could be retrofitted into the existing door frames.
One door was re-fitted, and,
in light of the demonstrated improvement in
performance, all of the Management Unit rear doors were upgraded. That process
was completed
the upgrade process, it was brought to the attention of Mr Batten that there was
“potential” for makeshift rope
to be forced between the horizontal
bars and the Lexan, allowing the door to be used as a ligature
On 5 June 2015, Mr
Batten sent Mr Don Taylor, the General Manager at the AMC at the
an email to bring that
to his attention,
suggest that there be “intermediate fixing” to stop the Lexan from
bowing out in a way that would create this
He met with Mr Taylor,
and the doors were inspected. His recollection was that Mr Taylor “did not
want to make additional modifications
to the doors, which would depart from the
original door design”.
He reported Mr Taylor as saying that he did not think the problem represented an
“obvious ligature point”, in that tools
would be required to create
a gap between the Lexan and the bars. His recollection was that Mr Taylor said
that the Management Unit
was not for “at risk prisoners”. Any risk
could be addressed by placing at risk detainees in the CSU, rather than by
adopting an engineering
Taylor, in a statement tendered during the
indicated that he
was not in favour of further modification of the doors, because:
(a) bowing was unlikely, and if it did occur, the “only time the risk was
exposed was when any detainee had access to the external
area of the
(b) an additional staff member was put in place in the Management Unit
“for the purposes of monitoring detainees that had the
(c) access to the rear door (opened) was only possible when extra monitoring
staff were rostered in the area;
(d) detainees in the Management Unit were being visited by an on-site
psychologist;
(e) higher risk detainees could be placed in the AMC “T risk”
(f) detainees placed in the Management Unit would not be of new arrival status
at the AMC; and
(g) an at-risk process would identify risk factors relating to a detainee, and
they would be managed through the High Risk Assessment
Taylor went on to say that an additional concern “for any door” is
that, in an open position, “it can be utilised
as a ligature point
regardless of any additional bars or structure/fittings. An anchor point for any
ligature can easily be facilitated
through inserting an item at the top of the
door as it is being
Batten indicated that he was satisfied with his discussion with Mr Taylor. They
both agreed that the horizontal bars on the rear
door were not “an obvious
ligature point”.
added the use of the Lexan “removed all the gaps that had been there
previously”.
to add that an industrial “felt tape” was used between the Lexan and
the bars as a “dampener”
to reduce the likelihood of
(b) Prior Acts of Self-harm in the Management Unit
23 March 2020, a detainee committed an act of attempted hanging in a Management
Unit cell by using a piece of clothing over the
door and causing it to be
secured by closing the door. He spun around, causing the ligature to tighten,
and then dropped his weight,
causing the ligature to tighten further. Staff
intervened. Initially no pulse was detected. CPR was conducted, an ambulance was
and he was transported to
13 May 2020, a similar event occurred. A detainee secured a ligature by slamming
the door closed on the item of clothing and placing
it around his
CPR was performed, and
an ambulance was called. Again, the inmate survived.
second incident in time prompted correspondence on the following day from Mr
Batten and the then-Director of Contracts and Procurement
to Mr Jon Peach, the
Commissioner for ACT Corrective Services. Mr Peach in turn sent a memorandum to
the Director-General of the
ACT Government’s Justice and Community Safety
Directorate. According to that brief, prior to that being sent to the
Director-General,
the Minister for Corrective Services announced that the doors
within the Management Unit were to be replaced
The brief to the
Director-General stated that:
Due to an incident that occurred in the AMC on 13/5/20, it has been identified
that all of the high security doors in the AMC’s
Management and Crisis
Support Units are no longer fit for purpose, and present a safety risk to
detainees and custodial officers.
As a result, up to 42 doors require urgent
replacement.
cost of the replacing the doors was given at $610,000. The exemption from normal
capital works processes was justified on the
basis that “the inherent
safety risk identified with the current doors, and the replacement of these
doors have been deemed
The brief was
approved by the Director-General.
replacement of the rear doors did not go ahead. An approval had previously been
given under an infrastructure funding
to allocate $300,000
to replace the front doors of the Management Unit cells. The reason for that was
that they were considered to
be destructible, and, therefore, capable of being
damaged by detainees. Despite the approval that had been given for funds to
the front and rear doors, it transpired that funding for all the doors
to be replaced had never been secured, and it was not
The replacement of
some of the more problematic front doors to the cells in the Management Unit
occurred after Luke’s
apparently funded by
the $300,000 infrastructure allocation.
(c) Continuing Concerns about Door Safety
November 2019, an external architect was commissioned to undertake a review of
the design features of the Management Unit. The
scope of the review was
determined during 2020.
March 2021, information was being gathered internally as part of the review
process. On 30 March 2021, Mr Batten sent an email
to Ms Corrine Justason, the
Deputy Commissioner of the AMC, and others, listing issues relevant to the
design review. In respect
of the rear door (referred to as the “mid
door” in the email), it was noted relevantly that they could not be locked
open, the glazing was not strong enough, and that “bars are ligature
points”. In evidence, Mr Batten claimed that the
identification of the
horizontal bars as ligature points may have been an erroneous reference to the
self-harm incident of 13 May
2020, which he appears to have assumed involved use
of the horizontal bars.
their draft report dated 13 April 2021, Pedavoli Architects noted that the rear
doors were not consistent with contemporary design
standards. In their view, the
door should have been solid with a window to the side to provide
The bars were not
identified as representing a ligature point. However, it was recommended that
all cell doors within the Management
Unit should be replaced with a contemporary
“fit-for-purpose”
draft review was distributed for comment. Mr Batten noted
I do not recall that many people responded or were interested in the review at
review was not progressed, and the architects “were not engaged to design
remedial work for the AMC Management
– Remediation Work to Doors after Luke’s Death
Luke’s death, remedial work was done to the doors by placing a flat strip
of metal at the rear of the door and securing
that to the bar by using Orlock
That device removed
the possibility of a gap being accessed between the bar and the
The cost of that
upgrade to all the doors was, according to Mr Batten, about $3,500-$4,500 and
took about 3 months to
– The Decision to Accommodate New Detainees in the Management Unit
noted, Ms Adams acknowledged that there were risks associated with the new
COVID-19 procedures that involved extended quarantining
of new detainees.
Therefore, a range of measures were developed to mitigate that risk:
(i) medical reviews by Justice Health staff (at a minimum of twice daily);
(ii) an initial screening of the detainee by a member of the Forensic Mental
Health Team;
(iii) the availability of portable telephones to allow detainees in isolation
regular telephone access to remain in contact with
family and friends;
(iv) the inclusion of detainees’ family members’ contact numbers on
‘the approved telephone contact list’
as a matter of priority for
new arrivals into COVID-19 isolation;
(v) provision of $20/week telephone credit to all detainees to support
family/community contact during COVID-19;
(vi) provision of ‘reading materials such as magazines’ to detainees
in the MU; and
(vii) making books/magazines from the library available to detainees isolating
risk assessment was done to take account of the suicide or self-harm factors
that arose from the physical environment of the Management
attention was not drawn to any issues concerning the doors representing a
although she seemed to
have been aware of a couple of episodes of attempts at self-harm in the
Management Unit cells, including one
where the rear door was used as a ligature
Ms Adams stated that
Mr Batten did not raise issues regarding the concerns that had emerged about the
safety of the units.
(a) Risk Mitigation Measures
the safety of the physical environment was not considered in the decision to
accommodate new arrivals in the Management Unit,
there was advertence to the
general issue of the elevated risk that flowed from the fact that the detainees
were new arrivals in
the AMC, and that they were going to be accommodated on
their own for an extended period of time.
risk mitigation measures proposed by Ms Adams were examined during the inquest
as to whether they were actually implemented.
(i) Regular Reviews by Justice Health (twice daily at a minimum)
Amanda Chase was, at the relevant time, the Assistant Director of Nursing with
the Primary Health team at the AMC. According to
a statement signed by her on 21
November 2022:
The Primary Health team would conduct an assessment of all detainees in the
Management Unit three times a day in the course of doing
medication rounds...
[e]ven if a detainee did not require medication, an assessment would still be
undertaken”.
plan was, so far as the Management Unit was concerned, for medication rounds to
occur at approximately 10:00-11:00 am, at the
conclusion of the “lunchtime
lock” (which ran from 11:30 am to 1:00 pm) and at 5:30-6:00 pm. It was not
clear if the
expectation was that contact would occur face-to-face, or if there
was such an expectation that was communicated to
There were no
mechanisms in place to ensure that the contacts
Further, the
pattern of nursing visits followed the same pattern that applied before COVID-19
arrangements were put in
Ms Chase agreed, the reality was that unless there was an “outreach”
(that is, a request for a consultation with a
nurse about a medical or mental
health issue), there was no contact between nursing staff and detainees during
the morning and afternoon
The round in the
middle of the day was for quarantine purposes, and it was directed at COVID-19
testing. It appears that this contact
may have occurred through a closed
reality, therefore, there was no proactive outreach to detainees. Ms Chase
conceded that the description given in her statement
(extracted above) was
the time, it appears that decision-making processes around COVID-19 arrangements
were not such as to permit significant focus on
mental health monitoring in the
clinical setting. Ms Leigh Thompson was, at the time of Luke’s death, Team
Manager for CMHS.
One of her responsibilities was to oversee clinical governance
for Custodial Mental Health.
In her statement, Ms Thompson indicated that, close to the time of the changes
in the accommodation arrangements for new detainees,
she expressed concerns that
her team “had not been specifically consulted about these changes to the
housing of detainees”.
the hearing, asked of what she would have raised in those discussions, Ms
Thompson said she would have raised concerns about
remandees not being
accommodated with someone else and staff trying to do reviews through the hatch
when clothed in full PPE.
risks had been identified with the doors, then, in her view, CMHS should have
been informed.
should have played a role in assessing the physical environment in which the
detainees were to be placed, she answered:
Should you have had a role to play?---Yes, I – in an ideal world probably.
But we were always told we’re a guest in a
correctional environment. A
guest service in a correctional environment so - - -
But you’re not told that explicitly but that’s the feeling you got
that you’re a guest?---No. Told.
You’ve been told?---I’ve been told that.
(ii) Initial Screening by Forensic Mental Health Team
efficacy of the screening as a risk mitigation measure has been
(iii) Portable Phones Being Available, (iv) Inclusion of Family Members
Numbers to be Prioritised, and (v) Phone Credits
Large considered those measures to be sensible. There were, however, significant
practical issues that needed to be addressed.
CO Knight explained the process by
which a detainee would contact “the outside world” using a phone,
noting that during
the COVID-19 period, face-to-face contact with visitors
(including legal visitors) was prohibited, and court appearances were also
conducted remotely:
detainees would
fill out a list of persons they wanted to have on their phone list with their
phone numbers;
Correctional
Officers would then conduct a check to see if there were not court orders
prohibiting contact with each person on the
checks then had
to be made of whether the nominated person was prepared to receive calls from
the detainee; and
once consent was
obtained, “security” (who were responsible for ensuring that only
nominated numbers were rung), would
add that number to security’s
non-COVID-19 times, parts of this process were conducted by other areas within
the COVID-19 period, responsibilities fell to Correctional Officers to perform
more of the phone access
When asked about how
long it might take for a detainee to be put in a position to make a call to
someone on their list, CO Knight
could not say, other than to point out that
they (Correctional Officers) were doing their
Even when phone access
was arranged, it appears that the number of phones that were available in the
Management Unit were limited.
CO Knight’s evidence was that there were two
phones available, but only one outside line. Therefore, the custodial staff on
duty had to carry the phone around to individual cells to allow it to be used.
Legal and court calls were given precedence, and personal
calls made by
detainees had to be placed in gaps between those
Handsets also had to
be disinfected after each use. The evidence suggested that Luke was concerned to
ensure that his phone list
was processed. The evidence confirms this process had
not been completed by the time he took his own life, and that he made no calls
after he was placed in his cell.
(b) Auditing of Risk Mitigation Measures
Adams said she was unaware of any auditing process to ensure the risk-mitigation
steps were in fact occurring.
She confirmed that no direction was given in relation to observations being done
in any way different to
– The Adequacy of Observations made of Luke at the AMC – Issues List
Background – Purpose of Observations
new detainees were placed on a minimum of one hourly observations. The result of
Luke’s assessment process was that he was
subject to that same regime of
hourly observations.
policy documents that were produced at the inquest described what, for custodial
purposes, observations were intended to achieve,
and how they were to be
conducted and documented. It was suggested by Counsel for the Territory, in
cross-examination of CO Knight,
that the commentary on the Observation Forms
themselves was the official guidance as to how observations were to be
conducted. Those
requirements, as it was suggested to CO Knight, were
re-enforced during recruitment
and form part of a
“learner guide” provided during a training program for Correctional
CO Knight’s
replies acknowledged the content of the form, but otherwise he did not recall
the content of the training he was
referred to.
purpose of observations was variously described by witnesses. CO Knight
described them as being to ensure the detainee “was
CO3 Turner was,
at the time of Luke’s death, employed as an Area Manager at the
He was in charge of the
Management Unit at the relevant time, and described the purpose of observations
mainly looking for signs of life, or anything that's going to
indicate something
is not suggested that if observations had been conducted as they were supposed
to be, Luke might have been discovered as committing
acts preparatory to an act
of self-harm. The timing of his suicide and his decision to cover the cameras
suggest that he was trying
to avoid detection. However, the absence of contact
meant that, if he was exhibiting signs of distress, they were not likely to be
detected. The absence of human contact may have also compounded his sense of
Large saw observations as having limited immediate protective effects, in the
sense of permitting the detection of acts
of self-harm whilst they were being
In his opinion,
their efficacy lies in building a level of human contact between detainee and
Correctional Officers, so as to mitigate
feelings of
How Observations were to be Conducted
to how the observations were to be conducted, the Observations Form (in which
observations were to be recorded) provided
(a) observations must be conducted in-person, not through camera.
(b) the recording of observations must be made contemporaneously – at the
(c) observations must describe the detainee’s behaviour as observed by the
Correctional Officer (including any dialogue, request,
and concerns, such as
refusal to eat, and the appearance of the detainee).
practice of observations at the time of Luke’s incarceration might have
varied from this directive. CO Knight indicated
that he did his best to perform
observations at the allocated interval. However, workloads did not always permit
observations to
occur exactly on the hour, and it was recognised that they could
be done “a little bit late or a little bit
He strived to
conduct the observations through the cell door, but occasionally he did it via
The CCTV image was
sufficiently clear on the screen in the officer’s station, without the
need to “zoom in” on
a given cell’s
the use of CCTV in conducting accountable observations was not permissible, the
camera in the Management Unit cells allowed
a detainee to be observed in that
way. As noted, Luke covered the camera in his cell with labels taken from drink
containers. It
appears to have been a commonplace that detainees would do this.
CO3 Turner suggested that cameras that were covered in this way
detected from the master control room, and notification would be sent to the
relevant area to remove the material that covered
COVID-19 arrangements, complications arose, as COVID-19 protocols would have
required the use of PPE to enter the cell to remove
any item covering the
camera. CO3 Turner indicated that it was his “expectation” that
Correctional Officers would request
detainees to remove the covering. This did
not happen in Luke’s case, which does raise questions about how ingrained
that practice
was no evidence before the inquest that the use of CCTV footage was the subject
of formal procedural
nor was there any
suggestion that the greater use of CCTV was considered as a risk mitigation
device in the context of COVID-19 arrangements.
(a) The Recording of Observations
to how the observation sheets were filled out, the detail on them was scant. CO
Knight’s practice, and clearly the practice
of others, was simply to write
“in cell.” CO Knight indicated that he had been filling out
Observation Forms in this
way for “some years.” He, and he believed
others, had not received adverse feedback in respect of that
respect of Luke’s observation sheets, on 1 February 2022, entries were
made on the hour, at every hour until 1803. Until
that time, the entries were
uniformly “in cell.” The entry for 1803 reads “in cell,
talking through
The entry for
1900 (written in retrospect) says nurses treating detainee with CPR”. CO
Knight conceded that the entries were
not necessarily recorded contemporaneously
and said that “you just wrote them in when you had the
When it was
put that the appearance of the entries on the Observations Sheet gave the
impression “of being written at the same
time”, he indicated
“that’s how I
(b) The Observations of Luke Conducted on 1 February 2022
officers on duty on 1 February 2022 in the Management Unit were CO Knight and
CO1 McAppion. They commenced their shift at 7:30
am. CO Knight confirmed that
CO1 McAppion was absent for a significant proportion of the afternoon and
returned at about
4:00-4.30pm.
McAppion’s recollection was that he only had one contact with Luke on 1
February 2022, when he handed over his
officer was given instruction or advice as to any heightened risks that might
arise from the circumstances of Luke’s
confinement under COVID-19
arrangements, and neither was given any instruction as to how they might modify
or address any risks posed
by the cell
is clear from the evidence that those responsible for conducting observations in
the Management Unit on 1 February 2022 were busy.
After 1500 hours, the Unit was
Knight explained that during the COVID-19 period, Correctional Officers were
asked to assume additional duties that would normally
be performed by others,
such as the setting up of phones and the conducting of checks of issues arising
from their life outside (such
as the care of pets). Those duties were over and
above making sure they were – “the meals were done,”
“conducting
observations during the day,” and “generally
staying in contact with the detainees in there to help them through the
isolation”.
burden of arranging telephone access has already been addressed.
the day of Luke’s death, staff responsibilities were increased due to the
arrival of, at about 1500 hours, a detainee in
the Management Unit because of
his heightened and aggressive behaviour elsewhere in the AMC. CO Knight assisted
with that transfer
and that detainee’s management. That detainee’s
behaviour disrupted others, including a detainee in Cell 14, who began
at the door and
analysis of the video footage of 1 February 2022 suggests there were in-person
1005 (through
the hatch) [144] ;
1022 (though the
hatch) [146];
1616 (through
the hatch) [147]; and
1803 (through
the hatch) [151].
if the observations recorded were conducted, they must have been done through
suggests that if camera observations were done, CCTV was being relied upon to a
significant degree to at least ensure the detainee
was “alive and
well”. The covering of a camera, therefore, may have of been of greater
significance than usual.
6.3.5 – The Absence of a
Hoffman Knife – Issues List (f)
242. A Hoffman knife was described by Ms Adams in these terms:
So Hoffman knife – or they are sometimes referred to as an intervention
knife, is a rather sharp implement that if someone
is using strangulation, that
this knife will easily cut through any cord, rope or material that is being used
for self-strangulation,
and part of the use of the knife will be to always cut
– I think it’s about 10 centimetres from any knot, to allow for
further investigation, and it's to provide staff with an option to have someone
removed from the ligature around them. It’s
not actually designed to
actually remove the ligature from the throat, it’s to actually remove
where it’s attached to
a hanging point.
who first responded to Luke’s act of self-harm were not able to access a
Hoffman knife. This slowed down the process of
removing Luke from the ligature
and exposed responding staff to the trauma associated with having to lift Luke
to prevent further
compression of his neck.
(a) Established Procedure
Ms Adams started in her role, she was requested by Ms Corrine Justason, Deputy
Commissioner of the AMC, to consolidate two separate
Hoffman knife policy
documents. Her evidence was that in preparing those documents, she was told that
“Hoffman knives being
issued to all staff was not to occur”, and she
was to “create an operating procedure that allowed Hoffman knives back
into accommodation areas.”
consolidated document “Hoffman Knife Operating Procedure” was
submitted for approval on 21 September 2021. Consistent
with the direction
given, the document directed that a Hoffman knife would be kept in each
accommodation area of the AMC in a locked
box. The document also directed that
at the start of each shift, the area supervisor was required to check that the
Hoffman knife
was available and provided to a Correctional Officer in the area,
and that, at the start of each shift, the area supervisor would
allocate the
tool to a particular staff member for the duration of the
A compliance form was
developed, which required the area supervisor to sign off daily that the knife
was present in the accommodation
the time of Luke’s death, procedure in respect of the use of Hoffman
knives had been promulgated to staff but not formally
adopted. The further
development of the document resumed the day after Luke’s death.
(b) Reason for the Procedure Not Being Followed
reasons that were not explained during the inquest, the procedure had not been
followed on the day of Luke’s death. Ms Adams
indicated that
“questions were asked” as to why the knife was not in the box. She
was not aware of the outcome of that
investigation. CO Knight was never informed
where the knife was.
Turner’s belief was that all the Hoffman knives had been taken to a
professional sharpening business at the time, but he
was unsure of the
PART 7 – FORMAL FINDINGS
Coroners Act 1997
Section 52(1)
7.1.1 – Cause of Death
findings required by
ss 52(1)(a)
and (b) of the Act were not in contest. I find
Luke Anthony Rich died on 1 February 2022 at the Alexander Maconochie Centre,
10400 Monaro Highway, Hume, in the Australian Capital
Territory. He died as a
result of suicide by hanging.
7.1.2 – Manner of Death
took his own life by fixing a sheet from his bed to a bar that formed part of
the rear door of Cell 3 of the Management Unit
at the AMC. The relevant cell
door was designed and constructed in a way that permitted that to be done. It is
possible that Luke
used bamboo cutlery that had been issued to him with his
meals to push the sheet between the metal bar and the Lexan window.
am unable to say with any degree of certainty why and when Luke decided to end
his own life. There may have been a range of circumstances
that weighed upon
Allegations of
domestic violence had been made against him, and he knew of their nature and
scope. Those allegations were untested.
However, they were serious. If proven to
their full extent, a judicial officer would likely have considered incarcerating
a full-time basis. He made comments at the time of his arrest that he
feared such an outcome. He had previously experienced custody
as a remandee, as
a result proceedings arising out of a previous domestic violence incident
involving the same person. By his own
admission, he found his previous
experience of custody to be difficult and humiliating.
relationship with his long-term partner, the victim of his alleged violence, was
possibly at an end.
His inability to
communicate with friends and family once isolated in his cell in the Management
Unit may have created a sense of
isolation from those protective factors and
influences in his life.
I find that at
the time of his admission, he was, in general terms, depressed and anxious.
incarceration was likely to lead to a loss of his employment. Given the value he
placed on discharging the responsibilities of
his job in a proficient way, he
was likely to have felt the impending loss of his job keenly.
He was using
illicit substances at the time of being taken into custody. Given there were
traces of cocaine found in his blood at
the time of his death, it is likely, and
consistent with what he indicated during his induction assessment, that he was
drug in considerable quantities. He may have been feeling physical
symptoms associated with no longer having access to that drug.
in the absence of a record made by him of his suicidal intent, it is impossible
to say exactly why it was that he had acted
in the way he did.
is also impossible to say when Luke decided to take his own life. The covering
of the cameras in his cell may have been an indication
that he had taken a
decision to commit an act of self-harm. However, it may also have been an
attempt to provide himself with a degree
of privacy.
observations at 1803 hours and 1900 hours occurred at about the time they should
have. Luke seems to have timed his tying of the
sheet to the door to a period
when he would reasonably anticipate he would not be disturbed by Correctional
Officers or nurses conducting
observations or welfare checks. The covering of
the cameras prevented his act of self-harm to be observed remotely.
that regard, his actions spoke of determination to end his own life and to
deliberately circumvent some of the protective measures
that were in place.
Coroners Act 1997
Section 52(4)
Matters of Public Safety
must consider whether matters of public safety arise in connection with the
inquest I have conducted.
7.2.1 – Response to COVID-19
– the Decision to Use the Management Unit as an
Isolation Facility
Taylor, when employed at the AMC in non-COVID-19 times, regarded the Management
Unit as unsuitable to accommodate new arrivals.
However, clearly there was a
need to establish processes to reduce the risk of new arrivals at the AMC
transmitting the COVID-19
virus to other detainees.
is also apparent that the implementation of the decision to use the Management
Unit as an isolation facility was affected by the
general challenges that were
faced by public institutions in coping with COVID-19.
make no finding that it is was inappropriate to use the Management Unit as an
isolation facility.
7.2.2 – Assessment Processes –
ACT Watch House
with the opinion of Professor Large, I find that Luke’s assessment process
conducted at the ACT Watch House was adequate.
realistic assessment of Luke was that he had been using cocaine and perhaps
other drugs (illicit and prescription) in considerable
quantities in the time
leading up to his arrest on 31 January 2022. His use of cocaine in the time
leading up to his arrest was disclosed
in the police “Statement of
Facts”. That information was conveyed to ACTCS and was revealed by Luke
himself when he was
assessed at the AMC.
demeanour in the Watch House did not raise concerns. His mental health,
criminogenic and drug use profiles were not out of the
ordinary and did not of
themselves suggest that he was at greater risk of self-harm.
7.2.3 – Assessment Processes – AMC
find that the assessment processes conducted at the AMC at the time of
Luke’s admission were adequate.
process adopted systematically sought to identify medical issues and mental
health concerns that were potentially relevant to
Luke’s circumstances. He
was identified as not presenting with acute medical needs or mental health
concerns. That translated
to an hourly observation regime, and he was reminded
of his ability to self-refer to clinicians if any need did arise. He had the
opportunity to “self-refer” on the day he took his own life, but he
did not do so.
issue arises as to the extent to which mental health assessments are integrated
into an overall strategy of addressing an elevated
suicide risk in the cohort to
which Luke belonged – young, a recent detainee, accommodated alone, and
without access to family
and friends through contact visit or use of the phone.
The mental health assessments that were conducted were, for the reasons given,
of limited value in predicting suicide.
lack of a predictive value of suicide assessments was acknowledged by AMC staff
during the inquest. General self-harm risks still
had to be managed,
particularly in respect of the exceptional arrangements that were in place
because of COVID-19. However, it was
not clear that induction processes formed
part of a co-ordinated response in relation to detainee welfare generally, and
the management
of the risk of suicide specifically. The impression was that the
response of the AMC to suicide risk was a siloed one, in which information
relating to potential risks were not communicated effectively between areas
having different functional responsibilities.
Observation Processes – Management Unit
find that the process of observation of Luke that took place on 1 February 2022
was unsatisfactory.
There was no
documented procedure associated with how prescribed observations were to be
conducted, other than the observation form
itself. Relevantly, according to the
Observations Form:
(a) the observations must be conducted in person;
(b) notes of the observations must be made contemporaneously; and
(c) observations must describe the behaviour.
exceptions indicated above, the observations made of Luke on 1 February 2022
were not conducted in-person. If the observations
were done at all, they were
done by the use of CCTV. The records that were entered only confirmed that Luke
was in his cell. They
did not describe his behaviour.
The purpose of
conducting observations was not described in any policy or procedure.
Observations conducted at hourly intervals are
not likely to result in the
detection of acts of self-harm. It is assumed that the purpose of observations
in a custodial setting
(a) detecting abnormal behaviours or issues which might inform protective
measures being taken;
(b) establishing human contact with detainees; and
(c) confirming that the detainee is actually in the cell.
There was no
formal direction given that indicated that observations might :
(a) assist in addressing practical issues that a detainee was not able to
(b) lessen feelings of isolation;
(c) allow medical and mental health needs to be identified and acted upon;
(d) assist in developing a documented profile of a detainee’s behaviour,
(i) proactive interventions can take place to address potential medical or
mental health issues; and
(ii) demonstrated distress can be alleviated; and
(e) assisting in the development of appropriate case management strategies.
aims were most likely not being addressed by the observations regime that
existed on 1 February 2022.
shortcomings in the recording of observations were, I find, officially
tolerated. No evidence was drawn to my attention to suggest
that CO Knight
misled the hearing in saying that he had been recording observations in that
brief form for years without consequence.
find that the use of CCTV for the purpose of conducting hourly observations was,
likewise, tolerated. CO Knight was not challenged
in respect of his evidence on
this issue. No submission was made by the Territory to suggest that CCTV was not
relied upon as a form
of observation.
also find that it was commonplace for cameras to be obscured by detainees. If
the expectation was that the detainee would be requested
to remove the material
obstructing the lens, there was no evidence of that expectation being enforced
in Luke’s case. Given
the reality was that staff were under pressure to
perform observations at all, it was inevitable that CCTV was going to be relied
upon to a greater extent than normal to perform observations. Therefore, actions
taken by detainees to cover cameras may have had
a greater relevance to safety
than normal.
do not attribute blame to the individual Correctional Officers who were on duty.
The staffing shortfalls were apparent and known
at management levels. The
absence of CO1 McAppion for a part of the day led to a situation where CO
Knight’s ability to conduct
in-person observations was compromised.
am unable to say what the consequences of those shortfalls were for Luke. During
the observation that occurred at 1800 hours (in
the hour before his death),
nothing was noted by staff, and he made no request for assistance. It is
possible that, at that time,
he had already made up his mind to commit an act of
self-harm. It is possible that he had not. It is also not possible to ascertain
whether, if the door had been opened, acts preparatory to an act of self-harm
would have been seen. It is not possible to determine
when Luke began the
process of attaching the sheet to the door.
submission made by the Territory reflected upon this issue and decisions made by
the Government as to how the COVID-19 risk was
to be responded to:
53. In considering this evidence, the following should be given appropriate
consideration and weight. Justice Health, along with
all other aspects of the
management of the AMC were being guided and directed by the overarching public
health requirements set by
the ACT government for managing the Covid risk in the
high risk setting of the AMC, this could change frequently, sometimes on a
basis. Further, Justice Health were required to adjust to the new circumstances
in the absence of any increase in funding or
personnel to meet the increased
public health requirements. This was coupled with the circumstances that staff,
including Justice
Health staff were personally also required to isolate and not
attend work if they were sick or otherwise exposed to the virus, creating
rostering and staffing issues, and given the unique environment and skills
required for health staff at the AMC, no additional staff
could be pulled from
other ACT health facilities.
accept that the absence of suitable staffing arrangements may have impacted the
ability of Correctional Officers to discharge their
duties in this context,
including conducting appropriate observations. However, the shortfalls in
process that were highlighted in
the inquest cannot simply be explained by
COVID-19 related staffing issues. The shortfall in observation processes were
clearly reflective
of an ingrained culture and almost complete lack of
procedural guidance.
recommend that ACTCS publish guidance to staff, pursuant to
Corrections Management Act 2007
that addresses, in light of
the findings of this inquest:
(a) the purposes of detainee observations;
(b) how observations are to be recorded;
(c) the role that CCTV is to play in the observation process; and
(d) what is to be done when cameras are intentionally covered by detainees.
7.2.5 – Ligature Points in the Cells in the Management
specifically address the submission made by the Territory on this issue.
was put by the Territory that comments made by ACTCS staff members that the bars
on the rear doors created ligature points were
intended as referring to the
possibility of the Lexan “bowing”, and thereby creating space
between the bars and the Lexan.
submission was made that:
From the evidence it is possible to find that the ligature point used by Mr Rich
was not an obvious ligature point.
submission made seems to be that the fact that filler tape was used, that tools
were needed to remove the tape to create a gap,
and that the Lexan did not
“bow” meant that the ligature point was, therefore, not
Territory’s submissions referred to the self-harm events of 2020 as
“an unrelated incident”
The submissions went
on to say that “unfortunately” funding could not be secured to
replace all the doors.
do not accept these submissions. The email of 5 June 2015 sent by Mr Batten to
Mr Taylor speaks of a possibility of a gap being
created either by the Lexan
bowing, or by the use of tools to remove the tape and create a gap between the
bar and the Lexan backing.
Tools in the form of cutlery were always available to
detainees, and the re-enactment conducted by Mr Batten and his team after
death confirmed, as was always suspected, that it was possible to
create a ligature point without the Lexan “bowing”.
to identify the mechanism used by Luke to commit the act of self-harm as the
measure of the risk is, in my view, unreasonable.
Those in senior management
positions, who, in 2020, advocated for the doors to be replaced did not make a
distinction between the
bars being a ligature point and the movable door being
manipulated to create a ligature point. The rear doors of the Management Unit,
taken as a whole, had been assessed as “unfit for purpose”.
suggestion was also made that the exclusion of ligature points in a custodial
environment is practically impossible, and that attempts
to achieve such a
result can create an environment that is sterile and cold.
whatever the merits of this proposition, that was not the issue in this case. I
find that the rear doors of the Management
Unit were not fit for purpose and
represented a risk to the safety of detainees. The rear doors, including the
bars on those doors,
had been identified as being unsafe. The bars had been
identified as possible ligature points. The closing of the door to secure
adapted as ligatures had occurred twice before Luke’s death. It was open
to ACTCS to secure the Lexan to the bars in
the way that was suggested in 2015,
and that was actually undertaken after Luke’s death. It took Luke only a
short period of
time to identify the door as a ligature point.
recommend that:
(a) external consultants be engaged to assess the safety of the rear doors in
the Management Unit in light of the evidence in this
inquest; and
(b) the outcome of that review be published.
7.2.6 – Hoffman Knives
find that, contrary to policy that had been distributed to staff, a Hoffman
knife should have been available in the Management Unit
at the time Luke was
found hanging in his cell.
find that, whilst the absence of the knife is likely to have added to the trauma
of the staff who needed to remove Luke from the
ligature he had created, it is
not possible to say that the delay in accessing the Hoffman knife in this
instance made a difference
to their attempts to save Luke’s life.
absence of an explanation of where that Hoffman knife, and perhaps other Hoffman
knives, was unsatisfactory.
note that immediately after Luke’s death, the process by which Hoffman
knives were located has changed. The changed process
is that each Correctional
Officer is issued with a Hoffman knife when they come onto shift. The Territory
has indicated that additional
knives have been procured.
find that response to be a reasonable one, and I make no further
recommendations.
7.2.7 – A Suicide Prevention Framework
for the AMC
Taylor’s suggestion that the management of suicide risk in a custodial
environment is a shared responsibility is, with respect,
correct. However, I
find that Luke’s death highlights the lack of a coherent policy framework
to give effect to that conclusion:
(a) The decision to use the Management Unit as a means of COVID-19 isolation for
new arrivals at the AMC was a matter for ACTCS.
However, it is clear that
decisions around this issue were not materially informed by assessing the impact
of those arrangements
on the mental health of new detainees. Although a CMHS
staff member was, in a formal sense, “at the table” in respect
deciding to use the Management Unit as an isolation facility, there was no
evidence that the concerns identified by Ms Thompson
were being pressed or
advocated for in planning processes.
(b) Ms Adams knew of the risks associated with the rear doors. If the mitigation
measures were intended to mitigate suicide risks
generally, as Ms Adams
suggested, the evidence suggests they were not implemented in an effective way.
(c) In respect of the induction process, there was no evidence of how this
process fitted into an overall scheme to address mental
health concerns and
manage suicide risks, particularly in cases where a detainee was accommodated in
a mainstream unit.
(d) The absence of a Hoffman knife highlights not only a lack of accountability
within senior management as to this issue, but also
demonstrates a lack of
insight as to how the ready availability of a knife should form part of an
overall strategy to prevent harm.
the hearing, the Territory was asked by me to address a number of issues,
including the development of a more cohesive suicide
prevention framework or
approach strategy. A comprehensive reply was received, including a statement
from Ms Narelle Pamplin, Assistant
Commissioner, Offender Reintegration of
ACTCS. Ms Pamplin spoke in detail of ACTCS’s development of a
“Detainee Health
and Wellbeing Strategy” (“the
Strategy”). As Ms Pamplin made clear, the Strategy is a foundational
document aimed
at improving the collaboration between key service providers. The
development of a Suicide Prevention Framework will occur later.
This will be led
by ACTCS, in collaboration with CMHS, ACT Health, and the Winnunga Nimmityjah
Aboriginal Health and Community Service
as key health
Pamplin also noted that an Induction and Screening Unit has been established
within ACTCS, which “aims to strengthen induction
and assessment processes
in order to develop a more personalised and holistic perspective of a
detainee’s health needs, individualised
circumstances, and immediate and
long-term health
conceded that reviews conducted had found that “the induction process was
too siloed, and there was no centralised
set of information from which to base
an individualised case
The Induction
and Screening Unit has been developed “to work collaboratively with
Justice Health Services and Custodial Services
to ensure that a broad range of
supports can be provided to detainees at the earliest opportunity in order to
minimise distress and
ensure immediate needs are
formation of the unit, Ms Pamplin stated, recognises “that the induction
period is a time of increased
the time of Luke’s death, there were specific policies in place that
provided specific situational guidance in respect of
the management of suicide
However, those policies
were not intended to provide general guidance and only applied to detainees who
were, or may be, eligible
to be considered “prisoners at risk”.
2015, Victoria developed a framework to address suicidality within prisons:
Correctional Suicide Prevention Framework Working to prevent prisoner and
offender suicides in Victorian correctional settings (‘
In its foreword, the purpose of the Framework was
described as complementing specific procedural documents by providing “a
overarching whole-of-system prevention framework to complement existing
standards and procedures”, and it serves as “a
key reference guide
for all relevant documentation and creates transparency in the key theoretical
underpinnings and principles to
guide the strategic nature of this
The Framework
identifies a set of guiding principles to inform its prevention focus. These
(a) The intention of suicide prevention must be to do no harm;
(b) A prevention approach must be taken to the likelihood of suicide in
correctional settings;
(c) Suicide prevention in correctional settings is a shared responsibility;
(d) All staff must create a positive, responsive, and supportive environment for
addressing suicide prevention in correctional settings.
adoption of such a framework at the AMC would be to encourage advertence to
suicide prevention in relevant decision-making, including
that concerning
infrastructure and prisoner accommodation, and case management processes.
has accepted the need for a suicide prevention framework, and Ms Pamplin
indicated that the development of such a framework
was expected to be completed
by June 2024.
recommend that:
(a) a Suicide Prevention Framework for ACTCS be developed as a priority;
(b) it gives expression to the need for suicide prevention to be accepted as
shared responsibility at the AMC;
(c) the terms of the Victorian Framework be considered in that process; and
(d) an attempt be made as to assess the efficacy of the introduction of the
Framework in the Victorian Prison system and reflect
those learnings in the
process of developing the framework document to apply at the AMC.
7.2.8 – Co-operation with the Inspector
is much for the community to gain from a legislative scheme that permits
effective co-operation between the Inspector and the
Coroner. That co-operation
is envisaged by the ICS Act, and there is no absence of goodwill to make that
process effective in assisting
both the Inspector and the Coroner’s Court
to discharge their respective functions when a person dies in a custodial
If I am prevented from referencing the information and recommendations
made by the Inspector in specific cases and in general, the
coronial function is thereby disadvantaged in investigating custodial deaths and
in having available the expertise
of the Inspector (and perhaps her findings in
respect of a death in custody) when framing recommendations.
am aware that the parliamentary privilege issue is under review. Therefore, I do
not make any specific recommendations as to that
public administration issue,
pursuant to s 52(4)(b) of the Act.
PART 8 – SECTION 74
8.1 – The Statutory Framework
74 of the Act provides:
coroner holding an inquest into a death in care or death in custody must include
in a record of the proceedings of the inquest
findings about the quality of
care, treatment and supervision of the deceased that, in the opinion of the
coroner, contributed to
the cause of death.
proceed on the basis that s 74 of the Act does not require a coroner in cases to
which this section applies to always make findings
treatment, and supervision of the deceased. What the section calls for is for
findings to be made when
shortfalls in the quality of care, treatment, and
supervision of the deceased “contributed to the cause of death”.
shortfall does not need to be the only matter that caused the death.
303. Given the classes of vulnerable people that fall within
the concepts of “custody” and “care”, the legislative
framework clearly envisages that a finding of contribution to the cause of death
can occur when an act of deliberate self-harm is
the operative cause of death. I
do not regard that such an act breaks the chain of causation. However, in each
case, the shortfall
in the standard of care, treatment, and supervision must be
such as to have made a contribution to the decision to take, or ability
effect to a decision to take, one’s own life.
the purpose of this section, I reflect the findings I made above. At the time of
Luke’s death, the Territory chose to accommodate
newly arrived detainees
in a physical environment they knew to be, in one important aspect, unsafe. The
rear doors of the Management
Unit cells were known to offer ligature points. The
class of detainees that were to be accommodated in those cells were at greater
risks of self-harm than general detainees. The length and character of the
period of COVID-19 isolation meant that new detainees
were held in what amounted
to a form of solitary confinement. The isolation may have been justified on
public health grounds. However,
this did not obviate the need to take reasonable
steps to ensure that the isolation was as safe as it reasonably could be.
suicide, as with suicide generally, could not be reliably predicted. In light of
that difficulty of prediction, Luke’s
assessment as being of generally low
suicide risk did not mean that such risk could be ignored. The reasonableness of
the arrangements
that were put in place are to be assessed against known
(statistical) risks associated with detainees of particular profiles and
risks arising from remandees being placed in a form of health segregation for an
extended period. Measures that were said to
have been designed to mitigate those
risks were not, in Luke’s case, implemented.
observation regime in place was inadequate. Staffing resources were insufficient
to address the safety needs of detainees. Staff
with responsibility for caring
for Luke were not briefed in respect of known risks associated with the physical
environment in the
Management Unit cells. This is so both in relation to the
CMHS staff and Correctional Officers who were on the ground discharging
responsibilities in respect of Luke’s care and supervision.
cameras were used as form of observation, rather than detainees being observed
and engaged through personal contact. This reliance
on CCTV cameras was an
inevitable consequence of inadequate staffing resources to perform observations
in-person. Luke’s decision
to cover the cameras in his cell and the portal
gave rise to greater safety concerns as a result. Those concerns were not
nor acted upon.
these reasons, I find that a shortfall in the care and supervision of Luke
contributed to his death.
again offer my condolences to Luke’s family and friends. Despite the
challenges he faced, Luke was a person of great ability
who was loved. He will
acknowledge the contribution to the coronial process made by Luke’s
family. The investigation process and hearing were confronting
and required the
family to re-visit the trauma associated with his death. Their active engagement
in the process of investigation
and the hearing was of great assistance to the
Court in the discharge of its statutory responsibilities.
I certify that the preceding three hundred and ten [310] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for findings of his Honour
Associate: Markus Ching
Date: 22 August 2024
In s 52 of the Act,
“inquest” is effectively synonymous with a process of investigation.
Section 34A of the Act does
not permit a coroner to dispense with a hearing if the coroner has reasonable
grounds for believing that
the death, relevantly, is a death in custody.
That issue was not canvassed
during the hearing, and it falls outside the scope of the inquest. That
submission was answered in detailed
in submissions in reply from the Territory.
It is sufficient to note that other than COVID-19 arrangements a urine test
been performed on admission. If performed, it is likely that it would
have confirmed what Luke had told staff during his induction
– that he had
been using illicit and prescribed drugs.
Ex 1.63 contains his medical
records from that admission. No continuing mental health issues were raised.
WT presented at the
Canberra Hospital the same day complaining of head, neck and back pain. She said
she fell over a dog: Ex 1.90.
Breaking of the skin was
depicted in photographs taken by attending police: Ex
It was made clear at
the hearing that the material in relation to Luke’s arrest on 31 January
2022 was not being received to
enable an assessment to be made of the truth of
WT’s allegations. It is noted that NE, who was present at the time,
that WT had assaulted her, and that Luke was acting in defence of her:
Ex 1.83. Luke told attending police that the damage observed
in the house was
caused by WT: Ex 1.83. As noted, the material was received to enable a realistic
assessment to be made of Luke’s
state of mind at the time he decided to
take his own life.
Milner Ex 3 at
Ex 1.95, Ex
The charge in respect of
the events of 26 January 2022 was of common assault. It was possible that the
number and seriousness of
charge(s) ultimately preferred in respect of that
event may have escalated during the prosecution process.
A warrant of remand was
issued pursuant to
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
At least from the signing of that warrant, Luke was in the custody of the
Director General, and he was required to keep Luke in
custody under full time
detention under those Acts:
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act
Ex 1.213. This
comment may have significance in terms of the criminal litigation. On the
previous occasion he had been charged, WT
indicated a preparedness “not to
press charges” (see Ex 1.63 at page 17). Whilst the DPP continued the
prosecution, WT
gave a letter of support in the sentencing process.
18 November
Ex 1.21 [5].
Ex 1.21 Admission
Assessment Form.
Vinod, T 25 May 22,
248. See also 250 at line
The COVID-19 test
collected in the late afternoon of 31 January 2022 was reported as negative in a
report time-stamped 0543 hours
on 1 February
Nurse Manzano
explained that the information she recorded in the form up until this point had
been elicited by Nurse Vinod, as he
worked through the corresponding sections in
the paperwork he was completing. The information which follows was elicited by
Manzano via her own questioning of Luke: T168:36-41.
Ex 1.25 Annexure
‘A’ 2-4 and
T168:15-169:43.
24 May 2023, 167-168.
Ex 1.20 [16]-[17].
Although the form indicated ”
Nil Obs”, in fact all new detainees
were on a regime of 60-minute observations. The frequency of the observations
increased by the outcome of the assessment process.
It was not made clear what
the “drug overdose” being referred to was. It is likely that the
reference derived from the
2020 arrest. ACTMHS notes from this event reference that “Girlfriend
reported that Luke took an overdose with Xanax and Diazepam with alcohol”.
A “medication overdose” is also referenced.
Ex 1.63 at page 1. At
his 2020 induction at the AMC Luke denied any attempt at self-harm saying
“it was news to me”:
Ex 1.63 at page 7. That denial was repeated in
a subsequent review on 10 November
2020: Ex 1.63
T 24 May 2022, 165, line
Ex 1.20 CMS
It was completed
within a few hours of the assessment: T 24 May 2022, 170, line
Ex 1.20, Page 1 of SVAT.
The capitalisation and underlining are as per the exhibit.
Ex 1.20 Annexure
Nurse Manzano described the
self-referral process in these terms:
Can you just explain what that is, please?---That would be a discussion with the
detainee regarding that the nurses come round to
the units about twice a day,
show them the uniform that they’re wearing underneath the - because we
have to wear the full PPE,
so show them the colour of the uniform, what they
would look like, that they frequent the unit, that they can either talk to the
Corrections staff or the nursing staff if they’re having thoughts about
harming themselves and they will let our team know.
And then we also have
ongoing training with Corrections about how to recognise if someone is mentally
unwell and they can contact
our team about that as well.
T 24 May 2022, 178, line
Ibid 173, line
Natalie Adams, Senior
Director of ACT Corrective Services at AMC, Ex 1.25
Knight, T 25 May 2022,
290, line 8.
Corrections
Management (Management of Segregation and Separate Confinement) Policy
Knight, T 25 May
2022, 303, line 45.
315, line 15-25.
Lunch ws provided
in the morning and could be consumed at a time convenient to the detainee.
Knight. Ex 214 and summary in brief
Ex 1.7: CO McAppion
22/11/22 [18].
Vinod, T 25
May 2023, 255, line 9 (Vinod was not present but said this was part of the
purpose of he visits). Both nurses who were
present said they asked Luke whether
he had any thoughts of self-harm or suicide or wished to speak to Justice Mental
health clinicians
and he said “No”: Ex 17.4(b) and
T 25 May 2023,
Ex 1.216. T 25 May 2023
per CO Knight, 321.
2023, 306, line 41-45.
Vinod, T 25 May 2023, 272.
A Hoffman knife was
described by Ms Adams in these terms:
So Hoffman knife – or they are sometimes referred to as an intervention
knife, is a rather sharp implement that if someone
is using strangulation, that
this knife will easily cut through any cord, rope or material that is being used
for self-strangulation,
and part of the use of the knife will be to always cut
– I think it’s about 10 centimetres from any knot, to allow for
further investigation, and it's to provide staff with an option to have someone
removed from the ligature around them. It’s
not actually designed to
actually remove the ligature from the throat, it’s to actually remove
where it’s attached to
a hanging point.
Vinod, T 25 May 2023,
Ex 1.33 F/C
There was no
evidence before the inquest to suggest that consumption of cocaine could have
occurred after arrest. Luke was searched
at the Watch House. He was under
supervision while he was there. He was isolated soon after his admission to the
AMC and could not
have sourced cocaine given the circumstances and the brief
time he was there.
Professor Duflou Ex 1.44.
BSc, MBBS, fellow of the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of
Psychiatrists, PhD in medical
T 26 May 2023, 343, line
T 26 May 2023, 342,
Large, T 26 May 2023,
345-355: “to a factor of “10”. Batten, T 22 May 2023, 80.
Thomson, T 24 May 2023,
Large, T 26 May
Taylor, T 22 May 2023, 33. Adams, T 23 May 2023, 95-96. Thomson, T 24 May 2023,
205. See generally, Matthew Willis et al,
‘Self-inflicted Deaths in
Australian Prisons’ (
Trends & Issues in Crime and Criminal
No 513, Australian Institute of Criminology, 2016) 1
(‘Self-inflicted Deaths in Australian
22 May 2023, 45. Manzano, T 24 May 2023, 185. Thomson, T 24 May 2023, 206.
Chase, T 24 May 2023,
Large, T 26 May
Adams, Ex 1.25
[16] –[21].
T 24 May 2023,
Taylor, T 22 May
He had filled
that role permanently since February
2014: Ex 1.27
Re-creations conducted by Mr Battens’ team after Luke’s death, which
were videoed, suggest that insertion
of the sheet may not have been possible
without a tool such as a disposable cutlery knife. Luke had access to disposable
According to Mr Batten [21], there was normally filler tape between the
bars and the Lexan. The filler tape had been removed creating
a slight gap. The
re-creations suggested that even then a tool was needed to feed the sheet
through. Ex 1.17 [21].
Taylor was the General Manager of Custodial Operations until April 2016. In that
position, he had direct responsibility for the
daily operations and facility
management at the AMC: ibid [3]-[4].
Ibid [18] Annexure
Ex 13 [18].
Taylor, 16 November
2022, Ex 1.32.
Mr Taylor, in evidence said that in preparing the statement, he incorrectly
stated that the bars were inside the cell:
T 22 May 2023,
Ibid [7]. Once the
door was “buzzed open” the detainee had control of its movements:
Batten, T 22 May 2023,
Batten, T 22 May
T 22 May 2023,
Supplementary Statement of Craig Batten, Annexure
The brief was a
Procurement Threshold Exemption (Single Select) Brief
The purpose of the brief was to seek exemption from the usual procurement rules
that required a public tender process for procurements
valued at $200,00 or
Infrastructure Funding, Batten, Ex 1.27
T 22 May 2023, 54,
A form of high
strength structural rivet.
Batten, T 22 May 2023,
Ex 1.27 [39], T 22
May2023, 71.
1.25 [22] and T 23 May 2023,
Adams, T 23 May
2023, 134, line 31.
Ibid 132, line
Ibid 134, line
Chase, Ex 1.23
Chase, T 24 May
2023, 219, line 35-45.
Thomson, Ex 1.24
Thompson, T 24 May
2023, 209-210.
cross-examination of Ms Chase, she suggested that she did not
“represent” Corrections Mental Health during COVID-19
meetings concerning the use of the Management Unit. However, an
“operational director” had responsibility above
her for Corrections
Mental Health and that person (unnamed) was at those meetings: T 24 May 2023,
Knight, T 25 May
Adams, T 23 May
T 25 May 2023, 326,
Ibid 285, line
Turner, T 23 May
Large, T 26 May
2023, 354. Professor Large based this opinion on what he understood to be the
rates of suicide in psychiatric hospitals.
Knight, T 25 May
2023. This lack of predictability obviously may have some benefits provided that
in the end the observations were
Ibid 305, line 18.
CO1 McAppion said the observations should be done at the window, and it was his
practice to conduct observations
at the window: McAppion, T 26 May 2023,
Turner, T 23
May 2023, 144, 156.
144: CO3 Turner positively asserted there was no such formal
CO Knight indicated
that the words “talking through window” were written by someone else
after Luke’s act of self-harm,
and after he had signed the observation
sheet. Knight, T 25 May 2023, 299, line
Ibid 298, lines 3,
Ibid 301. CO1
McAppion said that he was called away to “help the security team relocate
a non-compliant detainee”: McAppion,
T 26 May 2023, 368, line
Ibid 371, line
20-25, and 372, line 20. CO1 McAppion was aware that the rear door had been used
as a ligature point “multiple
times on multiple occasions”. CO
Knight said he did not know that the door had been used to commit acts of
self-harm until
after Luke’s death: Knight, T 25 May 2023,
Ibid 303, line
T 25 May 2023,
Adams, Ex 1.25
Knight, T 25 May
Turner, T 23
May 2023, 151.
submissions [65].
Pamplin, Ex 17 [8].
Corrections
Management (Court Transport Unit Person at Risk Management) Operating Procedure
(Exhibit 8); and
Corrections Management (Management of At-risk
Detainees) Policy
Correctional
Suicide Prevention Framework Working to prevent prisoner and offender suicides
in Victorian correctional settings
Pamplin, Exhibit
RTF format (1.4 MB)
Signed PDF/A format