Kember v The Queen (No 4) [2025] ACTCA 9 (28 February 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
Kember v The Queen (No 4)
[2025] ACTCA 9
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Baker and McWilliam JJ, Ainslie-Wallace AJ
(1) The appeal is dismissed.
Catchwords:
– CRIMINAL LAW – Application to withdraw plea of
guilty after conviction – whether insufficient evidence to prove
appellant’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt – plea of guilty
encompasses acceptance of proof of each necessary element
to a charge –
sufficient evidence to support plea of guilty – whether denying leave
would amount to miscarriage of justice
– whether primary judge’s
decision attended by error of fact or law – consideration of elements of
each charge
– error not established – no miscarriage of justice
– application for leave to withdraw guilty pleas dismissed
– CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal against sentence –
child pornography offences – whether sentence was manifestly excessive
– whether primary judge erred in failing to consider alternatives to
custodial sentence – whether offender’s lack
of prior convictions
and the low objective seriousness of offending warranted reduced sentence
– whether primary judge failed
to consider extra curial punishment –
where primary judge characterised offences as falling within mid to low range of
seriousness – such a characterisation does not diminish the
significant criminality of the offending – full-time custody
warranted to
reflect the seriousness of offending – no error in primary judge’s
balance of factors favourable to appellant
against the importance of deterrence
and denunciation – appeal dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Criminal Code Act
(Cth) ss 473.1, 474.19, 474.22,
474.22A, 474.26, 474.27, 474.27A
Crimes Act 1914
Cases Cited:
Director of Public Prosecutions v Ka-Hung Ip
[2005] ACTCA
Dinsdale v The Queen
[2000] HCA 54
202 CLR 321
Fares v DPP
[2025] ACTCA 2
Gifford v R
[2016] NSWCCA 302
v The Queen
[2022] ACTCA 26
Hili v The Queen; Jones v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR
Kember v The Queen (No 3)
[2022] ACTCA 73
[1999] HCA 29
195 CLR 665
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25; 228 CLR 357
Meissner v The Queen
Melville v The King
[2023] NSWCCA 284
[2014] ACTCA 53
[2008] VSCA 268
[2007] ACTCA 21
1 ACTLR 145
[2022] ACTSC
[2020] ACTCA 8
(1986) 22 A Crim R
[2020] NSWCCA 81
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
164 CLR 465
[2022] NSWCCA 241
110 NSWLR 163
[2001] HCA 64
207 CLR 584
Rhys Karl Kember (Appellant)
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
Representation:
Self-represented (Appellant)
K Breckweg with M Keks (Respondent)
Self-represented (Appellant)
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
File Number:
ACTCA 38 of 2022
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: Supreme Court
Before: McCallum CJ
Date of Decision: 27 June 2022
Case Title: R v Kember
[2022] ACTSC 153
Court File Number: SCC 90 of 2021
27 June 2022, Rhys Karl Kember (the appellant) was sentenced by McCallum CJ (the
primary judge) on his pleas of guilty to six offences
which can be described as
child pornography offences, pursuant to the
Commonwealth Criminal Code Act 1995
Criminal Code
ACTSC 153 (Primary
Date of offence
Description
Maximum penalty
Sentence imposed
Between 7 June 2016 and 30 November 2017
Use a carriage service to solicit child pornography material contrary to s
474.19(1) of the
Criminal Code
15 years imprisonment
16 months imprisonment
Between 1 November 2017 and 31 August 2018
Use a carriage service to solicit child pornography material contrary to s
474.19(1) of the
Criminal Code
15 years imprisonment
10 months imprisonment
Use a carriage service to procure a child to engage in sexual activity with
the appellant contrary to s 474.26(1) of the
Criminal Code
15 years imprisonment
8 months imprisonment
Between 1 January 2020 and 31 January 2020
Use a carriage service to solicit child abuse material contrary to s
474.22(1) of the
Criminal Code
15 years imprisonment
6 months imprisonment
Between 27 March 2020 and 27 April 2020
Use a carriage service to transmit indecent material to a person under the
age of 16 years contrary to s 474.27A(1) of the
Criminal Code
7 years imprisonment
On or about 8 May 2020
Possess child abuse material obtained using a carriage service contrary to
s 474.22A(1) of the
Criminal Code
15 years imprisonment
primary judge imposed an effective total sentence of 3 years’ imprisonment
commencing 25 June 2022 to expire on 24 June
2025. Her Honour directed that
after serving 8 months of his sentence, on 24 February 2023, the appellant be
released on a recognisance
release order on giving security in the sum of
$2,000, after which the appellant would be subject to a good behaviour order for
term of 2 years.
Grounds of Appeal challenge both the conviction and the sentence imposed. The
conviction challenge asserts that the appellant
should have leave to withdraw
his pleas of guilty and consequently that the convictions be set aside.
the alternative, the appellant challenges the sentences imposed, alleging that
they were manifestly excessive.
the reasons that follow, the application for leave to withdraw the pleas of
guilty and the sentence appeal are dismissed.
order to give context to our consideration of the Grounds of Appeal, it is
useful to briefly set out the facts relating to the
charges in the indictment
taken from the primary judge’s sentencing remarks and other
non-contentious material. The particular
facts relating to each charge will be
considered later in these reasons.
appellant, who was born in March 1988, made contact through various social media
messaging platforms with young girls whom he
had met through his work at a
trampoline park, through his membership of a cheerleading club, and in the case
of two of the victims,
they were the younger sisters of women with whom the
appellant was in a relationship. In the case of two of the victims, the
importuned each to take nude images of themselves and send them to
him. In relation to another two victims, in the course of communications
the appellant they asked him to buy alcohol for them, which he agreed to do on
condition that they send him nude pictures of
themselves and in relation to one
of those victims, the appellant imposed a second condition which was that she
give him oral sex
(which did not occur), however the appellant delivered the
alcohol to the victim at her school. None of the victims was older than
appellant’s plea
12 November 2020 the appellant entered pleas of not guilty to an indictment
presented in the ACT Magistrates Court. The matter
was committed to the ACT
Supreme Court for trial, for hearing on 15 March 2022. The appellant’s
pleas of guilty were entered
on 15 March 2022, the day fixed for the trial. At
the time of entering the pleas of guilty, the appellant was represented by
and a solicitor. There had been negotiations between the
appellant’s lawyers and the Crown which resulted in the number and
seriousness of the counts alleged against him being reduced.
extensive and detailed statement of agreed facts was before the primary judge.
The details of the offences and the dates on which
they occurred and to which
the appellant pleaded guilty were fully set out.
sentence was heard on 24 June 2022. On 27 June 2022, the appellant was convicted
on his pleas of guilty and sentenced.
25 July 2022, the appellant appealed against the sentences on the basis that
they were manifestly excessive. On 1 December 2022,
the appellant sought leave
to challenge his conviction. The question of leave and if leave is granted,
whether the convictions should
be set aside were considered during the hearing
of the appeal.
29 July 2024, the appellant filed a document entitled “Grounds of Appeal
against sentence/conviction”. While couched
in terms of
“grounds”, the matters to which the document refers are in fact the
reasons why the appellant submits the
Court would grant leave to withdraw his
pleas of guilty. However, for ease of reference, we will refer to the various
document relevantly provided as follows:
GROUNDS OF APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE/CONVICTION
Introduction
of the Case
for Retracting the Plea of Guilt 3.1. Duress and Lack of Voluntariness 3.2.
Pressure from Counsel 3.3. Statement of Remorse
and Responsibility
Evidence 4.1. New Evidence Details 4.2. Relevance and Impact 4.3. Specific New
Ineffective
Assistance of Counsel 5.1. Failure to Follow Directions 5.2. Lack of
Investigation
to Consider Alternative Sentencing 6.1. Judge's Oversight 6.2. Sentencing
Principles 6.3.
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Section 82(1)(a)
Section 16F(2)
in Law Related to Charges Under the Criminal Code Act 1995 7.1. Section
474.19(1)(B) 7.2. Section 474.26(1)(B)
Extra-Curial
Punishment 8.1. Nature of Extra-Curial Punishment 8.2. Impact on Sentencing 8.3.
Additional Considerations
Miscarriage
of Justice 9.1. Unreasonable Conviction 9.2. Insufficient Evidence
Additional Considerations 10.1. No Previous Record 10.2. Low Range of
and Relief Sought Annexures
The conviction
ineffective assistance of counsel
can be seen from the above, in Grounds 3.1, 3.2 and 5, the appellant made
various complaints about his legal representation at
first instance. Those
grounds were ultimately withdrawn during the course of the hearing of the
appeal. What occurred is recorded
for transparency and completeness.
Ground 3.1, the appellant contended that the pleas of guilty were entered under
duress and were not as a result of a voluntary
decision by the appellant. The
appellant said that he felt pressured to take the plea deal despite expressing a
desire to go to trial.
He said that notwithstanding his long expressed desire to
have the charges determined by a jury, he felt pressured by his lawyer
guilty to the charges. He also claimed that he was “not of sound
mind” due to “mental health issues”.
He said he was not aware
of the full consequences and impact of the decision to plead guilty.
Ground 3.2, the appellant asserted that his counsel had pressured him to plead
guilty, notwithstanding the appellant’s insistence
and instructions to
pursue a defence.
Ground 5, a separate but related Ground, the appellant claims that his counsel
failed to follow his instructions to seek a defence
but pressured him to take
the plea deal. He also claims that his counsel failed to properly investigate
the fresh evidence or present
a viable defence strategy constituting ineffective
assistance.
the commencement of the appeal hearing, the Crown observed that the appellant
had produced an affidavit supporting his claims in
relation to duress and the
ineffectiveness of his lawyers and in which he set out his conversations with
his lawyer. The Crown indicated
that she wished to cross examine the appellant
on the affidavit. Concerns were expressed by the Court as to whether the
understood the concept of legal professional privilege, its waiver,
and what waiver might mean for him.
the Court’s request, Ms Katrina Musgrove, a barrister, was contacted by
the ACT Bar Association to offer the appellant pro
bono advice on this issue. Ms
Musgrove made herself available at very short notice and gave advice to the
appellant. The Court must
express its gratitude for her assistance in this
matter which was, in our opinion, in the finest traditions of the bar.
discussed the issue of privilege with Ms Musgrove, the appellant withdrew
reliance on paragraphs 3.1, 3.2 and 5 of the Grounds
for leave to withdraw the
challenges to conviction
remainder of the Grounds of Appeal concerning the appellant’s conviction
were Grounds 4, 7 and 9.
4 contends that the appellant could not properly have been convicted of Count 1
on the indictment because he had evidence that
shows that he could not have
communicated with the victim in the period alleged in Count 1, and thus his plea
of guilty to that charge
gave rise to a miscarriage of justice.
7 contends that errors of law relating to the section of the
Criminal Code
under which Counts 1 and 2 were brought; that the intentional element of
Count 3 was not established by the facts, and in relation
to Count 1, the
appellant believed the victim to be over 16 year of age and thus he could not be
convicted on his plea.
9 contends that the evidence before the primary judge was insufficient to prove
the appellant’s guilt beyond reasonable
doubt and that the conviction was
unreasonable.
4 and 7 are each addressed below, as they raise contentions that a miscarriage
of justice had arisen, such that the appellant
should be given leave to withdraw
his plea of guilty.
respect of Ground 9, the appellant pleaded guilty to the Counts on the
indictment based on the agreed statement of facts tendered
to the primary judge.
That plea encompasses, amongst other things, an acceptance of proof of each
necessary element to the charges:
Meissner v The
(1995) 184 CLR 132
) at 157 and see also
(1986) 22 A Crim R 73
) at 80-81.
those circumstances, there can be no argument that there was insufficient
evidence to support the conviction. Ground 9 must be
dismissed. The
appellant’s convictions must stand unless he is granted leave to withdraw
his pleas of guilty.
is to this question that we now turn.
Should the appellant have
leave to withdraw his pleas of guilty?
relevant principles to be applied in the determination of this issue are set out
[2007] ACTCA 21
1 ACTLR 145
) where at [38] the Court said, “the single test applicable
to all cases is whether there would be a miscarriage of justice
if the plea were
not permitted to be withdrawn ...”. The Court referred to
at 157, where Dawson J said:
It is true that a person may plead guilty upon grounds which extend beyond that
person’s belief in his guilt. He may do so
for all manner of reasons: for
example, to avoid worry, inconvenience or expense; to avoid publicity; to
protect his family or friends;
or in the hope of obtaining a more lenient
sentence than he would if convicted after a plea of not guilty. The entry of a
guilty upon grounds such as these nevertheless constitutes an admission
of all the elements of the offence and a conviction entered
upon the basis of
such a plea will not be set aside on appeal unless it can be shown that a
miscarriage of justice has occurred.
Ordinarily that will only be where the
accused did not understand the nature of the charge or did not intend to admit
he was guilty
of it or if upon the facts admitted by the plea he could not in
law have been guilty of the offence. But the accused may show that
a miscarriage
of justice occurred in other ways and so be allowed to withdraw his plea of
guilty and have his conviction set aside.
For example, he may show that his plea
was induced by intimidation of one kind or another, or by an improper inducement
or by fraud.
(Citations omitted.)
at [39] continued and said apropos a plea of guilty that
it, in this context, means “a voluntary and otherwise tolerable acceptance
of guilt” (emphasis omitted).
[2022] NSWCCA 241
110 NSWLR 163
), the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal undertook a
wide-ranging consideration of the authorities on the question of withdrawal
pleas of guilty and concluded that a different test is to be applied when an
application to withdraw a plea of guilty is made
before conviction and when that
application is made following conviction. As in
, the Court in
concluded at [58] that where a plea is sought to be withdrawn
following conviction, the test to be applied is whether there has been
be a miscarriage of justice were the plea not to be withdrawn.
– errors of law and fact
ground has been considered first as it concerns Counts 1, 2 and 3. In respect
of Counts 1 and 2, each are an offence of using
a carriage service to solicit
child pornography material, contrary to 474.19(1) of the
Criminal Code
over the periods set out at [2] above.
appellant argued error of law, in that the material he solicited from the
victims in Counts 1 and 2 did not meet the definition
pornography”. As a result, he could not legally be convicted of those
charges. He made no submission as to
the definition of child pornography or how
or in what way the material he solicited did not meet the definition of
“child pornography”.
Crown submitted, and we accept, that child pornography is extensively defined in
s 473.1 of the
Criminal Code
and includes the consideration that it is
material that “reasonable persons would regard as being, in all of the
circumstances,
offensive.”
statement of facts tendered on sentence sets out in detail the conversations
between the appellant and the victims in Counts 1
and 2 and the material he
wished them to send him. There was no argument before the primary judge that
the material sought did not
meet the description of child pornography and the
primary judge proceeded to sentence on the basis that the material sought met
description of child pornography material.
the appellant argued that since there was an amendment to s 474.22 after he
pleaded guilty, the elements of the offence changed
and the plea was not capable
of supporting a conviction because it did not address all of the elements of the
we have said, the appellant was charged with an offence under s 474.19 of the
Criminal Code
. In September 2019, s 474.19(1) was repealed and replaced
with s 474.22 which is in identical terms to s 474.19(1) save for the
substitution of the words “child abuse material” for the words
“child pornography material”. It is in respect
to the change of
terminology that the appellant argues an error of law. He contends that the
wording of the amended section does
not accord with the wording of the charges
contained in Counts 1 and 2 on the indictment.
wording of the charges contained in Counts 1 and 2 in the indictment alleges
that the appellant solicited “child pornography
material” because
those were the terms of s 474.19(1) then in force at the time of the offending.
They correctly identify
the elements of the charge at the time of the offending.
It was to those charges that the appellant entered his pleas. It is not
relevant that, at a later time, the wording of the section changed.
respect of Count 3, the charge was brought pursuant to s 474.26(1) of the
Criminal Code,
which is use a carriage service with the intention of
procuring the recipient to engage in sexual activity with the sender. The
argued this had not been established on the facts before the Court.
The appellant argued that the evidence produced by the Crown
was inadequate to
support the charge because the primary judge found that the appellant did not
attempt to have sexual activity with
the complainant.
it is important to be clear about the timing of the offence. The charge
represented in Count 3 refers to the intention of
the appellant at the time of
using the carriage service. The charge concerns a communication recording the
appellant asking the
victim for oral sex in exchange for him bringing her
alcohol, a fact noted by the primary judge. That no sexual activity was later
attempted is irrelevant to the charge, which was established by the agreed
the appellant argued that as he believed the victim in Count 3 was over 16, he
was not properly convicted of that Count.
The appellant first argued that there
was no evidence before the Court on sentence that the victim was under 16.
However, the statement
of agreed facts on which the appellant was sentenced set
out the ages of each of the victims at the time of the offences. In relation
the victim of Count 3, it said she was 15 at the time. Further, that fact was
relied upon by the appellant’s counsel during
the sentencing submissions,
who argued that the objective gravity of the offence in Count 3 should be
lessened because the victim
was 15 and the legal age in relation to this offence
was 16. As outlined above, the appellant’s plea encompassed an acceptance
of proof of each necessary element to the charges: see
and see also
at 80-81. This contention
must therefore be rejected.
further submission, made for the first time on the appeal, was that the
appellant thought the victim in Count 3 was over 16. There
is no evidence to
support that belief, but even if that were the case, there are two separate
answers which defeat the appellant’s
argument. The first is that, as
pointed out by Mossop J in
Kember v The Queen (No
[2022] ACTCA 73
, an offence under s 474.26 of the
is committed in two alternative ways – if the recipient of the
communication is under 16 years of age, or is believed by the
person sending the
communication to be under 16 years of age. In this case, Count 3 was
established on the objective fact of the
victim’s age, not the subjective
belief of the offender. The second answer is that the existence of a possible
available contention
that would contradict an element of an offence does not of
itself suffice to demonstrate any miscarriage of justice arising from
acceptance of a guilty plea.
Accordingly,
none of the errors asserted in relation to Counts 1, 2 and 3 are
established.
– Error of fact in relation to the charge in Count 1
this Ground, the appellant contends that in relation to Count 1, evidence
obtained by him since he was sentenced demonstrates that
he could not have
communicated with the victim at the time specified in the charge and therefore
his plea of guilty to that charge
cannot stand and amounts to a miscarriage of
evidence on which the appellant relies to make out this Ground consists of four
single documents said to be screen shots of his
social media accounts and which
he said showed that he could not have communicated with the victim in Count 1,
referred to as “DF”,
on the dates alleged in the indictment. These
documents were provisionally admitted during the appeal hearing.
appellant referred to these documents as “fresh evidence” and relied
on the well-established authorities to have them
admitted into evidence.
However, we are not convinced that the authorities concerning whether or not
fresh evidence is to be admitted
are relevant to an application for leave to
withdraw pleas of guilty. It is not necessary for these purposes to consider
further, however we must consider the documents to see whether they
make good the appellant’s claims.
four documents purport to show Instagram activity between the appellant and DF.
MFI 1 bears two references to two different usernames
associated with DF under
the heading “Blocked Accounts”. The dates against the accounts are
4 March 2020 and 26 May
2018. The appellant relied on this document as proof
that in relation to two of DF’s Instagram accounts, one was blocked on
May 2018 and the other on 4 March 2020 and he said that DF did not have a phone
available to her when the offences took place.
2 shows a username for DF under “Blocked users” dated 2 January
2015. The appellant contended that the document showed
that having blocked DF
in January 2015 from communication with him, there could be no transmissions
between him and DF from that
date until the present time, and so he could not
have committed the offences.
3 is a page with a heading “Pending Requests” and underneath is a
username of DF, but no date of creation of the “request”
document. The appellant relied on this document to support his contention that
because DF had requested communication
with him, no communication could take
place without his replying to the request.
MFI 4 which was produced at the hearing of the appeal is headed
“Instagram” and shows conversations between the
appellant and a
username of DF commencing on 15 January 2020.
Significant
difficulties attend the court placing any reliance on these documents. First,
they bear no indication of their provenance
other than on documents MFI 1 and
MFI 4, which bear the words “Instagram”. Secondly, in her recorded
interview with
police (MFI 6 in the appeal hearing), DF said that when she first
started to chat with the appellant it was through Snapchat and
later on through
Instagram. She said that she used a number of different usernames on Instagram
and mentioned at least four. She
said she also contacted him using Facebook
none of the dates on which the appellant allegedly “blocked” DF from
communicating with him reflects the dates
of offending in the indictment being
between about 7 June 2016 and 30 November 2017.
and in our view, fatally to the appellant’s argument, is the agreed fact
that 43 nude photographs of DF were found
on the appellant’s phone
corresponding with DF’s account of sending him nude photographs of herself
at his request.
counsel for the Crown also pointed out, these documents also contradict the
appellant’s submission that he had no conversations
with the victim until
those reasons, the material contained in the four separate sheets marked MFI 1
to 4 do not establish the asserted errors of fact.
Conclusion on
conviction appeal
appellant has not demonstrated that a miscarriage of justice has arisen from the
acceptance of his guilty pleas. It follows that
his appeal against his
conviction must be dismissed.
Appeal against
The sentence
order to consider the argument of the appellant that the sentences imposed were
manifestly excessive (individually and cumulatively),
it is helpful to briefly
set out the circumstance of each offence.
Count 1 – using a carriage service to solicit child
pornography material
victim in relation to this charge was aged about 13 when she first met the
appellant. She was the younger sister of a young woman,
herself about 21 or 22,
with whom the appellant was having a sexual relationship. The appellant and the
victim communicated via
Snapchat. At some stage during those conversations, the
appellant asked the victim to send him nude pictures of herself. Although
initially reluctant, the victim began sending the appellant photos of herself.
The primary judge said at [7] that the appellant
encouraged the victim to do so
in a way the primary judge described as “manipulative”. Her Honour
noted the appellant
saying to the victim that if she cared for him, she would
send him the intimate photographs.
was an hiatus in the relationship which resumed in early 2019, again via
Snapchat when the victim was aged 15. She added the
appellant to her contacts
and they began to communicate again. The victim sent the appellant pictures of
herself, sometimes at his
request, sometimes unprompted.
Honour found the objective seriousness was below the mid-range of offences of
the type. In coming to that view, her Honour took
into account the age
difference between the victim and the appellant and the length of time over
which the offending took place,
some 17 months, and because the victim created
the images at the appellant’s request.
appellant was sentenced to 16 months imprisonment to commence on 25 June
Count 2 – using a carriage service to solicit child
pornography material
relation to this offence, the victim was aged between 14 and 15 years old at the
date of offending. She met the appellant through
being on the same cheerleading
team. The appellant and the victim communicated through Snapchat and formed a
friendship. From time
to time the victim would confide in the appellant about
mental health difficulties she was experiencing. Early in 2018, on one occasion
the appellant encouraged the victim to send him an explicit photograph of
herself. The victim “laughed off” this request
and refused. Later
when the victim was about 16 years old, the appellant again asked her to send
him nude photographs of herself.
The victim was reluctant but eventually sent
the appellant a photograph of herself with her breasts exposed.
primary judge considered this offence to fall below the mid range of offences of
this type. However, her Honour noted at [20]
that the victim impact statement
prepared by the victim referred to her confiding in the appellant her mental
health difficulties
and as a result of his offending, she has not only lost
trust in the appellant but in the therapy and support she needed to deal
her mental health. Her Honour had regard to the effect of the appellant’s
actions on the victim.
appellant was sentenced to 10 months imprisonment to commence on 25 June 2023
being partially accumulated on the sentence for
Count 3 – use a carriage service to transmit a
communication with intent to procure engagement in sexual activity
victim of this offence was 15 years old, and she and the appellant exchanged
conversations through Instagram. The victim instigated
the conversations when
she asked whether the appellant could supply her with alcohol. He said that he
would in exchange for photographs.
Although the victim sent photographs, the
appellant was dissatisfied with them and, after asking the victim what type of
she wanted, said: “[w]ell you’ve got an hour to send me at
least something decent then, you can send better ones.”
primary judge noted at [31] that the conversation continued and culminated in
the victim agreeing to give the appellant oral sex
in exchange for alcohol.
While the appellant purchased the alcohol and delivered it to the victim at
school, there was no suggestion
before the primary judge that the agreed sexual
activity took place.
Honour found that this offending fell at the lower end of the range of objective
seriousness.
this Count the appellant was sentenced to 8 months imprisonment partially
accumulated on the sentence for Count 2.
Count 4 – use a carriage service to solicit child abuse
the appellant encouraged a teenage girl to send him explicit nude photographs of
herself. The victim was the younger sister
of a person with whom the appellant
was then in an intimate relationship.
the relationship between the appellant and the victim’s sister, the
appellant and the victim became close, and they would
spend time together in the
absence of the victim’s sister. The facts before her Honour recorded that
from time to time the
appellant would deliver KFC to the victim at her school in
exchange for a “daily photo” or “daily snap” on
the victim was 15 years old, she asked the appellant to purchase alcohol for her
and he said he would if she sent him photographs
of herself. She refused. The
appellant downloaded photographs of the victim in her swimming costume she had
posted on Instagram
and messaged the victim saying: “You post photos like
this, but you won’t even send photos to someone who has been in
for ages”. Eventually the victim blocked the appellant from her social
primary judge found this offence to fall at the lower end of objective
seriousness.
appellant was sentenced to 6 months imprisonment to commence on 25 June 2024
being partially accumulated on the sentence for Count
Count 5 – use carriage service to transmit indecent
material to a person under 16 years
this case, the appellant knew the victim as she was the younger sister of one of
the other victims through the cheerleading association.
At this time the
appellant was 32 years old. He communicated with the victim over a period of
one month in which he asked the victim
told her that he and her sister had exchanged nude photos. In a conversation
sexual experience, the appellant asked her whether she
sent “nudes” and she replied that she did not and was “not
like that”.
primary judge accepted that in this Count the appellant persisted in questioning
the victim about her sexual experience when she
had told him she did not want to
have the discussion, however concluded that the offending fell at the lower end
of the range of
objective seriousness because the offending occurred twice and
the indecency related to conversation.
appellant was sentenced to 3 months imprisonment to commence on 25 December 2024
being partially accumulated on the sentence for
Count 6 – possess child abuse material
police executed a search warrant of the appellant’s home, the material to
which this charge relates was discovered on the
appellant’s iPhone on an
application which required passcode access.
nature of the material was ascribed a category. The primary judge recorded at
[44] that most of the material in the appellant’s
possession was of
Category 1 being “[i]mages of children which are likely to cause offence
to a reasonable adult, but where
there is no sexual activity taking place. There
is no specific requirement for nudity or for a particular focus on, or attention
to, the genitals. However, the image must be sexually suggestive or sexual in
Honour saw a sample of the material seized and said at [45] that “[m]ost
of the photos were nude photos of the kind one
might expect to see in
pornographic literature which is restricted to persons over 18”.
was one image that fell within Category 2 which is defined as “[s]exual
acts between children only, with no part of the
body being penetrated, and the
solo masturbation by a child”. Her Honour at [47] said that the photo in
question was of one
girl with her hand down her underpants.
assessing the objective seriousness of this offence, the primary judge accepted
that the offence fell at the lower end of the range
of objective seriousness.
Her Honour indicated that she came to that conclusion because probably the
victims depicted were between
15 and 18, although the dates suggest that one
victim was 15. Her Honour indicated that one victim could have been between 13
16 but the date stamp on the photo made the determination of her age
appellant was sentenced to 6 months imprisonment to commence on 25 December 2024
and to be served wholly concurrently with the
sentence imposed for Count
circumstances
psychological report was before the primary judge in which, amongst other
things, the author considered the appellant’s risk
of recidivism, which he
assessed as being low to moderate. The author of the report also said that his
risk will reduce because the
offending was related in part to the
appellant’s social milieu with which he was connected at the time of his
offending while
pursuing a sporting career which, the psychologist described, as
being overly sexualised. The primary judge said that while this
context does
not excuse the offending, it served to explain the circumstances of it.
primary judge concluded that the appellant’s childhood emotional
deprivation had “some” causal connection with
the offending. She
further accepted that because of his background he is more vulnerable to
offending of the present kind. She
found he had good prospects of
rehabilitation provided he remains connected with his pro-social supports.
primary judge took into account that at the time of sentence, the
appellant’s father was suffering from Alzheimer’s
disease which was
progressing and that there was a significant prospect that on the
appellant’s release from prison, his father
may not recognise
primary judge noted that it was accepted that a custodial sentence of some kind
was warranted. As to specific deterrence she
observed that the effect of being
charged has had a salutary effect on the appellant even though he had minimised
the severity of
his offences.
considering the nature of the offending the primary judge found the offences
were individually culpable and distinct in time. Her
Honour noted that to make
the sentences wholly cumulative would result in a crushing sentence.
Honour, as she was entitled, took into account the implicit harm that flows from
offences of this kind and the concomitant need
to protect children from making
immature decisions.
appellant’s plea was entered on the day of the hearing and the primary
judge accepted that it obviated the need for the
victims to give evidence, which
she said was “better than no plea at all”. Her Honour indicated that
the discount to
be afforded to the appellant on sentence was reflected between
10 to 15 percent.
primary judge determined to impose a custodial sentence but to release the
appellant on a recognisance release order after a period
of imprisonment of 8
months to give effect to the prospects of rehabilitation and to take into
account hardship to the appellant’s
Appeal Grounds
the ground of appeal asserts that the sentences were manifestly excessive, the
appellant’s written document identifies
several matters which we will
consider as part of the overall challenge to the sentence. The appellant
contends that the primary
judge erred in that she did not consider or properly
take into account:
(a) the availability of alternative sentencing
options other than full time custody;
(b) his lack of criminal convictions;
(c) the low range of objective seriousness of the offending; and
(d) extra curial punishment.
is well accepted that where, as here, the ground of appeal asserts that a
sentence or sentences imposed are “manifestly excessive”,
intervention will only occur where the Court is satisfied that there has been an
error of the kind referred to in
House v The
(1936) 55 CLR 499
. That is, the appellant must demonstrate that there is a
specific error of fact or law, or that the sentence is such that it may
inferred that there was some misapplication of principle in the sentencing of
the appellant, even though when and how is not apparent
from the sentencing
judge’s reasons.
intervention is not justified simply because an appellate court may have a
different view as to the most appropriate sentence
Lowndes v The Queen
Markarian v The
[2005] HCA 25; 228 CLR 357 at [28]) or where the sentence is
markedly different from sentences that have been imposed in other cases
Wong v The Queen
207 CLR 584
v The Queen; Jones v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
appellant must establish that the sentence imposed falls “wholly outside
the available sentencing range” and the appeal
will only succeed if the
appellate court considers that the sentence is “unreasonable or plainly
Dinsdale v The
[2000] HCA 54
202 CLR 321
is against this legal principle that we turn to consider the appellant’s
availability of alternate sentencing options to full time
appellant contended that the primary judge erred in not considering community
service, rehabilitation programs or suspended sentences
rather than full time
custody. Further, he argued that her Honour failed to explain why no sentence
other than full time custody
was appropriate. In short, the appellant contended
that the sentence of imprisonment was disproportionate to the objective
seriousness
of the offences.
her reasons for sentence, the primary judge reflected on the objective
seriousness of the individual offences and she found them
to be within the
mid-to-low range of offences of this type. However, that is not to say that they
were not attended by significant
seriousness. For example, the appellant used
social media to prey on the younger siblings of women with whom he was in a
relationship,
on occasions agreeing to provide the victims with alcohol in
return for them providing him with nude photographs. On one occasion
delivered the alcohol to the school that the victim was attending. The
appellant was at all material times many years their senior.
At the sentence
hearing, the appellant’s counsel conceded that nothing short of a
custodial sentence was appropriate to reflect
the objective gravity of the
offending and her Honour agreed with that concession: Primary Judgment at [86].
However, it is not
the case that there was any failure to explain that finding.
It is apparent from her Honour’s reasoning at [84] that deterrence
denunciation were the principal factors to which her Honour gave effect.
primary judge then dealt with the manner of the sentence. In that regard, the
reasons must be understood in the context of the
submissions that were made to
the Court. The submission was that “a recognisance release order would be
appropriate after
the offender has served a salutary brief period in
prison”: Primary Judgment at [87].
that was the focus of the case presented, there was no error in the primary
judge not referring to a fully-suspended sentence,
with or without community
service, as available sentencing options. It has been repeatedly stated by
appellate courts that a sentencing
judge does not need to rehearse every
conceivable consideration on sentence, and indeed, such a practice should be
[2020] ACTCA 8
Fares v DPP (No 2)
[2025] ACTCA 2
As stated in
Higgins v The Queen
[2022] ACTCA
, sentencing remarks need not be elaborate and it is unnecessary to
structure them as a checklist “to avoid the prospect of
an ‘armchair
appeal’ at a later stage seizing upon any missing reference as evidence of
Accordingly,
the sentencing judge was not required to raise those alternatives only to
discard them as patently not reflective of
the seriousness of the offending.
That such alternatives were not appropriate was a point manifestly understood by
the appellant’s
counsel at first instance, by the submissions that were
put and with which her Honour engaged at [87]-[92].
criminal record
same reasoning applies to the lack of a reference to the appellant’s prior
criminal record. The relevance of the lack of
a prior criminal history is
really directed to whether the offender is a person of prior good character and
as such entitled to leniency:
Veen v The Queen
(1988) 164 CLR 465 at 477-8. The primary judge accepted that the
conduct to which the offender pleaded guilty was out of character
Primary Judgment at [64]. As that finding encapsulates consideration of the
offender’s criminal history, there was
no requirement for the primary
judge to expressly refer to every item of evidence supporting the finding.
Low range of
objective seriousness
primary judge’s reasons at [5]-[49] reflect a detailed assessment of the
objective seriousness of the individual charges
as reflected against other
offences of a similar nature. Merely characterising them as falling within the
mid to low range does
not mean that of themselves the offences were not grave
and did not involve significant criminality.
curial punishment
appellant contended that as a result of his conviction he has been subject to
public vilification and personal harm (this was
not elaborated on in either the
written or oral submissions). The appellant also stressed that, as a result of
his criminal conviction,
he is unable to travel to many countries.
evidence before the court did not establish any particular “public
opprobrium” visited upon the appellant such as
to constitute extra curial
punishment of the kind described in
[2020] NSWCCA 81
and the cases there-cited. To the extent that the
appellant may now be unable to travel to other countries, that does not
punishment that goes beyond that of the imposition of sentence. It
is more properly understood as the ordinary consequence of being
convicted of a
Melville v The King
[2023] NSWCCA
same reasoning applies to the appellant’s reliance upon the consequences
of the sentence for his partner, in terms of visa
complications and mental
distress experienced by her. This included the appellant being unable to travel
with her to Russia to see
her family and her anxiety that she may not be able to
obtain a visa to remain in Australia because of the appellant’s
convictions.
This matter was not directly raised with the primary judge on the
appellant’s plea. A passing reference was made in the medical
referring to the partner’s medical condition and the letter from the
doctor itself was referred to by the primary
judge as part of the materials her
Honour had considered on sentence: Primary Judgment at [63]. Again, neither the
submissions nor
the evidence, such as it was, establish that this matter fell
outside the ordinary consequence of a criminal conviction, such as
to constitute
extra-curial punishment.
Hardship to
third parties
of the mandatory considerations of the
Crimes Act 1914
the probable effect of any sentence on an offender’s family or dependants:
s 16A(2)(p)
, discussed in
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Ka-Hung Ip
[2005] ACTCA 24
the sentencing hearing, the appellant produced evidence of his father’s
Alzheimer’s disease and its predicted deterioration.
The appellant said
that during his incarceration, the progress of his father’s
Alzheimer’s disease has advanced to the
point where he does not recognise
the appellant. That is no doubt a personal tragedy for the appellant.
primary judge made specific reference to the circumstances of the
appellant’s father and noted that during the appellant’s
incarceration his father’s condition may well deteriorate, as it appears
to have done: Primary Judgment at [83]. However her
Honour continued that the
importance of this matter cannot be overplayed because deterrence and
denunciation of the appellant’s
conduct must be the principal factors in
the sentencing exercise: Primary Judgment at [84]. As has been emphasised at
level in a number of jurisdictions considering federal offences of
this type, general deterrence is the primary sentencing consideration
offending involving the online sexual exploitation of children, given the
vulnerability of children online and the need to protect
children both from the
potential for sexual abuse and from the harm caused by insidious or graphic
sexualised communications directed
at children: see, for example,
[2008] VSCA 268
(2008) 192 A Crim R 76
, [56]-[57];
Gifford v R
[2016] NSWCCA 302
at 384 and the
authority there-cited.
relevant consideration having been manifestly considered, the question of weight
to be given to hardship was a discretionary one
for the primary judge (
at [61]). On the principled application of the discretion, it was clearly
open to her Honour to give weight to the sentencing objectives
she did and as
such, the appellant’s complaint does not provide any basis for appellate
intervention.
Consideration
of individual and cumulative sentence in context of features of
remains to consider the complaint of manifest excess in terms of each individual
sentence and the overall challenge maintained
to the cumulative total effective
sentence. In that regard, neither the individual sentences, nor a sentence of 3
years’ imprisonment
with release following a period of 8 months in
full-time custody are manifestly indicative of any misapplication of principle.
the contrary, the imposition of such a sentence following the appropriate
weighing of the relevant subjective factors was within
a range of legitimate
outcomes, both individually and cumulatively.
Accordingly,
the appellant has not established that her Honour’s sentence was
manifestly excessive, unreasonable, or plainly
unjust, nor that the decision was
infected by any specific error. It follows that the appellant’s appeal
against the sentences
imposed must be dismissed.
the above reasons, the Court makes the following order:
(1) The appeal is dismissed.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and thirteen [113] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Date: 28 February 2025
RTF format (352 KB)
Signed PDF/A format