Director-General, Community Services Directorate v BQ and KQ [2024] ACTCC 2 (6 May 2024)
CHILDRENS COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Director-General, Community Services Directorate v BQ and KQ
[2024] ACTCC 2
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Magistrate Stewart
See [90]-[93]
Catchwords:
CARE AND PROTECTION
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– Care Proceeding – Parental responsibility – Out of home care
- Extension
of short-term parental responsibility – Acts of Parliament
– Interpretation – Rebuttable presumption for long-term
responsibility – Rebuttable presumption not engaged
Legislation Cited:
Children and Young People Act 2008
Legislation Act 2001
Cases Cited:
Blue Metal Industries v Dilley
[1969] UKPCHCA 2
(1969) 117 CLR
Calatzis v Jones
[2024] ACTSC 42
Civil and Civic Corp Pty Ltd v Nova Builders Pty Ltd
[2023] ACTCA
Director-General, Community Services
Directorate v NW and LW
[2023] ACTCC 3
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
(2012) 250 CLR 503
Hudson v ACT Magistrate Court and Anor
[2014] ACTSC 192
JH v Director-General, Community Services Directorate
[2012] ACTSC
Minister for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs v Wendy Susan Baker
[1997] FCA 105
Stowe Australia Pty Ltd v Kelly
[2013] ACTCA 18
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
The Electricity Trust of South Australia v Krone (Australia) Technique
Pty Ltd, Krone Ag and Krone Gmbh
[1994] FCA 1209
[1994] 51 FCR 540
Walsh v Tattersall
[1996] HCA 26
(1996) 188 CLR 77
WS v Director-General, Community Services Directorate
[2018] ACTSC
Texts Cited:
Explanatory Statement
Children and Young People Act 2008
Department of Disability, Housing and Community Services and Department of
Justice and Community Safety, ACT Government,
Second Report on Key Findings:
Review of the Children and Young People Act 1999
(Report, December
Director-General, Community Services Directorate (Applicant)
Respondent Father
Respondent Mother
Child Representative
Maternal Grandmother
Representation:
Katrina Musgrove (Applicant)
Hugh Jorgensen (Respondent Father)
Desmond Leyden (Respondent Mother)
Cesira Mussato (Children’s Representative)
Maternal Grandmother, Self-Represented
ACT Government Solicitor (Applicant)
Aboriginal Legal Service (NSW/ACT) (Respondent Father)
Des Leyden and Associates Lawyers (Respondent Mother)
Legal Aid ACT
(Children’s Representative)
Maternal Grandmother, Self-Represented
File Number:
CP 98 of 2023
CP 99 of 2023
MAGISTRATE STEWART:
and KQ are now aged eight years and six years respectively. On 9 March 2021,
they were taken into care by way of emergency action.
On 20 July 2021, a
Magistrate of this Court made a final care and protection order for two years.
On 11 July 2023,
the Director-General, Community
Services Directorate (the DG) filed an originating application seeking to extend
the care and protection
orders for each child until they attain the age of 18
way through the hearing of the application to extend the orders to 18 years the
father sought a ruling about the applicability
Children and Young People Act 2008
(ACT) (CYP Act).
Applicant and other parties sought to file written submissions on the
interpretation of s 477. The proceedings were adjourned
by consent to enable a
determination to be made.
names of the children and parties have been anonymised to protect the children
from being identified.
A Rebuttable Presumption of Extension of Short-Term Parental
Responsibility
477 of the CYP Act creates the statutory framework for the extension of a
short-term parental responsibility provision in
a care and protection order.
section requires the Court to be satisfied that it is in the best interests of
the child or young person to extend a short-term
parental responsibility
provision. It also creates a rebuttable presumption based on the age of the
child or young person that it
is in their best interests to be subject to a
long-term parental responsibility provision where certain conditions are met:
parental responsibility
provision—extension
(1) The Childrens
Court may extend a short-term parental responsibility provision in a care
and protection order (the
extension decision
satisfied that extending the provision is in the best interests of the child or
young person.
(2) However, for subsection (1) it is a rebuttable presumption
that it is in the best interests of the child or young person for
the child or
young person to be subject to a long-term parental responsibility provision
(a) for a child who is younger than 2 years old when the
extension decision is made—
(i) the director‑general has had an aspect of daily care
responsibility or long-term care responsibility for a total of at
1 year before the extension decision is made; and
(ii) the child or young person has been living with a stated
person under a care and protection order for a total of at least 1 year
before the extension decision is made; or
(b) in any other case—
(i) the director‑general has had an aspect of daily care
responsibility or long-term care responsibility for—
(A) the 2 years immediately before the extension decision is
(B) a total of at least 2 years in the 3 years
immediately before the extension decision is made; and
(ii) the child or young person has been living with a stated
person under a care and protection order for—
(A) the 2 years immediately before the extension decision is
(B) a total of at least 2 years in the 3 years
immediately before the extension decision is made.
(3) To rebut the presumption, a person who is a parent of the
child or young person, or someone else who has had parental responsibility
the child or young person during the term of the order, must satisfy the
Childrens Court that—
(a) the person is likely to be able to resume care of the child or
young person during the period of extension; and
(b) it is in the best interests of the child or young person for
the person to resume care of the child or young person during the
(4) In subsection (2):
stated person
(a) the carer under the care and protection order; or
(b) one parent to the exclusion of another parent; or
(c) a family member who is not a parent.
A short-term parental responsibility provision may be
extended, amended or revoked under pt 14.5.
If an application has been made to the Childrens Court for
a care and protection order and the application is adjourned, any parental
responsibility provision that is in force at the time of the adjournment may be
extended until the end of the adjournment or revoked
(see s 431).
issue in this decision is how the section should be interpreted, and,
ultimately, whether the rebuttable presumption under s 477(2)(b)
is able to be
relied upon by the DG in the circumstances of this matter.
section provides for two preconditions to be satisfied before the rebuttable
presumption for extension of a care order is engaged.
The first precondition
relates to whether the DG has held an aspect of daily care responsibility or
long-term care responsibility
for the child or children in the previous two or
three years.
second precondition appears at s 477(2)(b)(ii) and relates to the living
circumstances of a child or children in the previous
two or three years. It is
the interpretation of this precondition that has given rise to this decision.
Put broadly, the question
to be answered is this: Should this subsection be read
to mean that any number of placements with any number of carers for the previous
two years or two out of three years will satisfy the second precondition of the
presumption to extend orders (“
the multiple placement
”), or should s 477(2)(b)(ii) be interpreted to read that the
second precondition for the engagement of the presumption of extension
requires a stable placement with one carer for the previous two years or two out
of three years (“
the singular placement
does “a stated person” mean one placement with one out of home carer
or more than one placement with one out
of home carer?
is an important issue as, for a multiplicity of reasons, not all children in the
care of the DG are able to be placed in singular
placements during short term
is also important because if the presumption is engaged the onus of proving the
best interests of the children and where they should
be placed falls upon the
respondent parents (who are often unrepresented) and (potentially) the
Children’s Representative (CR)
rather than the DG who is usually relying
upon the section to assist in her application to extend the orders until age
previous paragraph should not be read to mean that where the presumption for
extension does apply the DG has to do nothing in
terms of evidence and has no
onus of proof at all. The Court must decide what is in the best interests of
each child regardless of
who has the onus of
Necessarily the DG must
provide evidence of what has occurred since her intervention in a child’s
life and what is planned
for the future to show what she says is in a
child’s best interests. Further, if the DG was to simply rely on the
presumption and adduce no evidence it might make the
respondent’s case far easier to prove.
it is clear that the DG’s tactical preparation for, and presentation of a
case where there is no such presumption and
it carries the burden of proof (for
example where the child is older than two years old and had been subject to
parental responsibility
provisions in an order for 18 months or is an 18 month
old who has been subject to orders for nine months), might be quite different
a case where it had the benefit of the presumption of an order continuing until
any party to a proceeding, the DG has a discretion to choose how to prepare her
case. It may be in some cases that it is more
expedient, or fairer, or it would
be of assistance to the Court for the DG to ignore the statutory presumption and
press on proving
her case on what is in the best interests of a child on the
civil standard of proof. It is the very nature of litigation that each
different and that some call for novel approaches.
The Submissions of the Parties
A. SUBMISSIONS OF THE DG AS APPLICANT
her counsel, the DG advanced a multiple placement argument as being the correct
interpretation of s 477(2)(b)(ii).
DG pointed out that the first precondition for the rebuttable presumption
contained in s 477 was satisfied because the DG has
had an aspect of daily care
responsibility for BQ and KQ for two years before the extension decision will
ultimately be made. In
fact, that responsibility has been held by the DG for
over three years since emergency action was taken on 9 March
DG submitted that the second precondition was also satisfied, because she
submitted that both children had been living with ‘a
stated person’
under a care and protection order for the two years immediately prior to an
eventual order being made.
DG submitted that the legislative drafter was free to use the terms “a
single stated person” or “the stated
person” or “one
stated person”, but instead chose to use the term “a stated
DG pointed to the definition provided in s 477(4) of the CYP
(4) In subsection (2):
stated person
(a) the carer under the care and protection order; or
(b) one parent to the exclusion of another parent; or
(c) a family member who is not a parent.
DG submitted that
Minister for Immigration & Ethnic Affairs v Wendy Susan
[1997] FCA 105
was authority for her proposition that the word
“or” in s 277(4) should be used conjunctively rather than
disjunctively,
or, as Von Dousa J said in
The Electricity Trust of South
Australia v Krone (Australia) Technique Pty Ltd, Krone Ag and Krone Gmbh
[1994] FCA 1209
[1994] 51 FCR 540
each option should “
be construed as
an alternative, but not as mutually exclusive
alternatives
DG submitted that the combination of this showed that the legislature did not
intend for a requirement of one carer.
the DG submitted that in relation to the term “the carer”,
Legislation Act
(ACT) should be observed and that it
should be read as a plural.
DG submitted that this decision should be made in the broader interests of all
children and young people rather than in the interests
of BQ and KQ and pointed
to the operation of ss 7, 8, 9, 349 and 350 of the CYP Act in this regard and
for the context in which s
477 should be construed.
DG submitted that
Legislation Act 2001
allowed for secondary material to be considered by the Court, and in particular,
the explanatory statement (ES) to the
Children and Young People Bill 2008
to work out the meaning of the CYP Act and s 477 specifically.
I accepted that submission.
DG finally submitted that a narrow or restrictive interpretation of s
477(2)(b)(ii) would be contrary to the stated intention
as it would artificially
and unnecessarily reduce the applicability of the section and that “a
stated person’ should
be read as being any one or combination of the
various definitions of stated person in s 477(4).
B. SUBMISSIONS OF THE CR
CR pointed out that the children in this matter have been in their current
kinship placement since December 2023 – about
CR advanced singular placement argument submissions. She submitted that the ES
made it clear that s 477 was introduced to give
stability to children and young
people who had entered out of home care.
CR submitted that the word “stability” in the ES should be read to
include ensuring stability in a child’s care
arrangement, bringing
permanency and certainty at an earlier stage to the child and consistency in who
is making parental responsibility
CR pointed out two other references to the term “the carer” in the
CYP Act and submitted that the term seems to refer
to a single person in those
other places in the same act:
529JA(5)(b), which allows the DG to provide financial assistance “if the
previous out-of-home carer was a foster career
– to the foster
carer’s approved kinship and foster care organisation, for the
organisation to provide to
854 which I repeat in full here:
Out-of-home
carer and approved kinship and foster care organisation-giving information
necessary for responsibilities
(1) A carer may give
someone protected information, that is not sensitive information, about a child
or young person if-
(a) the carer considers that giving the information is necessary for the proper
exercise of the carer’s responsibilities for
the child or young person;
(b) the giving of the information is in accordance with any directions given by
the director-general.
(2) In this section:
(a) an out-of-home carer; or
(b) an approved kinship and foster care organisation.
CR submitted that s 482(b) of the CYP Act should be afforded scrutiny as it also
uses the term “a stated person” as
that section, on her case,
clearly envisages a stated person being one person only. Section 482 does,
however, contain a different
definition of ‘stated person’ to s
“stated person
means the person to whom the
court proposes to transfer daily care responsibility and long-term care
responsibility for the child
or young person under the proposed enduring
parental responsibility provision.”
CR, in closing, submitted that a singular placement approach to s 477 remains
consistent with the objects and principles of the
CYP Act and observed that in
her experience, such an approach would have little impact on the majority of
cases in any event.
C. SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENT PARENTS
respondent mother declined to file submissions. No inference is to be drawn from
his legal representatives, the respondent father of the children advanced a
singular placement argument at the hearing and
in written submissions. He
submitted that the rebuttable presumption in s 477 cannot apply to this matter
as it should only apply
where the child or young person has been in the same
living arrangement with the same carer for two years (or two out of three
father commenced by mounting an argument that the present care
contained orders that were
already long-term parenting provisions on each order and, therefore, s 477 does
(g) That the daily care responsibility for the child
be transferred to the Director-General, for a period of 2 years
(h) that long term care responsibility for the child be transferred to the
director-general, for a period of 2 years; and...
found that this to be a flawed argument. The CYP Act is clear at s 479 that a
long- term parental responsibility provision is one
in force until 18 years old
that transfers daily care responsibility and long-term care responsibility to
the DG or another stated
responsibility is defined at s 15 of the CYP Act to include daily care
responsibility as well as long-term responsibility.
It is probably unfortunate
then that the Act re-uses “long-term” when defining orders to 18
years and ‘short term
orders” when defining one or two year orders.
The submission cannot succeed when the sections are read together – as
confusing as they might appear to be. I reject this argument and find that s 477
does potentially apply to the present application
because it is an application
to extend short-term (as in two year) parental responsibility
provisions.
to interpreting what a ‘stated person’ is under s 477(2)(b)(ii), the
father submitted that the definition of a stated
person under s 477(4) means the
carer under the care and protection order (a), one parent to the exclusion of
another parent (b),
or a family member who is not a parent (c) without listing
the DG or simply anyone with parental responsibility.
father submitted that only where the child or young person has been in the same
household is the presumption enlivened and that
this is different to a situation
where a child or young person has been under the care of the DG in multiple
living arrangements.
The father further submitted that the differentiation in
the two requirements is a deliberate attempt by the drafters of the legislation
to shape the presumption.
father submitted that the ES contained the suggestion that stability in out of
father made the point that the two-stage test in s 477 (the two preconditions
for enlivening the presumption) was unnecessary
if the intention was that the
presumption should apply to all children in the care of the DG. Such an
intention could have been executed
by using the first precondition at s
477(2)(b)(i) without any requirement for the second at s 477(2)(b)(ii). The
father submitted
that this meant that stability of out of home placement must be
a requirement before a parent’s right or ability to challenge
application for 18-year orders is made more difficult by the
presumption.
was submitted that the term “the carer” rather than “a
carer” in the definition at s 477(4) suggests an
intention to personalise
the application of the provision.
Importantly,
the father submitted that the children had been “living with their
maternal grandmother (MGM) since December 2023
following a series of different
placements throughout the course of the 2-year order put in place in July
2021”. I asked for
clarification of this after submissions were closed and
the parties provided a list of placements that the children had been placed
since being in the care of the DG.
the father submitted that in the overall context of the CYP Act and, in
particular, s 350 which sets out that the primary
responsibility for care of
children lies with the parents and priority must be given to supporting the
parents in this
D. SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENT MGM
MGM is the present carer for the two children as has been so since 20 December
2023. She advanced a singular placement argument
but posed the question of
whether singular placement was an aspirational or actual requirement of s
MGM set out the amendment history of the CYP Act and referred to
Director-General, Community Services Directorate
[2018] ACTSC 144
Director-General, Community Services Directorate v NW and LW
3, concluding that both decisions did not shine light on the issue
at bar as both cases appeared to deal with extension applications
where there
had been settled long-term out-of-home placements. I agree.
MGM pointed out that in the ES there appeared a recurring theme of stability in
placements and that in three separate places the
document referred to a desire
for stability for children and young
MGM submitted that there had been a report published entitled the “Second
report on key findings from the review of the
Children and Young People Act
” and that at page 22 that report had “
described considerable
interest and concern whether the care and protection system can provide
stability given that over 20% of children
in care experience more than three
placements”.
E. SUBMISSIONS IN REPLY FROM THE DG
DG filed further submissions on 24 April 2024. No party objected to the Court
receiving them.
DG submitted that the Second Report on the
Key Findings “Review of the
Children and Young People Act 1999
referred to a concern about multiple
short term orders rather than multiple placements. This cannot be
DG re-emphasized the contents of the ES and its reference to stability in orders
and not on stability of placement. This cannot
be refuted.
DG pointed out that s 482 has its own definition of ‘stated person’
and therefore could not assist with the interpretation
person’ in s 477. This cannot be refuted.
DG made the following submissions on the definition of
'The carer'
term 'the carer' is not defined in the
Children and Young People Act 2008
In considering what 'the carer' in section 477(4){a) means,
literal comparisons to other sections using the term are not of assistance.
Rather, the CYP Act as relates to who may provide care to child or young person
pursuant to a care and protection order needs to
be considered as the
sub-section reads:
Stated person means:
The carer under the care and protection order; ...
is, it is relating to the carer for the child or young people pursuant to a care
and protection order as is in place. That then
requires consideration of who can
be a carer of a child or young person pursuant to care and protection
15.4 CYP Act relates to out-of-home carers. Section 509 provides that if the
Director-General has daily care responsibility for
a child or young person, then
the Director-General must place that child or young person with an out of home
carer, subject to exceptions
such as placement in a health facility or an
independent living arrangement for a young person over 16 years.
Section 508 defines who is an out-of‑ home carer
508 Who is an out-of-home carer? In this Act:
Out- of- home carer, for a child or young person, means -
a) A kinship carer of the child or young person; or
b) A foster carer for the child or young person; or
c) A residential care service for the child or young person.
15.4.2. CYP Act provides that if the Director-General has daily care
responsibility or long-term care responsibility for
a child or young person,
they may authorise a kinship carer
, a foster carer
a residential care service
to exercise that daily care or long-term
care responsibility for the Director-General.
one of those listed 'out-of-home carers' could be 'the carer' for a child or
young person under and care and protection order
at any point of time. That
includes a residential care service, which by its very nature is not an
individual person but an organisation
providing residential
none of the sections allowing for the Director-General to authorise an
out-of‑ home carer are exclusive in their language;
that is, nothing on
the face of the sections excludes multiple out-of-home carers being authorised
at the same time. Indeed section
474 CYP Act, which provides what a parental
responsibility provision is, specifically allows for parental responsibility for
or young person to be shared at 474(b)(iii).
all of the circumstances, when the provisions of the CYP Act, particularly those
relating to who may be out-of-home carers pursuant
to care and protection
orders, are looked at holistically, there is no basis to read 'the carer' under
section 477(1)(a) on a narrow
or singular basis.
The Placement History of BQ and KQ in Out of Home Care
in mind that BQ and KQ are now aged eight years and six years respectively and
have been in the DG’s care since 9 March
2021, on my reckoning on the
information provided by the parties by email on 17 April 2024, the children had
been in 15 different
foster or kinship placements prior to going into the care
of the MGM on 20 December 2023. This figure of 15 does not include the
different respite placements in the same period.
no party has made any submission on this information, it is safe to take
judicial notice of the fact that these two children
being subject to such in
stability in placements could not be in their best interests.
Working out the Meaning of s 477
Honour Penfold J was considering the meaning of s 470 of the CYP Act in
Director-General, Community Services Directorate
[2012] ACTSC 30
“However, the drafter’s
failure to put the matter beyond doubt in such a way is not the end of the
matter. It is still
necessary to work out what meaning is to be given to the
provision, and in particular to the words “before the application
There are various considerations in interpreting s 470(3). I note first that,
in working out the meaning of an Act, the
Legislation Act 2001
requires the provisions of an Act to be read in the context of the act as a
whole (s 140); permits consideration of various
extrinsic materials (s 141); and
also requires that the interpretation that would best achieve the purpose of the
Act is to be preferred
to any other interpretation, whether or not the
Act’s purpose is expressly stated (s 139). Section 138 defines
out the meaning of and Act” as:
(a) resolving an ambiguous or obscure provision of the Act; or
(b) confirming or displacing the apparent meaning of the Act; or
(c) finding the meaning of the Act when an apparent meaning leads to a result
that is manifestly absurd or is unreasonable; or
(d) finding the meaning of the Act in any other case.
I note also that headings to provisions are available in interpreting
provisions. Because under
Legislation Act
a heading is part of
the provision (except in the case of a section or subsection headings dating
as the Court of Appeal stated in their joint decision in
Stowe Australia Pty
Ltd v Kelly
[2013] ACTCA 18
at paragraph
“In working
out the meaning of an Act, including resolving an ambiguous or obscure provision
of an Act, the interpretation that
best achieves the purpose of the Act is to be
preferred to any other interpretation:
Legislation Act
(ACT). In working out the meaning of a provision, the provisions of the
Act must be read in the context of the Act as a whole:
Legislation Act
Also, in working out the meaning of a provision, regard may be had to any
explanatory statement for the bill that became the Act,
and the presentation
speech made to the Legislative Assembly during the passage of the bill that
became the Act:
Legislation Act
and Table 142.”
there is a limit on the utility of extrinsic materials in the interpretation of
statute. The plurality of the High Court
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
(2012) 250 CLR 503
at paragraph
The statutory text must be considered in its context. That
context includes legislative history and extrinsic materials. Understanding
context has utility if, and in so far as, it assists in fixing the meaning of
the statutory text. Legislative history and extrinsic
materials cannot displace
the meaning of the statutory text. Nor is their examination an end in
the interpretation of the Act within its context, the High Court in
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
the role the broader context has in interpreting statute at paragraph
The starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning of a
statutory provision is the text of the statute whilst, at the same time,
is had to its context and purpose. Context should be regarded at this first
stage and not at some later stage and it should
be regarded in its widest sense.
This is not to deny the importance of the natural and ordinary meaning of a
word, namely how it
is ordinarily understood in discourse, to the process of
construction. Considerations of context and purpose simply recognise that,
understood in its statutory, historical or other context, some other meaning of
a word may be suggested, and so too, if its ordinary
meaning is not consistent
with the statutory purpose, that meaning must be rejected.
later paying heed to the
Legislation Act 2001
(ACT), Curtin AJ recently
stated the following in
Civil and Civic Corp Pty Ltd v Nova Builders Pty Ltd
[2023] ACTCA 30
at paragraph
“The process of
statutory construction begins and ends with the words of the statute. That oft
repeated mantra does not prescribe
a rigid order of analysis. Rather, it serves
to emphasize the primacy of the words used in the statute.
Context must be considered in the first. In CIC Insurance v Bankstown
Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384
Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gummow JJ,
Gaudron agreeing , said at 408:
Moreover, the modern approach to statutory interpretation (a) insists that
the context be considered in the first instance, not merely
at an at some later
stage when ambiguity might be thought to arise, and (b) uses
“context” in its widest sense to include
such things as the existing
state of the law and mischief which, by legitimate means such as those just
mentioned, one may discern
the statute was intended to remedy
In Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Jayasinghe
[2016] FCAFC 79
(2016) 247 FCR 40
Allsop J said at [7] that that passage from
had been cited too often
to be doubted and cited 15 joint or single judgments of the High Court in
support of that proposition.
Legislation Act 2001
relevant sections of the of the
Legislation Act 2001
(ACT) are set out
139 Interpretation best
achieving Act’s purpose
(1) In working out the meaning of an Act, the interpretation that
would best achieve the purpose of the Act is to be preferred to
interpretation.
(2) This section applies whether or not the Act’s purpose is
expressly stated in the Act.
140 Legislative context
In working out the meaning of an Act, the provisions of the Act must be read
in the context of the Act as a whole.
141 Non-legislative
(1) In working out the meaning of an Act, material not forming
part of the Act may be considered.
(2) In deciding whether material not forming part of an Act should
be considered in working out the meaning of the Act, and the weight
to be given
to the material, the following matters must be taken into account:
(a) the desirability of being able to rely on the ordinary meaning
of the Act, having regard to the purpose of the Act and the provisions
Act read in the context of the Act as a whole;
(b) the undesirability of prolonging proceedings without
compensating advantage;
(c) the accessibility of the material to the public.
(3) Subsection (2) does not limit the matters that may be taken
into account.
(4) For subsection (2) (c), material in the register is taken to
be accessible to the public.
142 Non-legislative
context—material that may be considered
(1) In working out the meaning of an Act, material mentioned in
table 142, column 2 may be considered.
(2) In working out the meaning of a statutory instrument, material
mentioned in table 142, column 3 may be considered.
(3) This section does not limit the material that may be
considered in working out the meaning of an Act or statutory instrument.
The Words of s 477(2)(b)(ii) and s 477(4)
starting point is the words of the section. The relevant part of s 477(2)(b)(ii)
the child or young person has been living with a stated person
under a care and protection order
477(4) reads:
(4) In subsection (2):
stated person
(a) the carer under the care and protection order; or
(b) one parent to the exclusion of another parent; or
(c) a family member who is not a parent.
the legislature did intend that the DG was to be included the definition of a
stated person, then subparagraph (a) might well have
been worded as the
“Director-General or the carer under the care and protection order”.
Similarly, the legislature could
have included the DG as her own, separate
definition of stated person under s 477(4) if that was the
did neither of those things and it was an obvious omission not to do
overwhelming conclusion from the words of the section is that the DG is not to
be regarded as “the carer under the care
and protection
wording of the section overall and the definition at s 477(4) is in the singular
voice. If the legislature wished to convey a
plural meaning, then it erred
completely by using the words “has been living with a stated person”
and, “the carer”,
“one parent” and “a family
no place do the words imply that “a stated person” or “the
carer” are to be read as anything other than
a singular person. I do not
accept the submission of the DG that there is no basis to read “the
carer” on a singular
basis. I find that there is no reason not to read it
in the singular.
ordinary meaning of the words used within the section means the section is to be
interpreted as requiring a single carer for two
years or two out of three years
prior to engage the rebuttable presumption for extension of an order. There is
nothing absurd or
unreasonable about such an interpretation. It provides that
where there is consistency of placement in short-term orders there should
rebuttable presumption of long-term orders to preserve such a
is trite to point out that, contrary to the DG’s submissions on stability,
her desired broad interpretation of the section
only serves to reward placing
children and young people in care in multiple out of home care placements. The
only stability that
such an interpretation provides is a rebuttable presumption
that once a child is in care they stay in care until age 18.
The Aid to Interpretation within the
Legislation Act 2001
Legislation Act
(ACT) contains a rule that applies
to the CYP Act:
145 Gender and number
In an Act or statutory instrument-
(a) words indicating gender include every other gender; and
(b) words in a singular number include the plural and words in the plural
number indicate the singular.
However, it is not a determinative provision (see
Hudson v ACT Magistrate
Court and Anor
[2014] ACTSC 192
at paragraph
Calatzis v Jones
[2024] ACTSC 42
and can be displaced by a contrary intention that is implicit
rather than “manifest contrary intention”
Legislation Act 2001
Blue Metal Industries v Dilley
[1969] UKPCHCA 2
(1969) 117 CLR 651
656 the Privy Council stated:
Words in the singular will include the
plural unless the contrary intention appears. But in considering whether a
contrary intention
appears there need be no confinement of attention to any one
particular section of an Act. It must be appropriate to consider the
its setting in the legislation and furthermore to consider the substance and
tenor of the legislation as a whole.
was cited with approval by the High Court in
Walsh v Tattersall
[1996] HCA 26
and Mossop J in
in the context of s
CYP Act as a whole cannot be read as one that works to provide an aid to proving
that children should remain in the care of the
DG. Broadening the meaning of s
477 to be read as “The child or young person has been living
stated carers
under the care and
protection order” would mean that in every care matter where there have
been orders in place for two years
there is a rebuttable presumption for 18 year
orders. And that would be so no matter how disruptive, inconsistent and
the provision of care by the DG had been.
case at bar provides a stark example of how short term orders for out of home
care can provide extraordinary instability for children
CYP Act speaks to stability, the primacy of children living with their family
and the best interests of children:
Recognising
that children have a right to grow in a safe and stable environment; s
Considering
the best interests of children and young people: s 8;
parents have parental responsibility: s 16;
aspects of parental responsibility can be transferred and shared: ss 17 and
Recognising
that it is important for children and young people to have settled stable and
permanent living arrangements: s 349(h);
need to ensure that the earliest possible decisions are made about a safe,
supportive and stable placement: s 349(i);
principle of primary responsibility for providing care and protection lying with
parents and other family members: s 350 (a);
principle that priority
be given to supporting parents and other
family members to provide for the wellbeing, care and protection of their
children: s350(b);
DG preparing care plans that contain stability proposals for children and young
people that include restoration plans or long
term placements: s 456(3);
and protection orders being able to extended, amended or revoked if it is in a
child or young person’s best interests:
ss 471 and 472;
rebuttable presumption that is in a child or young person’s best interest
to have contact with their family: s 486.
The Explanatory Statement
ES for cl 476 of the
Children and Young People Bill 2008
(ACT) which
became s 477 of the CYP Act stated (in part):
The Second Report on
Key Findings from the Review of the
Children and Young People Act 1999
identified concerns that multiple, short parental responsibility orders (between
2 and 5 years in duration) were being made for children
and young people.
Concern was expressed that this creates considerable uncertainty and
instability for children and young people and often disrupts
their attachment
and relationships with new caregivers
. (emphasis added) This can occur
whilst intervention is occurring to return a child or young person to their
The intention of this clause is to limit the making of multiple short term
parental responsibility provisions (of up to 2 years in
duration) and to create
a presumption for the child or young person to be subject to a long-term
parental responsibility provision
after being in out of home care for the 2 year
period of a short term parental responsibility provision.
The clause creates a rebuttable presumption that it is in the best interests
of the child or young person to be subject to a long
term parental
responsibility provision (until 18 years) when an application to extend a short
term parental responsibility provision
is made. This presumption can be rebutted
by a parent or other person who has had parental responsibility during the term
order by satisfying the Childrens Court that the person is likely to be
able to resume care of the child or young person during the
period of the
extension and it also in the best interests of the child or young person for the
person to resume care.
Unfortunately,
the ES in inconsistent with the wording of the provision being explained. As the
father pointed out in his submissions
– if the intention was to create a
presumption for extension in all matters where there had been sufficient time in
warrant the presumption of 18 year orders, then the addition of
s477(2)(a)(ii) and s477(2)(b)(ii) was superfluous and countered such
intention. Further those two subsections are not discussed in the ES, nor is
there any discussion of the definition at s 477(4).
Penfold J said in
at paragraph [25] in such a
circumstance:
“...the obvious carelessness in the preparation
of the ES means that I would not have been inclined to allow the ES explanation
of s 470(3) to displace the words of the provision if the ES had been the only
reason for interpreting s 470(3) otherwise than according
to its plain
in my view the ES should not be utilised to displace the words contained in s
Consideration
have read and considered each submission and submission in reply of the parties
carefully. In the context of this matter the question
to be answered is: were
the children in the care of a stated person for the two years prior to the
extension decision or two out
of the three years prior to that
this case, following the disclosure of the pattern of care experienced by BQ and
KQ, the Court is informed that no individual person
has had the care of BQ and
KQ for a period of time that would satisfy either of those tests.
person other than the DG was named in the relevant parts of the final orders
dated 20 July 2021 which provided:
(g) that daily care
responsibility for the child be transferred to the Director-General, for a
period of 2 years;
(h) that long term care responsibility for the child be transferred to the
Director-General, for a period of 2 years;
enough the DG is capable of being described as a person, but that is not how the
section is worded. Lest it needs be stated
– the DG has many children in
her care, but she is not the actual carer of them in a personal sense and they
do not ‘live
with’ her as specified in s 477
(2)(b)(ii).
set out above, I do not accept the DG’s submissions on what the plain
words of s 477 amount to. Nor do I find that
Legislation Act
(ACT) should be utilised to give a very different meaning and outcome
to s 477 than what is very clearly set out in the words of the
section. Nor
should a plural term be imported by virtue of the
Legislation Act
change the singular words specifically used in the section. In both cases this
is because the meaning of the words in the section
itself is abundantly
considering the CYP Act in a purposive light it is clear that there is a deep
current of intent and purpose flowing through the
Act that reflects a goal of
stability for children and young people. Thus, to read s 477 as creating an aid
to proof for the DG
in securing orders to age 18 in every single matter where
there has been short term orders for two to three years is contrary to
obvious context of the section and purpose within the whole of the Act. Further,
the section itself does not read in such a way
as to command the reader to think
that an unstable combination of placements in the previous two or three years
will satisfy the
preconditions for engagement of the presumption in
requirement for a child being placed with a single stated person amounts to a
very clear requirement for stability and consistency
of care as a pre-condition
for the rebuttable provision to be engaged. It is a sensible and ‘best
interests’ based requirement
that, I think, reflects the whole of the
accept that there is a gaping chasm between the ES and such a determination. As
I have stated above, the words of the section are
so different to what the ES
conveys that there, respectfully, must be an error (or two) in the preparation
term “the carer under the care and protection order” at s 477(4) of
the CYP Act under the definition “stated
person” should be read in
the singular and not the plural.
is, for the rebuttable presumption to be engaged where a child or young person
is in out of home care, they must have been in
the stable care of the same carer
under the care and protection order for the periods of time described in the
the facts of this case and the DG’s inability to prove stability of
placement with the same carer for BQ and KQ in the
previous two years to the
extension decision or two out of three years prior to the extension decision,
the rebuttable presumption
of extension at s 477 of the CYP Act is not engaged
in this matter.
this case the DG must prove her case for 18-year orders on the civil standard
without the benefit of s 477’s aid to
I certify that the preceding ninety-three [93] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Decision of his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Jonathan Pears
Date: 06 May 2024
Children and Young People
See paragraphs 17 and 18
of his Honour’s decision for
Court Book, pages 282
See CYP Act s
350(1)(a) and (b).
Explanatory Statement,
Children and Young People Act 2008
(ACT) 3, 6 and
Grandmother’s submissions at page
For a child younger than
two years old – at least one year and for older children and young people
two years or a total of
two years out of the previous three years prior to the
extension decision.
RTF format (496 KB)
Signed PDF/A format