Cahill v Nominal Defendant [2025] ACTSC 472 (22 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Cahill v Nominal Defendant
[2025] ACTSC 472
Hearing Date:
Decision Date
(1) The Court is satisfied that the plaintiff is not a person under a legal
disability within the meaning of r 282 of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(2) The defendant is to pay the plaintiff’s costs of and incidental
to the application as agreed or assessed.
Catchwords:
– APPLICATION – Whether plaintiff is a person
with a legal disability – traumatic brain injury – where evidence
impairment does not relate directly to conduct of litigation – Court
satisfied plaintiff not a person with a legal disability
Legislation Cited:
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), r 282, Dictionary
Cases Cited:
De Aquino v Allred
[2022] ACTSC 354
Sowmi v Master Electrical
Services Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 176
[1982] 2 NSWLR
Raymond Cahill (Plaintiff)
Nominal Defendant (Defendant)
Representation:
D Shillington (Plaintiff)
L Armstrong (Defendant)
Paul Edmonds & Associates (Plaintiff)
Hall & Wilcox (Defendant)
File Number:
SC 2 of 2025
Cahill was a pillion passenger on a motor bike when the rider crossed to the
incorrect side of the road and collided with an embankment.
Mr Cahill sustained
a severe traumatic brain injury.
Cahill commenced these proceedings against the Nominal Defendant seeking damages
for his injuries and disabilities. His claim has
been resolved subject to one
issue which is the basis for the application heard by me on 17 October
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) provides that a person with
a legal disability may only enter into a settlement or compromise with the
Court’s approval.
Dictionary to the Rules provides:
person with a legal
(b) a person with a mental disability.
person with a mental disability
, for a proceeding, means a
person who is not legally competent to be a party to the proceeding ...
an application in proceeding filed on 4 September 2025, the defendant seeks a
determination as to whether Mr Cahill is a person
with a legal disability.
issue arises from a medical report prepared by a joint expert Professor Cameron,
a rehabilitation physician, in which he relevantly
It is my opinion that [the plaintiff] is not capable
of managing his affairs. This is due to his severe traumatic brain injury. He
at risk of financial exploitation if he has to manage significant amounts of
other evidence relevant to the issue is the following:
(a) Professor Cameron also said “[h]e clearly can make day to day
decisions”.
(b) Mr Edmonds has been the plaintiff’s solicitor since 8 November 2020.
He has met with the plaintiff on numerous occasions.
He has also acted for the
plaintiff in other matters. He has always been very alert to the need to assess
the plaintiff’s capacity
to provide him with instructions. At all times he
has been comfortably satisfied that the plaintiff could understand the legal
open to him in his case, his legal entitlements and the basis on which
the proposed settlement had been calculated.
(c) Mr Edmonds and the plaintiff had a conference with counsel on 10 June 2025.
Mr Edmonds says that the barrister advised him that
he had formed the opinion
that the plaintiff understood the issues in his case and he was capable of
providing instructions to conduct
his personal injury claim.
(d) The plaintiff instructed Mr Edmonds that he would like to have his sister
manage the settlement funds. Accordingly, earlier this
year, Mr Edmonds retained
a retired magistrate and practising solicitor to advise the plaintiff as to the
appropriateness of entering
into a trust deed. The solicitor was sent a copy of
Professor Cameron’s report. The solicitor has advised Mr Edmonds that he
also was satisfied as to the plaintiff’s capacity to understand the issues
and provide instructions.
term “legal disability” carries the notion of capacity to do the
things a person has to do during litigation, including
giving instructions,
understanding advice and making decisions about the conduct of the proceedings.
It is to be assessed in the
context that the person is likely to have the
support and protection of those acting in his interests in the proceedings
De Aquino v Allred
[2022] ACTSC 354
only evidence of some impairment does not relate directly to the conduct of the
litigation but rather the management of the settlement
Sowmi v Master Electrical Services Pty Ltd
[2024] NSWSC 176
similar provision was considered and the following passage from
[1982] 2 NSWLR 700
at 702 was cited with approval:
... it is not sufficient, in my view, merely to demonstrate that the person
lacks the high level of ability needed to deal with complicated
transactions ...
am satisfied that the evidence establishes that the plaintiff is not a person
with a legal disability.
make the following orders which were agreed on by the parties:
(1) The Court is satisfied that the plaintiff is not a person under a legal
disability within the meaning of r 282 of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(2) The defendant is to pay the plaintiff’s costs of and incidental to the
application as agreed or assessed.
I certify that the preceding twelve [12] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of her Honour Acting Justice
RTF format (135 KB)
Signed PDF/A format