Inquest into the death of NICOLE LOUISE ABBOTT [2023] ACTCD 8 (19 May 2023)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Inquest into the death of NICOLE LOUISE
[2023] ACTCD 8
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Coroner Russell
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– death in care – cause and manner of death
– whether issue with quality of care, treatment or supervision –
whether matter of public safety arises.
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
sections 3C(1)(c)
Mental Health Act 2015
Coroners Amendment Act 2020
(ACT), section 3BB
Cases Cited:
Inquest into the Death of Jacob Aldan Peter Cameron
[2021] ACTCD 7
Counsel Assisting:
Ms Simone Richards
File Number
CD 145/2020
CORONER RUSSELL
Louise Abbott died on 25 May 2020 at Calvary Hospital, Bruce in the ACT. She was
43 years old. At the time of her death, Nicole
Abbott was subject to a
Psychiatric Treatment Order made 19 December 2019 for a period of six
Formal Findings
Louise Abbott died on 25 May 2020 at Calvary Hospital, Bruce in the Australian
Capital Territory. The cause of Ms Abbott’s
death was the complications of
morbid obesity.
The manner of death was by natural causes.
matter of public safety is found to arise in connection with the inquest.
The quality of care, treatment or supervision of Ms Abbott did not
contribute to her death.
Abbott was born in Townsville, Queensland on 8 January 1977. She moved around a
lot as a child, in part because of her family’s
involvement with the
Australian Defence Force, living in Gladstone, Brisbane, and Rockhampton in
Queensland, and Raymond Terrace
in New South Wales.
left school in year 11 in Rockhampton and worked, for a short time, in the
hospitality industry.
1995 Ms Abbott married and, in 1998, gave birth to her only child, Tayla. In
1999 she was diagnosed with schizophrenia and admitted
to hospital in Newcastle,
NSW. Shortly thereafter, she was divorced and, unfortunately, became largely
estranged from her daughter.
an adult, Ms Abbott continued to move often and lived in various places in New
South Wales and in Brisbane before moving to Perth,
Western Australia in about
2010. She remained there until she came to Canberra.
mental health continued to be a serious problem and she was, on many occasions,
admitted to psychiatric hospitals in Queensland,
New South Wales and Western
Australia. In about 2010 or 2011, while under psychiatric care in hospital in
Western Australia, she
met and formed a relationship with another patient,
Darren Graham. It was with Mr Graham, that she moved to Canberra in late 2014
early 2015. At the time of Ms Abbott’s death, she and Mr Graham were still
cohabiting although no longer in a relationship.
Death in Care
at 25 May 2020,
(1) (c) of the
Coroners Act 1997
categorised the death of a person subject to a Psychiatric Treatment Order as a
‘death in custody’. That was
changed by the
Coroners Amendment
which introduced
section 3BB, pursuant to which the death of
a person subject to a Psychiatric Treatment Order is categorised as a
care’. I have been referred to the observations of Chief
Coroner Walker in the
Inquest into the Death of Jacob Aldan Peter Cameron
[2021] ACTCD 7
with respect to that amendment, effective from 29 January
While the nuance of this change is significant, I note that:
Coroner retains the obligation to independently investigate both deaths in care
and in custody;
hearing is a mandatory part of the inquest; and
provisions of part 6 of the Act, which prescribed additional procedural steps
and obligations for the Coroner for deaths in custody,
are also expressly
extended to deaths in care.
I consider that the changes to
the Act in relation to deaths in care are procedural in nature and do not create
or very substantive
rights and liabilities. On that basis I consider that these
provisions operate retrospectively.
adopt the submission of Counsel Assisting that reference to Nicole
Abbott’s death in these findings should be a reference
to a death in
inquest, including a hearing, is mandatory in relation to Ms Abbott’s
death. A Coroner must hold an inquest into the manner
and cause of death of a
person who dies in care (section 13(1)(i)) of the Act and, in such
circumstances, a Coroner must not dispense
with a hearing (section
52 of the Act sets out, relevantly, the principal functions of a Coroner
conducting an inquest. Those are to record the identity
of the person who has
died, the date and place of her death and the manner and cause of that death.
The Coroner must also state whether
a matter of public safety is found to arise
in connection with the inquest and, if so, comment on the
relation to a death in care, section 74 of the Act requires that findings must
also be made about the quality of care, treatment
and supervision of the
deceased person that, in the opinion of the Coroner, contributed to the cause of
Cause of Death
Johan Duflou, forensic pathologist, conducted a post-mortem examination which
involved external examination, CT scan, viral
testing, toxicological testing and
review of medical records. Professor Duflou determined that Ms Abbott’s
death was caused
by the complications of morbid obesity. Those complications, he
said, included a combination of progressive respiratory and cardiac
failure. He
noted a long-standing history of marked obesity with associated severe
obstructive sleep apnoea and type II respiratory
failure, and the presence of
pulmonary oedema. The respiratory failure, he said, was exacerbated by the
deceased’s long-standing
tobacco smoking and potentially by a prior chest
wall injury. He was not able to determine the cause of those rib fractures but
they could be the consequence of prior CPR attempts or the result of
falling heavily. Professor Duflou noted that Ms Abbott’s
body mass index
was 54.4 kg/m².
Mental Health Care in ACT
Abbott was discharged from Bentley Hospital, in Perth, on 29 October 2014. She
had been an inpatient at that hospital, on that
last occasion, since 18
September but had had prior admissions in Western Australia. She was receiving
zuclopenthixol by depot injection
with the next injection due on 12 November
is likely that Ms Abbott came to Canberra without notifying her case manager at
the Western Australian mental health service. There
is no record of any handover
by that service to the ACT mental health service.
first record of ACT Mental Health Services being involved with, or aware of, Ms
Abbott was on 28 January 2015. The Crisis Assessment
and Treatment Team (CATT)
received a call from the Australian Federal Police, City Watch House. She had
presented to the police station
with a male friend who police officers thought
may have been delusional. Police officers were able to convey some history to
CATT, sourced from treatment providers in Western Australia. The CATT
attended but it appeared to them that the immediate issue for
Ms Abbott was
Abbott commenced more formal engagement with ACT Mental Health Services in July
2015. On 14 July 2015 Ms Abbott was brought to
The Canberra Hospital by CATT and
police. She was grossly thought disordered and delusional. She had been found
camping on London
Circuit, talking irrationally, harassing passers-by and
demanding money from them. There was an allegation that she had been involved
an assault on another person in the days leading up to 14 July 2015. She was
involuntarily detained. The progress notes indicated
that she had received no
treatment for approximately six months. The involuntary detention order was
extended by the ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (ACAT) on 17 July 2015 and
a Psychiatric Treatment Order was made on 23 July 2015.
Abbott was regularly involved with ACT Mental Health Services from that time
until the time of her death. Nine Psychiatric Treatment
Orders were made with
respect to her during that time. Ms Abbott’s mental health also led to
many interactions with the police
as a result of psychotic episodes or incidents
in which police were called upon to assist mental health clinicians to
medication.
common with many others suffering from similar conditions, Ms Abbott was unable
to appreciate her need for treatment and was often
resistant to the provision of
that treatment.
Psychiatric Treatment Order
the Psychiatric Treatment Order current at the time of her death, a plan was in
place for three monthly reviews by a psychiatrist,
fortnightly depot injection
of zuclopenthixol and review with her clinical manager, Ms Sheena Abraham.
Gungahlin Mental Health Team, the team with responsibility for Ms Abbott, had
regular and frequent involvement with her in the
months before her death. They
often faced reluctance or refusal on the part of Ms Abbott to have her depot
injection administered
and, at those times, persisted, often over many days, in
an attempt to get her to the point where she would accept that injection.
alia, they arranged the engagement of the National Disability Insurance Scheme
to provide services, assisted Ms Abbott and her
partner with negotiations with
respect to their rent and arranged comprehensive cleaning of their home. A
number of these endeavours
were more difficult because the effects of Ms
Abbott’s illness meant that she often found it difficult to accept support
was at times aggressive.
records to which I have had regard indicate that Ms Abbott’s father, Mr
John Abbott, was deeply engaged with the Gungahlin
mental health team’s
efforts to assist Ms Abbott.
Physical Health
Abbott was in poor physical health. She exhibited, what her treating clinicians
described as, the ‘psychosocial sequelae
of chronic mental illness’.
Those included:
sedentary lifestyle with no regular exercise, poor nutritional intake with high
fat foods and soft drink consumption resulting in
significant weight gain, and
suboptimal physical health with limited adherence to medical care
Abbott suffered from a series of serious medical conditions, including Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and obstructive
sleep apnoea. She
continued, however, to be a heavy smoker.
April 2019 she was admitted to the intensive care unit at Calvary Hospital and
diagnosed with heart failure. In May 2019 she was
again admitted to Calvary
Hospital with a diagnosis of type II respiratory failure and an exacerbation of
COPD. In August 2019 she
was admitted to the Canberra Hospital and was diagnosed
with infective exacerbation of COPD and acute pulmonary oedema in the setting
severe diastolic dysfunction. It was noted that she had very severe nocturnal
respiratory failure.
Events Leading to Death
21 May 2020 Ms Abbott suffered a psychotic episode at the Early Morning Centre
in Civic. The Early Morning Centre is a project
of the Canberra City Uniting
Church, which provides essential services, including breakfast to those
experiencing homelessness or
social isolation. The Police Ambulance and Clinical
Early Response (PACER) team attended and, after consultation with Ms Abraham,
transported Ms Abbott to the Emergency Department at Calvary Hospital. There she
was diagnosed with congestive heart failure with
worsening shortness of breath.
A significant pulmonary oedema was noted on x-ray. Her respiratory condition
deteriorated and she
was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). She was
ventilated in the ICU. A Medical Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment review
a psychiatrist and cardiologist concluded that, given her psychological and
physiological status, invasive life-saving treatment
would not be in her best
interests. Her file was noted accordingly, ‘not for
resuscitation/intubation’.
Abbott remained in the ICU where, at about 4:15am on 25 May 2020 the Medical
Emergency Team (MET) were called because of her low
responsiveness.
Nasopharyngeal airway tubes were inserted in both nostrils and her airway was
suctioned, causing vomiting. Observations
taken at 6pm showed a high respiratory
rate, low oxygen and high blood pressure. She was encouraged to eat dinner and
her bedding
was changed but at about 7:15pm the nurse could no longer hear her
breathing and the MET were once again called. On arrival, the
MET observed that
her pupils were non-reactive and dilated and electrocardiography revealed an
asystole rhythm. There were no recordable
vital signs and she was pronounced
life extinct at 7:30pm.
Quality of Care, Treatment and Supervision – s74 of the Act
Professor Duflou noted that Ms Abbott’s respiratory and cardiac failure
were progressive complications of her morbid obesity
and the respiratory failure
was exacerbated by her long-standing smoking habit. She had been admitted to
hospital in a very serious
condition in 2019. It is evident that her health was
deteriorating. I accept the submission of Counsel Assisting that the treatment
provided to Ms Abbott at Calvary Hospital on her last admission was appropriate
and that necessary and appropriate treatment was
given to her.
Health Services
Mr Abbott had expressed concern about his daughter’s weight on a number
of occasions in the period, between 2015 and 2020, in
which she was under the
care of the ACT Mental Health Services. Given the cause of her death, and in the
context of these proceedings,
he expressed concern that his daughter’s
weight gain was the result of side-effects of the zuclopenthixol and other
anti-psychotic
medication she received under successive treatment orders,
including the final Psychiatric Treatment Order. In this respect, he questioned
the quality of the care, treatment and supervision she received.
a result of those concerns, further investigations were
undertaken.
Connection Between Antipsychotic Medication and Weight Gain
Duflou has advised that, in common with almost all antipsychotic medications,
and many other types of medication, zuclopenthixol
has metabolic effects which
can include weight gain and that, while the research into this side effect for
zuclopenthixol specifically
is so far quite limited, in his opinion,
zuclopenthixol does not have a weight gain effect which is more common or more
serious than
other long lasting antipsychotic medications.
Choice of Zuclopenthixol
a lengthy period of hospitalisation at the Bentley Hospital in Western
Australia, in 2014, Ms Abbott was discharged on zuclopenthixol
by 350 mg depot
injection every fortnight, in addition to olanzapine as a 20 mg wafer per day.
The treating psychiatrists in Western
Australia had tried risperidone and
amisulpride but she had developed hyperpolactinaemia, which, itself, can lead to
weight gain.
They had tried clozapine but Ms Abbott experienced problematic
side-effects of dizziness, nausea/vomiting and tachycardia on that
medication.
The Bentley Hospital records indicate that, at the time she was being treated
there, Ms Abbott already had a problem
with obesity.
mid-2015, ACT clinicians commenced treating her with olanzapine and were
concerned to monitor her weight on that drug. It was noted
by clinicians in a
report to the ACAT, dated 12 January 2016, that Ms Abbott’s medications
required review again, because she
had not been waiting at the health centre for
the mandated two hours after administration of Relprevv (olanzapine). That
observation was required, as I understand it, because there is a need
for cardiovascular monitoring after the administration of olanzapine
injection. Ms Abbott was moved back onto zuclopenthixol during 2016. There was a
component of oral olanzapine in her treatment
until late 2017 but it was
discontinued. The treating clinician specifically took her metabolic status into
account in making that
mental health records indicate that, on a number of occasions, while Ms Abbott
was on zuclopenthixol, her treating clinicians
sought to adjust the dosage and
monitor her response to the change.
selection of the right medication, at the right dosage, for Ms Abbott was a
complex matter, dependant on both her ability to be
compliant with the
requirements for her physical well-being on the medication, as well as her
ability to tolerate any side effects.
The records establish that those treating
Ms Abbott were very conscious of the side-effects, including weight gain, of the
antipsychotic
medications with which she was being treated.
Requirement for Antipsychotic Medication
Abbott’s mental health condition was serious and intractable. She suffered
from serious delusions, thought disorder and at
times, exhibited aggressive
behaviours. Her delusions were often of a nature which caused her very
significant distress. For that
condition to remain untreated so as to avoid any
side effects, including weight gain, from the medication would have had
significant
consequences for her safety and, in all probability, the safety of
others. I am satisfied that there was no feasible alternative
available to
clinicians other than to treat her schizophrenia by way of antipsychotic
medication and that the choice of zuclopenthixol
at the dosages given was an
appropriate clinical response to Ms Abbott’s needs. With respect to the
drug treatment regime prescribed
for her, the quality of care, treatment and
supervision of Ms Abbott did not contribute to the cause of her
Efforts to Encourage and Assist Abbott to Manage her Physical Health
mental health notes demonstrate repeated efforts by the mental health teams
aimed at improving Ms Abbott’s physical health
and well-being. There were
repeated discussions about diet with her and attempts to get her to exercise and
to stop smoking. Those
efforts were largely unsuccessful.
was also encouraged to attend medical and ancillary health appointments and, at
times, taken to those by mental health workers,
or transport was otherwise
arranged for her. Ms Abbott was, however, often unable to accept that she was
physically unwell. On a
number of occasions, Ms Abbott’s delusions,
beliefs that she had new lungs or that the creatures causing her physical
had been removed, appeared to prevent her accepting assistance. The
records indicate that the clinical manager was concerned that
Ms Abbott did not
take the prescribed medication for her physical illnesses. She rebuffed attempts
by Ms Abraham to monitor her blood
pressure at home.
her admission to Calvary Hospital in April 2019, efforts were made to encourage
her to use a continuous positive airway
pressure machine at home to manage her
obstructive sleep apnoea and to have her attend a sleep clinic but Ms Abbott was
manage, or be consistent in the use of, that non-invasive ventilation
at home and would not, despite the efforts of the mental health
team, attend the
sleep clinic. Once again, Mr Abbott was engaged in these attempts to encourage
his daughter and to assist her, including
by providing financial support for the
continued supply of the machine.
was noted in the discharge record from hospital in August 2019 that Ms Abbott
was not suitable for non-invasive ventilation at
to manage, or be consistent with the usage of, a continuous positive air
pressure machine and that
she could not be given home oxygen because of her
am satisfied that the mental health team engaged appropriately with Ms Abbott in
an attempt to encourage her to take better care
of her physical health,
including to ameliorate her weight gain, and to assist with necessary help for
her. They were actively engaged
in trying to assist her and interacted with her
at least every few days.
Psychiatric Treatment Order made under
Mental Health Act
authorises the compulsory psychiatric treatment, including drug
treatment, of a person, such as Ms Abbott, with respect to whom an
made. There is no power under a Psychiatric Treatment Order to compel a person
to accept treatment for their physical health
needs. I am satisfied that, in
that context, the mental health team treating Ms Abbott did what they could to
her physical health needs.
records do not support any finding that, with respect to the involvement of the
Gungahlin Mental Health Team or the ACT Mental
Health Services more generally,
the quality of care, treatment or supervision contributed to the cause of Ms
Abbott’s death.
Matter of Public Safety
Abbott’s death was the result of the complications of morbid obesity. That
morbid obesity developed in the context of her
long-standing, predating her
arrival in the ACT, struggles with mental illness and the psychosocial
consequences of that illness.
For the reasons given above, I can make no finding
that the care provided to Ms Abbott by mental health agencies in the ACT was
I am satisfied that no matter of public safety arises in connection
with the inquest.
Closing Remarks
Abbott struggled for most of her adult life with serious mental illness. That
illness has clearly had consequences for Ms Abbott’s
ability to engage
with health professionals and to make, and adhere to, positive decisions about
her physical health. It has also
clearly had an effect on her capacity to engage
with her family. Despite that, on the records available to me, her father, Mr
Abbott, has, in what must have been difficult circumstances, done all he
could to assist her. I thank him for his involvement in
this inquest and express
my condolences to him and to the rest of Ms Abbott’s
thank Counsel Assisting and her team and note that I have been significantly
assisted by her submissions.
close this inquest.
I certify that the preceding fortyeight [48] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Decision of her Honour Coroner
Legal Officer: Rebecca Evans
Date: 19 May 2023
RTF format (182 KB)
Signed PDF/A format