Police v "Sanford" (a pseudonym); Police v "Glover" (a pseudonym) [2022] ACTCC 1 (21 March 2022)
CHILDRENS COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Police v “Sanford” (a pseudonym)
Police v “Glover” (a pseudonym)
[2022] ACTCC 1
Hearing Date(s):
7 March 2022 and 21 March 2022
Chief Magistrate Walker
See [20] - [21] and [32]
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – affray – significance
context to affray – parity – youth sentencing principles –
extra curial punishment – reprisal attacks
– assistance to
authorities
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Magistrates Court
Cases Cited:
MS2 v The Queen
[2005] NSWCCA 397
(2005) 158 A Crim R 93
[2021] ACTCA 26
[2001] NSWCCA 37
; (2001) 125 A Crim R 451
R v KS, R v KN, R v KA
[2021] ACTSC 23
[2017] ACTCA 18
Saipani v R
[2021] ACTCA 5
288 A Crim R 191
[2001] HCA 64
207 CLR 584
David Crowe (Informant)
Detective Leading Senior Constable Louise Hawke (Informant)
“Matthew Glover” (a pseudonym) (Defendant)
“Abby Sanford” (a pseudonym) (Defendant)
Representation:
M Howe (ACT Director of Public Prosecutions)
J De Bruin (“Abby Sanford”)
Papas (“Matthew Glover”)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Legal Aid ACT
(“Abby Sanford”)
Hugo Law Group (“Matthew Glover”)
File Number(s):
CC 856 of 2020
CC 1085 of 2020
Publication Restriction:
Non-publication order in effect until 4pm 14 June 2022.
CHIEF MAGISTRATE WALKER:
Introduction
1. The young person (‘Matthew’) is charged with one
count of affray in which five or more people were present contrary
Crimes Act 1900
’) on 27 September 2020.
This offence carries a maximum penalty of 10 years of imprisonment but capped at
2 years pursuant to
s 375(16)(a) of the
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Magistrates Court Act
’) following the young person’s consent
to summary disposal. He initially pleaded not guilty but entered a plea of
on 20 December 2021. I heard submissions on sentence on 7 March
2. The young person (‘Abby’) is charged with one count of
affray in which two or more people were present contrary to
on 27 September 2020. This offence carries a maximum penalty of 5
years imprisonment but capped at 2 years pursuant to s 375(16)(a)
Magistrates Court Act
following the young person’s consent to summary
disposal. She initially pleaded not guilty but indicated a plea of guilty
this year which was confirmed today prior to receipt of submissions on
3. In interests of efficiency, I will refer to the young offenders
by the first name of their pseudonyms. In the interests of protection
offenders and their privacy, I have determined not to publish the details of the
exhibits tendered on sentencing in support
of oral submissions. These exhibits
are recorded in an unpublished addendum.
4. I refer to my earlier sentencing
remarks in respect of six co-offenders, three adult and three young people,
delivered on 30 September
2021. I repeat and adopt them here in so far as they
are applicable to the facts and circumstances of these young people.
the evening of Saturday 26 September 2020, Thomas Smith, and two other young
persons, Brett Ray and Chris Farrar, were at a gathering
at Thomas’ home
in Jerrabomberra. He engaged in conversation on Snapchat, a social media site
particularly popular with young
people, with his ex-girlfriend. She recorded and
distributed the exchange toa number of people, including Tony Sutton.
Tony was at a party in Stirling with Alex Brown, Wren Sean and Matthew Glover.
The conduct of Wren Sean is the subject of separate
proceedings in the Supreme
Alex saw the Snapchats. He had never met Thomas but connected with him on
Snapchat and continued the exchange. These exchanges were
loud, angry and nasty.
In particular Thomas threatened to kill Alex’s family and
“piss” on Alex’s mother’s
Thomas and Alex agreed to meet for a fist fight at the skate park. Thomas’
cousin Jonathan Smith collected Thomas, Brett and
Chris and drove to the skate
park in his Toyota 86 coupe (‘the 86’). Thomas sat in the front
passenger seat, Chris was
seated in the rear passenger side seat and Brett in
the rear driver's side seat.
Alex and Matthew were collected from the Stirling party by Abby Sanford,
Alex’s girlfriend, in her Toyota Corolla (‘the
The group drove to Weston, collecting Wren on the way. Alex sat in the front
passenger seat, Matthew sat in the rear passenger seat
and Wren in the rear
driver's seat. During their trips, Thomas and Alex continued to engage on
Snapchat one another.
Meanwhile, Matthew contacted Emmanuel Umunakwe to attend at the fight
‘just in case things went south’. Emmanuel, who
was at that time
living with Alex’s family, was at a separate party in Duffy with Jaxson
Kirkwood, Montgomery White and Samuel
Samuel was the only one who had not been drinking alcohol or using drugs, so he
drove Montgomery's work vehicle, a Mitsubishi Triton
(the Triton), to Weston.
Montgomery sat in the front passenger seat, Jaxson in the rear passenger seat
and Emmanuel in the rear driver's
The vehicles congregated in the car park at the skatepark after midnight. Alex,
Matthew and Wren got out of the Corolla. Abby stayed
with the vehicle. (I
interpolate that it is accepted that Abby got back into the car after about 30
seconds suffering what she described
as a panic attack and remained there until
she drove the same young males away.)
Alex and Matthew approached the front passenger side of the 86 and pre-emptively
attacked Thomas while he was still seated in the
vehicle. They punched Thomas
numerous times. He sustained swelling and bruising to his left eye, abrasions to
his inner lips and
chin, and superficial lacerations to his forehead, nasal
bridge, left cheek and eyelids.
Thomas got out of the 86; he, Alex and Matthew kept fighting. Thomas kneed Alex
in the groin causing him to fall to the ground and
take no further part in the
incident. Thomas was stabbed twice in the back and hip by someone other than the
offenders being sentenced
Whilst this was going on, the occupants of the Triton exited their vehicle.
Jaxson and Montgomery attacked Jonathan, pulling him
from the driver’s
seat of the 86. An altercation followed during which Montgomery punched Jonathan
to the head and right side
of the ribs, Jaxson punched Jonathan about five
times, and Emmanuel grabbed Jonathan from behind to assist Montgomery.
Due to the 86 being a coupe, Chris and Brett were initially stuck in the
backseat. Chris brandished a machete from the back seat
which had been brought
from Jerrabomberra. He then got out of the car with the machete and swung it
Jaxson, Montgomery and Emmanuel went to the rear tray of the
Triton. Jaxson grabbed a pickaxe, Montgomery grabbed a shovel, and
Emmanuel a plastic rake. Samuel returned to the Triton and remained in the
vicinity of that vehicle. Thus armed, Jaxson, Montgomery
and Emmanuel approached
Chris, who still had the machete.
Whilst Brett was sitting in the back of the 86, Emmanuel hit the rear windscreen
with the rake causing it to shatter. Jaxson hit
the bonnet five times with the
pickaxe, causing five punctures through the metal. Montgomery hit the front
windscreen of the vehicle
with the shovel, breaking the front windscreen and
passenger side mirror. The vehicle, which had been purchased on 2 March 2020 for
$21,366.00, was a write-off.
When the offenders left to return the tools to the Triton, Brett climbed out of
the broken rear windscreen of the Toyota and fled
on foot. Thomas, who had been
stabbed, and Chris, still in possession of the machete, fled the area on foot.
Meanwhile, Alex, Matthew
and Wren returned to the Corolla and were driven away
by Abby, who had remained with her car throughout.
Jaxson, Montgomery, Emmanuel, and Samuel, who was still driving, left in the
Triton. In driving the others to and from the fight,
Samuel became knowingly
concerned in the affray committed by these offenders. There is no evidence of
him engaging in any actual
During the altercation Jonathan suffered multiple stab wounds to his chest and
upper body and died. Thomas was treated for his injuries
at the Canberra
Hospital. The whole incident had lasted about 3 minutes.
Jaxson, Montgomery, Emmanuel, Samuel, Alex, Matthew, Wren and Abby all went to
an address in Duffy. On the way and once at the house,
Wren showed a number of
different people that he had a knife and said he had stabbed someone.
It was not until the evening of 28 September 2020 that the offenders attended
Woden Police Station to speak with police about the
incident. Each of the
offenders participated in interviews with police and provided a version of
events consistent with their pleas
and the above facts.
All of the offenders entered guilty pleas following initial brief disclosure,
therefore at an early but not the earliest, opportunity.
Significance of context
As part of the agreed statement of facts, the Court was
apprised of Jonathan Smith’s death. None of the offenders currently
this Court are implicated in Jonathan’s death. All offenders agreed with
the prosecution that it was appropriate to put
this information before me at
sentence. It is relevant in a number of ways.
It would be artificial to consider the criminal conduct of these offenders
without having regard to what came immediately before
the conduct and also what
ensued. It was also the media coverage of Jonathan’s death that led to a
number of offenders presenting
themselves to the police. Thus, the context is
relevant as to how those individuals came to be prosecuted and what assistance
provided to police in investigating that matter. The context is relevant in
considering the impact on those involved in the offending
and how they have
responded to that. It is also important to give context to the victim impact
statement. The context also provides
a salutary warning to the community and
other would-be offenders as to how quickly trivial matters can escalate and how
wrong they may go.
5. I also adopt the observations I made in respect to the
offence of affray in my remarks in respect to the co-offenders at [39] –
[60] of my earlier sentencing remarks. I concluded at paragraph [61]:
[61] In consideration of the disparate approaches
reflected in the authorities, I approach the issue as follows. The court should
have regard to those aspects of the affray in which an offender participated,
either by premeditation or considered act, for example
pre-arranging an event
with planned violence, being aware of or actively engaging a number of
participants, the location and thus
likely ‘audience’ of the
conduct, the bringing of weapons, or the level of violence engaged in.
[62] These may be differentiated from those aspects of the affray which arose
with no forethought or planning, such as being unaware
of the number of people
who were to be involved, becoming embroiled in a spontaneous event, or a lack of
intent to engage in violence.
[63] Both sets of circumstances ought then be considered against the event as it
in fact unfolded and the part played by each offender.
Where an offender is
charged with separate offences, unless those offences reflect conduct other than
that which is relied upon for
the affray, a significant degree of concurrency is
appropriate in reflecting the offender’s total criminal culpability.
[64] It is the act of engaging in violence, rather than the particular violence
or harm suffered as a result of it, which is the
gravamen of the offence of
affray. The level of violence is relevant in assessing whether the hypothetical
reasonable person might
be placed in fear of their own safety as a result of the
conduct. This is an element of the offence. However, it would undermine
nature of the offence were it necessary to assess to a nicety the role of each
individual involved.
Objective seriousness
6. Nothing in the submissions made in these cases varies
significantly from those facts relied on in the earlier sentencing proceedings.
In summary Matthew attended with friends to the scene knowing a fight may ensue
and called a friend to attend for back-up in the
event that it did. He did not
instigate the event but was proactive in initiating violence against another in
concert with another.
7. Abby drove her boyfriend and two others to the scene
at his request, got out of the vehicle briefly but then remained in it until
driving the same males away from the scene a very short time later. Whilst she
facilitated the affray by driving others to the scene,
she took no active part
8. I adopt the relevant sentencing considerations detailed in my
remarks when sentencing the co-accused as follows:
As to parity:
I have had regard to the principle of parity as it was recently espoused
in Saipani v R
[2021] ACTCA 5
, applying the decision in Wong v
[2001] HCA 64
207 CLR 584.
Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ observed at
[65] that ‘equal justice requires identity of outcome in cases that are
identical. It requires different outcomes in cases that are different
in some relevant aspect’.
[74] Parity is secondary to individualised justice, particularly when sentencing
young offenders.
Youth sentencing principles
9. As to the youth sentencing principles at [75] – [79],
stressing the need for individualised justice and a focus on rehabilitation:
[75] This very issue was addressed recently in MT v R
[2021] ACTCA 26
(‘MT’), in which Murrell CJ, Mossop and Thawley JJ canvassed the
legislative and common law approach to youth justice
principles in the
Territory. Their Honours observed that Chapter 8A of the
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
(ACT) (‘the Sentencing Act’) alters the way in which the s 7
sentencing purposes are to operate:
(a) to emphasise rehabilitation;
(b) to elevate the importance of “individualised justice”
(including by requiring that a sentencing court consider additional
relevant to the particular young offender);
(c) to tightly restricts a
court’s capacity to impose a sentence of imprisonment;
(d) to exclude
the parole provisions; and
(e) to promote combined sentences as the
preferred way in which a young offender should serve any sentence of
imprisonment.
[76] Further, despite s 7(2), in the case of young offenders
the sentencing purpose of rehabilitation is prioritised. It may be given
weight than other purposes. The sentencing court must pay ‘particular
regard’ to ‘individualised justice’,
pursuant to s 133C. The
importance of individualised justice in the sentencing of young offenders is
also supported by s 133D, which
addresses considerations of maturity,
development and past and present family circumstances. Their Honours stressed
that imprisonment,
if required after consideration of all possible alternatives,
must be for no longer than is necessary to achieve the relevant sentencing
[77] I note the absence of the option of parole when sentencing a
young person and the analysis of this legislative provision in MT.
In removing
this option, the legislature squarely placed rehabilitation of young offenders
under the supervision of the court, through
the availability of suspended
sentences, whose breach is dealt with by the court, rather than the Sentence
Administration Board,
an administrative body tasked to deal with the granting
and supervision of parole. This approach elevates the requirement for
rehabilitation
and individualised justice in respect to young offender vis-a-vis
general deterrence and denunciation.
[78] In R v KS, cited with approval in
MT, Loukas-Karlsson J reiterated at [23]:
law recognises the potential for the cognitive, emotional and/or psychological
immaturity of a young person to contribute to their
breach of the law.
Accordingly, allowance will be made for an offender’s youth and not just
their biological age. (
(2001) 124 A Crim R 451
[2001] NSWCCA
). The weight to be given to the fact of the offender’s youth
does not vary depending upon the seriousness of the offence (
[24]). Where the immaturity of the offender is a significant factor in the
commission of the offence, the criminality involved
will be less than if the
same offence was committed by an adult. (
(2005) 158 A Crim R 93
[2005] NSWCCA 397
[79] In R v TL
[2017] ACTCA 18
, Burns, Mossop and Collier JJ affirmed that
the approach statutorily required for those offenders under 18 years of age may
apply to young adult offenders, despite the seriousness of the offence.
Rehabilitation is to be preferred over the need for general
deterrence, as harsh
punishment may in fact lead to further offending. The prospect of moulding a
young offender is inherently greater
than that of a more mature offender whose
offending is less likely to be attributable to immaturity.
Extra curial punishment
10. As to extra curial punishment addressed [80] – [87],
concluding that:
I consider that where an offender has been subject to retributive violence, the
loss occasioned thereby, whether to the offender
or their family, should be
taken into account on sentence and given the weight thought appropriate by the
court. The purpose in doing
so is not to perversely punish the vigilante,
although vigilantism is to be discouraged, but rather to recognise that such
curial punishment may go some way to achieving the aims of sentencing.
Assistance to authorities
11. I note that both of the young people to be sentenced today
provided some assistance to authorities by attending the police station
giving full and frank accounts of the event as they perceived it. I note also
that both are to be called as witnesses in the
trial for murder by another
co-accused person. Their assistance has been useful and if they give evidence as
anticipated, is likely
to facilitate the course of justice.
Plea of guilty
12. Both pleas came relatively late in the proceedings but have
been very significant in avoiding a significant amount of court time
have been necessitated if the matters had been contested but more importantly
have avoided the need for witnesses to give
evidence multiple times with all the
stress attendant upon that. I am satisfied that the pleas reflect genuine
remorse in both cases.
13. I take the pleas and assistance to the authorities
into account in a general sense in ameliorating the severity of sentence to
imposed. The penalties to be imposed do not lend themselves to a precise
calculation of discount although the reduction in good
behaviour period is
approximately 30% for both.
14. Counsel for both offenders also submitted
that it would be appropriate that no conviction be recorded, with or without an
good behaviour order. The prosecution would not be heard against that
outcome for Abby but considered it overly lenient for Mathew.
15. At this
point, I turn to addressing sentencing considerations more specifically for each
young person.
16. Matthew was 17 years and 7 months when he offended. This is
his first offence. I accept that the plea, albeit entered late, is
a reflection
of his remorse. His open engagement with the police about the incident and his
willingness to give evidence have, and
will be, of significant assistance both
in the investigation of the offence and in the subsequent prosecution of a
co-offender.
17. Whilst nearly 18 at the relevant time, I am satisfied that
he lacked the maturity that might ordinarily be expected of a youth
stage. Ms Leesa Morris, forensic psychologist, in her report of 2 March 2022,
concluded that Matthew suffered from previously
undiagnosed Attention
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (‘ADHD’) and possibly post-offending
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder
(‘PTSD’). The ADHD probably affected
his academic and social functioning, along with late diagnosed dyslexia. She
that the ADHD would have resulted in behavioural and cognitive inhibition
and planning which would have had an impact on his ability
to ‘properly
consider the action he was taking and foresee potential
consequences’...’over and above the impulsivity
associated with
adolescence in general”. Whilst I am not satisfied that this condition
rises to a level enlivening the Verdins
principles, it is properly considered in
the application of the youth justice principles in considering its impact on his
mature decision-making.
18. Matthew had, and has, the benefit of a
highly supportive and law-abiding family who have gone to great lengths to
relocate him
and support him into a positive environment where he has been able
to develop an improved sense of self-esteem and purpose. This
action also
largely shielded him from the retributive actions experienced by a number of
co-accused, except to the extent that he
was required to delete his social media
19. I consider that Matthew’s prospects for rehabilitation are
good, particularly if he avails himself of future psychological
and practical
support to address not only the impacts of dyslexia and ADHD on his social and
vocational functioning, but also the
likely impacts of unaddressed PTSD. He has
undertaken volunteer work in his new location and been actively involved in
has aspirations of a military career.
20. It was largely on the
grounds of a potential impact on career options, along with his perspective of
the objective seriousness
of the offence, that Mr Pappas submitted that a
non-conviction order would be appropriate. Having regard to my view of the
seriousness of Matthew’s conduct, which is more in line with
those who were proactive in the violence than those who drove
others to the
scene without active participation, I do not agree. I am also not satisfied
that the speculative possibility of an
unspecified impact on Matthew’s
career aspirations militates against the more usual course of recording a
conviction. On that
basis, and with regard to the parity principle, I am
satisfied that it is appropriate to record a conviction which I now do.
impose a good behaviour order for a period of 6 months from today with core
conditions.
22. In terms of the objective seriousness of the offence,
clearly Abby is charged with a lesser offence of affray and that is to be
reflected in any sentence which is imposed. By any assessment her involvement
would be seen as peripheral. And to that extent I am
quite satisfied is
consistent with the involvement of the young person, Nguyen., who drove other
people to the incident.
23. In terms of Abby herself, the report of Dr.
Danielle Clout gives a fairly comprehensive family history, but also an
of Abby as a young lady. Abby comes from a family where she was
raised largely by her mother and did not have a great deal to do
with her father
until later in life. That relationship had a fairly rocky start but now appears
to be more positive.
24. Abby had some difficulty with her schooling, and it
has become apparent through her assessment with Dr. Clout that she may suffer
from ADHD. That is something which is to be investigated more fully in due
25. Since this incident, Abby has remained in a relationship with
Mr. Christensen and that continues, although she has made it clear
that she now
holds a more assertive role in that relationship. She shows some maturity is
stating that she would not now drive him
anywhere he requested without
26. Abby has finished school and worked briefly at the labour club.
It was not very satisfactory work and not very reliable in terms
of the hours.
She has now engaged very recently with a hairdressing apprenticeship.
27. Since the incident occurred, there is no doubt that Abby has been the
subject of extensive extra-curial punishment. I spoke in
my earlier sentencing
remarks about what constitutes extra-curial punishment and there is no doubt
that that applies in Abby’s
28. From those who have formed
a view in the community, whoever they may be, about her role in this incident,
they are determined
to exhibit vigilantism and to take into their own hands what
they perceive to be an appropriate way of dealing with these incidents.
violence does not assist the community in any way at all and it is also violence
which has been perpetrated in a degree of
ignorance about the incident.
29. There is no doubt Abby has been subject to physical violence on more
than one occasion, and significant physical violence resulting
in a cut above
her eye requiring the equivalent of stitching. She has suffered the invasion of
her sense of security at her home
with the attempted and actual arson on motor
vehicles at the property, which no doubt was both practically disturbing,
in financial loss of near $15,000, but also psychologically
significantly disturbing. In combination with what I accept as her sincere
remorse about the death of a young person that arose out of this incident, but
not out of her actions on that occasion, she has been
significantly
psychologically impacted by the aftermath of this incident, as have those around
30. I have taken into account the need for parity. I have taken into
account the extra-curial punishment. I have taken into account
the provisions of
Crimes (Sentencing Act) 2005
(ACT) and the youth justice principles
as they apply to Abby. I am satisfied that she showed a level of immaturity and
that was in
part a reflection of her age, but also her life circumstances and
the condition she has since been diagnosed as likely suffering.
consider that her prospects for rehabilitation are good, and her compliance with
bail over an extended period of time, despite
the extra-curial punishment she
has been subjected to, bode well for a life without further criminal offending.
32. Having taken into account all of these matters, I am satisfied that it
is appropriate to proceed without recording a conviction.
I will require that
Abby enters into a good behaviour order for a period of three months from today
with the core conditions.
certify that the preceding thirty-two [32] numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Sentence of her Honour Chief Magistrate
RTF format (128 KB)
Signed PDF/A format