Eirlys Josephine CHESSA & Matteo CHESSA v Commissioner for Social Housing in the ACT [2009] ACTRTT 8 (17 February 2009)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: Eirlys Josephine CHESSA & Matteo CHESSA –v-
Commissioner for Social Housing in the ACT [2008] ACTRTT (8)
935 of 2008
Catchwords: Rent increases; comparative market rents; one landlord owns
all comparators
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES
TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT
935 of 2008
EIRLYS JOSEPHINE CHESSA and MATTEO CHESSA
(Applicant/Tenants)
COMMISSIONER FOR SOCIAL HOUSING IN THE
(Respondent/Landlord)
The rent increase is disallowed.
..................................
A. Anforth -
February 2009
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
) NO: RT 935
EIRLYS JOSEPHINE CHESSA and MATTEO CHESSA
(Applicant/Tenants)
COMMISSIONER FOR SOCIAL HOUSING IN THE
(Respondent/Landlord)
REASONS FOR DECISION
matter concerns a rent increase at a tenancy at The Causeway, Kingston in the
ACT. The premises is a three bedroom stand alone
tenancy commenced on 25 January 2005 at a rent of $260.00pw; in November 2006
the rent was increased to $300.00pw; in November
2007 the rent was increased to
landlord has now served notice dated 3 September 2008 on the tenants advising a
rent increase to $360.00pw as from 30 November
2008. Following an internal
review by the landlord the rent increase was reduced to $340.00pw.
tenants applied to the Tribunal on 28 November 2008 for an order that the rent
increase to $340.00pw is excessive. Annexed to
the application was the following
statement from the tenants:
1. Please identify the Issues In Dispute, for example, payment
of rental arrears or that the lessor/grantor fix a broken heater.
Housing Market Rent Increase amount to $340.00, reviewed but still
unjustified and unacceptable on the grounds that painting is due
since moving in
(2005); that there is no car accommodation; that the condition of the carpets at
entry was unhealthy and that we
had to change the floor covering ourselves; and
that the level of amenity of this area - already low and subject to the stigma
"slum" status - has actually progressively diminished over the last four
years even though nearby land values have gone through the
roof. The sense of
insecurity and consequent stress of living here has also increased, as have
health problems, due to the constant
noise, traffic and dust from the
construction site.
2. Please state the nature of relief you seek, (what sort of order you
want the tribunal to make), for example, an order that the
tenant/occupant pay
rental arrears or the lessor/grantor fix the broken heater.
a. that the rent remain at $315 per week; or
b. that rent be increased to no more than $320 per week ONLY IF AND ONCE OUR
HOUSE IS PAINTED (as promised - see attached letter).
c. I would agree to the $340 only IF THERE WERE AT LEAST A CARPORT,
($20x52weeks=$1040 -close to the cost of a basic carport).
d. Finally, if at all possible, that all other rents in the Causeway area be
adjusted accordingly.
Please note that since this area is to be demolished soon and it is unlikely
ACT Housing will build us a carport or allow us to build
one which would remain
their property when we vacate the premises, option (a) and (b) above appear to
be the only realistic relief
3. Please give a brief history of the dispute, (why you are making the
application). If you are claiming money please show calculations
amount claimed.
We have been asking for floors to be changed and walls and doors to be
repaired and painted since we moved in (Jan 2005). In August
2005 we were
authorised to make these improvements at our expense, which we proceeded to do,
at least in part.
We did not dispute our first market rent increase in 2006 (from $260.00 to
$300.00 per week) because at the time we were on rebated
rent and we did not
fully understand the implications of the increase itself. In actual fact, the
$40.00 increase (15%) was well
over the maximum amount (June 2006 CPI index for
residential rent was 2.9% so the maximum allowable increase would have been
This failure to act is common to many public housing tenants, as the
text of the annual letter is misleading. *
When rent was increased by another 14% to $320.00 last year, I appealed
against the decision on various grounds (copies of letter
and supporting
documentation attached). I was only successful in having it reduced by $5.00.
The CPI index for that year was 5.4,
so the rent increase should have been no
more than 6.48%. Although I would have wished to pursue the matter with the
Tribunal, the
time given by the letter was insufficient. Even this year, upon
receiving the letter with the result of the review, I only had 10
working days
available in which to lodge my appeal to the Tribunal.
This year I again disputed the standard market increase, following the
proposal to increase the rent to $360.00 per week, on similar
and additional
grounds (attached documentation includes calculations).
Although ACT Housing have now reviewed the rent increase to $340 per week, I
still do not believe this reflects the reality of the
situation. I believe the
latest valuation still does not consider the depreciation of rents IN THIS
PARTICULAR STREET and in the
one behind it (Spinifex St), due to progressively
diminished amenity, less availability of public transport and loss of community
services. It also does not consider the stigma attached to living in this area,
which is obvious to us every day, in the discrimination
we experience when we
try to socialise, apply for jobs, go to the doctor or other offices, sell or
trade in a vehicle or other items.
We now understand that ACT Housing increases market rent on all properties
every year, based on an independent valuation of market
rents in the area.
However, the rents are often increased more that the allowed %20 of the increase
in the CPI for residential rent
(as stated in the
Residential Tenancies Act
), even when there has been little or no maintenance work done or other
improvements to the property. Since excessive rent increases
justified by the lessor, ACT Housing itself has been at fault in respect of the
majority of its tenants for several years.
While amenity is an important factor
in estimating private rentals, it does not appear to be considered in public
housing rentals.
When we first moved here in January 2005, we were told we could finally
settle down since we would have security of tenure. Having
been homeless for
over a year, this was good news. The only noticeable construction work was near
Wentworth Avenue and Printers Way
and our street was quiet, with no trucks or
earth moving equipment visible. Only a couple of months later, we were informed
the whole area would be demolished and redeveloped over an indefinite
period of time (5 to 10 years). Demolition crews and construction
workers and
their equipment took over the area within another few weeks, and dust and
rubbish started blowing over into our gardens.
We still are no closer to knowing
what will become of us and when. This is unsettling and profoundly stressful for
the entire community.
Considering the experience of living in this area for almost four years, we
are now in the position to state that IF, at the time
of being offered the
property, we had known more about the reputation and standards of living
associated with this area (The Causeway)
AND had not been homeless and fairly
desperate to move out of supported accommodation, we probably would NOT have
accepted the property.
On the other hand we were told if we did not accept this
place we would then be forced to accept the next or forgo the right to a
property altogether and start the whole application process again. The
consequent state of mind at the time also accounts for us
accepting a house with
no car accommodation, cracked driveway and surrounding pavements, broken fences
and roof, dirty carpets and
floors, holes in walls and urgently due for
repainting, inside and out.
Finally, if we consider all the allowable increases according to
Residential
Tenancies Act
and the CPI index for residential rent since our starting rent of
$260.00 in 2005-2006 (that is 3.48% for 2006, 6.48% for 2007 and
2008), the current rent should not be more than $312 per week.
DOCUMENTS ATTACHED:
Date* Document
24.09.2007 DHCS letter - Review of Public Housing Rents 2007
0^.10.2007 Tenants' application for review of decision, with accompanying
documentation
12.10.2007 DHCS letter acknowledging application and advising of review
13.12.2007 DHCS letter advising outcome of review of decision
July 2008 Letter from Spotless announcing intention to paint premises
03.09.2008 DHCS letter - Review of Public Housing Rents 2008
15.09.2008 Tenants' application for review of decision - form only
30.09.2008 DHCS Property inspection report
10.11.2008 DHCS letter advising outcome of review of decision.
* date on actual document. Letters may actually arrive up to 10 days later
than date of signature.
DOCUMENTS REQUESTED FROM ACT HOUSING AND TO BE ATTACHED TO THIS APPLICATION
WHEN SUPPLIED:
• transcript of internal reviews 2007 and 2008
• results of all independent valuations on the property since Jan
• evidence with date carpets cleaned prior to entry
• evidence with date of painting walls
• evidence with date of laying original carpet and any changes of
14 January 2009 the Commissioner filed her submissions which read as
1. The applicants commenced their tenancy with
Housing ACT
January 2005. A copy of the said Residential Tenancy Agreement is annexed hereto
and marked with the letter "A".
2. On 03 September 2008 the respondents sent a letter to the applicants
informing them that the market rent was to increase on 30
November 2008 from
$630.00 per fortnight to $720.00 per fortnight. ($315.00 per week to $360.00 per
week an increase of 14.28% )
A copy of the said letter is annexed hereto and
marked with the letter "B".
3. On 10 November 2008 the respondents wrote to the applicants informing them
that, following an independent valuation of the property,
the proposed rent
increase would be reduced to $340.00 per week. (7.93%) A copy of the said letter
is annexed hereto and marked with
the letter "C".
4. The respondents would observe that the adjusted rent increase from $315.00
per week to $340.00 per week is within the criteria
for non excessive rent
increases set out in S68 (2) (a) of the Residential tenancies Act 1997.
68 Guideline for orders
(1) The tribunal must allow a rental rate increase that is in accordance with
the standard residential tenancy terms unless the increase
is excessive.
(2) For subsection (1)—
(a) unless the tenant satisfies the tribunal otherwise, a rental rate
increase is not excessive if it is less than 20% greater than
any increase in
the index number over the period since the last rental rate increase or since
the beginning of the lease (whichever
5. From the commencement of their tenancy 25 January 2005 until March 2008
the applicants enjoyed a rebated rent making this rent
increase the first that
has affected the applicants.
6. The property was fully painted internally in September 1999 and is
scheduled to be repainted in the 2008/2009 tax year. The laundry
was repainted
in January 2005. Screen prints are annexed hereto and marked with the letter "D
7. The property was fully carpeted and vinyl laid in August 1999 and steam
cleaned throughout in January 2005. Screen prints are annexed
hereto and marked
with the letter "F & G".
8. The ingoing property condition report signed by the applicants 27 January
2005 details the internal paint as fair wear and tear
in the lounge, hall and
dining areas, clean but marked in the bedrooms and good in the remaining rooms.
The floor coverings are listed
as clean with marks or good. The applicants in
the annexure to the property condition report have stated that the carpets are
worn". A copy of the property condition report and annexure is annexed
hereto and marked with the letter "H".
9. The property has never had a car port or garage.
10. The independent valuation dated 30 September 2008 is based upon the
property as is without improvement. A copy of the independent
valuation is
annexed hereto and marked with the letter "I".
11 .A list of the properties available for rent in the Kingston area on
Allhomes dated 30 December 2008 is annexed hereto and marked
with the letter
12. For the reasons above and the comparison of market rents included in the
independent valuation dated 30 September 2008, the Respondents
believe that the
proposed rental increase is not excessive and should be allowed.
matter was listed before the Tribunal on 19 January 2009. Both tenants appeared
in person and Mr Adkins appeared for the Commissioner.
tenants tendered a submission together with a range of attached documents. The
submission read:
The comments in the Submission prepared by the Respondent have been
noted. However, the Applicants consider most of these comments
to be irrelevant,
dismissive and in some cases even offensive, not appearing to have considered
the applicants' statements in the
"history of the dispute" and documentation
attached to the original Application.
We would like to highlight the fact that we, a family of 2 working adults and
3 children, became Housing tenants after having been
temporary accommodation and various refuges for almost two years. During our
tenancy we never asked for
unemployment benefits, since our work hours and pay
were always fluctuating. We strive to improve our situation and are proud of
being able to finally afford market rent. Yet, as mentioned in both
applications, we constantly have to fight against the stigma
of living in the
Causeway, a planet apart from nearby Kingston, and market rent should be
adjusted to reflect this.
Applicant's comments on Submission dated 30/12/08 prepared by
Respondent:
No mention is made of PRIOR rent increases, all of which were
found to be excessive by the Applicants, regardless of whether an "application
to review decision" was made at the time (please refer to original
documentation).
5: This comment is to be considered irrelevant, misleading and
offensive, as it implies that Housing tenants are in a rut and expected
remain so, or that BECAUSE they are - or have been -on rebated rent, they should
not be attempting to dispute market rent increases
even though entitled to do so
by law. We did not "enjoy" rebated rent, we felt somehow humiliated by the fact
we needed it. That
is why we are proud now to pay full market rent, but a
amount, reflecting the reality of the location. The comment also
implies that the increased cost of living in the ACT has not affected
anything it affects us more, once added to market rent: passing the "income
barrier" results in an immediate and an extremely
steep increase in all everyday
expenses. The fact that rent is rebated has nothing to do with the
appropriateness
of the market rent increase.
Points 6-8:
The property to date
has NOT been repainted.
consider the internal repainting and our substitution of the flooring to be
essential repairs for health reasons,
not improvements. We maintain
market rent should be paid only AFTER painting has been completed. Condition of
external paint was not
mentioned. Our additional comments on the state of the
carpet outside the bathroom (evidence cleaning prior to entry had been
inadequate)
were also not mentioned. On these grounds alone, the increases of
2006, 2007 and 2008 are ALL excessive.
Is to be considered in our favour, since
most comparable
properties have some form of car accommodation.
The statement is also
incorrect and misleading, in that there is physical and anecdotal evidence that
the previous tenant had built
not only a garage but a carport and a pergola, and
was asked to remove them before vacating this property. Storage space is
inadequate,
both inside and out: the shed is minimal and there are
built-in wardrobes in the bedrooms,
also present in most comparable
properties (please refer also to the attached documentation).
: The list supplied is dismissive,
(apartments and units) and
(no property details, i.e. n.
of bathrooms, type of heating/air con, BIRs, car accommodation, state of repair
and recent improvements).
It is insulting to us, as we do not have the option
to rent privately
due to our current status.
It proves only that there are NO comparable properties nearby.
By definition, as cited in the attached letter from Housing dated 1 August
2008, "the market rent for a
Housing ACT
property is based on the rent likely to
be paid for an
property in the private rental market in a
similar location,
and of similar
size and amenity".
In fact, this whole suburb is marked for demolition/redevelopment under the
East Lake Renewal Project, therefore condemned. The area
is apparently still
zoned as temporary accommodation, and the houses are little more than kit homes
("govies") notably of less value
in real estate terms. None of the properties
have car accommodation.
The state of repair of the adjoining properties
(n. 10 and 14) is now worse than when we first arrived and further
depreciates the one we occupy. Here is a vacant lot on our street
an n.4, from a
house that burnt down in October 2007. This also
has not been at all
by the independent valuers, whereas on the private market,
"street appeal" can carry up to 50% of the value of a property.
It is scarcely believable that ACT Housing (and therefore the ACT Government)
could be so out of touch with reality as to assume that
this area is comparable
to any other in Kingston. To do so is an insult to the intelligence of its own
tenants and of the entire
Amenity here is IN NO WAY comparable to that offered in areas where private
rent is available. For four years we have lived in front
of a morgue, a power
station and a permanent building site, breathing the dust from mounds of dirt
higher than our houses which according
to a Canberra Times article some time ago
were even been found to contain traces of heavy metal. Rubbish from the site
our gardens and along the road, giving it an unkempt look.
Maintenance of nature strips, pavements and the public land section of
is kept to a bare minimum. Not far behind us we have the sewage treatment works
and old toxic waste dump sites. Our access
to the pleasanter areas around the
lake was barred by fences, and footpaths to Wentworth Avenue were only recently
completed and
opened. The street lighting is for the new development only, and
finishes halfway down Dawes Street, leaving us in the dark to walk
Wentworth Avenue bus stops in winter.
When we arrived in January 2005 we had a bus service which took us to Deakin
and the Hospitals in 20minutes, a preschool and a public
phone two blocks away,
and a library within walking distance. All four are now gone. Even the
Legislative Assembly stated (15/03/07)
that ACTION had given insufficient
explanation for why the 84, considered an "essential route", had been cut.
short, since moving in, we pay more money for fewer services in an area whose
image is getting worse not better. We feel that $320
a week is a fair amount
until the next rent review.
List of attached documentation
(including documents released by
Housing ACT
, as announced in original
application)
- ACT Housing letter explaining market rent reviews, 01/08/08
- ACT Housing letter in response to request for release of documentation,
- independent valuation of property, 29/10/2007, supplied by
Housing ACT
- transcript of market rent review summaries (2007 - 2008), supplied by
Housing ACT
- extract from ACT Legislative Assembly Standing Committee on Planning and
the Environment
Report 29, 2007 "ACTION Buses and the Sustainable Transport
- extract from public opinion website RIOT ACT, describing the Causeway
- list of comparative private rent prices in Canberra/Queanbeyan area (web
- Canberra Times article and public comments "Causeway being left to wither",
Documentation announced by Applicants, attached to ACT Housing
Submission:
- evidence, with dates, of laying of original carpet and carpet cleaning
prior to entry
- evidence, with dates, of full and/or partial indoor paintwork completed
- independent valuation of property, 2008.
the hearing the tenants developed their concerns about the lack of maintenance
of their house, the range of improvement that they
had themselves made to the
house and the general lack of amenity of the Causeway area.
tenants said that they had laid new floors in the house except in the kitchen;
painted several rooms, installed new handles in
the kitchen and showerhead in
the shower; built a brick retaining wall at the rear of the house and created a
tenants pointed out that within the Causeway area there were 50 houses of which
45 were owned by the Commissioner. Of the five
privately owned houses only one
is rented at $400.00 pw. There was no evidence concerning the standard of this
particular house.
tenants asserted that the Commissioner had plans to demolish their house and
other houses in the Causeway area. Mr Adkins denied
any knowledge of such a
tenants asserted that the Causeway area had been neglected by the ACT government
and was now badly run down. They pointed to a
deterioration in the roads, loss
of street lighting and a reduction of bus services.
tenants invited the Tribunal to view their house and the Causeway area. The
hearing was adjourned to 30 January 2009 for a view.
the view both tenants were present as was Mr Adkins for the Commissioner with
the relevant housing officer from the Commissioner’s
office. The Tribunal
first viewed the inside of the house, then the yard and then drove around the
Causeway area.
is no question but that the house is in a poor state of repair. The
tenants’ own work in laying new floors and painting
most of the interior
of the house was noted. The tenants showed the Tribunal and Mr Adkins the
various items in the house that they
asserted required maintenance.
yard was rough with building rubble left from previous works carried out by the
Commissioner presumably prior to 1995. The housing
officer undertook to remove
this material.
tenants asserted that some of this building material contained asbestos and
produced a report by Asbestos Consultants & Removalist
dated 19 January 09
which stated that asbestos concentrations existed in the building rubble and in
the back yard.
Tribunal noted the poor state of maintenance of the adjacent yards and the
housing officer said that he would have tradesmen attend
to the rubbish and
piles of rotting matter in the adjacent yard.
general area was severally affected by the developments going on in Kingston.
The roads had not been maintained and suffered from
pot holes. There was no
landscaping. The Tribunal noted the extent of the walk to the bus stops and the
tenants’ assertion
that the street lighting for that journey was not
tenants complained of the truck traffic from the adjacent development and the
unattractive appearance of the development. The
Tribunal had no difficult
understanding this complaint although there was little truck activity at the
time of the view.
Commissioner advised that the house is due for painting inside and outside in
the 2008/2009 financial year but could not be more
precise. It has been 10 years
since the last painting was done by the Commissioner.
The legislation:
relevant provisions are found in sections 67-70
Residential Tenancies Act
which reads as follows:
The tribunal may make the following orders in relation to an application for
review of a rental rate increase:
(a) an order allowing the increase applied for or the other increase that
the tribunal considers just;
(b) an order disallowing the increase;
(c) an order disallowing part of the increase.
Guideline for orders
(1) The tribunal must allow a rental rate increase that is in accordance
with the standard residential tenancy terms unless the increase
(2) For subsection (1)—
(a) unless the tenant satisfies the tribunal otherwise, a rental rate
increase is not excessive if it is less than 20% greater than
any increase in
the index number over the period since the last rental rate increase or since
the beginning of the lease (whichever
is later); and
(b) unless the lessor satisfies the tribunal otherwise, a rental rate
increase is excessive if it is more than 20% greater than any
increase in the
index number over the period since the last rental rate increase or since the
beginning of the lease (whichever is
(3) If a tenant or lessor proposes that a rental rate increase is or is not
excessive, the tribunal, in considering whether it is
satisfied about the
proposal, must consider the following matters:
(a) the rental rate before the proposed increase;
(b) if the lessor previously increased the rental rate while the relevant
tenant was tenant—
(i) the amount of the last increase before the proposed increase; and
(ii) the period since that increase;
(c) outgoings or costs of the lessor in relation to the premises;
(d) services provided by the lessor to the tenant;
(e) the value of fixtures and goods supplied by the lessor as part of the
(f) the state of repair of the premises;
(g) rental rates for comparable premises;
(h) the value of any work performed or improvements carried out by the
tenant with the lessor’s consent;
(i) any other matter the tribunal considers relevant.
(4) If the tribunal considers a proposed rental rate increase is excessive
but a lesser increase would not be, it may disallow so
much of the increase as
is excessive.
(5) In subsection (2):
index number
means the rents component of the housing group of
the Consumer Price Index for Canberra published from time to time by the
statistician.
Effect of orders
(1) If the tribunal makes an order under
(a) or (c), the rental
rate increase takes effect from the date when the proposed increase would, apart
, have taken place.
(2) The tribunal may, on application, grant a tenant time to pay rent owed
because of the operation of subsection (1).
(a) the tribunal makes an order mentioned in
(b) or (c);
(b) despite
, the tenant has paid the lessor the full amount of
the rental rate increase proposed by the lessor;
the tribunal may order the lessor to pay to the tenant the difference between
the amount the tenant paid to the lessor and the amount
that was payable.
Further increases
If a proposed rental rate increase has been reviewed by the tribunal, any
further purported increase in the rental rate for a period
of 12 months
after the day the proposed increase was to take effect is void.
tenants referred to the role of the 20% increase on the Housing CPI in
on several occasions. The Tribunal explained that this figures is only
relevant to determining where the onus of proof lies in establishing
excessiveness of the rent increase (
Commissioner for Housing v Key
In the present case because the proposed rent increase did not
exceed this threshold, the Tenant bears the evidential onus.
Tribunal is required to consider the matters listed in
section 68(3)(a)
tenants raised considerations (a)-(b) in their submission that the rent
increases imposed on them over the years since becoming
tenants in the premises
were burdensome and not consistent with the run down nature of the
neighbourhood. If viewed only as a percentage
rate of increase in rent then the
relevant historical increases imposed on the tenants are consistent with the
general trend in the
ACT rental market.
the tenants case is essentially that the poor state of maintenance of their
house, their own improvements to the property
and the general deterioration in
the Causeway neighbourhood make it unfair to simply apply historical market
tenants real concerns appear to be directed to the considerations in paragraphs
(f),(g) and (h) of section 68(3).
terms of consideration (f), the Tribunal has no difficulties in finding as a
fact that the premises were not properly maintained
by the Commissioner and were
in a general poor state of repair. The only maintenance of any significance
since the commencement of
the tenancy in 2005 is that carried out by the tenants
themselves which is a relevant consideration under paragraph (h).
(g) raises the issues of the rents for comparative premises. The valuation
relied upon by the Commissioner relied upon units
in new developments in
Kingston. Even the most casual inspection of the areas demonstrates the
inappropriateness of any such comparison.
In fairness to Mr Adkins he did not
press those comparisons.
the Causeway area itself 45 of the 50 house were owned by the Commissioner and
tenanted. They were all on essentially the same
rent depending on the number of
bedrooms ranging from $320 per week to $390 per week.
these houses are obviously the most comparative for present purposes, there is
an obvious problem with relying upon them for
the purposes of the present
application. In any situation were the same landlord owns essentially the whole
of the relevant housing
stock there is no true competition for rents. The
landlord is free to charge whatever rent the landlord chooses. In the present
the Commissioner could for example raise the rents on some premises and
then rely upon those rent increase to support a rent increase
on other premises
in the same housing stock. This leap frogging process could be repeated over and
over with the outcome that the
rents may bear little relationship to the
external market.
might be thought that the weakness in the above argument is that the tenants
involved in the first round of rent increases would
oppose those increases and
thereby thwart any future leap frogging. But most of the Commissioner’s
tenants in the Causeway
would be on rebated rent and so an increase in the
market rent would not directly affect them. Tenants in this position are
to spend the time and effort required to oppose a rent increase. Once a
good number of such rent increases have occurred these increases
may then form
the basis for dragging up the rents of those tenants who are not on rebates and
who may oppose the rent increase.
any event the Tribunal is not convinced that recourse to the existing government
rents in the Causeway is a good guide to whether
any particular rent increase is
excessive or not. Each case must be determined on its own facts having regard to
the considerations
in paragraph 68(3) and it is most unlikely that each of the
Commissioners tenancies in the Causeway satisfies these criteria in
approximately
the same way.
the presently constituted Tribunal does not accept that the Commissioner has a
legal or social duty to engage in rent increases
to the maximum extent that
comparisons with the private market will bear. The reasons for this conclusion
are set out in
Atherton v Commissioner for Housing
[2007] ACTRTT 20
Donohue v Havelock Housing Association
[2007] ACTRTT 1
NSW Land and Housing Corporation
2007 NSWCTTT 25.
Tribunal accepts as a fact that:
Applicants’ premises is in a poor state of repair
Applicants have invested substantial time and money into improvements
neighbourhood is run down
(d) the road,
street lighting and bus services are poor relative to other suburbs in
adjacent development causes noise and dust pollution.
Tribunal is satisfied that the proposed rent increase is excessive. Whether any
increase is justified in the light to the substantial
historical increases to
date is doubtful. If the 20%m increase on the housing CPI were applied then the
rent increase would be of
the order of $30.00 per week. But there is no obvious
rationale for applying this percentage increase.
rent increase is disallowed and the rent is therefore to remain at $315pw.
February 2009
RTF format (165 KB)
Signed PDF/A format