Harlovich v Sebbens [2023] ACTSCFC 3 (27 October 2023)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Harlovich v Sebbens
[2023] ACTSCFC 3
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Baker, McWilliam and Abraham JJ
The questions referred should be answered as follows:
Question 1: In an appeal to the Supreme Court brought by the prosecution from a
sentence imposed in the Magistrates Court, is there
a residual discretion not to
Answer: Yes
Question 2: If there is a residual discretion, to what extent, if at all, is it
affected by
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Answer: The residual discretion is not limited by
Magistrates Court Act
Catchwords:
– CRIMINAL LAW – Whether residual discretion
prosecution appeals from sentences
imposed in the Magistrates Court – whether
Magistrates
Court Act 1930
(ACT) limits the residual discretion – application of
the principle of legality – history of prosecution appeals against
sentences imposed in the Magistrates Court – no clear indication of
legislative intent to limit residual discretion.
Legislation Cited:
Court of Petty Sessions (Civil Jurisdiction) (Amendment)
Court of Petty Sessions Ordinance 1930
(Cth) Divs 2,
Court of Petty Sessions Ordinance 1972
(Cth) ss 4 and
Court of Petty Sessions Ordinance 1974
Crimes (Appeal
and Review) Act 2001
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes Act 1914
, 208(1)(e), 374, 375
Legislation Amendment Act 2008
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
Criminal Code Act 1924
Criminal Procedure Act
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Magistrates Court (Amendment) Act 1990
Magistrates
Court (Appeals against Sentence) Ordinance 1990
Magistrates
Court (Civil Jurisdiction) Ordinance 1982
Magistrates Court Act
(ACT) Divs 2, 3;
Legislation Amendment Act 2006
Supreme Court Act 1933
Supreme Court Amendment Act 2001 (No 2)
Cases Cited:
Adams v Navaratnam
[2021] ACTSC 256
Bui v Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth)
[2012] HCA 1
244 CLR 638
Chapman v Cottle
[2022] ACTSC 330
Police v Cadd
[1997] SASC 6187
(1997) 69 SASR 150
[2013] ACTSC 87
CMB v Attorney-General (NSW)
[2015] HCA 9
256 CLR 346
Courtney v Narjic
[2021] NTSC 61
Cowie v Bacopak Pty
[2022] WASC 14
Croatto v Banks
[2015] ACTSC 398
of Public Prosecutions v Chatters
[2011] TASCCA 8
Director of Public Prosecutions v JSP
[2020] TASCCA 3
282 A Crim R
DK v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2021] NSWCA 134
DPP v Karazisis
[2010] VSCA 350
; 31 VR 634
Everett v The
[1994] HCA 49
181 CLR 295
Fall v Vuolo
[2022] ACTSC
Green v The Queen
[2011] HCA 49
244 CLR 462
Griffiths v The
[1977] HCA 44
; 137 CLR 293
Harlovich v Sebbens
[2022] ACTSC
Harris v Leaman
[2022] TASSC 28
[2017] NTSC 68
Kaye v Siddiq
[2013] ACTSC 62
[2021] ACTSC 95
358 FLR 288
Knight v Birch
(1992) 106 ACTR
27; 106 FLR 109
Lacey v Attorney-General of Queensland
[2011] HCA 10
242 CLR 573
Lyons v Bakes
[2015] TASSC 37
Malvaso v The
[1989] HCA 58
168 CLR 227
Momcilovic v The Queen
Munda v Western Australia
[2013] HCA 38
Munday v Gill
[1930] HCA 20
Peel v The Queen
[1971] HCA 59
125 CLR 447
R v Chatfield
[2012] ACTCA 32
[2020] SASCFC 49
283 A Crim R 219
R v Flowers
[2014] ACTCA 13
[1983] 3 NSWLR 245
13 A Crim R 375
[2010] NSWCCA 49
R v Nicholas
[2019] ACTCA
R v Ralston
[2020] ACTCA 47
285 A Crim R 159
[1979] FCA 32
Rigby v Kotis
[2018] NTSC 48
273 A Crim R
The State of Western Australia v THN
[2023] WASCA 18
[2022] WASC 237
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
Young v White
[2016] QDC 159
Texts Cited:
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Court of Petty Sessions Ordinance 1972
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Court of Petty Sessions Ordinance
Explanatory Statement to the
Magistrates Court (Appeals
against Sentence) Ordinance 1990
Explanatory Statement to the
Sentencing Legislation Amendment Bill
Gregory Harlovich (First Appellant)
Naomi Chapman (Second Appellant)
Carla Lee Sebbens (First Respondent)
Damien Cottle (Second Respondent)
Representation:
A Williamson SC (First and Second Appellant)
K J Edwards and J
Cooper (First Respondent)
J Nottle (Second Respondent)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (First and Second Appellants)
Aboriginal Legal Service NSW/ACT (First Respondent)
SCB Legal (Second Respondent)
File Numbers:
SCA 10 of 2022
SCA 11 of 2022
Decisions referred:
ACT Magistrates Court
Special Magistrate Hopkins
Date of Decision:
Case Title:
Harlovich v Sebbens
Court File Number(s):
CC 6685/2021
ACT Magistrates Court
Magistrate Stewart
Date of Decision:
Case Title:
Chapman v Cottle
Court File Number(s):
CC 2020/12887, CC 2020/12888, CC2020/12889, CC20201/3074, CC2021/5742,
CC2021/8263
Introduction
issue before the Full Court concerns the existence and extent of the residual
discretion applying to appeals brought
by the prosecution from the Magistrates
Court in the Territory.
context of a prosecution appeal against sentence, the ‘residual
discretion’ refers to the discretion of
an appellate court to refuse to
intervene and re-sentence an offender, notwithstanding that the prosecution has
demonstrated error
in the sentence imposed at first instance:
[2011] HCA 49
244 CLR 462
at 465-6 [1] and 471 [24]
(French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ);
CMB v Attorney-General (NSW)
256 CLR 346
(Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ). For example, even
where error is established in the original sentence imposed, an appellate court
decline to allow a prosecution appeal and resentence an offender
(i) The prosecution contributed to the error in the court below, such as where
the prosecution resiles on appeal from a concession
made at first instance
(including where the prosecution consented to a non-custodial outcome at first
instance, yet submits on appeal
that a sentence of imprisonment should have been
imposed), or where the prosecution otherwise changes its case on appeal, or
the prosecution did not assist the court below in avoiding error;
(ii) The allowing of a prosecution appeal would occasion an unfair additional
burden upon the offender, such as where the allowing
of the prosecution appeal
would undermine an offender’s progress towards rehabilitation, or where
the offender has been released
(either unconditionally or on parole), or such
release is imminent;
(iii) There has been a delay in the commencement, hearing or determination of
the prosecution appeal; and
(iv) The prosecution’s selective invocation of appellate jurisdiction
could cause disparity between co-offenders.
at 480 [43] – [44];
Munda v Western Australia
[2013] HCA 38
249 CLR 600
R v Ralston
[2020] ACTCA
285 A Crim R 159
“limiting purpose” of a Crown appeal is “to lay down
principles for the governance and guidance of
courts having the duty of
sentencing convicted persons”:
at 477-8 [36]. This purpose
provides a framework in which the residual discretion is to be exercised, and
may, of itself, provide
a basis for the court to decline to intervene:
at [100]. Accordingly, a court may decline to resentence where
any guidance to sentencing judges that would be occasioned by allowing
appeal would be limited, such as where the case is unlikely to arise again in
the future, or where there is little difference
between the sentence that the
appellate court would have imposed and the sentence that was in fact imposed at
first instance.
exercise of the residual discretion is concerned with issues of fairness and
justice, both to the individual offender
and with respect to the administration
of justice more generally:
at 480 [43];
[2010] NSWCCA
DK v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2021] NSWCA 134
105 NSWLR 66
. As Street CJ held in
[1983] 3 NSWLR 245
13 A Crim R 375
at 255, the residual discretion
“enables the court to keep an ultimate control by protecting a convicted
person against unfairness
or injustice if that would flow from an adverse
appellate decision”. For this reason, the considerations which are
to the exercise of the residual discretion are not confined to those
outlined at [2] above:
at 23 [85].
onus is on the prosecution to satisfy the Court that this discretion should not
be exercised in favour of the respondent:
370 [66]. This,
too, flows from a recognition that the concern of the residual discretion is
with issues of justice and fairness.
It is understandable that the prosecution,
who seeks to invoke the jurisdiction of an appellate court to increase a
sentence, should
be required to satisfy the appellate court that the deployment
of that jurisdiction will not occasion injustice or unfairness.
well established that the residual discretion applies to prosecution appeals to
the Court of Appeal against sentences
imposed by the ACT Supreme Court under
Supreme Court Act 1933
R v Flowers
[2014] ACTCA
R v Nicholas
[2019] ACTCA 36
– [118]; and
relatively recently, it was also well accepted that the residual discretion
applied to prosecution appeals against
sentences imposed by the Magistrates
Knight v Birch
(1992) 106 ACTR 27; 106 FLR 109 at 115
[2013] ACTSC 62
Gordon v Reddin
[2015] ASTSC 286 at [129];
Croatto v Banks
[2015] ACTSC 398
. However, in
Kirby v Ali
[2021] ACTSC 95
358 FLR 288
, Robinson AJ expressed doubt about that line of authority.
Although both the prosecution and the respondent in
accepted that
the residual discretion applied to the appeal, his Honour stated that he was
“not convinced” that the relevant
Division of the
Magistrates
Court Act 1930
(ACT) “adopts this body of law”:
the decision in
Kirby v Ali
, different views have been expressed as to
whether the residual discretion applies to a prosecution appeal against a
sentence imposed
by the Magistrates Court. For example, in
Adams v Navaratnam
[2021] ACTSC 256
, Loukas-Karlsson J declined to follow
and held that the prosecution was required to negate the residual
discretion. Conversely, in
Fall v Vuolo
[2022] ACTSC 249
J indicated that he was “inclined to conclude” that the decision in
Kirby v Ali
was correct.
competing lines of authority came to a head in the two proceedings which have
given rise to the present referral
Harlovich v Sebbens
Chapman v Cottle
). In both proceedings, the Director of Public
Prosecutions (“the Director”), representing the prosecutor in each
appealed against sentences imposed in the Magistrates Court on the ground
that the sentences imposed by the Magistrates Court were
manifestly inadequate.
Chapman v Cottle
, the Director also alleged specific error in the
sentencing decision.)
sentencing proceedings in
Chapman v Cottle
, counsel for the Director
submitted that the residual discretion had been excluded by
Magistrates Court Act
Relying on the decisions in
Fall v Vuolo
, counsel for the Director submitted that
“when considering a prosecution appeal against sentence where satisfied
was an error”, the Supreme Court “would be required to
allow an appeal and re-sentence an offender unless satisfied that
different sentence was warranted’”. In contrast, in
Harlovich v
, counsel for the Director conceded that the residual discretion
appeals were listed before Loukas-Karlsson J for hearing. Noting the
inconsistencies in the approach taken by the Director
in each proceeding, on
1 December 2022, with the consent of all parties,
Loukas-Karlsson J referred the following questions to this
determination pursuant to
Supreme Court Act
(i) In an appeal to the Supreme Court brought by the prosecution from a sentence
imposed in the Magistrates Court, is there a residual
discretion not to
(ii) If there is a residual discretion, to what extent, if at all, is it
affected by
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Chapman v Cottle
[2022] ACTSC 330
Harlovich v
[2022] ACTSC 331
will be discussed further below, in their oral and written submissions on the
referred proceedings in this Court, there
was ultimately relatively little
difference between the parties’ positions. All parties agreed that the
first question (whether
there is a residual discretion to intervene) should be
answered ‘yes’.
only dispute between the parties concerned the answer to the second question
(whether the residual discretion is affected
Magistrates Court Act
). The respondents both submitted that the answer to
the second question should be that the residual discretion is unaffected by
Magistrates Court Act
. In contrast, the Director contended
that the second question should also be answered ‘yes’. Given that
the second question
asks “to what extent” the residual discretion is
affected by
, the answer proposed by the Director was somewhat
non-responsive. As discussed further below, the Director’s oral and
submissions did not clearly articulate what aspects of the residual
discretion were said to be affected by
the reasons outlined below, we
conclude that the two questions referred
should be answered as follows:
In an appeal to the Supreme Court brought by the prosecution from a sentence
imposed in the Magistrates Court, is there a residual
discretion not to
Answer: Yes
If there is a residual discretion, to what extent, if at all, is it affected by
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Answer: The residual discretion is not limited by
Magistrates Court Act
Section 219F
Magistrates Court Act
turning to the parties’ submissions on the referral, it is convenient to
first set out
Magistrates Court Act
, which provides as
follows (emphasis added):
219F Powers of Supreme Court
(1) On a review appeal, the Supreme Court may, after considering the
evidence before the Magistrates Court and any further evidence
called by leave
of the Supreme Court—
(a) dismiss the appeal if satisfied that the decision of the Magistrates
Court should be confirmed
(b) set aside or quash, in whole or part, or otherwise vary or amend, the
decision of the Magistrates Court.
(2) If, under subsection (1) (b), the Supreme Court sets aside, quashes or
otherwise varies or amends a decision of the Magistrates
Court, the Supreme
(a) for a decision mentioned in
section 219B
(1) (d)—order that the
Magistrates Court commit the person to whom the decision relates to the Supreme
Court for sentence under
section 92A
(b) for a decision mentioned in
section 219B
(1) (e)—order that the
Magistrates Court continue the committal hearing of the person to whom the
decision relates in accordance
(c) for a decision mentioned in
section 219B
(i) impose the sentence or penalty the Supreme Court considers appropriate;
(ii) by order, exercise any power that the Magistrates Court might have
exercised; or
(d) in any other case—
(i) remit the matter to the Magistrates Court for rehearing or for further
hearing with or without directions of law; or
(ii) make any other order the Supreme Court considers necessary to decide the
matter finally, including a prohibition order or habeas
corpus order.
(3) For the purpose of—
(a) correcting any defect or error in the proceeding before the Magistrates
(b) enabling the matter to be decided on the merits;
the Supreme Court may make the amendments of the proceeding in the
Magistrates Court it considers appropriate.
(4) For subsections (1) (b) and (2) (c), the Supreme Court must
(a) vary a sentence or penalty such that the sentence or penalty as varied could
not have been imposed by the Magistrates Court;
(b) impose a sentence or penalty that could not have been imposed by the
Magistrates Court.
(5) The Supreme Court may, despite the ground or any of the grounds for
review mentioned in
section 219D
being established, dismiss the appeal if the
court considers that no substantial miscarriage of justice has happened
(6) On the dismissal of an appeal, the decision of the Magistrates Court
appealed from may be enforced, executed or given effect to
as if the appeal had
not been instituted.
(7) If, in relation to a sentence or penalty mentioned in
section 219B(1)(f)
the Supreme Court—
(a) varies a sentence or penalty under subsection (1)(b); or
(b) imposes a sentence or penalty or makes an order under subsection (2)(b);
the sentence or penalty as varied or imposed or the order made has effect as
if it were a decision of the Magistrates Court and may
be enforced by the
Magistrates Court accordingly.
(8) On an appeal under this division from an order, decision, sentence or
penalty mentioned in
section 219B
(1) (a), (d), (e) or (f), the Supreme Court
must order that the costs of and incidental to the appeal are payable by the
(9) Subsection (8) applies whether the Supreme Court dismisses the appeal or
exercises any of the other powers given to it by this
The parties’ submissions
written submissions of the parties helpfully summarised the history of the
residual discretion, including the legislative
Magistrates Court Act
and previous decisions concerning the application
of the residual discretion under ACT legislation and legislation in other States
and Territories. Without repeating the detail of those submissions, the material
that the parties provided was of great assistance
in construing s 219F and has
been assimilated into our consideration of the proper construction of s 219F
turning to that analysis, it is convenient to briefly summarise the
parties’ ultimate submissions concerning
the proper construction of s
The Director’s submissions
noted above, the Director accepted that s 219F(5) preserves the residual
discretion “in the general sense of a
discretion on the part of the
Supreme Court to decline to intervene despite a ground in s 219D having been
established.” He
submitted that this was “plain from the
discretionary language of the provision” and its statutory context. The
unequivocally accepted that
Kirby v Ali
was wrongly decided.
19․ However,
the Director stressed that the statutory text of s 219F(5) is more specific than
Supreme Court Act
(which governs appeals from the ACT
Supreme Court to the Court of Appeal) or interstate legislation such as
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW) (which governs appeals from the NSW
District and Supreme Courts to the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal). In particular,
the Director
placed emphasis on the text of the proviso expressed in
Magistrates Court Act
, which states that, despite any finding of
error, the Supreme Court may “dismiss the appeal if the court considers
substantial miscarriage of justice has happened”. The Director
submitted that this language is “concerned with the nature
and effect of
first instance error”, and that the residual discretion should be seen as
confined by this specific language.
written submissions and in his initial oral submissions, Mr Williamson SC,
Acting Director of Public Prosecutions, argued
that the “use of the
present perfect tense” in
temporally limits the relevant
miscarriages of justice which may be considered within the discretion to those
occurring “at
or around the time of the original sentence being
imposed”. If accepted, this submission would appear to exclude
considerations
traditionally falling within the residual discretion, such as
rehabilitation which has been engaged in after the initial sentence
but prior to
the appeal, or prosecutorial delay in commencing an appeal. However, in his
subsequent oral submissions, Mr Williamson
SC appeared to accept that
these kinds of considerations could be taken into account by the Supreme Court
when determining whether
to exercise the residual discretion.
the course of oral submissions, Mr Williamson SC also appeared to contend that
the language of
places the burden of negating the existence of a
substantial miscarriage of justice on the respondent to a prosecution appeal.
Court granted the Director leave to provide further written submissions on
this issue.
short email provided on 19 May 2023, Mr Williamson SC indicated that he
relied on his written submissions, and that
it was accepted that residual
discretion principles continue to “justify the obligation on the
prosecution to negate the exercise
of the discretion”.
view of this email, we understand the Director’s final position to be as
set out in his written submissions. In
particular, we understand the Director to
submit that:
(i) Kirby v Ali
was wrongly decided, and
Magistrates
does not exclude consideration of matters that are relevant to the
exercise of the residual discretion;
(ii) Residual discretion considerations may be taken into account by the Supreme
Court in Div 3.10.3 review,
as a part of the court’s
determination of whether “no substantial miscarriage of justice has
happened” in
(iii) Many considerations that are traditionally relevant to the exercise of the
residual discretion may be taken into account by
the Supreme Court in
determining whether
applies. These considerations will include
whether the prosecution caused or contributed to the error in the court below,
and whether
the error identified had a “limited or immaterial”
impact on the sentence imposed.
24․ However,
it remains unclear whether the Director contended that there are any traditional
residual discretion considerations
which cannot be taken into account in the
court’s determination of whether there has been no substantial miscarriage
In particular, it is not entirely clear whether the
Director contended that rehabilitation that has been engaged in after the
sentence but before the appeal, or prosecutorial delay in commencing the
appeal, cannot be taken into account in making a determination
Respondents’ submissions
respondents’ position was clear and may be briefly stated.
respondents submitted that the principle of legality requires that the residual
discretion be “read into any prosecution
appeal statute unless it is
excluded by clear language”. They drew upon a comprehensive analysis of
High Court, ACT and other
interstate authorities in support of their contention
that nothing in the text, history or purpose of s 219F evinces a clear intent
modify the residual discretion, as it has been traditionally understood in cases
respondents’ primary submission was that the residual discretion is
located in s 219F(1) and that s 219F(5) provides
an additional materiality
consideration. In particular, the respondents submitted that locating the
residual discretion in s 219F(1):
(a) Accords with the text of the provisions;
(b) Aligns the internal order of s 219F with established authority on the
“order of the appellate exercise for Crown appeals”;
(c) Promotes the coherence of the
Magistrates Court Act
(d) Accords with interstate authority.
alternative, the respondents submitted that if the residual discretion is
located within
, that section has completely retained all of the
principles of the residual discretion as traditionally understood.
The proper construction of
Magistrates Court
History of principles relating to the residual
history of principles relating to the residual discretion cannot be understood
without an understanding of the history
of the right of the Crown to appeal a
trite to commence with the recognition that an appeal is a creature of statute
and not a common law remedy:
Lacey v Attorney-General of Queensland
[2011] HCA 10
242 CLR 573
. No Australian statute provided for a
right of the Crown to appeal against a sentence until 1924, when New South Wales
and Tasmania
each enacted provisions permitting an appeal against sentence:
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW) and s 401(2)(c) of the
(Tasmania), as introduced by the
Criminal Code Act 1924
at 579 [10].
enactment of these provisions was met with some concern by the courts. In
Peel v The Queen
[1971] HCA 59
125 CLR 447
at 452, Barwick CJ
observed that prosecution appeals “cut across time-honoured concepts of
criminal administration”.
Griffiths v The Queen
[1977] HCA 44
137 CLR 293 at 310, Barwick CJ held that a prosecution appeal “should be a
rarity, brought only to establish some matter of
principle and to afford an
opportunity for the Court of Criminal Appeal... to lay down principles for the
governance and guidance
of courts”. These statements were affirmed in
Malvaso v The Queen
[1989] HCA 58
168 CLR 227
[1994] HCA 49
181 CLR 295
High Court observed in
(at 582 [17]), these expressions stemmed
... a judicial concern that criminal statutes should not be construed so as to
facilitate the erosion of common law protection against
double jeopardy. This
was reflective of a wider resistance to the construction of statutes, absent
clear language, so as to infringe
upon fundamental common law principles, rights
and freedoms.
, the concern about eroding the protections of an accused in respect
of prosecution appeals against sentence found expression in the
principle that,
in the absence of clear language to the contrary, legislation providing for a
Crown appeal against sentence must
interpreted to require that the prosecution
demonstrate error in the sentence imposed by the primary judge:
583 [20] and 598 [62].
concern with the protection of an accused against potential unfairness resulting
from a prosecution appeal against
sentence also found expression in the
recognition that an appellate court has a residual discretion to refuse to allow
a prosecution
appeal against sentence, even where error is shown.
expressed in
, the concern was particularly associated with the
erosion of the common law protection against ‘double jeopardy’.
other early decisions concerning the residual discretion referred to,
, the injustice of exposing a defendant to “double
jeopardy because of an error affecting his sentence”:
[1979] FCA 32
at 388 – 389; see also
[30] – [31] and the cases cited therein.
South Wales and Victoria, the protection against double jeopardy was removed by
legislation: see s 68A of the
Crimes (Appeal and Review
(NSW) (considered in
Procedure Act 2009
(Vic) (considered in
DPP v Karazisis
; 31 VR 634). In some other jurisdictions, particular provisions of
sentencing legislation have been held to be inconsistent with
double jeopardy
principles. In particular, double jeopardy principles do not apply in federal
prosecutions by reason of
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), which
requires the court to impose a sentence “that is of a severity appropriate
in all of the circumstances”:
Bui v Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth)
[2012] HCA 1
244 CLR 638
[20], 653 [25],
654 [29]”. Similarly, in the ACT, it has been held that double jeopardy
principles are inconsistent with
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
which respectively prescribe the purposes and
considerations to be taken into account by a court in imposing a sentence:
v Chatfield
[2012] ACTCA 32
19 ACTLR 65
37․ However,
the legislative denial of double jeopardy principles did not extinguish the
residual discretion:
at 628 [89] (Bell J), 622 [64] – [73]
(French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Gageler and Keane JJ);
at 25 [95];
at 657 [99] – [100];
at [79] and
at [41]. As outlined above, the
residual discretion is concerned with the avoidance of unfairness or injustice
that may be occasioned
by the Court allowing a prosecution appeal against
sentence. These concerns extend beyond the narrow double jeopardy principles
were expressly or impliedly removed by the legislation referred to at [36]
been held that the residual discretion is an aspect of the principle of legality
– that is, “the presumption
that Parliament does not intend to
interfere with common law rights and freedoms except by clear and unequivocal
language for which
Parliament may be accountable to the electorate”:
Momcilovic v The Queen
[2011] HCA 34
at [65] – [67];
at [83]. As counsel for Ms
Sebbens submitted, residual discretion principles are fundamental legal
principles which are read into
generally worded appellate statutes unless
displaced by clear and unmistakeable language.
this reason, the residual discretion has been held to apply to legislation
providing for Crown appeals against sentence
in all Australian States and
Territories, despite considerable differences in the texts of those statutes. In
particular, the residual
discretion has been found to apply even where the
legislation in question does not textually distinguish between offender and
prosecution
Director of Public Prosecutions v JSP
[2020] TASCCA
282 A Crim R 28
Courtney v Narjic
[2021] NTSC 61
at 622 [64] – [73];
The State of Western Australia v
[2023] WASCA 18
Police v Cadd
at 157 – 158;
Young v White
[2016] QDC 159
residual discretion also applies “with equal force” both in
for prosecution appeals, and
at 368 [63];
[2020] SASCFC 49
283 A Crim R 219
. Indeed, in
, the residual discretion was found to apply even where the
statute in question
Criminal Procedure Act
(Vic)) did not provide any discretion for the court to refuse to
intervene once error was shown. In particular, the residual discretion
to inhere in the requirement that the Director of Prosecutions
“satisfy” the Court that “a different sentence
at 652 [73].
ACT, Crown appeals against sentences imposed by the Supreme Court were first
introduced by
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
”), which conferred broad appellate
“affirm, reverse,
or vary” a judgment appealed from the ACT Supreme
Court or to “give such judgment, or make such order, as, in all the
circumstances, it thinks fit, or refuse to make an order”. Since the
enactment of the
Supreme Court Amendment Act 2001 (No 2)
(ACT) in 2002,
the ACT Court of Appeal has been the court to which appeals from the Supreme
Court lie by right. Like s 24 of the
Federal Court Act
Supreme Court Act
provides a broad discretion to the Court of Appeal to
“give any order it considers appropriate or to refuse to give an order
applied for”. These provisions did not differentiate between Crown appeals
and sentence appeals of an offender. Nonetheless,
in view of the broad
discretion conferred, it is unsurprising that the residual discretion was held
to apply to the exercise of appellate
at 475 – 477), and has been held to apply to the exercise
of appellate jurisdiction under
Supreme Court Act
at [78] – [79];
at [115] – [118] and
The application of the residual discretion to appeals
against sentences imposed by courts of summary jurisdiction
are significant historical differences between proceedings on indictment and
proceedings in Courts of summary jurisdiction.
As Dixon J observed in
[1930] HCA 20
There is, however, a great distinction in history, in substance and in present
practice, between summary proceedings and trial upon
indictment. Proceedings
upon indictment, presentment, or
information, are
pleas of the Crown. A prosecution for an offence punishable summarily is a
proceeding between subject and subject.
The former are solemnly determined
according to a procedure considered appropriate to the highest crimes by which
the State may be
affected and the gravest liabilities to which a subject may be
exposed. The latter are disposed of in a manner adopted by the Legislature
expedient for the efficient enforcement of certain statutory regulations with
respect to the maintenance of the quiet and good
order of society.
43․ Despite
these differences, it has been accepted that the residual discretion extends to
prosecution appeals against sentence
from courts of summary jurisdiction:
at 76 [44];
Rigby v Kotis
[2018] NTSC 48
273 A Crim R 485
– [13] and [54] – [71];
Police v Cadd
[1997] SASC 6187
(1997) 69 SASR 150
Harris v Leaman
[2022] TASSC 28
R v Schenk; Ex parte Attorney-General (Qld)
caution must be applied when considering these interstate decisions, which
relate to statutory provisions that are
in different terms to
Magistrates Court Act
. For present purposes, it is sufficient to note
that none of those decisions have suggested that there is any feature of
prosecution
appeals against sentences imposed in the summary jurisdiction, as
contrasted with proceedings on indictment, that would render the
discretion inappropriate. Rather, the considerations of fairness which impel the
residual discretion apply equally to appeals
from the summary jurisdiction as to
appeals against sentences imposed on indictment: see similarly
[39], per McCallum JA (as her Honour then was). As Issacs CJ (dissenting)
observed in
Munday v Gill
(at 52), the entrusting of jurisdiction in
summary matters to a single tribunal determining both law and fact is “in
destructive of the inherent principles of the common law safeguarding the
liberty and property of the individual when the Crown seeks
to punish him for an
alleged breach of the criminal law”.
Text, structure and history of
Magistrates
Text and structure
Magistrates Court Act
confers jurisdiction on the Supreme
Court to hear criminal appeals from the Magistrates Court. The Act creates three
different types
of criminal appeal: appeals in criminal matters (Div 3.10.2),
reference appeals (Div 3.10.2A) and review appeals (Div 3.10.3).
46․ Reference
appeals concern proceedings on indictment, which are not relevant to the present
proceedings. There is, however,
considerable overlap between appeals in criminal
matters under Div 3.10.2 and review appeals under Div 3.10.3: see
[2015] ACTSC 286
– [16]. Both Divisions provide for appeals to
be brought against convictions and sentences imposed in the Magistrates
appeals which are the subject of the present proceedings are review appeals,
within Div 3.10.3 of the Act.
Section 219B(1)
Magistrates Court
provides that an “appeal by way of review” (defined as a
“review appeal”) may be made in respect of specified
which at the relevant time, relevantly included:
(f) a sentence or penalty imposed by the Magistrates Court for an offence dealt
with by that court under this Act, section 90A, part
3.6 or part 3.7 or under
, section 374 or section 375.
48․ Subsection
219B(2) defines a “sentence or penalty” as referred to in s
219B(1)(f) to include a sentence or penalty
imposed by an order of the
Magistrates Court under
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
(which deal respectively with sentences of imprisonment, non-custodial
sentences, non-association and place restriction orders,
deferred sentence
orders, combination sentences and the amendment and discharge of good behaviour
grounds upon which a decision of the Magistrates Court may be reviewed are set
Magistrates Court Act
. Those grounds relevantly
include where there is “a
prima facie
case of error or mistake on
the part of the Magistrates Court”
(s 219D(a))
; the Magistrates Court
lacked jurisdiction or authority to make the decision
(s 219D(b))
; the decision
“should not in law have been made”
(s 219D(c))
and, in respect of an
appeal against sentence, where “the sentence or penalty was manifestly
inadequate or otherwise in error”
(s 219D(e)).
orders which may be made by the Supreme Court on a review hearing are set out in
, which is extracted at [15] above. In summary,
provides that the
Supreme Court may, “after considering the evidence before the Magistrates
Court and any further evidence
called by leave of the Supreme
(a) dismiss the appeal if satisfied that the decision of the Magistrates Court
should be confirmed; or
(b) set aside or quash, in whole or part, or otherwise vary or amend, the
decision of the Magistrates Court.
51․ Further,
provides that:
The Supreme Court may, despite the ground or any of the grounds for review
mentioned in
section 219D
being established, dismiss the appeal if the court
considers that no substantial miscarriage of justice has happened.
requires the Court to award costs against an appellant, whether or not
the Court allows or dismisses the appeal.
important to observe that the powers conferred by
apply to sentence
appeals bought by the offender as well as by the prosecution.
Section 219F
applies to appeals against conviction and appeals against orders dismissing an
information:
s 219B(1)(a)
(1)(b) of the
Magistrates Court
noted above, there is considerable overlap between criminal appeals and review
appeals under the
Magistrates Court Act
. Consideration of the proper
interpretation of
must take account of the legislative history of
both forms of appeal.
Director’s written submissions helpfully summarised, the origin of the
distinction between criminal appeals
under Div 3.10.2 of the
Magistrates
and review appeals under Div 3.10.3 is found in amendments that
were made to the
Court of Petty Sessions Ordinance 1930
ss 4 and 10 of the
Court of Petty Sessions Ordinance 1972
(“the 1972 Ordinance”).
existing Div 2 of Part XI (ss 208 – 219), had, since the establishment of
the Court of Petty Sessions (now the
Magistrates Court) in 1930, provided for
appeals from rulings, orders, convictions, and determinations of that Court
(originally
to the High Court, and later to the ACT Supreme Court). The 1972
Ordinance updated Div 2 by removing the requirement for leave in
appeals and limiting appeals by way of rehearing in civil appeals; and inserted
the new Div 3 (ss 219A – 219F) which
created a procedure for appeals by
way of orders
to review. In other words, Div 2, which by 1986
provided for statutory criminal appeals, was the predecessor of Div 3.10.2,
Div 3, which provided for appeals by way of orders
predecessor of Div 3.10.3.
1984, separate appeal procedures for civil actions were introduced into the
Magistrates Court (Civil Jurisdiction) Ordinance 1982
(ACT) by the
Court of Petty Sessions (Civil Jurisdiction) (Amendment)
Ordinance 1984
(ACT), and in 1986, Division 2 of the
Magistrates Court Act
was amended
Magistrates Court (Amendment) Act 1990
(ACT) to provide
exclusively for criminal appeals against convictions, sentence, bail and other
originally enacted in the 1972
, s 219C provided that the available
grounds of review included
prima facie
error, lack of jurisdiction, or
where the decision should not in law have been made. Section 219F provided for
the powers to be exercised
by the Supreme Court in terms that are similar to the
powers contained in the present s 219F. Subsection 219F(1) provided:
(1) On the return of an order
to review a decision of the Court of
Petty Sessions, the Supreme Court, on consideration of the evidence before the
Court of Petty
Sessions and any further evidence called by leave of the Supreme
(a) may, if satisfied that the decision of the Court of Petty Sessions should be
confirmed, discharge the order
(b) may set aside or quash, in whole or in part, or otherwise vary or amend, the
decision of the Court of Petty Sessions and –
(i) may remit the matter to the Court of Petty Sessions for rehearing or for
further hearing with or without directions of law; or
(ii) may make such further order, including an order granting any relief that
the Supreme Court is empowered to grant on certiorari,
mandamus, prohibition or
habeas corpus, as the Supreme Court thinks necessary to determine finally the
originally enacted, s 219F(3) was in similar terms to the present s 219F(5).
Section 219F(3) provided:
(3) The Supreme Court may, notwithstanding the ground or any of the grounds on
which the order
to review a decision of the Court of Petty Sessions
was granted has been established, discharge the order
if the Supreme
Court is of the opinion that no substantial miscarriage of justice has occurred.
apparent both from the nature of the available grounds of review specified in s
219C and from the remedies specified
in s 219F that review appeals were intended
to expand remedies that were previously available at common law on an
application for
judicial review.
most of their history, appeals against conviction or sentence under Div 2 (and
its successor Div 3.10.2) could only
be brought by a defendant. However, upon
their enactment in 1972, reviews under Div 3 extended to the bringing of an
appeal by a
prosecutor against an order for the dismissal of an information. The
Explanatory Memorandum to the 1972
records that these amendments
constituted the first time in the Territory that an appeal statute had provided
the prosecution with
a right of appeal against the dismissal of an
information.
right of the prosecution to appeal against the dismissal of an information was
short lived. Two years later, the right
was removed by the
Court of Petty
Sessions Ordinance 1974
(Cth) (“the 1974 Ordinance”). The
Explanatory Memorandum to the 1974 Ordinance explained that the right could be
as “contraven[ing] the double jeopardy rule”.
1990, Div 3 was again amended by the
Magistrates Court (Appeals against
Sentence) Ordinance 1990
(Cth), this time to introduce s 219B(1)(g), which
conferred a right to seek review of “a sentence or penalty imposed by the
Magistrates Court”. This right to appeal against a sentence extended to
prosecutors as well as defendants. The legislature’s
intent that
s 219B(1)(g) extend to permit prosecution appeals against sentence was made
clear by the insertion of s 219C(1)(g) to
include a ground of review that the
“sentence imposed was manifestly inadequate or otherwise in error”
(a ground which
would, of course, only be relied on by the prosecution).
Explanatory Statement to the 1990 Ordinance explained that:
The purpose of the Ordinance is to introduce a right of appeal by the
prosecution against a sentencing decision by the ACT Magistrates
Court for an
offence punishable summarily...
Since the introduction in 1989 of a right of appeal by the prosecution against a
sentence imposed for a summary offence in the Local
Court of New South Wales,
the Australian Capital Territory has been the only jurisdiction in Australia
where the prosecution does
not have a right of appeal against a sentence imposed
at the summary level.
Explanatory Statement makes clear, the 1990 Ordinance was the first time that
the prosecution was conferred with
power to seek a review of a sentence imposed
by a court exercising summary jurisdiction in the Australian Capital Territory.
this point in time, s 208(1)(c) continued to limit the right of appeal
against sentence conferred by Div 2 to persons convicted of
an offence.)
66․ Despite
these significant amendments to the availability of review appeals under Div 3,
Div 2 (and its successor, Div 3.10.2)
was not the subject of similar amendment
until 2006, when the
Sentencing Legislation Amendment Act 2006
(“the 2006 Amending Act”) amended s 208(1)(e) and
s 208(1)(f)
Magistrates Court Act
ss 208(1)(e)
and (f) had provided for appeals “by the person
charged” and “by a person who has given a recognisance” from
specified decisions of the court under the
. In contrast, the
new provisions provided more generally for “an appeal from an order of the
court” under specified provisions
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act
, including both custodial
and non-custodial sentences.
their predecessors, the new
did not differentiate between appeals by an
offender and appeals by the prosecution. Textually, the new
s 208(1)(e)
capable of conferring a right on the prosecution to appeal against a sentence
imposed by the Magistrates Court. However,
the extrinsic materials to the 2006
Amending Act suggest that the legislature may not have intended that the
amendments occasion
such a significant change: the Explanatory Statement
described the amendments as simply “[u]pdating the references to adult
sentencing options in s 208(1)(e) and (f) to those available in the new
sentencing scheme”. It may be noted that in
, Refshauge J
accepted that the terms of s 208(1)(e) are broad enough to encompass a
prosecution appeal against sentence, but did
not finally determine whether the
proper construction of the provisions was to require that a prosecution appeal
be brought under
Div 3.10.3:
final amendments that are relevant to the present referral came into effect in
2009, when the
Crimes Legislation Amendment Act 2008
(ACT) (“the
2008 Amending Act”) removed the two-step process for seeking a review
appeal under Div 3.10.3, requiring only
the lodging of a notice of appeal. Apart
from some renumbering, the relevant provisions remained substantially the same.
219D(e) continued to provide the prosecution with a right of appeal on a
ground alleging that the sentence imposed was manifestly
inadequate.
70․ Section
219F(5) (which had, in earlier iterations of the provision, been numbered
s 219F(3) as noted above) was amended
The Supreme Court may, despite the ground or any of the grounds for review
mentioned in s 219D being established, dismiss the appeal
if the court considers
that no substantial miscarriage of justice has happened.
written submissions in reply, the Director appeared to contend that the
substitution of the words “despite
the ground or any grounds for review
mentioned in section 219D being established” constituted a
“substantial amendment”
to the provision. We do not agree. Those
words replaced the previous reference to the discretion of the Supreme Court to
“discharge”
“notwithstanding the
ground or any of the grounds on which the
to review a
decision of the Court of Petty Sessions was granted has been established”.
In other words, the amendment to s 219F
did not occasion a substantive change to
the operation of the discretion; rather, it simply reflected the procedural
change, by which
the two stage
process was compressed
into a single procedure which required only the lodging of an appeal.
Determination
The first question: Whether the residual discretion applies
to a prosecution appeal against sentence from the Magistrates Court
Director’s concession that
Kirby v Ali
was wrongly decided should
be accepted.
the reasons outlined above, residual discretion principles are concerned with
the protection of a convicted person against
the unfairness or injustice that
may arise from allowing a prosecution appeal against sentence. These principles
will be read into
a generally worded statute that confers such a right of appeal
unless displaced by clear and unmistakeable language.
74․ Accordingly,
the question to be asked is not whether the
Magistrates Court Act
indicates a textual intention to positively “adopt” the residual
discretion; cf
Kirby v Ali
[4]. Rather, the proper question to
be asked is whether, in conferring jurisdiction on the Supreme Court to hear a
prosecution appeal
against sentence, the legislature clearly indicated an
intention to oust the exercise of the residual discretion.
Director properly conceded, there is no support for the proposition that the
legislation intended to oust the residual
discretion in respect of prosecution
appeals against sentences imposed by the Magistrates Court.
Section 219F(1)
provides that the Supreme Court “may... if satisfied” dismiss an
Section 219F(5)
further provides for the Court to dismiss an appeal
where no substantial miscarriage of justice has occurred. The relationship
these two provisions is discussed further in answer to question 2 below.
For present purposes, it is sufficient to note that there
is no textual or
purposive reason to conclude that the legislature intended the court to
disregard the considerations of fairness
and justice which underlie the residual
discretion when determining whether to allow a prosecution appeal against a
sentence imposed
by the Magistrates Court.
there any historical basis to infer that the legislature intended to oust the
residual discretion. As summarised
above, Div 3.10.3 of the
Magistrates Court
, and its predecessor, Div 3 of the
Court of Petty Sessions
, have been the subject of somewhat piecemeal amendments over the
past five decades. The provision for a right of the prosecution
against a sentence imposed in the summary jurisdiction in the 1990 Ordinance was
intended to do no more than to bring the
Territory into line with other
Australian States and Territories. The residual discretion of an appellate court
to decline to resentence
following a finding of error was well-established by
this time: see
. There is no indication in the legislative history,
much less a clear indication, that the legislature at any time intended that
residual discretion would not apply to these appeals.
77․ Accordingly,
the first question should be answered in the affirmative.
The second question: Whether the content of the residual
discretion is affected by
Magistrates Court
have carefully considered whether the second question should be answered by
this Court. On the current referrals, the application
of the second question
could arguably be seen as somewhat hypothetical. We do not have any information
discretion factors are said to be enlivened in the
referred cases, nor, ultimately, was there a clear controversy between the
as to how any such factors should be taken into account. Whilst the
Director submitted that the second question should also be answered
affirmative (that is, that s 215F(5) does affect the residual discretion), the
Director did not ultimately identify the specific
respects in which he said that
s 215F(5) affected the residual discretion.
79․ However,
as counsel for Ms Sebbens submitted, the divergence in the Director’s
submissions as to the effect of
provides a compelling reason for this
Court to provide guidance as to the content of the residual discretion. As noted
the proceedings before this Court, the Director made contradictory
submissions about whether, in exercising its residual discretion
to dismiss an
appeal against a sentence imposed by the Magistrates Court, the Supreme Court
may consider events that occurred post-sentence;
and whether the onus of
negating the residual discretion lies on the prosecution or the offender. These
issues will be critical to
the application of the residual discretion in both of
the cases which are the subject of the present referral, and in the
determination
of prosecution appeals against sentences imposed in the
Magistrates Court more generally. Accordingly, we consider that it is
appropriate
to address the competing approaches to the construction of
proposed by the Director and the respondents.
noted above, the Director contended that the residual discretion should be
, and that the discretion is accordingly limited by the
text of this subsection. In contrast, the respondents contended that the
discretion is located in the broad discretion conferred by the use of
the word “may” in
not consider that the residual discretion should be construed as located
exclusively within either subsection.
noted at [4] above, the residual discretion is concerned with questions of
fairness and justice, both to the offender
and with respect to the
administration of justice generally. Some aspects of the discretion may be best
addressed by application
discretion to dismiss an appeal
“if the court considers that no substantial miscarriage of justice has
happened”. For
example, where the prosecution contributed to an error in
the sentence imposed at first instance, or where there is little substantive
difference between the sentence that was imposed at first instance and that
which should have been imposed, it may be appropriate
for a court to conclude
that “no substantial miscarriage of justice has happened”.
83․ However,
where, for example, there has been unexplained delay in the prosecution’s
commencement of an appeal, or where
the offender has made progress towards
rehabilitation in the period after the sentence was imposed, the court may
conclude that although
a substantial miscarriage of justice was occasioned by
the sentence imposed at first instance, the allowing of an appeal would
occasion unjustified unfairness. In such a case, it may be more appropriate
for the court to dismiss the appeal and confirm the sentence
imposed under the
broad discretion conferred by
other words, contrary to the respondents’ primary submission, we do not
consider that
should be construed as being
with materiality considerations, nor that the discretion in
only be addressed if the prosecution has first satisfied the Court that there is
no basis to exercise the residual discretion.
In our view, the discretions in
are broad and complementary discretions which should both
be considered by the Supreme Court after any conclusion that error is
established,
and prior to engaging in the process of resentencing under
s 219F(2)(c)(i):
at 477 [35];
at 366 [57] and 370
not accept the Director’s submission that the inclusion of
restricts the operation of the residual discretion.
principle of legality applies not only to the abolition of common law rights,
but also to their limitation. The principle
of legality “requires that
statutes be construed, where constructional choices are open, to avoid
their encroachment upon rights and freedoms at common law”:
at 45 [43] (emphasis added). Issues such as the onus of proof
and the relevance of temporality (that is, whether events occurring
imposition of the sentence at first instance can be taken into account) have the
capacity to significantly circumscribe
the operation of the residual discretion.
Clear language is required before a construction is adopted that could have the
of curtailing the court’s discretion to dismiss a prosecution
appeal for reasons of fairness.
creation of a separate discretion to refuse relief in
is clear from
the use of the word “may”, which “is generally understood to
authorise the court in which the relevant
power is reposed
the relief sought although it is enlivened”:
at 74 [36]. The
creation of the discretion is further confirmed by the provision in
s 219F(1)(a)
for an appeal to be dismissed if the Supreme Court is
“satisfied” that the decision of the Magistrates Court should be
confirmed. As counsel for Ms Sebbens observed, the matters that may
“satisfy” the Supreme Court that a decision of the
Magistrates Court
should be confirmed are not defined or limited. They are apt to include the
fairness considerations that are at
the heart of the residual discretion.
Indeed, as noted at [40] above, in
(at [73]), the Victorian
Court of Appeal held that
the residual discretion was expressly preserved
by similar statutory language in
Criminal Procedure Act 2009
there any textual basis to infer that the discretion in s 219F(5) is intended to
limit the broad discretion conferred
by s 219F(1). The two provisions are
largely concerned with different considerations. As the Director noted, s
219F(5) focuses attention
on the past: the prosecution’s appeal against
sentence may be dismissed if the Supreme Court considers that “no
substantial
miscarriage of justice
has happened
” (emphasis added);
whereas s 219F(1) confers a discretion that permits the Supreme Court to
take into account not only the
evidence that was adduced at first instance, but
also “any further evidence called by leave of the Supreme Court”.
express reference in
to “further evidence”, which may
include evidence of delay in the commencement of the appeal and evidence of
rehabilitation,
is entirely apt to include considerations of the fairness of
allowing a prosecution appeal that may have otherwise been excluded
by a strict
construction of s 219F(5).
is overlap between the two subsections. The specific miscarriage considerations
that are referred to in s 219F(5)
could, in the absence of that subsection, have
been considered under the broad discretion conferred by s 219F(1). However, this
does not constitute a reason to read down the generality of the
discretion conferred by s 219F(1).
principle of statutory construction that all words of a statute are to have
meaning and effect does not require a construction
that each word in the
provision have meaning and effect in each and every case. In this respect, it is
also to be borne in mind that,
as originally enacted, s 219F did not apply to
prosecution appeals against sentence. Whilst the 1972 Ordinance (briefly)
a prosecution appeal, this was only with respect to appeals against
the dismissal of an information, and did not extend to an appeal
sentence. For much of its early history, s 219F(5) primarily applied to appeals
against conviction brought by defendants.
In this context, the conferral of a
discretion to dismiss an appeal where “no substantial miscarriage of
justice has occurred”
may have reflected the proviso which commonly
applies in appeals against conviction: see
Weiss v The Queen
224 CLR 300
the 1990 Ordinance first conferred upon the prosecution a right to appeal
against a sentence imposed in the Magistrates
Court, it did so in a statutory
context which provided two sources of a discretion to dismiss such appeals, both
the proviso in s
219F(3) (now s 219F(5)), and the discretion conferred by
the permissive language of s 219F(1)(a). In these circumstances, there is
no purposive reason to infer that the legislature intended s 219F(5) to
operate to the exclusion of the broad discretion then conferred
completeness, we also observe that an interpretation of s 219F which does not
limit the residual discretion is consistent
with the construction that has been
adopted of similarly worded statutes by most courts in other Australian
in the Northern Territory, whilst the issue has not
been finally determined, it has been suggested that the residual discretion is
not limited by a legislative proviso to dismiss an appeal where “no
substantial miscarriage of justice has actually occurred”:
[2017] NTSC 68
Rigby v Kotis
. Similarly, in
Tasmania, the residual discretion was found to derive from the words
“warranted in law”, rather than in
a similarly worded proviso:
only interstate authorities which have held that a similarly worded proviso has
the effect of limiting the residual
discretion are two decisions of Curthoys J
in the Western Australian Supreme Court, in which his Honour held that the
residual discretion
“arises from, and is accordingly limited by, the
Toop v Smart
[2022] WASC 237
Bacopak Pty Ltd
[2022] WASC 14
. It does not appear from the
judgments that his Honour was assisted by submissions on this question of
construction in either case.
Neither decision referred to the principle of
legality, and as first instance decisions, do not alter the conclusions above as
the proper construction of
Magistrates Court Act
94․ Accordingly,
should be construed as providing separate, overlapping,
discretions to dismiss a prosecution appeal against sentence. Some residual
discretion considerations will be best addressed under
residual discretion considerations will be best addressed under the discretion
conferred by
the Supreme Court, when hearing a prosecution appeal against sentence, finds a
ground of review established under
, the Court should then consider
whether a prosecution appeal against sentence should be dismissed under either
before engaging in any resentencing task. As some
aspects of the residual discretion may be best dealt with under
not appropriate to declare that the residual discretion is
“unaffected” by
, as proposed by the respondents. However,
we are of the view that the second question can, and should, be answered by
stating that
the residual discretion is not limited by
Magistrates Court Act
the above reasons, the questions referred should be answered as follows:
Question 1: In an appeal to the Supreme Court brought by the prosecution from a
sentence imposed in the Magistrates Court, is there
a residual discretion not to
Answer: Yes
Question 2: If there is a residual discretion, to what extent, if at all, is it
affected by
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Answer: The residual discretion is not limited by
Magistrates Court Act
I certify that the preceding ninety-six [96] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Full Court
Associate: A McCook
Date: 27 October 2023
RTF format (457 KB)
Signed PDF/A format