COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY OF THE ACT v LP082024 (Archie Tsirimokos) (Occupational Discipline) [2025] ACAT 58 (4 September 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY OF THE
ACT v LP082024 (Archie Tsirimokos) (Occupational Discipline)
[2025] ACAT
Catchwords:
Disciplinary proceedings involving four related charges
– detailed statement of agreed facts – formal admissions by
regarding three charges relating to professional misconduct but
denial of charge 4 involving alleged dishonesty – Tribunal’s
that there was no relevant dishonesty and that there was no evidence to support
it – the view of the Tribunal that the
dishonesty charge should not have
been laid – consideration of factors relating to prosecutorial over-reach
generally agreed regarding penalty – considerations
regarding penalty – Orders to be made as agreed regarding the first
charges and refinement of the agreed charge 4 but without reference to alleged
dishonesty – parties to file submissions
regarding costs.
Legislation cited:
Legal Profession Act 2006
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
Subordinate
Legislation cited:
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
rule 4.1, 43
ACT Bar Rules rule 42
Cases cited:
A Solicitor v Council of the Law Society of New South
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
Berger v Council of the Law Society (NSW)
[2019] NSWCA 119
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v ACAT
[2025] ACTSC 251
Derry v Peek
) 14 App Cas 337
King v The Queen
[1986] HCA 59
(1986) 161 CLR 423
Kumar v Legal Services Commission of NSW
[2016] NSWCA
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society (ACT)
[2018] ACTCA
Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
(1994) NSWLR 408
Macleod v The Queen
[2003] HCA 24
(2003) 214 CLR 230
Metaxis v Legal Profession Complaints Committee
[2020] WASCA 27
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 67 ALJR
Nocton v Lord Ashburton
[1914] UKLawRpAC 31
[1914] AC 932
Peters v The Queen
[1998] HCA 7
(1998) 192 CLR 493
Pollard v Director of Public Prosecutions
(1992) 28 NSWLR 659
Roberts-Smith v Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
(Reopening Application)
[2025] FCAFC 66
Smith v New South Wales Bar Association
[1992] HCA 36
(1992) 176 CLR 256
The Council of the Law Society of the ACT v ACT Civil and Administrative
[2025] ACTSC 25
Weaver v Law Society of New South Wales
[1979] HCA 35
(1979) 142 CLR 201
Wentworth v New South Wales Bar Association
(1992) 176 CLR 239
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of NSW
[1957] HCA 46
Texts/Papers cited:
G. E. Dal Pont,
Lawyers’ Professional
Responsibility
edition) (Sydney: Thomson Reuters/Lawbook Co.
Senior Member Dr W J Neville
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) OR 8/2024
COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY OF THE ACT
Archie Tsirimokos
Senior Member Dr W J Neville
The Tribunal orders that:
14 days, the parties are to provide the Tribunal with Orders that reflect (a)
the Tribunal’s reasons, and (b) the admissions
in the Statement of Agreed
Facts regarding Charges 1-3, and the Tribunal’s findings in relation to
12 noon on Friday 18
July 2025, the parties are to provide the
Tribunal with a timetable in relation to submissions regarding costs. The
submissions
are not to exceed 5 pages.
for the Respondent indicated that he may wish to provide some limited further
correspondence) in relation to costs. An agreed
bundle may be able to be agreed
Counsel also inquired whether oral
submissions might also be made after the written submissions are filed. No
decision was made
in this regard.
Tribunal indicated that an informal approach may be made to the Tribunal by
email regarding the matters set out in the Notation
............ ............
Senior Member Dr W J Neville
REASONS FOR DECISION
are disciplinary proceedings against the Respondent, who is a senior legal
practitioner in the ACT who has a “long and
unblemished record”, in
the words of the Applicant’s
Four charges have been
laid against him.
As explained and
detailed further in the Statement of Agreed Facts set out as an Appendix to
these reasons, the claims brought against
the Respondent arise out of, among
other things, two certifications given by him regarding the provision of advice
and the execution
of certain guarantees and loan documents.
first three charges in relation to what can and should be described, in general
terms, as negligence, have been accepted and admitted
by the Respondent. The
fourth charge, which alleges dishonest conduct against him, is a cornerstone of
the Applicant’s case.
The intense focus of the Applicant regarding this
charge is reflected in the document styled “Statement of Real Issues in
filed 17 March 2025, which is set out below.
Respondent accepts that his professional conduct that gives rise to the fourth
charge was seriously lacking, and which involved
carelessness or gross
negligence. However, he disputes that his conduct was dishonest, and in turn,
that (as sought by the Applicant)
it warrants his suspension from legal
practice. After noting that the Applicant’s primary case was that the
Respondent actually
read par.5 of the acknowledgment regarding the provision of
legal advice,
the Applicant’s
Counsel commented (emphasis
anxious to emphasise that
what the Applicant has to establish on the
Briginshaw standard
is that [the Respondent]
subjectively knew
what he was certifying was untrue. There are two ways to do it ... One, that he
knew, he had actual knowledge that what he
was certifying was untrue, or
alternatively that he was recklessly indifferent to the truth or falsity of what
he was certifying.
MR MOUJALLI: And I’m sorry to be belabouring this, but I have just
read a lot of cases where the tribunal has fallen into error
by making a finding
along the lines of what the practitioner should have known.
MR MOUJALLI: That is why I want to emphasise, it’s the burden that
the applicant carries, and
if there is to be a finding of dishonesty, it has
to involve findings as to the practitioner’s state of mind
to what is noted later in these reasons, Counsel did not accept that there was
any “third option” between the
two positions he
the contest regarding the Tribunal’s findings in relation to Charge 4 is
directly relevant to the question of penalty
– suspension or not. Other
matters regarding penalty in relation to the other charges (
undertaking a course in legal ethics, public reprimand, and a fine) are, by and
large, and with some modest tweaking, agreed.
short, especially because the parties have now prepared a Statement of Agreed
Facts (with very few areas of contest), and because
of the significant areas of
agreement regarding penalty, the scope of the contest is quite narrow which, as
already indicated, concern
characterisation of the facts and circumstances that
give rise to Charge 4, and the relevant penalty regarding that Charge.
significant and serious as Charge 4 is, and the facts surrounding it are
likewise, no less significant is the fact that the charges
before the Tribunal
are the first and only ones faced personally by the Respondent in a legal career
that spans 39 years, having
been admitted to practice in 1986. The factual
details regarding each charge are set out below in the Statement of Agreed
the course of a directions hearing prior to the substantive hearing, and during
it, I inquired of Counsel for the Applicant how
he proposed making
“good”, or otherwise providing the evidentiary bridge whereby the
claim for “professional negligence”
relevantly moved to
“dishonesty” in relation to Charge 4. I was assured that, while it
was something of a “task”,
it would be accomplished. Even after the
Respondent gave his oral evidence, and after again highlighting my concerns,
again I made
a similar inquiry. The Applicant not only persisted in prosecuting
Charge 4 as pleaded but also submitted that the Respondent’s
oral evidence
showed, or warranted, a finding that it was false and that he was a dishonest
witness. Respectfully, these were very
grave submissions but which, as I note
below, in my firm view were never made out.
it is “early” in these reasons, so to speak, it is apposite to deal
with the Respondent’s evidence (with
more detail to come) in the light of
the Applicant’s submissions regarding the low, or alleged poor,
credibility of his evidence.
My view of it accords with the Full Federal Court
of Australia’s recent assessment of that of Mr McKenzie in the
increasingly
fabled litigation of
Roberts-Smith v Fairfax Publications Pty
. In one of the multiple recent judgements in that matter (the failed
Application to re-open), the Full Court said of Mr McKenzie’s
which (like the Respondent here) was very strongly attacked by the
McKenzie was cross-examined extensively on the contents of his affidavit and on
several other issues. We reject the submission
that he should be treated as a
witness of no credit and generally accept his evidence. He acknowledged his
limited recollection
of events and conversations and answered the questions put
to him with care. We did not perceive any significant contradictions
implausibilities in his evidence.
confirm, the description by the Federal Court of Mr McKenzie’s evidence,
with relevant adjustments, in my view accords with
my assessment of the
Respondent’s evidence here.
general terms, and in addition to the Tribunal’s reasons below, and
without in any way ameliorating [or lessening] the gravity
and very serious
lapses of judgment of the Respondent detailed and accepted by him as set out in
the Statement of Agreed Facts, I
prefer and accept the submissions on behalf of
the Respondent in relation to Charge 4 on the issues of both liability and, with
tweaking, also in relation to penalty.
Statement of [Real - sic] Issues in Dispute
Statement of Issues was filed on 17 March 2025. As earlier indicated, it will be
immediately apparent that the focus was and
remained pre-eminently upon Charge
The Statement was as
are four remaining issues in dispute, with the first, second and fourth issues
being significantly related.
whether the conduct the subject of charge 4 of the Application dated 7 May 2024
Application
) involved:
(a) carelessness in the sense of gross negligence and breached rule 4.1.3 of
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
contended by the Respondent; or
(b) dishonesty and breached rules 4.1.2, 4.1.5 and 5.1 of the Rules in
addition to rule 4.1.3, as contended by the Applicant.
whether the conduct the subject of charge 4 of the Application should be
characterised as:
(a) professional misconduct within the meaning of
subsection 387(1)(a)
Legal Profession Act 2006
) only, as contended by the
Respondent; or
(b) professional misconduct within the meaning of both
subsections 387(1)(a)
(1)(b) of the Act, as contended by the Applicant.
whether the conduct the subject of charges 1, 2 and 3 of the Application should
be characterised as:
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
Act, as contended by the Respondent; or
(b) professional misconduct within the meaning of
of the Act, as
contended by the Applicant.
the appropriate sanction to be imposed under
of the Act depending on the
Tribunal’s determination as to breach and characterisation of the
Respondent’s conduct.
The Statement of Agreed Facts
Statement of Agreed Facts (
Statement or SOAF
) was filed with the Tribunal
on 9 April 2025. It is Appendix A to these reasons.
The Respondent’s affidavit evidence
(a) the narrow scope of the matters in contest, (b) the detail in the Statement
of Agreed Facts, (c) the detail in the written
submissions, and (d) the detail
in the Amended Application under
Legal Profession Act 2006
(ACT), the cross examination of the Respondent was relatively brief. That is
summarised after dealing with the Respondent’s
Affidavit evidence.
the Respondent’s Affidavit, filed 7 February 2025, I note the
referred to the Respondent’s legal practice, which focussed initially on
“general litigation” before expanding
“to include property
related work (commercial conveyancing, leasing, and general property work), and
general commercial work
(drafting agreements, transaction relating to
businesses, and general corporate advisory).”
outlined the Respondent’s close connections to the Greek community in
Canberra, which I need not recount save than
to note that the Respondent knew Mr
and Mrs X and their family through this community.
detailed the Respondent’s preparation of the wills and enduring powers of
) for Mr and Mrs X.
set out the loan (including mortgage and guarantee) arrangements on behalf of Mr
). The SOAF sets out the most crucial detail regarding these
matters, which form the foundations for the charges against the Respondent.
already noted, the SOAF is Appendix A to these reasons.
recorded the Respondent’s acknowledgment of his “mistake(s)”
regarding N’s entitlement to use
the POA, while pars.54-69 outlined the
Respondent’s recognition and acceptance of his negligent mistakes
regarding the two
formal acknowledgments concerning the omission to provide
legal advice [directly] to Mr and Mrs X in their capacities as guarantors
loan to their son, N, who used their family home as security for that loan. More
particularly, after deposing (pars.59-62) that
he did not read carefully the
terms of the acknowledgments, the Respondent deposed
... when I signed the First and Second Acknowledgments,
I believed that, by advising N (as attorney for Mr and Mrs X) as to the legal
effect of the guarantee, I had thereby provided advice on the guarantees as
required by those Acknowledgments. That was based on
my incorrect
understandings and assumptions about what the Acknowledgments required, and my
not having read paragraph 5 of the Acknowledgments.
already noted, pars.54-69 detailed the Respondent’s account of his
“mistake” regarding the two acknowledgments.
Relevantly, and in more
detail, he stated, at par.54:
I did not speak with Mr and Mrs X
(a) As at 18 March 2019, based on my telephone discussions with Mr N.X (see
paragraph 38 above), I understood that their departure
overseas was imminent and
they were busy preparing to travel overseas;
(b) The lender knew that the attorney would be executing the
(c) Mistakenly, it was not necessary to do so because Mr N.X was authorised
under the EPAs to execute the Loan Documents; and
(d) Mistakenly, that by me advising N as their attorney, that amounted to me
advising Mr and Mrs X.
Respondent never wavered in his evidence (including his oral evidence) in
relation to these four basal matters, particularly those
sub-paragraphs (c) and (d).
and 56 outlined the Respondent’s usual practice regarding witnessing and
advising clients with respect to the execution
of documents, although he noted
that he could not recall ever having been required to assist with documents
requiring “an attorney
to sign for and on behalf of guarantors under a
loan agreement.”
Respondent’s comments in par.57 are of some moment, not least because of
the “timeline” and the matters he understood
he was facing in August
2022. The timeline and the charges he faced are canvassed below in more detail.
He deposed:
When preparing my response to the Law Society dated
30 August 2022, I provided a comprehensive response to the terms of Mrs
complaint. As I perceived the complaint, the correspondence from the
ACT Law Society, the substantive area of concern with my actions
was the issue
of “conflict” arising out of acting on the loan transaction in which
N benefitted personally. As to the
conflict issue, I explained that I had
proceeded on an honest (but mistaken) belief that the EPAs authorised N to
execute the documents
notwithstanding that he was receiving a personal
followed, in pars.58-63, a series of “reflections” (my word)
regarding his conduct that ultimately gave rise to the
current charges. In
particular, he noted the following regarding the two acknowledgments he signed.
Relevantly, he said (emphases
I did not carefully read
all terms of the First Acknowledgment
when I signed it. I checked the first page of the First Acknowledgment which
included the specific
details of the parties and the documents, and then I
glanced at the second page.” (par.59)
(b) In par.60, he stated that, in the course of his legal practice, he had
provided advice to guarantors, which required him signing
a certificate or
acknowledgment regarding that advice. He further deposed that he had seen such
certificates and acknowledgments
in various other matters.
(c) In par.61, he said that when “I signed the First Acknowledgment during
my conference with N and Mrs I.X and [sic] on 20
March 2019,
that I was signing a “standard” form, the effect of which was that I
had advised the guarantors (in this case, Mr N.X
and Mr and Mrs X) to the legal
effect of the guarantees. By “standard” I mean the sort of forms
which I refer to in paragraph
60 above. I recall thinking that the First
Acknowledgement appeared to be in the nature of similar forms/certificates,
which I describe
in paragraph 60 above.”
(d) Par.62 dealt with the Second Acknowledgement. The Respondent stated here
that when he signed it “on 22 March 2019 after
receiving the legal
representative of the Trust’s (the
) email of 22 March
I likewise did not carefully read
that document as it appeared to
be in the same terms as the First Acknowledgment. I made the same assumptions
referred to above.”
(emphasis added)
(e) Par.63, in many respects, summarised the Respondent’s
[mis]understanding and incorrect knowledge and belief regarding the
acknowledgments. He stated: “... when I signed the First and Second
Acknowledgments, I believed that, by advising N (as
attorney for Mr and Mrs X)
as to the legal effect of the guarantee, I had thereby provided advice on the
guarantees as required by
those Acknowledgments. That was based on my incorrect
understandings and assumptions about what the Acknowledgments required,
my not having read paragraph 5 of the Acknowledgments
(f) By way of preliminary comment at this juncture: on the face of his Affidavit
and the outline of it provided here, there is a
basic inconsistency between the
Respondent’s evidence in pars.59 and 62 (and pars.65 and 67 discussed
below), where he deposed
to not reading the two acknowledgments
“carefully”, and par.63, where he deposed of “not having read
5 of the Acknowledgments.” The problematic oscillation between
“not having read carefully”, on the one hand, and
on the other hand,
“not having read [at all]” is plain and something of a difficulty.
noting (par.64) that he relied (my words) on the fact that the “loan
documents” were prepared by the lender’s
lawyers, and in turn that
he did not anticipate any further acknowledgment being required, at pars.65 and
67 he said (emphasis added):
[65] For these reasons,
to notice or properly read paragraph 5
Had I read paragraph 5
would have realised that I could not sign that First/Second Acknowledgment
without me having directly advised Mr and Mrs X about
their guarantees.
Had I carefully read the terms of the First/Second
Acknowledgment
, I would have realised that clause 5 of the First
Acknowledgment could only have been accurate had I directly advised Mr and Mrs
I accept that I
negligently did not read the entire First Acknowledgment carefully, particularly
by failing to read paragraph 5
and 69 confirmed the Respondent’s denial of any dishonesty in his conduct
regarding the transactions here; he noted
that he had made a number of
assumptions regarding the documentation, which proved to be
“incorrect”. Had he read them
and appreciated their significance, he
said that he would not have signed the acknowledgements. He also noted a range
personal and professional stressors that were going on in his life
around these times. These were elaborated in some detail at pars.82-84,
pars.85-110 outlined (a) events subsequent to the “fraud” committed
by N upon his parents being discovered, (b)
the Respondent’s
“reflections” in the light of the events the subject of the current
charges, and (c) the impact
upon him, personally and professionally, of the
charges and the events that gave rise to them. The Respondent readily and openly
noted his professional errors, his embarrassment, and importantly, his concern
for Mrs X in relation to the matters detailed here.
Mr X senior had died in
approximately April 2021.
set out the expanded range of charges the Respondent faced, having originally
being advised in June and August 2022 by
the Applicant that there were [only]
issues (my words) arising out of a complaint that had been lodged by Mrs X.
These related to
matters concerning a conflict of interest, and others relating
to alleged negligence concerning his actions under the
Powers of Attorney Act
. However, it was only in January 2024
that allegations concerning “dishonesty” (as opposed to negligence)
raised. Why it had taken approximately 18 months or thereabouts to
expand the charges against the Respondent, notably to include
the very serious
charge of dishonesty, was never explained. In my view, particularly as the
relevant regulatory body, some basic
explanation should have been provided.
Other matters relating to the significantly delayed notification in January 2024
are canvassed
later in these reasons.
should note that, at par.73, the Respondent confirmed that when the Applicant
first contacted him in 2022, he thought that he had
signed only one
acknowledgment, and in consequence, he could not recall signing a second such
document. He confirmed that there was
no second document on his file that
contained the Second Acknowledgment. It was only in consequence of the research
for materials
for the preparation of his Affidavit (including his firm’s
IT team) that he became aware of the Second Acknowledgment.
state the obvious: persons charged with serious “offences”, here
obviously in disciplinary proceedings, are entitled
to know what those charges
are, and at an appropriately early stage. Similarly, if there is to be any
change in them, particularly
if they are to include more serious charges, even
more alacrity is required. The time-frame identified here, without explanation,
does not suggest, without more (I do not put it any higher), that due or
reasonable attention to either detail, or expedition, was
undertaken. More is
said on this matter later in these reasons.
the 18 month “gap” between the first iteration of the charges in
mid-2022, and the later iteration of them in
2024, which included charge 4 in
relation to “dishonesty” for the first time, takes on some piquancy
if not significance
given that, during the Respondent’s cross examination,
as noted below, he was challenged if not criticised for the alleged
dilatoriness
in responding to the dishonesty charge, especially in his response to the Law
Society in 2022. To state the obvious:
it is rather difficult to respond to a
charge approximately two years before it was formulated and notified to the
Respondent. As
already noted, such matters are canvassed further below.
are of particular procedural, and other, significance.
noted the consequences that arose in the Respondent’s thinking after a
preliminary conference held at the Tribunal on
October 2024. In
my words, this conference seemed to have crystallised certain things for the
Respondent. For example, he said that
he “reflected on” why he had
signed the first acknowledgment. He said that initially he had worked on or
formulated his
response (my words) on the basis of the giving of the
certificates was a “relatively standard process.” He said that
had not “fully articulated that in my responses.” He continued:
“That is why, on 15 October 2024, I instructed
my solicitors to write to
the Applicant providing a Respondent’s Admissions document which in
paragraph 67(b) I explained that,
in signing the First Acknowledgment, I thought
I was signing a “standard” document.”
followed, according to par.78, instructions to his lawyers to file an Amended
Response, which included “Respondent’s
Admissions.” Paragraph
23A of that Amended Response and paragraph 67(d) of the Respondent’s
Admissions admitted that,
in signing the Acknowledgement, he had breached Rule
4.1.2 of the Rules.
Respondent went on to say (par.79) that his admissions (and in consequence,
pleadings) were based upon legal advice he had received
from his former Senior
Counsel regarding the legal meaning of the word “honest” in Rule
4.1.2. He continued: “I
made the admission on the basis that my actions in
failing to read the words in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of the Acknowledgement
to reckless indifference to the truth of the Acknowledgement which I
signed, and that this recklessness amounted to a form of dishonesty
purposes of Rule 4.1.2 of the Rules.”
emphatically, at par.80, the Respondent stated: “I do not believe that, in
signing the Acknowledgement in the circumstances,
I was dishonest.”
set out the consequence, from a “pleading” perspective, of what had
gone before; the Respondent stated:
I have accordingly instructed
my solicitor to lodge a Further Amended Response affirming the matters stated in
the Amended Response
paragraphs 21 and 22(a)-(i) but withdrawing my admission in
the Amended Response paragraph 23A that I breached rule 4.1.2 of the
similarly withdraw that admission from paragraph 67(d) of the Respondent’s
Admissions.
do not need to set out the not insignificant professional and personal matters
that were, at the time, impacting upon the Respondent.
They were sufficiently
outlined in pars.82-84(a)-(d).
detailed the Respondent’s engagements with Mrs X, including at her
Husband’s funeral, a number of discussions
with Mr G.X (brother of N and
son of Mr and Mrs X) (
) which included comments by him to the Respondent
of not knowing anything about a “mortgage” from his parents in
the Respondent received notice from the Law Society of the complaint by Mrs X,
at pars.90-96, the Respondent set out various
further conversations with N
(albeit somewhat brief) and G. At par.96 he concluded:
what G and Mrs X say about the matter. Based on what they have said, I believe
I was misled by N about several matters,
including that Mr and Mrs X knew of the
loan and mortgage, that the Company was set up for, and with the knowledge of,
X, and that G knew of the loan. Furthermore, after I met with N in
August 2022, he did not get back to me to confirm the dates his
parents went
overseas, and now I doubt whether they went overseas.
Pars.99-110
outlined, in my view, thoughtfully and in some detail the significant,
cautionary and sobering impact the claim raised
by Mrs X has had on the
Respondent, personally and professionally. Again, I do not need to summarise it,
save that in par.110, the
Respondent stated: “Notwithstanding my errors
and the explanation of what took place, I remain upset and embarrassed that I
have placed Mrs X, and the lender, in a difficult position. I have not acted
dishonestly. I had nothing to gain from this transaction.”
The Respondent’s oral evidence
Respondent’s oral evidence, summarised, was as follows.
chief, the Respondent confirmed that he had nothing to gain (
sense of no personal gain) from making a false statement in par.5 of the
acknowledgements.
He also confirmed
that he made no “file note” of his initial discussion with N
regarding the proposed loan and guarantee.
He said this was because he regarded
the transaction(s) proposed to be
“straightforward.”
acknowledged that par.5 of the acknowledgment was false.
Respondent confirmed that, to the best of his knowledge, N was still in Canberra
and that he had instructed lawyers in relation
to the repayment of the loan
secured by the mortgage taken out over his parents’
cross examination, the Respondent’s evidence was as follows.
Respondent agreed with a series of general propositions regarding his complete
acceptance of N’s instructions concerning
the loan/mortgage and guarantee
arrangement he was proposing; likewise that the Respondent had no reason at all
not to trust (and
accept) instructions from N’s and that N’s
parents were supportive of the loan/mortgage/ guarantee arrangement
In particular, he
MOUJALLI: You understood from what he told you that his parents knew about the
loan and were in favour of it, correct?
WITNESS: Yes, I did.
MR MOUJALLI: You did not consider that you needed to do anything to
satisfy yourself that the parents knew about the guarantee. Correct?
WITNESS: That's right, yes.
MR MOUJALLI: And you didn't consider that need because of the form which
you – because of the view which you had formed about
the X family,
WITNESS: Because of that view. Because of the position that he was
appointed as attorney and because of the fact that the loan was
to a company in
which they were shareholders.
MR MOUJALLI: But, yes, all of those factors were at play, and those
factors included your view that the X family was a close-knit
family where all
members trusted each other.
WITNESS: That's absolutely right.
Respondent was taken through the documents that he listed at par.43(a) of his
Affidavit, which included the relevant mortgage,
and deeds of guarantees from Mr
and Mrs X, and N. Sub-paragraph (b) of the same paragraph outlined the terms of
the attestation clause
in the Deed of Guarantee. Then the witness was taken
through each of the relevant documents which he signed and which, the witness
confirmed, he read in advance of explaining them to
There followed this exchange
with Counsel for the Applicant (emphasis
be fair, [witness], to say that you read these documents because, in addition to
other things, you wanted to satisfy yourself
whether there was something unusual
or unduly onerous in them from the point of view of the borrower and the
WITNESS: That wasn't the specific purpose. The purpose was to understand
what the documents contemplated and to be able to explain
those documents to the
MR MOUJALLI: And presumably I – you’re a solicitor of
considerable experience, that is undisputed here. When you’re
acting for a
borrower or a guarantor with documents which have been prepared by the lender,
as a diligent solicitor you would want
to know whether there is something
unusual in them that you should bring to the attention of the borrower and
guarantor. Do you accept
WITNESS: I think that’s fair, yes.
MR MOUJALLI: And I take it that you – the documents that I have
taken you to, I take it that you read them carefully so that
you could discharge
your duties as a solicitor to the borrower and guarantors. Do you accept
It’s hard for me to say today whether I read them
carefully, Mr Moujalli. I certainly read the documents. Whether I read them
carefully or not, as you know from my affidavit, I read – I did not read
some things carefully and it’s quite possible
I didn't read these
documents carefully
SENIOR MEMBER: Can I ask, just in that regard, did you have anyone else
from your firm, for example, a junior or intermediate solicitor
working with you
who went through these documents with a fine toothcomb or not?
WITNESS: No, I did not.
followed a series of questions (or propositions) which, in my view, were
somewhat unfair. The highlighted question below from
Counsel proceeds on a
negative assumption. The exchanges were as follows (emphasis
MOUJALLI: ... So when I’m asking you whether you read the documents
carefully, I’m asking you about the loan documents
which I have taken you
to which do not include the acknowledgement. So if you could just focus on
those documents, you certainly
don’t say in your affidavit that you did
not read those documents carefully. Correct?
WITNESS: I don’t say that, that's true.
MR MOUJALLI:
And can I take it from the fact that you don’t
mention that in your affidavit, can I take it from that that you have no reason
to think that you did not read them carefully?
MR STRICKLAND: I object. The line of questions is obviously quite
permissible, but it’s really, because something is not in
your affidavit -
SENIOR MEMBER: Must mean some particular - - -
MR STRICKLAND: Exactly.
SENIOR MEMBER: Yes. No, I understand. Perhaps if you rephrase it,
Mr Moujalli.
MR MOUJALLI:
I’m going to make submissions on it, Senior
SENIOR MEMBER: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI:
He has a duty to be forthcoming
SENIOR MEMBER: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI:
He hasn't mentioned it in the affidavit. I have given him
the opportunity
. I’m going to leave it there.
that Respondents in disciplinary proceedings have a duty of candour and
co-operation, notably under Rule 43 of the
Legal Profession (Solicitors)
Conduct Rules 2015
), here, the questioning related to the
care with which the Respondent read the relevant documents. Questions were then
terms of omissions from his Affidavit regarding “careful
reading” and how those “omissions” can or should
inference regarding (a) the quality or care of the reading, which the witness
had already answered, and (b) a further
but unarticulated complaint regarding
the Respondent’s [alleged] lack of candour in having, somehow, omitted to
include further
matters in his Affidavit regarding the care (or lack of it) in
reading the documents that gave rise to the current proceeding. Further
is made later in these reasons which highlight that issues of candour in
relation to the Respondent, in my view, were without
foundation and should not
have been made.
my view, the elision between (a) care in reading documents the subject of the
proceedings, (b) alleging that the Respondent had
not specifically referred to
relevant careful reading, and (c) candour (or lack of it) in responding to the
Applicant, was both a
stretch and inappropriate. Although there was a general
objection by the Respondent’s Senior Counsel, it was not in relation
any unfairness. However, in my view, the elision mentioned, particularly when
there was no formal charge against the Respondent
that he was not (or had not
been) candid and forthcoming in response to inquiries from the Applicant, was
akin to what the High Court
King v The Queen
cautioned about regarding
the duties of prosecutors being careful “not to use any tactical manoeuvre
legally available in order
to secure a
conviction.”
Counsel for
the Applicant is not,
a prosecutor. However, as noted and
discussed later in these reasons, disciplinary proceedings are
quasi-prosecutorial. It must
follow that a “prosecuting Counsel”
for the Applicant Society, should reasonably be expected to generally follow the
duties of a prosecutor, notably as set out in the ACT Bar
Indeed, as Dal Pont
points out:
disciplinary proceedings are not criminal in nature, moreover, the position of
the relevant regulatory body or officer is sufficiently
similar to that of a
prosecutor in criminal proceedings to justify a duty of fairness and behaviour
as a model litigant.
still, the omission relied upon by Counsel here regarding the care with which
certain documents were, or were not, read, or
what was, and what was not,
written into certain documents, must also be considered in the context of the
consistent evidence of
the Respondent in relation to what he read, how he read
it, what he included and what he did not include in his Affidavit, and the
various assumptions he operated under at the time. The bald proposition put to
the witness regarding his care in reading specific
documents, should have been
qualified as indicated. It should not have been an instance where a further
complaint was asserted orally
against the Respondent when it had not formally
been laid against him.
the actual signing of the respective acknowledgments, the beginning of the
Respondent’s evidence on this matter went
this way (emphasis
MOUJALLI: And it was the lender’s solicitor who had inserted your name on
page 2 of the document? Is that correct?
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: And it was also the lender’s solicitor which had
inserted your name at the very start of the document, correct?
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: And you knew when you signed this document that you were
certifying to the lender’s solicitor, and indeed the lender,
that you had
given advice to the guarantors. Correct?
WITNESS: That's right, yes.
MR MOUJALLI: You knew the importance of this document to the lender and
its solicitor? Correct?
WITNESS: Of course, yes.
MR MOUJALLI: You knew that this document was intended to give the lender
assurance that Mr and Mrs X had been given advice about the
guarantee which they
gave. You knew that?
I knew that and I believed I gave that advice to their
attorney on their behalf
MR MOUJALLI: And you knew when you signed this document on 20 March
2019, you knew that the lender and the lender’s solicitor
should be able
to trust your word as a solicitor.
WITNESS: Yes, for sure.
MR MOUJALLI: You say in your affidavit, [witness], that you – I
think in the interests of efficiency, [witness] can we do this.
another version of this document on 22 March 2019, correct?
WITNESS: Yes, I – I did, correct.
MR MOUJALLI: Now, the answers which you have given to my questions about
your knowledge of the importance of this document to the
lender, I take it that
you were still of that knowledge when you signed this document, or when you
signed the second version of this
document on 22 March 2019. Is that
WITNESS: I agree.
oral evidence continued on this topic as follows (emphasis
MOUJALLI: You say in your affidavit that when you signed this document on
20 March 2019 you say that you did not read paragraph
5. Is that your
I did not read it carefully
MR MOUJALLI:
Did you read it at all
I don't recall that specifically
, Mr Moujalli.
MR STRICKLAND: Was that a question in relation to the first or the second
acknowledgement? I’m sorry, I didn't - - -
SENIOR MEMBER: The first.
MR STRICKLAND: It’s the first. Thank you.
MR MOUJALLI:
What you say in your evidence witness, is that you made an
assumption that paragraph 5 contained standard wording
WITNESS: That's right.
MR MOUJALLI:
That's your evidence?
That is my evidence, yes
MR MOUJALLI: Now,
I just want to be clear what your evidence is as to
whether or not you did read it in some form
. Can I ask you to go to
paragraph 67 of your affidavit, and just let me know when you have that in
front of you.
WITNESS: Yes, I see that.
MR MOUJALLI: Now, in the last sentence of paragraph 67, you say, ‘I
accepted that
I negligently did not read the entire first acknowledgement
carefully, particularly by failing to read paragraph 5
’. Can you see
WITNESS: I see that.
MR MOUJALLI: Do I take it that in paragraph 67 you are saying that you
– I withdraw that.
Do I take it by saying in paragraph 67 that you
failed to read paragraph 5, do I take it by that that you are saying you did not
paragraph 5
I made an assumption about what was in paragraph 5, and I, on
that basis I believe I did not read it
followed a series of questions regarding the reading of the
“acknowledgments”. This was in the context of what the
Respondent’s lawyers did, or did not, say in response to the
Applicant’s two letters of complaint (why two separate letters,
& 23 June 2022, was not explained). The Applicant’s Counsel persisted
in questions to the Respondent (a) at least
implicitly (later explicitly)
doubting his candour in his response to the Law Society on 30 August 2022
because, (b) that response
did not say that he had not read par.5 of the
acknowledgment. The Respondent noted that he was answering the complaint,
then framed
, regarding an allegation of a conflict of interest. He said that
he was not focussing on the circumstances of him signing the acknowledgment.
relevant exchange was as follows (emphasis
MOUJALLI: And you can see at page 125 a letter from the Law Society to you dated
20 June 2022?
WITNESS: Yes, I see that.
MR MOUJALLI: And you can see in the first paragraph of that letter that it
refers to correspondence from Mrs X received on 18 May
2022 which made
allegations about your conduct?
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: And you understood this letter from the Law Society to be a
serious matter. Correct?
WITNESS: Of course, yes.
MR MOUJALLI: And you understood that it engaged duties on your part to
engage with the Law Society in a full and frank manner about
your conduct.
WITNESS: Yes, I did understand that.
MR MOUJALLI: And you prepared a response to that letter, the start of
which commences at page 130 of that bundle. Is that correct?
WITNESS: Yes, it is.
MR MOUJALLI: And when you prepared this response you were mindful of that
duty to the Law Society which you have just referred to.
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: Can I ask you to go to paragraph 16 of that letter which is
at page 132. Can I just ask you just to take a moment to
read paragraph 16 to
yourself before I ask you a couple of questions about it.
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI:
You don’t say in paragraph 16, [witness], that you
did not read paragraph 5 of the acknowledgement. Correct
That is correct. I was answering this complaint in relation to
an allegation of conflict of interest. I volunteered the acknowledgement
first opportunity and this was the opportunity. I wasn't focussed specifically
on the circumstances arising to – to
me signing that
acknowledgement
MR MOUJALLI: Yes, but
you knew when you wrote paragraph 16, you knew
that you had a duty to be frank with the Law Society
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: And you don’t say in that paragraph that you made any
assumption that paragraph 5 of the acknowledgement contained
standard wording
when you signed it. That's the case, isn’t it?
WITNESS: That is the case, yes.
same comments already made apply equally here. This is to say that the witness
was being challenged about his alleged lack of
candour in the Response, on his
behalf, to the Applicant in mid-2022. At that time, there was no charge
regarding the acknowledgements
that, some 18 months or so later, would come to
constitute Charge 4. At the time of the witness’s response in mid-2022,
understandable focus was upon the charges he faced then. To challenge his
oral evidence in 2025 regarding his lack of candour in
2022 regarding matters
that did not arise, from the Applicant’s perspective with all of its
plenary powers of investigation
and the like, until 2024, was, respectfully
pushing the quasi-prosecutorial boat a long way out with little water beneath
state again: in mid-2022, the Respondent had not been charged regarding anything
to do with the acknowledgements. Why and how he
should be challenged about lack
of candour for what was something akin to part of what is now referred to as the
Matrix” (after former US Defence Secretary, Donald
Rumsfeld), which includes “known knowns; and known unknowns”,
unfortunate, and as noted below, questions in this regard, in my view, were
improper. There are multiple other layers, which
need not be set out here. It is
sufficient to note that, in mid-2022, the Respondent knew what he was being
charged with (
known-knowns
); and although he knew generally the
documentation that gave rise to the charges, he did not know that he would be
(or even might
be) charged with what came to be in Charge 4
unknown-unknowns
). Yet the Respondent, not for the first time, was being
challenged, indeed accused, of lack of candour regarding factual matters
were not, at the relevant time, a consideration for either the Applicant
(because no charge regarding dishonesty had been laid),
or the Respondent (for
the same reason).
of the gravity of the proceeding, and the charge of dishonesty (which is the
subject of a separate discussion below), I summarise
(with some repetition) the
following, which confirms my view that the challenge to the Respondent, set out
above, regarding alleged
lack of candour in dealing with the Applicant in
relation to the acknowledgements, was improper,
(a) On 23 June 2022, the Applicant Society wrote to the Respondent stating,
“upon further consideration, the following additional
allegation is made
in relation to your conduct.” What this “further
consideration” was unfortunately not explained.
Then followed an outline
of a charge only concerning “conflict of interest.”
(b) On 30 August 2022, the Respondent replied personally to the Applicant
Society. That response, at par.16, included specific reference
acknowledgment of legal advice in par.5 and the Respondent’s mis-reading
(c) It follows that any suggestion of lack of candour by the Applicant is
readily met by reference to the letter sent to it by the
Respondent on 30 August
2022. If anything, the Respondent, effectively, “blew the whistle on
himself” (to speak colloquially),
Yet it was not until
approximately 18 months later that the Applicant formally laid Charge 4 against
the Respondent. Respectfully,
celerity of prosecution, and therefore compliance
Legal Profession Act
to ensure that complaints are
dealt with “as efficiently and quickly as possible”, this was
Nor was there any
explanation why it took the Applicant some 18 months or so, with no explanation
for the remarkable delay, after
the Respondent had alerted it to issues relating
to the acknowledgments, to add an additional charge relating to those documents.
Respectfully, it was hardly “model litigant” conduct, especially
regarding such a serious charge from the profession’s
legal regulator.
challenge to the Respondent’s frankness in correspondence with the
Applicant Law Society continued. He acknowledged that
his lawyer’s later
letter of 14 February 2024 made no mention of what was in his Affidavit
regarding what he did, and did not
do, regarding the reading of par.5 of the
acknowledgment
testing of the Respondent’s evidence continued to focus on what the
Applicant effectively contended was a disjuncture between
the responses by his
lawyers to the multiple allegations from the Applicant in its correspondence, on
the one hand, and on the other,
his formal Response once litigation had begun in
the Tribunal. This part of the contest was again permeated with contentions of
a lack of candour on the Respondent’s part, which he denied, while
accepting that some things were not set out in the correspondence
subsequently appeared in the “pleadings” before the
in his Affidavit (as noted above) and in his oral evidence, the Respondent
stated that his appreciation about the nature and
detail of the claim only
clarified in a number of respects during and after the “preliminary
conference” held at the
Tribunal in October 2024. The relevant exchange
was as follows (emphasis
MOUJALLI: And you can see that what is said as part of your case in
subparagraph (iv), it is said that you glanced at paragraphs
3, 4 and 5, but did
not read them, in the belief that they were standard paragraphs commonly
appearing in a document of this kind.
Can you see that?
WITNESS: I can see that, yes.
MR MOUJALLI: Witness, you now say – I withdraw that. What is stated
there is reflected in your affidavit. Correct?
WITNESS: Yes, it is.
MR MOUJALLI: This version of events, witness, was put forward by you some
two years after your first response to the Law Society.
That's the case,
WITNESS: Yes, I accept that.
MR MOUJALLI: And witness,
if what is stated there is the truth, you had
the opportunity to put this version forward on multiple occasions before this
was prepared. That's the case, isn’t it?
WITNESS: The –
the matter of the, what I call the standard
document came about during the preliminary conference and some questions were
asked directly
of me in relation to that, and it occurred to me that that was
the reason for me not paying attention to the document. I explained
immediately instructed my solicitors to write to your instructors to advise them
accordingly
MR MOUJALLI: When was that preliminary conference, witness?
WITNESS: That was – that was in October of 2024.
MR MOUJALLI:
That is more than two years after your response to the Law
Society of August 2022. That's the case, isn’t it?
And for almost two years we were dealing with essentially the
question of the – the conflict of interest question and that’s
way in which I had prepared the matter, and the whole – the totality of my
conduct, rather than the specifics of the acknowledgement
SENIOR MEMBER: Sorry, but you say that it was only during this conference
in October last year this prompted this recollection? Yes?
I had made an assumption that everybody understood the
document was a standard document, and it was only when the Presidential Member
asked me a question during the preliminary conference as to why I had not read a
document which is such a short document, or not
properly read a document such as
this, that I responded by saying, ‘But it’s a standard
document’, and that’s
when it was produced to the Law
MR MOUJALLI: Witness,
you, yourself, said that in August 2022 you,
yourself, volunteered information about the signing of the acknowledgement on 20
2019. That's the case, isn’t it?
Yes, I volunteered it at that time, yes
MR MOUJALLI: And
at all times you have known that you have to be frank
in your dealings with the Law Society
Yes, of course
MR MOUJALLI: And if you were being frank with the Law Society, and if what
you say in subparagraph (iv) is the truth, you had had
many opportunities to
bring this forward before the first time that you did. That’s the case,
Opportunities, but the light was shone on it in October
I note the important fact that the Applicant did not raise a charge against the
Respondent in relation to “dishonesty”
until 2024 making it
perfectly understandable, and (in my view) legally defensible, to focus in
responses (in correspondence and
otherwise) with the Applicant upon the
charges then being faced. On this basis, the constant questioning
of the Respondent regarding his candour and when “the light
regarding the acknowledgments during and after the preliminary conference in
October 2024, was, at least, close to,
if not actual, “over-reach.”
This is even more the case, as earlier noted, that the Respondent had himself
notified the
Applicant Society in August 2022 of issues relating to the
acknowledgments. It is difficult to know, or otherwise apprehend, in the
of specifics from the Applicant (which were not forthcoming during the cross
examination or in any other respect), how much
more candid the Respondent could
actually have been, notably given the state of the charges at relevant times.
Moreover, to recall
that it was the Applicant who bore the onus of proof; the
Respondent did not have to establish his honesty or diligence. Both sides
certain duties. Having regard to the state of the charges at relevant times,
generalised complaints assisted no one.
as already noted a number of times, there was never any formal charge against
the Respondent regarding any purported lack
of candour. Respectfully, in this
regard, the constant attempts to impugn the Respondent’s credibility
arising from his alleged
lack of candour with the Applicant Law Society were, in
my view, fruitless. Given the history and context, as described earlier
length, it bordered on the improper especially given the duty on the Applicant
to prove its case. The Respondent, in my view,
provided everything he could at
the relevant time in the light of the charges then in play. Even after
providing the information
he did in August 2022 regarding the acknowledgments,
nothing happened regarding those matters by the Applicant regulator until 18
unexplained months later.
noted later in these reasons, contrary to the Applicant’s submissions, I
found the Respondent’s oral evidence to be
consistent, credible and
unwavering. It was also consistent with both his Affidavit evidence, and with
correspondence with the Applicant
Society. He readily gave concessions and
consistently acknowledged (in writing and in his Affidavit) his failings in
certain key
aspects regarding the acknowledgments in issue and the circumstances
surrounding them. Fairly, in my view, he also stood his ground
considered it to be appropriate. In my firm view, he was an entirely credible
response to a question from the Tribunal the Respondent acknowledged that his
usual practice was, surprisingly in my view, not
to make file notes
but rather his correspondence (
by email) was effectively a
summary of relevant conversations and acted (in my words) as a
regarding the execution of the acknowledgments, and accepting that he was not
told by anyone that these used “standard
wording”, the Respondent
said (emphasis
MOUJALLI: No one told you that it was based on wording for a form commonly used
in New South Wales. That’s the case, isn’t
WITNESS: No, nobody told me that.
MR MOUJALLI: You say in your affidavit that you had not previously acted
for guarantors where the guarantee was to be executed by
their attorney.
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: It follows from that, doesn't it, that from your point of
view this transaction was not a standard transaction. Correct?
That was not my view at the time
MR MOUJALLI: This was a transaction where the guarantee was being
executed on behalf of guarantors by their attorney. Correct?
WITNESS: Yes
MR MOUJALLI: And
did I understand you to agree with me that from
– based on your experience, that was not a standard
arrangement?
It wasn't a standard arrangement, but it did not seem to me to
be anything unusual because the attorney was authorised under –
face of the power of attorney to do exactly what he did
MR MOUJALLI: But you hadn't previously acted for guarantors?
WITNESS: No, that's true.
MR MOUJALLI: In this type of scenario. Correct?
WITNESS: No, I agree with that. Yes.
MR MOUJALLI:
When you signed the acknowledgement on 20 and
22 March, you knew that you could not be sure as to what you were
certifying unless
you read the document. Correct?
I don’t agree with that proposition, no
MR MOUJALLI: Is that a serious answer, witness?
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: Are you seriously saying that you could be sure what a
document said without reading it?
WITNESS: Mr Moujalli, as I’ve said before,
the document appeared
to me to be in similar terms to the document that’s normally used in
respect of guarantees in New South
Wales. I have accepted that I did not read
the document carefully and that – and I also accept that I should have
document carefully
MR MOUJALLI: Can I ask you to focus on my question, witness.
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: And answer my question.
My question was, you could not be
sure as to what this document said unless you read it. That is my
I could not be certain, that's true
MR MOUJALLI:
You knew that if you didn't read it there was a risk that
you could be certifying something which was not true. That's the case,
I didn't consider that, no
MR MOUJALLI: Well, if you couldn't be sure as to what it said, witness,
you knew that there was a risk that you could be certifying
something which was
untrue. That’s the case, isn’t it?
I believed I knew what was in the document
Mr Moujalli,
at that time
MR MOUJALLI: But you didn't know for certain. That’s the case,
I accept that now
time sequence, and when the witness knew or understood certain matters, or
recognised (or assumed) certain matters, was not always
as clear as it should
have been in the course of the cross examination. Indeed, the time periods were
elided from time to time,
which was unfortunate at the very least. As the above
account makes plain, the Respondent was at pains, as he was throughout his
examination, to make clear what he understood or assumed “at the relevant
time”, and what he subsequently acknowledged
as gross negligence. The
questioning did not always, as it should have done, make this distinction
regarding the relevant time of
comprehension of the Respondent as clear as it
should have been. Not infrequently, the benefit of “hindsight”
to inform some questions.
continued, as did the same or similar answers, regarding the reading –
carefully/not carefully – of the acknowledgements.
While repetitive at the
time, and equally so in the re-reading of the Transcript, I will set them out to
, among other things, the Respondent’s clear
and patient evidence in which he noted, on more than one occasion, his errors
the acknowledgments. It was, and remains, somewhat perplexing what
else could be gleaned from the Respondent’s evidence simply
by persistent
questioning that canvassed already well-tilled ground. Unfortunately, again, the
relevant time-differences as to when
the Respondent comprehended certain things
(and assumed others) was not regularly, or sufficiently, clarified, which
necessarily
meant that, effectively with the benefit of hindsight, certain
things from the Respondent’s perspective are clearer now than
they were at
the relevant time (emphasis
MOUJALLI: ... The fact is, witness, when you signed the acknowledgment on 20 and
22 March, the only way you could have been sure
of what you were certifying was
to read the documents. Correct?
WITNESS: I think I’ve answered that, Mr Moujalli.
MR MOUJALLI: They are not long documents, correct?
WITNESS: I accept that.
MR MOUJALLI: It would not have taken you long to read them,
WITNESS: I accept that, too.
MR MOUJALLI: The fact is, being a diligent lawyer, you read these
documents before – I withdraw that.
Being a diligent lawyer, you read
the entirety of the acknowledgement before you signed it on 20 March 2019.
That’s the case,
I’ve already explained that I did not read the
acknowledgement carefully
SENIOR MEMBER: So did you read any of these documents before each of the
times when you affixed your signature to the acknowledgement,
or did you just
– or did you read them at the time when you were speaking with N?
I’d seen the document previously
that the document was in the same form as the New South Wales form,
and I completed it and executed it during the – during
Mr N and Mrs I.
X’s presence. The second document, the second time the document came to
me, I – it appeared to me to
be in similar, almost identical terms, and I
signed it as well without further consideration of what was in paragraph
SENIOR MEMBER: So you didn't read it before any later meeting because were
there – were there two meetings with N, each time?
WITNESS: No, there was only one.
SENIOR MEMBER: I see. Thank you.
MR MOUJALLI: Thank you, your Honour. Witness,
I just need to put this
question to you very clearly. When you signed the acknowledgement on
20 March 2019, you read paragraph 5 before
you signed that document.
That’s the case, isn’t it?
WITNESS: As I’ve said, I –
I believe that I did not
carefully read paragraph 5. I glanced at paragraph 5
MR MOUJALLI:
You read it and you knew what that paragraph was stating.
That’s the case, isn’t it?
No, it’s not
MR MOUJALLI:
That is why you didn't tell the Law Society on 30 August
2020 that you did not read paragraph 5. That’s the case, isn’t
That's not true
the second acknowledgment, recalling that it had been changed by the
lender’s lawyer and the change had been brought
to the Respondent’s
attention, there were these exchanges (emphasis
MOUJALLI: Again,
when you signed this document on 22 March 2019, you
understood the importance of what you were certifying? Correct?
MR MOUJALLI:
You understood that if the lender’s solicitors had
gone to the trouble of changing paragraph 5, that paragraph was likely to
some importance to the lender and the lender’s solicitors,
I accept that
, but I have thought about what occurred and
I can assist with that if you ask me further questions on it.
MR MOUJALLI: Well, if Mr Strickland wants to re-examine that’s a
matter for him, and we can have that debate then, but again,
as with the
first acknowledgement, you knew that as a solicitor the lender and the
lender’s solicitors should be able to trust
Yes, I agree. Yes
MR MOUJALLI: And as with the first acknowledgement, you knew when you
signed this acknowledgement you could not be sure as to what
provision had been
made unless you read it. Correct?
WITNESS: I couldn't be sure. That's correct, yes.
MR MOUJALLI: You knew that if you didn't read it, there was a risk that
you could be certifying something which was untrue. Correct?
didn't consider there was a risk
SENIOR MEMBER:
But you accept that now
I do accept that, yes, absolutely
I note that it was only the Respondent who qualified his responses by reference
to the relevant time-frame within which certain
things were done. Likewise, in
this part of the cross examination, and in most of the rest of it, there was
very little discussion
of the assumptions the Respondent steadfastly confirmed
he held at the relevant times regarding, for example, the acknowledgments
the consequence of him giving advice to N , as Attorney for his parents. Those
assumptions at the time, the Respondent readily
and completely acknowledges now
to be incorrect and that his professional conduct should properly be considered
to be grossly negligent,
of which he is now properly embarrassed.
similar, fine-grained, questioning continued (emphasis
MOUJALLI: And
you put that risk – you disregarded the possibility that
you could be signing something which was untrue. Correct?
I did not disregard it. I – I thought I was dealing with
the – a document in similar terms to the first
acknowledgement
MR MOUJALLI: But you had been told this time, witness, that the document
had been revised. Correct?
I see that now
. I didn't have the benefit of the letter
that you refer to until I found it during my discovery process in January of
MR MOUJALLI: I take it that you read the email from [the solicitor at the
Law Firm] that is at page 54 when you received it on 22
March 2019?
WITNESS: I don’t specifically recall doing so, but I expect that I
MR MOUJALLI: Well, can I ask you to go to page – witness, with the
documents which you received – I’m sorry, just
bear with me for one
moment. You can see in paragraph 3, witness, that what [the solicitor at the
Law Firm] asked you to do was
to advise what identification documents should be
circled. Correct?
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: And when you signed the acknowledgement on 22 March
2019, you circled identification documents in paragraph 2. Correct?
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: And
you circled those documents because you had read the
email from the solicitor at the Law Firm and took on board what she was asking
you to do in relation to the acknowledgement. That’s the case,
I don’t specifically recall that, but I must
MR MOUJALLI: And you must have read in her email that she had said there
was a revision to paragraph 5. Correct?
WITNESS: I don’t specifically remember that, no.
MR MOUJALLI: Witness, you knew she was sending you these documents because
she wanted the acknowledgement to be signed again. Correct?
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: So you knew sufficient to know that the first acknowledgement
which you had said was not sufficient for the lender’s
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: Do you normally read emails from solicitors which you are
dealing with in a professional capacity?
WITNESS: Yes, I do.
MR MOUJALLI: And in the solicitor at the Law Firm’s email she did
not say to you that this acknowledgement contained standard
WITNESS: I accept that.
MR MOUJALLI:
Being the diligent lawyer, you read paragraph 5 before you
signed it. Correct?
I did not unfortunately
MR MOUJALLI: You realised with this document that you were certifying the
giving of legal advice. Correct?
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: And again, as with the first acknowledgement, your belief was
that Mr and Mrs Z , as in Mr Z Senior , were either overseas
or about to go
overseas. Correct?
WITNESS: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: You knew that it would be inconvenient for them to meet with
you. Correct?
WITNESS: That was partly the case.
MR MOUJALLI: You knew that N wanted this transaction to be finalised
urgently? Correct?
WITNESS: N did, yes.
MR MOUJALLI:
You signed the second acknowledgement knowing that it was
MR MOUJALLI:
That's the case isn’t it?
I – no, I refute that
MR MOUJALLI: And
your motive for that, witness, is that you wanted to
. That's the case, isn’t it?
There was no motive at all
, Mr Moujalli.
MR MOUJALLI:
At the very least, you knew that if you didn't read the
revised paragraph 5, you knew that you could not be sure as to what you were
certifying. That’s the case, isn’t it?
I made an assumption about paragraph 5 which is – which
I’ve said was incorrect
MR MOUJALLI: My question was, you could not be sure as to what that
paragraph stated without reading it. That’s the case, isn’t
WITNESS: I’ve previously answered that question as a yes.
MR MOUJALLI: And
to make yourself sure of what it said, you could have
read the paragraph. Correct?
I could have, yes
MR MOUJALLI:
It’s a very short paragraph? Correct?
Mr Moujalli, I’ve said that to myself many
remaining questions related to the use of identifying documents for Mr X
(Senior). I need only record the final two questions
MOUJALLI: You wanted to convey by this document that you had identified Mr X
Senior by his driver’s licence for the purpose
of giving him advice about
the guarantee. That’s the case, isn’t it?
WITNESS: No, it’s not.
MR MOUJALLI: And you knew by entering his name and by signing this
document, you knew you were conveying a false impression when you
signed this
document on 22 March 2019. That’s the case, isn’t it?
WITNESS: I don’t agree
Factual findings
getting to these findings, I remind myself of the following.
the relevant civil standard is, of course, prescribed by
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) (identically under the ACT Act of the same name,
2011). Importantly,
requires that, without limiting matters to be
considered in establishing proof, a Court or Tribunal is to take account of (a)
nature and cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the
subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters
in considering “the gravity of the matters alleged”, almost
invariably there is reference to Dixon J’s
magisterial consideration of
such matters in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
at 361-362 (emphasis
is that, when the law requires the proof of any fact, the tribunal must feel an
actual persuasion of its occurrence or existence
before it can be found. It
cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical comparison of probabilities
independently of any belief
in its reality. ... it is enough that the
affirmative of an allegation is made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the
reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is attained
or established independently of the nature and consequence of the
fact or facts
to be proved. The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood
of an occurrence of a given description,
or the gravity of the consequences
flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the
answer to the question
whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable
satisfaction of the tribunal
to the gravity of the matters alleged against a senior legal practitioner of
essentially unblemished record, which has a likely
consequence of suspension if
established, such as here regarding an allegation of dishonesty, the High Court
commented in
Neat Holding Pty Ltd v Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
citations omitted; emphasis
ordinary standard of proof required of a party who bears the onus in civil
litigation in this country is proof on the balance
of probabilities. That
remains so even where the matter to be proved involves criminal conduct or
fraud. On the other hand, the strength
of the evidence necessary to establish a
fact or facts on the balance of probabilities may vary according to the nature
is sought to prove. Thus,
authoritative statements have often been
made to the effect that clear proof is necessary "where so serious a matter as
fraud is to
be found". Statements to that effect should not, however, be
understood as directed to the standard of proof. Rather, they should
understood as merely reflecting a conventional perception that members of our
society do not ordinarily engage in fraudulent or
criminal conduct and a
judicial approach that a court should not lightly make a finding that, on the
balance of probabilities, a
party to civil litigation has been guilty of such
Charge 4: prosecutorial over-reach?
to one side for the moment the remarkable delay by the Applicant in bringing it,
I have already noted a number of times my
concerns regarding the evidentiary
foundation for the charge of dishonesty (Charge 4) against the Respondent and
the unusual if not
remarkable circumstances that surrounded it. Because of those
concerns, and in addition to what has already been said, it is apposite
consider a number of matters more discretely but also more directly. Initially,
I confine my comments to documents put before
the Tribunal at the hearing. In my
view, the documentary chronology is
instructive.
The documentary
history provides important background to the provenance and procedures relating
to Charge 4; the documentation also
raises issues of delay, procedural fairness,
and the evidentiary foundation for Charge 4, which, of course, must also be
in the light of all of the Respondent’s evidence. I do not rely
upon the documentation for any purpose other than context and
background.
June 2022, the Applicant Society wrote to the
Respondent.
That letter outlined
that a complaint (dated 18
May 2022) had been received from Mrs X
regarding the conduct of the Respondent. The letter from the Applicant Society
alleged breaches of conduct against the Respondent. Those alleged
breaches ranged from failing to act in the best interests of Mr
and Mrs X in
breach of Rule 4.1.1, to acting unconscionably in breach of
, through to
various alleged breaches of
, culminating in a general
allegation of breach of “fiduciary duty and common law duty of loyalty to
former clients by not acting
against their interests ...”.
completeness, I should note that the heading in
“dishonest and disreputable conduct”. However, in the operative
parts of it, there is no reference specifically
to “dishonesty.” In
terms, this Rule provides:
A solicitor must not engage in
conduct, in the course of practice or otherwise, which demonstrates that the
solicitor is not a fit
and proper person to practise law, or which is likely to
a material degree to:
5.1.1 be prejudicial to, or diminish the public confidence in, the
administration of justice; or
5.1.2 bring the profession into disrepute.
response was sought from the Respondent within the time prescribed under the
Rules of 14 days. Noting that the Applicant Society
had approximately one month
to consider and draft the allegations, in my view, given the number of
allegations made, the requested
time-frame was rather tight.
that as it may, on 23
June 2022, the Applicant again wrote to the
Respondent, saying that “on further consideration” an additional
was made, which related to a breach of
What this “further
consideration” was between 20
regrettably not explained; likewise, why it was not included in the original set
of 10 allegations was similarly not explained.
The further allegation was a
regarding a breach of the “conflict of interest”
provisions arising from acting for N as attorney for his parents. I
need not go
into further detail because of what is ultimately set out in the SOAF.
response that covered all 11 allegations was then sought from the Respondent by
August 2022, the Respondent personally replied at length (9
pages) to each of the allegations
I have already noted the
important comments by the Respondent at par.16 of this reply, which set out
specifically his acknowledgement
that he “must have mis-read paragraph
5” of the Acknowledgement of Legal Advice.
August 2022, the Respondent’s lawyers wrote to the
Applicant Society.
provided, if more be needed, formal refutations of, and commentary on, the
allegations levelled against the Respondent. In the
course of this letter, the
Respondent’s lawyers noted the following:
(a) The Respondent admitted, with embarrassment and distress, that he did not
know (and should have known) the obligations created
Attorney Act 2006
; and with equal embarrassment and distress he believed
honestly, but mistakenly that the power of attorney allowed N to do what he
regarding raising the loan and using his parents residence as security (letter
p.2; p.141).
(b) At p.3 of the letter, after a lengthy discussion of a recent decision of
this Tribunal, which I need not canvass, the Respondent’s
lawyers stated:
“... [the Respondent] acknowledges that his lack of understanding of
is a very serious error particularly in the context of what has occurred
(c) The Respondent’s lawyers rejected allegation 3 regarding
unconscionable conduct, particularly that (as alleged) that he
knowingly took
advantage of the vulnerability of Mr and Mrs X , recalling them being in their
senior years. Over 8 further paragraphs,
the Lawyers outlined how and why the
Respondent believed he was acting for the benefit of Mr and Mrs X.
(d) Allegation 4 regarding the Respondent acting “unconscionably”
(in breach of
was refuted by the lawyers. I need not summarise the
nine (9) paragraphs over which the denial of any unconscionable conduct by
Respondent was laid out.
(e) Nor do I need not go through the remainder of the denials and refutations by
the lawyers, except to note that there was repeated
reference to the
Respondent’s “honest and genuine” belief regarding the
propriety of his instructions from N as
attorney of his parents, and his honest
but mistaken belief regarding the [imputed] knowledge of Mr and Mrs X, courtesy
son and attorney, N.
(f) There certainly were concerns expressed regarding, for example, what alleged
“confidential information” of Mr and
Mrs X had been breached,
especially in the absence of relevant details, and likewise a concern regarding
the allegation (no.10)
with respect to an alleged breach of duty to former
clients in circumstances where such a duty was, according to a case referred
from the ACT Supreme Court in 2011, seemingly rejected.
(g) Regarding allegation 11 concerning a breach of the conflict of interest
terms set out in
, the lawyers acknowledged that the Respondent, on
reflection, considered that there could have been such a conflict but at the
time(s), he had not appreciated such a risk. Details across 9
paragraphs outlined why he did not consider there to be any such breach
time, not least because he understood that he was acting with proper
instructions.
(h) At the end of the comments on this allegation, the lawyers stated (letter
p.9; p.147): “For the sake of completeness, [the
Respondent] specifically
acknowledges his mistake and clear misunderstanding as to the wording of the
Acknowledgment of legal Advice
as detailed in paragraph 16.” Thus, this is
a second notification on behalf of the Respondent to the Applicant Society
the vexed issue of the Acknowledgments of Legal Advice. But still,
nothing happened from the Applicant’s side arising from
this matter until
many months hence.
(i) It is important to note also, and in conclusion from this letter, that the
Respondent’s lawyers (at p.10; p.148) highlighted
that the respondent was
misled by N. The Respondent’s specific words to his lawyer were: “I
was duped.”
simply record that, at this stage of the correspondence and the significant
number of allegations against the Respondent, there
was no allegation of
dishonesty.
next document before the Tribunal in the chronology was a letter to the
Applicant Society from the lawyers acting for Mrs X, dated
December 2022, which provided a copy of the Acknowledgment of Legal Advice,
March 2019, signed by the
Respondent.
March 2023, the lawyers for the Applicant Society wrote to the
Respondent’s lawyers.
There appears to have been earlier correspondence between the lawyers in 2023.
That does not appear to have been put before the Tribunal.
In the letter of
March 2023, the Applicant’s lawyers requested
“further information” across approximately a dozen or more areas.
They related, to a significant degree, to what the Respondent’s
“understanding” was in relation to a range of matters
at specified
times. Upon receipt of the information sought, the Applicant would then formally
seek the Respondent’s final response
to the allegations. No contention
regarding honesty (or the lack of it) was detailed in this request for further
information.
Respondent’s lawyers replied to the request for information by letter
Again, there is no
reference to any alleged dishonesty.
July 2023, the Professional Standards Manager of the Applicant
wrote (by email) to the lawyers acting for Mrs X, in which he confirmed
complaint against the Respondent would be considered at the meeting of the
Council of the Applicant on Monday, 17 July
strictly out of chronological sequence, next in the documents before the
Tribunal was a letter from the lawyers for Mrs X,
dated 7 March 2023
(effectively a letter of demand), by which the Respondent’s law firm be
held responsible for the amount
owing under the Loan Agreement, plus interest
These lawyers
contended that the security arrangements set up with N were unenforceable. In
any event, they alleged 7 areas of breach
against the Respondent. None of them
comprehended any dishonesty. In addition to the multiple areas of breach or
negligence alleged,
the lawyers stated (p.3; p.163): “[The Respondent] was
complicit in, and enabled, N to obtain the loan and provide security
sic] the detriment of our client and her late Husband. [The Respondent’s]
actions in this regard amount to a breach
of the duty of care he owed to our
client and have caused her to suffer loss and damage.”
July 2023, the lawyers for the Applicant Society wrote to the
Respondent’s lawyers, in which they sought a “final
That letter
specified the allegations against the Respondent. The lawyers confirmed that
there were “four allegations”
(albeit listed under 3 paragraphs (a)
– (c)). Summarised, the allegations related to:
(a) breach of Rule 4.1.3 relating to the diligent and competent provision of
legal services (which included reference to breach of
Powers of Attorney
(b) failing to act in the best interests of Mr and Mrs X in breach of Rule 4.1.1
and 4.1.3, then also in breach or
The particulars here simply referred
to signing the acknowledgment of legal advice by the proposed guarantor, and
exchanging the
Loan Agreement containing clauses 1 and 9, which were not
satisfied; and
(c) failed to avoid a conflict of interest in breach or Rule 11 (in acting for N
and his parents).
detailed particulars then followed in relation to “allegations (a) and
(b)” and later in relation to “allegation
(c).” As of the date
of this letter (July 2023), there was no formal or other allegation of
dishonesty against the Respondent.
Respondent’s lawyers provided a formal reply to the Applicant
Society’s lawyers on 13
For current purposes, I do
not need to canvass this extensive response, which covered 106 paragraphs. This
was followed up by supplementary
submissions (referred to as an Addendum), dated
October 2023. In the course of this letter, there is an
interesting series of references that include the following:
(a) There were exchanges between a Senior Associate at the Respondent’s
firm, who was in the Wills and Estate section of the
practice. A general
question arose from that Associate seeking advice from the Professional
Standards manager of the Applicant Society
regarding a general question of who
was the client where a law firm acts on instruction from an attorney exercising
a power of attorney.
The inquiry was made in on
. The reply from the Applicant Society did not appear until
September 2023
, which indicated that, in his view, the
principal was the client, but he also acknowledged that there was a prevailing
some [unspecified] quarters that the attorney is the
(b) Then followed the following further submissions on behalf of the Respondent:
“The fact that it took Mr Reis [from the Law
Society] around a year to
answer this question suggests [of who is the client when instructions come from
an attorney acting under
a relevant power] that the answer may not be
straightforward. Whilst we respect Mr Reis’ experience, expertise and
we query whether his views as expressed are shared by members of
relevant ACT Law Society Committees, such as the legal profession
Act and Ethics
Committee or the Elder Law & Succession Law Committees.”
(c) The letter went on to submit that there was no judicial authority answering
the question of who is the “client” when
an attorney purports to
exercise a power of attorney; and “in the absence of such authority, and
if this is a question upon
which minds might differ, [the Respondent’s]
conduct (as alleged in allegations (b) and (c)) could not be regarded as
disgraceful
by professional colleagues of good repute and competency.”
January 2024, the lawyers for the Applicant Society confirmed to
the Respondent’s lawyers that there had been a meeting of
the Council of
the Applicant on 20
That meeting
“resolved” to seek a further response from the Respondent regarding
the “execution and submission
of the Acknowledgment of Legal Advice by
Proposed Guarantor.” A copy of the Statement of Reasons of the Council was
to the Respondent’s lawyers. Those reasons did not feature in the
proceeding before the Tribunal. Why these matters were not
considered until the
meeting of 20
November 2023 was not explained. In this letter, the
following allegations were raised for the first time:
(a) The Respondent engaged in conduct, in the course of practice or
otherwise, which demonstrates that the solicitor is not a fit
and proper person
to practice law, or which is likely to a material degree to be prejudicial to,
or diminish the public confidence
in, the administration of justice or bring the
profession into disrepute in breach of Rule 5.1, and/or
(b) Failed to be honest in all dealings in the course of legal practice in
breach of Rule 4.1.2.
breaches were alleged in this letter which I need not detail. The relevant
particulars of these new allegations related specifically
to the signed
acknowledgments regarding the provision of legal
other matters regarding the letter of 25
January 2024 are important
to record. This is no mere hermeneutical exercise; it goes to the fairness of
the process and the proper
details the Respondent was entitled to know, all the
while being assured that the Council was properly and fairly, through proper
process, addressing the very serious matters raised against him. Thus:
(a) As earlier noted, par.1.1 of this letter recorded a meeting of the Council
of the Applicant on 20
November 2023, at which it was
“resolved” that an Application for disciplinary action, under s.419
of the Act, would
be filed regarding “three charges”.
(b) The same paragraph went on to record the Council’s expression of
“concern” regarding “the execution and
submission of the
Acknowledgment of Legal Advice by Proposed Guarantor” by the
Respondent.
(c) The letter went on to confirm further that “at its next meeting”
the Council “will consider any further response
your client wishes to make
and then make a decision as to whether to include a fourth charge in the
application for disciplinary action
.” (emphasis added)
(d) Par.1.2 stated that “a copy of the Statement of Reasons for the
Council’s decision made on 20 November 2023 ...”
was enclosed. There
is no other detail concerning this statement, which assumes some import in the
light of matters discussed below
in relation to the Council actually having two
different Statements of Reasons, both dated 25
January 2024, and
both signed the same day by the President of the Applicant.
(e) Par.2.1 set out in some detail the further allegation the Council
“will consider” regarding the Respondent’s
fitness to continue
to practice law. The issue of the Respondent’s “honesty” was
raised in par.2.1(b). Particulars
of the allegation here were set out in the
same paragraph, unfortunately using the same paragraph numbering as earlier in
the paragraph.
Nothing turns on the repeated paragraph numbering, except to note
that the NSW Supreme Court in
(discussed briefly below) expressed
frustration at such things and the difficulties it can needlessly cause.
(f) Par.2.2 set out the time-frame for a response from the Respondent regarding
the new, late-breaking allegation.
(g) The same paragraph went on to state (emphasis added): “Following
receipt of your response, our final advice and, if required,
advice from
the Council will make a final decision in relation to this
questions arise from this letter, but particularly the last paragraph. They
include: (a) whether any statement of reasons
from the Council’s later
consideration of the last allegation, and after the Respondent’s comments,
was actually prepared
and provided to the Respondent; (b) when was the next
deliberation by the Council of this matter and what decision was made; and
in the light of events detailed below, what was the provenance of the two
Statements of Reasons dated 25
January 2024 (noting that one of the
them was later acknowledged to be wrong), including in the light of the
apparently subsequent
decision by the Council, on a date unknown to the
final sentence set out in sub-paragraph (g) above, to repeat, stated that
“ ... the Council will make a final decision in
relation to this
complaint.” There is nothing before the Tribunal regarding who made this
“final decision”, when
it was made, and if (or when) it was
communicated to the Respondent. To be repetitive: all this was in the face of
two Statements
of Reasons, one of them incorrect, both bearing the same date,
and the same signature. At least in relation to these matters, attention
detail, and “fairness of process” (to use the words of Kirby P in
), in my view, were not hallmarks of this proceeding. Even
more bluntly, in the light of the final paragraph of the letter of
January 2024, was there ever any “final decision” by
the Council as averred by its lawyers; if so, who made it, and when?
decision was ever made, did that, or could that, omission have potentially
impacted upon the status if not the legality
of the “decision” to
bring Charge 4 against the Respondent? The double set of reasons, and no detail
decision”, only add further concerns about the
process here of the regulator. I raise these matters based solely upon the
put before the Tribunal. There was little discussion of them at the
hearing, which means that the Tribunal cannot take the multiple
questions noted
here any further.
response from the Respondent’s lawyers is dated 14
Among other things, with
some force (in my view, fairly so), it expressed concern regarding the highly
unusual provision of two Statements
of Reasons by the Applicant. The first was
provided to the Respondent, which proposed that the allegations be dealt with
Legal Profession Act 2006
. With little detail provided
to the Tribunal, apparently the first set of reasons was withdrawn on the basis
that they were wrong.
That section provides for the summary finalisation of a
matter. The second Statement of Reasons, which bears the same date as the
Statement of 25
January 2024, confirmed that it was [now] proposed
to proceed under
of the Act and bring a proceeding in this Tribunal.
Neither iteration of the reasons is before the Tribunal. Also not before the
Tribunal was further correspondence from the Applicant’s lawyer, dated
respectively 27
January and 1
February 2024 under
cover of which the two different Statements of Reasons were provided to the
Respondent’s lawyers. These
details are known only because of them being
recorded in the letter from the Respondent’s lawyers of 14
February 2024 to the Applicant’s attorneys.
state the obvious: why the regulator prepared and had signed by the President of
the Society two Sets of Reasons (both bearing
the same date), how they came into
existence, how two different sets of Reasons came to be provided to the
Respondent in circumstances
where there was, apparently, only one meeting of the
Council on 20
November 2023 (presumably there were not two
Statements of Reasons circulated at the November 2023 meeting), were never
The fumbling of the reasons to be relied upon not only poses some
questions about the efficacy and much else in this regard, but
perhaps also, it
raises a real question whether the Council (or delegated officer) was actually
functus officio
once the first Statement of Reasons was signed, and
therefore the second Statement was nugatory or voidable. Obviously because none
of these interesting and important questions were raised at the hearing, it
would be inapt to consider them further. That said, the
raised in par.11 of the Respondent’s letter. It was not addressed at the
Respondent’s lawyers then went on to note, again with good reason in my
view, how disappointing it was to deal with a further
allegation 18 months after
the last round of allegations were raised. “Efficiency and
alacrity”, in accordance with
of the Act, unfortunately were not
evident here. It also brings to mind the comments by Kirby P in
(noted below) regarding the importance of “fair
procedures” for lawyers who are the subject of disciplinary proceedings.
In my view, two sets of “reasons”, both bearing the same date and
signature, hardly accords with proper process, especially
from the “model
litigant” regulator.
lawyers further noted, and summarised at par.14 of this letter, the
circumstances and mistaken belief of the Respondent at the
time of signing the
acknowledgments. That paragraph concluded: “It is also apposite to note
that the documents were prepared
by the solicitors for the lender knowing that
Mr and Mrs X were not going to be instructing [the Respondent], but were to be
by N under the power of attorney. The lender was therefore not misled
by the Acknowledgment in any way.”
unfairly, the Respondent rejected categorically any suggestion of dishonesty or
recklessness or indifference. He (the Respondent)
said that he simply
“made a mistake.” Then at par.17, the Lawyers for the Respondent
circumstances relating to the signing and serving of the First and Second
Statements of reasons show anything, it is (with
the greatest of respect) that a
mistake in the rush of a busy day can occur. It would be, in our respectful
submission, unreasonable
to hold [the Respondent] to any higher standard than
that the Council and its representatives hold themselves to be accountable.
this regard we refer to the apparent error in the President signing and your
office forwarding the incorrect First Statement
of Reasons which illustrates how
human error can occur.
further correspondence was provided in this Exhibit, including how the President
of the Applicant could sign two sets of reasons,
both with the same date of late
January 2024, seemingly arising out of a Council meeting held on 20th November
2023. What happened
in the intervening period regarding the formulation of two
sets of reasons remains a somewhat concerning mystery, as I have repeatedly
said. Leaving to one side issues of delay, nor was there any mention –
anywhere – regarding the validity, or potentially
vitiating import, of
there being two sets of reasons, signed on the same date by the President, the
“wrong set” then
being sent to the Respondent, and what, if any,
such maladroit handling by the regulator had on the validity of Charge 4.
any event, the Application to this Tribunal was not filed until 7
May 2024 – without any mention of whether any “final decision”
was ever made by the Council regarding Charge 4,
as promised by the
Applicant’s lawyers on 25
January 2024.
Outline of principle
turn now to some matters of principle, beginning with comments by Deane J in
Smith v New
Association
They reflect
others that have been noted earlier in these reasons, but they helpfully
encapsulate the most basic of principles.
Disciplinary
proceedings against a legal practitioner are primarily directed towards the
protection of the public and not the punishment
of the legal practitioner ...
Nonetheless, a court or other tribunal entertaining such proceedings is bound to
observe the requirements
of procedural fairness before making or acting upon any
finding of misconduct. Two of those requirements in such proceedings are
relevant for present purposes. The first is that the allegations against the
particular practitioner must be specifically identified.
The second is that the
practitioner must be afforded an appropriate opportunity of being heard in
relation to them.
point of noting the procedural fairness grounds in
, is simply to
refer again to the very significant delay between, on the one hand, the
Respondent here bringing to the Applicant’s
attention the issue
surrounding the acknowledgments and his candour in noting his misunderstanding
and misreading of them, and on
the other hand, the 18 month delay between him
addressing the allegations as they were, before getting notice,
sets of slightly different reasons, that he would be facing an additional charge
in relation to dishonesty. His lawyers properly
raised their concern about the
delay. In my view, an 18-month delay to bring such a charge (especially after
the Respondent himself
reported the circumstances to the Applicant 18 months
earlier, which ultimately gave rise to the charge), together with the two
competing sets of reasons but still bearing the same date, borders on
the unconscionable. It definitely does not fit into the principles
outlined by
extracted here regarding “fair
procedures, including for solicitors charged with professional
misconduct.” His Honour
went on to say that this is “part of the
fabric of the law by which the Court defends the public interest.”
Unsurprisingly,
there is significant case law, which confirms that, the graver the consequence
at the time of trial or hearing, the
stronger the evidence required to conclude
that the allegation was relevantly established on the balance of
probabilities.
this were not the case, the force of other comments by Dixon J in
, recently cited by the Full Federal Court in
Roberts-Smith
v Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd
would apply, thus (emphasis
... it is necessary to keep in mind two important
principles which may pull in opposite directions. One is the rule embodied in
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), which was heavily relied upon by
the appellant in his submissions in the appeal alleging errors by the primary
judge. Here,
the allegation concerning Mr McKenzie is pitched at such a level
and has such significant consequences that it cannot be taken to
have been made
out on the basis of what Dixon J referred to in Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
at 362 as “
inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect
facts and the evidence here were not, as it were, in the same league as in the
Roberts-Smith
saga. However, what was on display was, effectively, an
implicit case theory that undergirded the prosecution of the Respondent
Charge 4, and which only surfaced 18 months after the Respondent had
raised his own concerns in writing by letter dated 30
August 2023.
By this I mean that, often with degrees of either incredulity and/or
frustration, Counsel for the Applicant pressed
the Respondent that his evidence
could not be true regarding the execution of the guarantees (examples are noted
above in the review
of the evidence). Because, for example, par.5 of said
guarantees was so short, he
have read it and, therefore, he
have known that what he was signing was untrue, and [therefore]
deliberately so. This line of questioning, as outlined above, imputed
(and/or assumed it) to the Respondent and did not relevantly consider that his
assumptions regarding these documents (together
with his erroneous understanding
of what could and could not be done under the
Powers of Attorney Act
which he consistently gave evidence, could possibly be true.
is no less curious, as well as concerning, is to divine what the
Applicant’s actual (or proper) evidence was upon which
the purported
dishonesty was based. Apart from the putative case theory of imputed (or
assumed) dishonesty regarding the Respondent’s
conduct noted in the
previous paragraph, and in the face of the consistent, long-time denial of
dishonesty and explanation for his
actions (with admitted embarrassed
negligence), it is very difficult to know. The case law regarding the centrality
to ensure that
any and every question put to a witness has a proper evidentiary
base is well known and need not be recorded here. Likewise, Bar
Solicitors Rules in this regard are equally well-known and need not be detailed.
And, of course, the more grave the allegation,
the more stringent is the
requirement for there to be a firm evidentiary foundation for it. As the Court
of Appeal of Western Australia
(Quinlan CJ and Pritchard JA) stated in
Metaxis v Legal Profession Complaints Committee
, at [69] (bold
emphasis in original; bold and underlined emphasis
steps are necessary for there to be a
factual foundation
for a pleading or submission will, of course, vary with the circumstances of the
case. Relevant considerations
may include the resources of the practitioner, the
ability of the client to pay for legal work, whether it is reasonable to proceed
on the basis of a client's instructions as to matters not personally known to
the practitioner and the knowledge of the practitioner.
The nature of the
pleading or submission will also be important. In the case of an allegation of
fraud or serious misconduct, for
example, the steps necessary to ensure that
there is a proper factual basis are likely to be greater than in the case of a
or submission relating to more quotidian matters
be clear: I was at the time, and remain now, highly concerned regarding the
apparent lack of evidence to support the charge of
dishonesty. I raised my
concerns regarding this precise matter at the pre-hearing directions, and during
the hearing itself. I was
assured that (in my words) all would be revealed (or
words to that effect). Respectfully, and most unfortunately, it was not revealed
at all. Perhaps the Applicant also assumed, wrongly as it turned out, that the
consistent evidence of the Respondent (
regarding his various
assumptions) would not withstand scrutiny at the hearing. It did, and did so
firmly in the face of significant,
often-times, blunt questioning. In my view,
there was insufficient attention paid to the Respondent’s evidence and
consistent explanation for what occurred regarding the signing of, and
the circumstances surrounding, the guarantees and his lack,
or barely cursory
reading, of them, short as they were. He made assumptions on a number of fronts
in relation to the mortgage and
guarantee transactions, which proved, legally
and factually, to be erroneous. The Respondent readily acknowledged (and
to do so) his negligence and general errors (and gave plausible
reasons why he held them at the time, and the pressures he also faced
none of which relieve him of his relevant duties or really ameliorate his
plight) and did so from early in the litigation;
he steadfastly, consistently,
and plausibly, rejected any dishonesty. His lawyers noted that the Respondent
“had been duped.”
As they also noted, just as the Applicant had made
a mistake (of a somewhat different order, to be sure) in providing two sets of
reasons for its decision, both curiously dated the same date and seemingly if
not concerningly both signed by the President of the
Applicant on the same date,
so did the Respondent make a mistake regarding events and documentation that
gave rise to the current
proceeding.
should also note that in
Kumar v Legal Services Commission of NSW
New South Wales Court of Appeal referred to questions of plausibility when (or
if) alternative explanations are proferred by
a witness. For example, when
considering a very late-breaking narrative from the Appellant in that case,
Leeming JA said, at
was and is no plausible explanation inconsistent with deliberate
dishonesty.
the contrary here, as recorded multiple times already, there was a plausible
explanation (albeit dismissed by the Applicant’s
Counsel) provided by the
Respondent for what happened in relation to the acknowledgements. Further, the
Respondent’s account
never wavered and, very significantly, he brought it
to the attention of the Applicant who took 18 months to do something about
note again, from a later part of the hearing, the Applicant’s insistence,
and focus, regarding the alleged dishonesty of the
Respondent. In the course of
submissions, Counsel for the Applicant confirmed the following (emphasis
MEMBER: Permit me to ask a question which I think I belaboured even in the
directions hearing. How do you make the jump from
gross negligence to
dishonesty?
MR MOUJALLI:
Awareness of a risk
that what you are saying is
SENIOR MEMBER:
MR MOUJALLI:
SENIOR MEMBER: Drawn from the, or inferred from the surrounding
circumstances?
MR MOUJALLI: Correct. Well,
here, and we’ll come to this, here
there was an admission eventually from the practitioner that he knew that he
could not be
sure that what he was certifying was true without reading the
. It must follow that he knew therefore there was a risk that he was
certifying something which was untrue.
SENIOR MEMBER: Regardless of whether he actually turned his mind to either
of those propositions?
MR MOUJALLI:
He necessarily turned his mind to it because he said he
knew at the time he could not be sure that what he was certifying was true
without reading it
Respectfully,
the evidence of the Respondent summarised here by Counsel for the Applicant was
inaccurate. As highlighted above, the
Respondent made no such admission
relevant to the time of execution of said documents
. His confirmation or
“admission” related to his acknowledgment and comprehension
, but not in relation to the time when the acknowledgments were
executed. There was again, unfortunately, an elision between what
Counsel for
the Applicant asserted, and what the actual evidence was. In my view, such
elision (or conflation) was not open on the
evidence. The consistency and
credibility of the Respondent’s evidence, in my view, was clear. For the
reasons he gave, which
the Tribunal has accepted, the Respondent never
apprehended any relevant risk, and in consequence, he did not turn his mind to
such risk. The Applicant steadfastly refused to countenance that the
Respondent’s evidence in these respects could possibly
be true. Such
certitude can come at a needlessly high price.
followed this exchange, by way of summary of part of the Applicant’s
position (emphasis
MOUJALLI: If we get to gross negligence, we say that the negligence is so gross
that it indicates unfitness. There’s a debate
as to whether professional
misconduct on the assumption that the tribunal makes a finding of gross
negligence falls within section
387(1)(a), which is a substantial failure to
maintain standards.
SENIOR MEMBER: Yes.
MR MOUJALLI: Or 387(1)(b), which is conduct indicative of unfitness.
Knowledge is critical to fitness
. We have included the full decision of
the full court here which says that competence is a fundamental requirement for
We say it is signing a solicitor’s certificate without
reading it is such a departure from proper standards that it indicates
to practise
as noted elsewhere in these reasons, I have recorded that Counsel stated that
there was no question regarding the fitness of
the Respondent, yet the Applicant
was seeking a short-term suspension of the Respondent, thereby indicating a
certain “lack
incongruities in these respects were, and are, concerning.
in these reasons I said that it was apposite to deal with the Respondent’s
evidence in the light of the Applicant’s
submissions regarding the low, or
alleged poor, credibility of his evidence. I commented further that my view of
the Respondent’s
evidence accords with the Full Federal Court of
Australia’s assessment of that of Mr McKenzie’s evidence in the
increasingly
fabled litigation of
Roberts-Smith v Fairfax Publications Pty
. In one of the multiple recent judgements in that matter (the failed
Application to re-open), the Full Court said of Mr McKenzie’s
which (like the Respondent here) was very strongly attacked by the Appellant
McKenzie was cross-examined extensively on the contents of his affidavit and on
several other issues.
We reject the submission that he should be treated as a
witness of no credit and generally accept his evidence. He acknowledged his
limited recollection of events and conversations and answered the questions put
to him with care.
We did not perceive any significant contradictions or
implausibilities in his evidence
reviewed and outlined the Respondent’s evidence, I adhere even more firmly
to the positive views of it, which I have
earlier recorded. It necessarily and
relevantly follows that, on all the evidence before the Tribunal, on matters of
fact, I accept
the Respondent’s evidence that:
(a) he negligently, but not
dishonestly
, signed the two acknowledgements
the subject of Charge 4.
(b) if he read paragraph 5 of the two acknowledgements, he did so only cursorily
(my word, not the Respondent’s) and, because
of various assumptions he
made regarding the standard form of the guarantees, he did not relevantly
appreciate (or actually turn
his mind to) the significance of the affixing of
his signature to the guarantees. I accept his later acknowledgement, indeed as
submitted by his Senior Counsel, that this was grossly
(c) he believed at the relevant time that by giving advice to N as the attorney
of his parents, he was giving them the advice.
(d) his admission and acknowledgment that this belief referred to in the
previous sub-paragraph was erroneous as a matter of law
and, therefore,
significantly negligent, especially for a lawyer of his experience.
(e) his evidence that he had nothing to gain by signing the acknowledgments, and
that his “motivation” was, among other
things, to assist the X
family more broadly, accepting that he was aiding them (in his view) by helping
N with the loan and documentation.
it was not addressed at the trial, other than by implication, there can be
little doubt, as recorded by the Respondent’s
lawyer (noted above) that
the Respondent relied completely upon what he was told by N, but which turned
out to be an exercise of
him being “duped”.
more detail, as already noted, I accept that the Respondent acted in relation to
him signing the acknowledgments based on assumptions
he held at the
time (articulated in his evidence outlined above and earlier in his Affidavit,
February 2025) regarding what was permissible
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
, but which he now recognises, and
does so readily and with embarrassment, were erroneous. In my view, assumptions,
even seriously
erroneous ones, are an insufficient (if not improper) basis to
make any finding of dishonesty, as sought, indeed pressed, by the
my view, there was insufficient evidence for the dishonesty charge to be
prosecuted. The Applicant bore the relevant onus to establish
dishonesty,
according to the well-known
standard (including, of course,
the criteria in
Evidence Act
). The Applicant imputed (or
assumed) dishonesty. Such imputation (or assumption) was itself erroneous. The
Applicant’s case
regarding Charge 4 approximated, in certain respects, the
kind of case cautioned against by Dixon J in
, notably that
relies upon “inexact proofs ... [and] indirect inferences.” Further
still, given the multiple authorities,
perhaps most notably for current purposes
by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in
“fair procedures”, and by the Court of Appeal in Western Australia
, regarding a “proper factual foundation”,
especially where serious misconduct is alleged, at its highest, the
Applicant’s
case regarding Charge 4 against the Respondent relied upon the
drawing of inferences that, in my view, were firmly rebutted by the
Respondent’s evidence.
matters that undergirded the assumptions by the Applicant were set out in
par.4.2(a) – (f) of the Applicant’s
“Submissions on breach,
characterisation and penalty for hearing on 26 March 2025”, filed 3 March
2025, which were repeated
in the second iteration of the submissions, filed on
25 March 2025. These paragraphs in each set of submissions commence with the
following: “The Respondent’s evidence that he did not read paragraph
5 cannot be accepted because it is inherently implausible
for the following
reasons ...” Nowhere in either iteration of the submissions in par.4,
entitled “First issue: whether
the respondent’s conduct was
dishonest”, is there any reference to, or consideration of, the
Respondent’s evidence
that he proceeded in each instance of the relevant
acknowledgements based on certain assumptions regarding the form and content of
those acknowledgments.
assumed a single, and very narrow, prism through which the evidence was
considered. I raised my concerns in this regard with the
Applicant’s
Counsel on a number of occasions, including after the Respondent’s oral
evidence was given. That is to say,
I questioned how the Applicant could, or
would, make the relevant factual and legal “bridge” between admitted
by the Respondent to him having allegedly acted dishonestly. Simply
using a different analogy to emphasise the point, I questioned
Counsel directly
how the “jump” from negligence to dishonesty would be made or
achieved. I was assured that the evidence,
albeit unspecified, was sufficient to
make out Charge 4. To have pressed so hard on the dishonesty charge in the face
evidence and (b) the expressed concerns by the Tribunal was, in my
respectful view, a very unfortunate, imprudent and unnecessary
over-reach. To
quote others: in an investigation, details matter. Investigations, of any kind
but especially such as those here by
the Regulator which involve the livelihood
and reputation of legal practitioners, notably here one of unblemished,
long-standing,
require not only proper and detailed evidence but also the proper
and fair assessment of it. To rely upon assumptions or inferences
foundation for such a serious charge, with equally serious consequences, as
appears to have been the case here, was dangerous
if not bordering on the
improper. In my respectful view, it was certainly imprudent to put all of the
Applicant Council’s modest
eggs, one of them significantly damaged, into a
single basket.
was compounded by the almost unyielding focus upon the dishonesty charge and
very little, or realistic, countenance that the
Respondent’s evidence,
fairly assessed, did not support a charge of dishonesty. In more colloquial
terms, there was little
apparent attention to any “Plan B” if the
dishonesty charge did not succeed. There was basically passing reference to
Plan B if dishonesty was not established. Put in other terms, the
Applicant’s case against the Respondent was almost completely
and white” if not one dimensional; however, the reality of life, including
in legal practice, is usually in shades
making these comments, none of them should be taken, and are not intended to be
taken, as indicating that the Respondent should
not be required to account for
his very significant professional lapse of judgment and grossly negligent
actions on the occasions
of signing the two acknowledgments that are the
foundation of Charge 4.
Applicant’s submissions
definitely not a surfeit, there was something of an abundance of submissions
from the Applicant, with only the following [(a)
and (b)] reproduced below: (a)
a three-page
Applicant’s Case Outline
, filed 25 March 2025; (b) a
thirteen-page
Applicant’s Submissions on breach, characterisation and
penalty for Hearing on 26 March 2025
, filed 25 March 2025; and (c) a
document styled
Statement of Agreed Facts in relation to Charge 4
filed on 25 March 2025. This latter document can, and will, be taken as having
been superseded by the Statement of Agreed Facts
set out earlier in these
reasons. Both of these documents are set out in the Appendix A and Appendix C1
and C2 to these reasons.
Respondent’s submissions
Respondent filed two documents, styled as follows: (a)
Respondent’s
written outline of submissions on facts, charges, characterisation and sanction
to be determined at hearing
, filed 21 March 2025 (13 pages); and (b)
Respondents case outline – summary of issues for determination,
relevant legislation, authorities and summary of argument
, filed 26 March
2025 (3 pages). Both of these documents are set out in the Appendix B1 and B2 to
these reasons.
Further outline of principle
statutory and other regulatory provisions are set out in the Amended Application
Legal Profession Act 2006
(ACT), filed on 20 March
as well as in the
Applicant’s [Bundle of] Authorities. Because of those references and
outline, I will not set out those provisions
in full here and need only note (or
refer again) to the Case Outline of the Applicant, also filed on 25 March 2025
(par.2 “Relevant
legislation and Rules”) which refer to the relevant
sections and Rules as follows:
This document is annexed to these reasons at appendix B1.
of that said, because of their centrality, it is important to set out
(1)(b) of the
Legal Profession Act 2006
), which provide definitions of “unsatisfactory professional
conduct” and “professional misconduct.” Similarly,
relevant Rules involved are set out below because of their centrality. Those
sections, and those Rules, are as follows:
is unsatisfactory professional conduct?
unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an
Australian legal practitioner happening in connection with the practice of law
that falls short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal
practitioner.
Note See also
(Conduct capable of being unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct).
is professional misconduct?
(1) In this Act:
professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, if
the conduct involves a substantial or consistent
failure to reach or maintain a
reasonable standard of competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an
legal practitioner whether happening in
connection with the practice of law or happening otherwise than in connection
with the practice
of law that would, if established, justify a finding that the
practitioner is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal practice.
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
(ACT), Rule 4.1
provides that:
A solicitor must also:
4.1.1 act in the best interests of a client in any matter in which the
solicitor represents the client;
4.1.2 be honest and courteous in all dealings in the course of legal
4.1.3 deliver legal services competently, diligently and as promptly as
reasonably possible;
4.1.4 avoid any compromise to their integrity and professional
independence; and
4.1.5 comply with these Rules and the law.
now follows is a brief consideration of authorities relating to the two
fundamental areas of principle that must guide the Tribunal
in the current
matter. Those areas are: (a) the protective (and regulatory) nature and function
of disciplinary proceedings; and
(b) jurisprudential considerations regarding
“honesty”, which includes some discussion of
“recklessness.”
the history and general jurisprudence regarding the objects and principles that
govern disciplinary proceedings are so well
known, I need only note a few
specific matters.
A Solicitor v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
Court made the following observations (emphasis
(a) The dividing line between conduct that warrants formal disapproval and what
then takes it into the realm of removing someone
from legal practice (in that
case, “unfitness to practise at the Bar”) “is by no means
always an easy task.”
At [20] quoting Kitto J in
Ziems v The
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of NSW
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
(b) At [21], the High Court said: “Professional misconduct may not
necessarily require a conclusion of unfitness to practise,
and removal from the
roll. In that regard, it is to be remembered that fitness is to be decided at
the time of the hearing.”
(c) At [22], the Court said (emphasis added): “The facts of the conduct
referred to in declaration 1(a) exemplify the difficulty
of which Kitto J spoke
. They also exemplify the importance that may attach to a
consideration of the detailed
subjective and objective circumstances of
offending behaviour
Interestingly,
and accepting the differing statutory and other circumstances involved, the High
Court (at [41]) made no Order regarding
is also a central feature and object of disciplinary proceedings that they
serve, and seek to ensure, that the public are protected
from lawyer
misconduct.
There is also, again
to speak generally, an object to safeguard the reputation of the legal
profession,
maintaining proper standards of the profession, among other things, by example
and by proper and ongoing education of
The eminence and experience
of a lawyer (as is precisely the case here) is no impediment or shield to
disciplinary proceedings.
disciplinary and quasi-prosecutorial, the object of such proceedings is not,
, to punish the lawyer who is the subject of them, notwithstanding
that the ultimate effect is often, if not almost invariably,
in terms of statements of principle, I need only refer to two further
statements. First, in
Solicitor, with the High Court again quoting from
the earlier High Court’s almost foundational decision in
97 CLR at 297-298), the Court recalled (emphasis
possibly disastrous consequences of disbarment to the individual concerned [are
such that] a court to which an appeal comes
as of right
is bound to examine
the whole position with meticulous care
my regularly expressed concerns regarding the paucity or poverty of evidence in
relation to the dishonesty charge, together
with the extreme and unexplained
delay in bringing it, respectfully, it is not altogether clear that zeal, rather
than “meticulous
care”, was sometimes the guiding light in this
matter. In a very recent description of the nature of disciplinary proceedings
against legal practitioners, McCallum CJ said (emphasis
[Law] Council accordingly stands in a
quasi-prosecutorial role in respect of
disciplinary proceedings against lawyers
in the Territory. The Council is
bound in the investigation of a complaint and the prosecution of any subsequent
disciplinary action
by the rules of procedural fairness
obliged to deal with complaints as efficiently and quickly as possible
s.417 of the [Legal Profession] Act.
matters of “honesty”, I note the following.
might be regarded as something of a
fons et origo
decision, in
v The Queen
, the High Court discussed “dishonesty” in the
following terms (Toohey and Gaudron JJ at [18]; emphasis
in which it is necessary for a jury to decide whether an act is dishonest, the
proper course is for the trial judge to identify
knowledge, belief or
which is said to render that act dishonest and to instruct the jury
to decide whether the accused had that knowledge, belief or intent
and, if so,
to determine whether, on that account, the act was dishonest. Necessarily,
the test to be applied in deciding whether the act done is properly
characterised as dishonest will differ depending on whether the
question is
whether it was dishonest according to ordinary notions or dishonest
special sense
. If the question is whether the act was dishonest
according to ordinary notions, it is sufficient that the jury be instructed that
that is to be decided by the standards of ordinary, decent people. However,
if "dishonest" is used in some special sense in legislation creating an
offence, it will ordinarily be necessary for the jury to be
told what is or,
perhaps, more usually, what is not meant by that word
. Certainly, it will be
necessary for the jury to be instructed as to that special meaning if there is
an issue whether the act in
question is properly characterised as
has been consistently followed and applied, without distinguishing between
different kinds of dishonesty, such as the dishonest,
and therefore improper,
use of trust funds, or
As the highlighted
part of the extract from
makes plain, it is for the Court or
Tribunal hearing a particular matter to make any due “adjustment”
regarding the application
of principle. Further, as the extracted part from
makes plain, as do the comments by McHugh J in
follow, it is
the actual knowledge, belief and intent of the person that is
, as opposed to the assumed or inferred knowledge of the Respondent.
, McHugh J said, at
accordance with Peters, the trial judge in a case like the present
(a) identify the knowledge, belief or intent which is said to render the
relevant conduct dishonest; and
(b) instruct the jury to decide whether the accused had that knowledge,
belief or intent and, if so, to determine whether, on that
account, the act was
dishonest; and
(c) direct the jury that, in determining whether the conduct of the accused
was dishonest, the standard is that of ordinary, decent
is also important for the discussion, at [34], regarding the correlation,
indeed correspondence, between “fraudulently”
“dishonestly.”
note these comments from
, and other decisions
in the footnotes because Counsel for the Applicant eschewed the relevance of
for the current matter. Respectfully, the authorities recorded
here, perhaps most particularly by the NSW Court of Appeal in 2019
disciplinary proceedings against a solicitor, make distinctions that seek to put
the High Court’s comments in
regarding contentions of
‘dishonesty” to one side, inapt. Perhaps I misunderstood
Counsel’s comments.
this section, it only remains to note three further matters. First, it is
uncontroversial that recklessness can amount to
dishonesty.
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society
the ACT Court
of Appeal noted that in order for there to be established a relevant level of
“recklessness”, it was necessary
that there be a
“awareness of the risk in each case
, that the statement made ... may
be untrue but that [the risk was consciously] disregarded ... in those
circumstances.”
[68] and [69], the Court of Appeal stated (emphasis added):
concept of recklessness is well illustrated in Giudice v Legal Profession
Complaints Committee
[2016] WASCA 159
where the Western Australian
Court of Appeal stated:
[31] ... A finding that
the appellant was reckless as to whether the statement in par 20 of the
affidavit was true or false
required the Tribunal
to find as a fact
that the appellant
was subjectively aware there was a risk
that it was
false and that he consciously disregarded that risk
finding made against the appellant at [156] of the Tribunal’s judgment was
that “at the very least [the appellant] was
reckless in making on his
affirmation a false statement to the Tribunal”.
Whether this amounts to
professional misconduct requires an analysis of all of the proved
circumstances
both parties, but the Applicant in particular, relied heavily on the classic,
common law decision of
The Applicant relied
principally upon the well-known comments of Lord Herschell (at 374), while the
Respondent noted some interesting
observations by Lord Halsbury LC (at 343). I
will come to those parts of
Derry v Peek
is somewhat interesting is the continuing reliance upon
Derry v Peek
the complete absence of reference to, let alone consideration of, the almost
equally esteemed House of Lords decision, but in
Nocton v Lord
This decision is
significant not only because of its discussion of the nature and extent of
duties owed by lawyers to their clients,
but also because of its almost scathing
criticism of
Derry v Peek
(which paid no attention to the relevant
equitable jurisdiction), so much so as to lead one of the doyens of legal
history, Sir Frederick
Pollock, to say that
Nocton v Lord Ashburton
as near as it dare to holding
Derry v Peek
wrong “as all
Lincoln’s Inn thought at the
In the same place,
the learned authors of
observed that the comments in
Nocton v Lord
, and by Pollock, “illustrate the distinctions between the
two jurisdictions, and concedes the correctness, in its sphere of
Derry v Peek,
although hinting that a different analysis might have
emerged had some versed in the practice of the Court of Chancery been present
among the great common lawyers who decided it.”
noted the enlightening and broader jurisprudence founded upon
Nocton v Lord
, and its more flexible areas of application than the more limited
principles in
Derry v Peek
, it is unnecessary to take this interesting
discussion any further. Instead, I need to note the respective areas of
difference advocated
by Counsel for the parties in the current matter from their
use of different speeches in the House of Lords in
Derry v Peek
well-known, it is nonetheless important to record that part of Lord
Herschell’s remarks relied upon by the Applicant.
At p.374, his Lordship
said (emphasis added):
First, in order to sustain an action of
there must be proof of fraud
, and nothing short of that will
suffice. Secondly, fraud is proved when it is shown that a false representation
has been made (1)
knowingly, or (2) without belief in its truth, or (3)
recklessly, careless whether it be true or false. Although I have treated the
second and third as distinct cases, I think the third is but an instance of the
second, for one who makes a statement under such
circumstances can have no real
belief in the truth of what he states.
To prevent a false statement being
fraudulent, there must, I think, always be an honest belief in its
a slightly different approach, Lord Halsbury referred (at 343) to the
requirement that, in that case, a prospectus, must have
been “calculated
to mislead.” As such, this required an assessment of the subjective
intention of the person involved.
This accords with later authority, such as
which emphasise that the Court
or Tribunal must have regard to the actual knowledge, belief and intent of the
Consideration & disposition: liability
the light of the multiple comments and findings already made in the course of
these reasons, and having regard to (a) the detail
contained in the Statement of
Agreed Facts (including the formal admissions by the Respondent), and (b) the
narrow scope of the primary
matters in dispute regarding Charge 4, I can be
relatively brief here in relation to the specific Charges against the Respondent
and the Tribunal’s formal findings regarding them.
accept the Statement of Agreed Facts and, in particular, the admissions therein
regarding Charges 1-3 as being established on the
facts set out, in particular,
at pars.59 - 66.
Charge 4, and noting in particular the terms of par.74 in the SOAF (which I also
but without
the qualifications asserted by the Applicant), I have
made findings in the course of these reasons that I accept the
Respondent’s
evidence, specifically in relation to:
(a) him operating under the now recognised and accepted mistaken understanding
regarding the scope of actions permitted under the
Powers of Attorney
(b) the now recognised and accepted erroneous assumptions he held in relation to
the substance and effect of the two acknowledgments
he signed in March 2019;
(c) in relation to the admissions just referred to, he was also labouring under
the misapprehension (also now recognised as erroneous)
that the terms of the
guarantee were of a standard kind used in NSW.
in relation to Charge 4, I accept the Respondent’s submission/admission
(par.74(c) of the SOAF) that in signing the two
acknowledgments in March 2019,
he was careless (or reckless, in the sense of grossly negligent) as to whether
or not they created
a misleading impression.
my view, the signing of the two acknowledgements was more than simple, or
“just”, careless conduct. Using the terms
from the SOAF, it was
reckless in the sense of grossly negligent. Put shortly, because so much has
already been said about the Respondent’s
conduct, I accept the
Respondent’s evidence that he was effectively reliant (my description)
upon the two major, albeit completely
wrong assumptions that (a) by advising N ,
as attorney for his parents, the Respondent was advising the parents, and (b)
of his firm belief in his [erroneous] assumption, he had not wilfully
disregarded the truth or falsity, or closed his mind, whether
he had personally
advised Mr and Mrs X. Such conduct by a lawyer, and especially such an
experienced one, was grossly negligent.
Conversely,
and importantly, in the light of the Tribunal’s findings regarding the
Respondent’s evidence (and my concerns
in relation to certain aspects of
how the matter was run on behalf of the Applicant, especially with respect to
the poverty of the
evidence and the multiple assumptions undergirding it, as
well as the various inferences the Applicant sought to have the Tribunal
regarding the Respondent’s evidence), in my firm view, the Applicant has
not discharged its onus to establish Charge 4
in relation to the alleged
dishonesty of the Respondent. The plausibility and consistency of his evidence,
however incredulous the
Applicant’s Counsel seemingly regarded it, made
the task of the Applicant regarding the firm evidentiary foundation for Charge
almost insuperable. I have already noted my concerns about having raised issues
prior to and during the hearing regarding the
bridging of the gap between
negligence (even gross negligence) and dishonesty. For all of the attacks on the
Respondent, his evidence
remained firm, clear and credible – albeit that
it made his negligence even more stark in the circumstances. However, a strong
cross examination, even at times a zealous one, does not substitute or fill gaps
in evidence that otherwise do not support the Charge
in question. This is
especially so, according to the High Court’s comments in, among many
Neat Holdings
(recorded above) when very serious charges were
on the table for decision.
the issue of “characterisation”, more formally, I note the
Having regard to (a) the SOAF in relation to Charges 1-3, and (b) the
Tribunal’s findings regarding the Respondent’s
evidence, in my view,
there is no doubt that the Respondent failed to deliver legal services
“competently and diligently”
as required by Rule 4.1.3 of the Rules.
in relation to acting for N as attorney, is relevantly
established on the evidence outlined earlier in these reasons and in accordance
with the SOAF. I accept the summary of facts at pars.59-60 of the SOAF, which
confirm the Respondent’s admission in relation
to this charge.
Having regard to (a) the SOAF in relation to Charges 1-3, and (b) the
Tribunal’s findings regarding the Respondent’s
evidence, in my view,
there is no doubt that the Respondent failed to deliver legal services
“competently and diligently”
to Mr and Mrs X in breach of Rule
4.1.3. He also failed to act in the best interests of his clients, Mr and Mrs X
in relation to
the loan transaction in breach of Rule 4.1.1. Likewise, the
Respondent failed to provide clear and timely advice to Mr and Mrs X
them to understand relevant legal issues and to make informed choices about the
matter in breach of
Accordingly,
regarding the
Respondent’s failure properly (if at all) to advise Mr and Mrs X is
relevantly established on the evidence outlined
earlier in these reasons and in
accordance with the SOAF and the admissions made therein and accepted by the
Tribunal. In addition
to the Tribunal’s findings regarding the
Respondent’s evidence, I accept the summary of facts in pars.61-64 of the
that readily support the Respondent’s admission or breach of the
Rules set out in those paragraphs.
This charge relates to a breach of duty concerning a conflict of interest
between the Respondent acting for N, on the one hand, and
his parents, on the
other. In so acting, it put the Respondent relevantly in breach of
facts agreed in the SOAF, notably as pars.65 and 66, and in the light of the
evidence canvassed in these reasons, the conflict
of interest was (and is)
clear, as is the relevant breach of duty by the Respondent. I accept his
admission in this regard.
Pars.67-74 outline the basic factual foundations for Charge 4. With the
exception of the Applicant’s qualifications in par.74(a)-(d),
formally reject, I accept the paragraphs mentioned in the light of the
Tribunal’s discussion of the Respondent’s
evidence above. Charge 4
is established as per the paragraphs mentioned, except and insofar, as it
excludes references to “dishonesty.”
Accordingly, the Respondent
accepts, as does the Tribunal, that the conduct of the Respondent was grossly
negligent in signing the
two acknowledgments in March 2019 as established by the
evidence set out above.
of the SOAF confirms the Respondent’s acknowledgment that his conduct
regarding Charges 1, 2, and 3 constitutes “unsatisfactory
within the meaning of s.386 of the Act, when each Charge is considered
individually and globally. It was plainly an
instance relating to one
transaction, albeit with a number of disparate but connected parts, and in
relation to which the Respondent’s
conduct (readily admitted) fell
“short of the standard of competence and diligence that a member of the
public is entitled
to expect of a reasonably competent Australia legal
practitioner.” I accept this acknowledgement by the Respondent.
Charge 4, in my view, as a discrete albeit glaring (on two occasions) breach of
relevant professional standards, in terms
of the Act, the Respondent’s
conduct readily comes within the definition in s.387(1)(a), because it was a
“substantial
... failure to reach or maintain a reasonable standard of
competence and diligence.” In my firm view, the circumstances here,
properly considered, do not safely approximate, let alone fit within, the terms
of s.387(1)(b) that would warrant a finding that
the Respondent was not a fit
and proper person to engage in legal practice.
discussing matters in the aftermath of
Nocton v Lord Ashburton
in equity, the learned authors of
at [12-035]) that Sir
Thomas More LC referred to the following in expressing pithily the jurisdiction
of his Court: “Three things
are apt to be helpt in Conscience, Fraud,
Accident and Things of Confidence.” In the light of the Applicant’s
Derry v Peek
in particular, together with the
Respondent’s evidence regarding certain assumptions, plus the largely
unexamined situation
regarding the deceit of N perpetrated upon his parents, and
to a significant degree upon the Respondent, the Lord Chancellor’s
references to conscience, fraud and accident seem particularly apt.
submissions of the parties were set out earlier in these reasons, which included
matters relating to penalty. It will be recalled
that, apart from penalty in the
event that the Respondent was found to be in breach of s.387(1)(b) regarding his
fitness to practice,
the parties were largely in agreement, namely for there to
be a public reprimand, a fine (the Applicant sought a fine of $20,000;
Respondent sought a fine of $10,000), and, within 12 months, the Respondent to
undertake a course in legal ethics approved by
the Applicant.
broad terms, a penalty must properly balance the following goals: (a) due
recognition by the Tribunal of fact of the professionally
inapt or improper
conduct of the legal practitioner; (b) the due and proper protection of the
public; (c) part of the ongoing education
of the legal profession (and
potentially of the public, albeit indirectly); and (d) relevant deterrence to
the practitioner in question
and to others regarding the need for diligence and
compliance with the highest ethical and professional standards. All such matters
are, of course, fact specific in each matter before the Tribunal or Court.
range of matters relevant here are as follows:
(a) The factual circumstances that gave rise to the four charges here were
acknowledged by all to be a very unfortunate but nonetheless
isolated incident.
The charges here are the only personal ones faced by the Respondent in a legal
career of some 39 years or thereabouts.
(b) Although charge 4 alleged dishonesty on the Respondent’s part, I have
firmly found no such evidence of dishonesty. Indeed,
in my view, for the reasons
given, the charge 4 as framed was one of some over-reach and should not have
been brought. This might
explain, but the Tribunal cannot know if it was in fact
the case, why there was such a very long delay between the first tranche
multiple allegations (and charges) against the Respondent, and not until 18
months later was the dishonesty charge brought to
his attention, albeit that the
long delay was never explained.
(c) The lawyer acknowledged at the earliest opportunity his wrong-doing and did
so plainly, with embarrassment, indeed remorse and
distress. He has never sought
to downplay his errors; he has only challenged the dishonesty claim. He has done
so clearly, in my
view fairly, and successfully.
(d) The lawyer has expressed on multiple occasions, and through his own
lawyers’ submissions, his full appreciation of his
wrongdoing. He has
never sought to exculpate or palliate his conduct but has explained the personal
and professional stressors he
was under at the time, and that he was
“duped” by a member of a family he knew reasonably well and had no
reason to doubt
the instructions he received. Very curiously, notwithstanding
the focus upon the Respondent and his alleged dishonesty, there was
little or no
consideration of the deceit and duplicity by N in any relevant respect –
my view, the appropriate penalties in relation to the Respondent here are: (a)
within 2 months, a public reprimand be published
(the terms of the reprimand are
to be formalised between the parties and then provided to the Tribunal prior to
publication); (b)
within 3 months, the Respondent is to pay a fine of
$15,000.00; (c) within 12 months, the Respondent is to undertake a course in
legal ethics approved by the Applicant.
formulating the penalties indicated, I am conscious also of the financial and
personal cost to the Respondent by virtue of the
proceeding before the Tribunal.
This was, in my view, exacerbated by (a) the prolonged delay of 18 months in
Charge 4 emerging not
until notification from the Applicant’s lawyers in
January 2024 (with the Respondent having brought relevant details to the
attention of the Applicant in his first response to it on 30
2022) and (b) the remarkable circumstances of two sets of reasons, which
provided for different procedural and legal courses,
being provided by the
Applicant (the regulator of the profession), both bearing the same date (in
January 2024), and being signed
on the same day by the President of the
Applicant, but which – apparently – were the subject of the
Council’s deliberations
in November 2023. The opaque manner in, and indeed
the almost obfuscatory procedures by, which the different reasons emerged, the
signing of two sets of reasons at the same time a number of months after the
Council meeting (presumably the Council in November
2023 did not deliberate
of reasons” to be sent
to the Respondent, which provided him with a false
dawn of hope) concerningly, have never been explained. And the ultimate question
of whether there was ever a “final decision” made by the Council as
foreshadowed by its lawyers in late January 2024,
remains an ongoing mystery.
Poirot-like “order and method” by the Applicant, between November
2023 and the filing of
the Application in the Tribunal, let alone proper
attention to details, this was not. Each of these matters doubtless impacted
upon the Respondent.
Tribunal has already expressed its concern about these matters in relation to
the two sets of reasons, the long-delayed charge,
and related matters in the
course of these reasons and simply records how unsatisfactory they are from the
regulator of the profession.
In not dissimilar circumstances, the New South
Wales Court of Appeal in
(referred to earlier; a matter that
involved significant actions of dishonesty, plus a delay but only of six months
in the laying
of an additional charge) recorded its concerns (at [191] and
[362]) regarding the unduly confusing conduct of the proceedings before
Court. The proceeding here was not so much “confusing” as
concerning, especially in relation to Charge 4. This was
in relation to the
shallow evidence (including, it would seem, some assumptions) relied upon for
it, and the somewhat alarming course
of events, as far as they are imperfectly
known by the Tribunal, and the maladroit, bordering on the incomprehensible (or
anomalous), procedures and decision-making revealed by the albeit
limited documents provided to the Tribunal between November 2023
will hear the parties on the question of costs. It will be more expedient if
this occurs by way of written submissions, of no more
than 3 pages, within 21
days from the date of these reasons.
............
.............
Senior Member Dr W J Neville
Date(s) of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Thomson Geer
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Strickland SC, Mr A Opas
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Appendix A:
Statement of agreed facts including Respondent’s admissions as to facts
and characterisation and identifying key facts which
are in dispute.
XD OR 8/2024
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
Statement of agreed facts including Respondent’s admissions as to facts
and characterisation and identifying key facts which
are in dispute
Application for Disciplinary Action dated 6 May 2024 (filed 7 May 2024) as
amended by its Amended Application (the
Application
), the Applicant
brought proceedings against the Respondent under
section 419
Profession Act 2006
the purposes of these proceedings, the Respondent admits the following matters
with respect to facts, charges and characterisation
of the conduct alleged in
the Application.
The Respondent
Respondent:
(a) was admitted as a Solicitor of the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital
Territory on 22 April 1986; and
(b) was at all material times:
(i) a ‘local legal practitioner’ as defined in the Act;
(ii) the holder of an unrestricted practising certificate;
(iii) a legal practitioner director of an ACT incorporated legal practice;
(iv) the legal practitioner with carriage of the loan matter the subject of the
Enduring Powers of Attorney for Mr and Mrs
March 2018, the Respondent met Mr and Mrs X and two of their sons, N and G, to
take instructions to prepare
for Mr and Mrs X. During the
conference, the Respondent suggested that it might be appropriate to consider
making Enduring Powers
of Attorney (
). The Respondent explained that
the EPAs could cover property matters and Mr and Mrs X provided specific
instructions that they
wanted to appoint N and G as their attorneys, wanted the
EPAs to be operative immediately, and wanted their attorneys to act severally
well as jointly. Mrs X appointed her attorneys immediately because, at the time,
she required assistance managing her finances.
Wills and EPAs were executed by Mr and Mrs X on 27 March 2018. In attendance
were also N and G and two members of the Greek community,
Mrs V and Mr S. The
Respondent explained the EPAs and Mr and Mrs X confirmed their instructions that
the EPAs were to have immediate
effect and that N and G. were able to act
jointly and severally. Prior to executing the EPAs, the Respondent read the
and Mrs X in the Greek language. The Respondent and Mrs V witnessed
the EPAs, Mr and Mrs X appointed G and N as attorneys. Both EPAs authorised the
attorneys to act in relation to Mr and Mrs X’s
financial and property
matters, stating:
4.1 Property Matters (includes financial
I authorise my attorney to do, on my behalf, anything that I can lawfully
do by an attorney, in relation to my property matters (which
includes financial
EPA expressly authorised the giving of any benefit to either of the attorneys.
The only express provision under each power
was that the attorneys could provide
for the reasonable living expenses for the principal's spouse.
and G executed the EPAs on 27 March 2018 to accept their
appointments.
Purchase of the Griffith unit by N
or around November 2018, N contacted the Respondent in relation to N intended
purchase of a unit in Griffith in the ACT (
Griffith Unit
Respondent accepted instructions and his firm issued a cost agreement and opened
a file for the matter.
the transaction progressed, N told the Respondent that the Griffith Unit was to
be his principal residence and that his parents
had agreed to assist him to
purchase the Griffith Unit because N had separated from his wife.
exchanging contracts, N and the seller later agreed to rescind the
Loan to X Corp Pty Ltd
or about 9 January 2019 a company, owned by the X family (
incorporated with ASIC. Its shareholders were N (2 shares) and Mr and Mrs X (1
share each). Its directors were N and Mr and
Mrs X, with N’s daughter, Ms
), as alternate director.
early 2019, N provided the Respondent with documents relating to the Company
signed by Mr and Mrs X which suggested that they were
aware of the incorporation
of the Company and their role as directors.
N's instructions as attorney, the EPAs were registered in or around March 2019
under 0146331 (Mrs X) and 0416332 (Mr X) to enable
them to be relied upon to
execute loan documents.
early 2019, during the course of the Respondent assisting N with the acquisition
of the Griffith Unit, N contacted the Respondent
and advised that he had
arranged a loan to consolidate some debts for himself and his parents, that his
parents were assisting him
with the deposit to purchase the Griffith Unit and
that the Respondent should expect to receive loan and mortgage documents in due
course. N told the Respondent that his parents were going overseas and he would
be signing the documents under the EPAs. N also advised
the Respondent that his
parents were aware of the loan and supported the loan and the mortgage and that
they would benefit from it.
The solicitors for the lender also advised the
Respondent that the parents were overseas and this was the reason for execution
N’s request, the Respondent arranged for his firm to prepare documents
as alternate director of the Company so that she could sign
loan documents as a director of the Company. The Respondent made those
arrangements with the belief that Mr and Mrs X were going overseas.
March 2019, the Respondent received Loan Documents (defined in paragraph 35
below) reflecting a loan from Mr P.L ATF L Family Trust
) to the Company for the sum of
$250,000. The Respondent read the documents and on 20 March 2019 attended on I
and N to advise on
and witness the execution of the documents (save for the
Second Acknowledgement which was received by the Respondent from the
solicitors on 22 March 2019). This took place over the course of
hours dealing
with the matter.
instructions from N , the Respondent assisted N with respect to a loan of
$250,000 from the Trust to the Company, in respect of
which the Respondent dealt
only with N and at no time with Mr and Mrs X.
20 March 2019, the Respondent met with N and I at his office, during which the
Respondent witnessed the execution of the following
(a) Mortgage Linked Loan Agreement (Loan Agreement) dated 28 March 2019
comprising 9 pages executed by N in his personal capacity
as a guarantor and by
N in his capacity as attorney for Mr and Mrs
X as guarantors;
(b) Three Deeds of Guarantee in respect of guarantees given by Mr and Mrs X and
(c) Mortgage Instrument dated 28 March 2019 executed by N in his capacity as
attorney for Mr and Mrs X.
Mortgage included a 40 page annexure also dated 18 March 2019 containing further
provisions relating to the guarantee provided
by Mr and Mrs X.
Loan Agreement was executed on behalf of the borrower Company by N as a director
of the Company and by I as alternate director.
the time the documents were executed, N provided to the Respondent bank
statements for his parents' accounts, copies of general
rates and water rates
notices, and a certificate of currency for his parents' property noting the
incoming mortgagee as an interested
party and the Respondent sighted N and Mr
X’s original drivers licences.
1 of the Loan Agreement provided:
''1. The Guarantors will cause
their lawyer to acknowledge to the Mortgagee or their solicitor, on or before
the date of the Loan
Agreement that the Borrower is using the Mortgaged Property
as security and in the case of a default the Mortgaged Property may be
9 of the Loan Agreement provided:
''The guarantor warrants that
before execution of this deed the guarantor sought such advice as the guarantor
considered necessary
to fully understand this guarantee and in particular the
financial consequences for the guarantor of default by the mortgagor. The
guarantor has satisfied itself as to the financial position of the mortgagor and
the mortgagor's capacity to service this loan and
comply with the mortgagor's
obligations under this deed.
This guarantee and indemnity is a principal obligation and is not to be
treated as ancillary or collateral to any obligation to the
intent that this
guarantee will be enforceable notwithstanding that any of the deeds and other
obligations arising between the mortgagee
and the mortgagor are in whole or part
unenforceable for any reason.
20 March 2019, the Respondent signed an Acknowledgement of Legal Advice by
Proposed Guarantor (
First Acknowledgement
which he provided to the lender's solicitor on or about 20 March 2019 together
with executed loan documents. Paragraph 5 of the
First Acknowledgement stated:
'”5. After receiving the above advice the guarantors
freely and voluntarily authorised their attorney to sign the loan
documents.''
3 and 4 of the First Acknowledgement (and also the Second Acknowledgement
referred to in paragraph 28 below) explained
the advice referred to in paragraph
5 of the First Acknowledgement (above):
"3. The advice given
included that:
(a) if the borrower fails to make payments on time, the guarantor will be
liable to remedy that failure, and that could involve payment
to the lender of
all amounts owed by the borrower to the lender including principal, interest,
default interest and the lender's
costs to rectify the default;
(b) if the guarantor fails to remedy any failure by the borrower to comply
with the terms and conditions of the loan in any way, including
the obligation
to pay principal, interest, default interest, or other charges:
can sue the guarantors personally;
possession of the property secured to the lender and, after notice, sell it to
recover the amount owing together with interest
and other costs, including
solicitor's costs, the costs of selling the property and the costs of
maintaining the property; and
proceeds of sale from the property are insufficient to satisfy the debt to the
lender, the lender can sue the guarantors for
the deficit.
(c) the guarantor's liability under the loan documents can be increased (set
out the facts regarding the extent of the possible increase,
restriction or limitation of the guarantor's rights or obligations in relation
to the security and any other party to
the documents);
(d) the lender can exercise its rights against the guarantors even if it has
not pursued the borrower;
(e) the guarantor's liability under the loan documents is eg limited to a
specific sum, or is unlimited (whichever is the case) and
may be affected by
cross guarantees; and
(f) the additional obligations, rights and remedies set out in the loan
documents if the National Credit Code or the
Personal Property Securities Act
(Cth) apply.
in relation to the proposed transaction I specifically advised that:
by virtue of their profession possess no special skill to give financial (as
distinct from legal) advice; and
guarantors have doubts about the wisdom of the transaction, or its possible
financial consequences or they have other questions
of the transaction or the documents, the guarantors should consult with an
accountant or other financial
counsellor of their choice before authorising the
attorney to sign the documents.
22 March 2019, the Respondent received an email from the lender’s
solicitors confirming receipt of the mortgage documents
but noting a number of
outstanding matters. The email stated
3. Acknowledgement of Legal Advice by Proposed
Guarantor for E and L– we enclose revised acknowledgement noting the
of N’ name in paragraph 5, and point 1(iii) updated to Annexure
to Mortgage, and please advise what identification documents
lender’s solicitor’s email of 22 March 2019 attached an
Acknowledgement of Legal Advice by Proposed Guarantor (
Acknowledgement
). Paragraph 5 of the Second Acknowledgement
“5. After receiving the above advice the guarantors
freely and voluntarily authorised their attorney N to sign the loan
22 March 2019, the Respondent signed and dated the Second Acknowledgement and
handwrote the words “- N & E ” next
to the words “(b)
Driver Licence” in paragraph 2 of the Second Acknowledgement.
Second Acknowledgement was otherwise in the same terms as the First
Acknowledgement, including paragraphs 3 and 4 as quoted in
paragraph 26
27 March 2019, the Respondent emailed the signed and dated Second
Acknowledgement to the lender’s solicitors.
or about 28 March 2019, the parties to the Loan Agreement effected the exchange
of the Loan Agreement.
Trust paid the balance of the advance under the Loan Agreement ($201,389.20) to
N at his direction.
summary, in relation to the loan, in March 2019 the Respondent provided legal
services by:
arranging for an employed solicitor of the Respondent to register the
meeting with N and I during which meeting N and I signed Loan
signing the First and Second Acknowledgements; and
witnessing, executing and returning documents to the solicitors for the
Loan Documents
(a) a Mortgage Linked Loan Agreement from the Trust to the Company, secured via
a mortgage over Mr and Mrs X’s house at Watson,
ACT, plus guarantees by N
and Mr and Mrs X:
(i) N and I signed the Loan Agreement as directors on behalf of the Company;
(ii) N signed the Loan Agreement in his own right as guarantor, and also (via a
purported exercise of N’s authority as attorney
under the EPAs) on behalf
of Mr and Mrs X as guarantors. The Respondent witnessed N’s signatures
with respect to the three
guarantees;
(b) a Mortgage with Annexure document providing for a registered mortgage over
Mr and Mrs X’s Watson home:
(i) N signed this document (via a purported exercise of N’s authority as
attorney) on behalf of Mr and Mrs X as mortgagors,
which the Respondent
(c) separate Deeds of Guarantee by N and Mr and Mrs X:
(i) N signed these deeds (via a purported exercise of N’s authority as
attorney under the EPAs) on behalf of Mr and Mrs X,
which the Respondent
(d) the First and Second Acknowledgements;
(e) an Authority to Complete and Satisfy Requisitions, which N and I signed on
behalf of the Company; and
(f) a statutory declaration by N, which the Respondent witnessed.
effect of the Loan Documents was:
(a) a $250,000 loan by the Trust to the Company;
(b) security for the loan via a registered mortgage over Mr and Mrs X’s
Watson home, later registered on 1 May 2019; and guarantees
by N and Mr and Mrs
8 April 2019, the Respondent’s firm exchanged contracts for the purchase
of N’s Griffith Unit and N paid a deposit
on exchange. However, N did not
complete his purchase of the Griffith Unit and the seller agreed to rescind the
contract with the
deposit forfeited to the seller. N ultimately withdrew
instructions from the Respondent’s firm on 23 October 2019.
1 May 2019 a mortgage was registered in favour of the Trust over Mr and Mrs
X’s jointly owned Watson, ACT family home.
all times during the loan transaction, the Respondent:
(a) received all instructions from N;
(b) was aware that the loan benefited N as it was intended to enable him to
purchase a unit for his sole benefit and to repay some
of his unspecified
(c) did not advise N that he was not authorised to do "anything that would
result in a benefit" to himself pursuant to
Attorney Act 2006
) and the terms of the EPAs; and
(d) did not advise N that the loan was a "conflict transaction" vis-à-vis
his personal interests and his role as his parents'
attorney as defined in the
POAA and that he was not authorised to enter into a conflict transaction
pursuant to
of the POAA and the terms of the EPAs.
all times during the transaction, the Respondent did not speak with Mr and Mrs X
them in relation to the loan, and
did not seek confirmation from them regarding:
the purported consolidation of certain debts for N and Mr and Mrs X;
the particulars of those debts and the division as between N and Mr and
whether and, if so, how the loan would benefit Mr and Mrs X;
Mr and Mrs X’s acceptance of the benefit to N;
Mr and Mrs X’s acceptance that they were to assist N to purchase a
Mr and Mrs X’s capacity to pay the proposed loan;
Mr and Mrs X’s understanding of and willingness to provide both a
guarantee and indemnity and a first registered mortgage over
their family home
in support of the loan; and
that Mr and Mrs X freely and voluntarily authorised N to sign the Loan
Documents in accordance with the First and Second Acknowledgements.
Respondent's file contains an email chain which contains the following emails
sent on 28 March 2019:
(a) From N to G (via email):
As discussed, please see the email below, can you please confirm the
following and ensure that you include all the recipients listed
email to me.
Please confirm
understand as a POA for ‘L and E’ X (Mum and Dad) the T&Cs of
this consolidation and deposit loan are as
amount borrowed is $250K
period is a minimum of 12 months and no longer than 24 months (second year is an
Watson property is security for this loan
the lender is not paid in full when the period of the loan expires, mum and dad
will need to either come up with the money and
if they (we) can't the lender
will be able to have the house sold in order to retrieve their outstand (sic)
amount plus all costs,
fees and charges, all remaining funds post the sale will
be returned to the family
lender will have a mortgage over the property until all the funds are paid in
full, we will get the Title back once this has occurred
and the Title will stay
[respondents]
lender does not hold security on any of our other properties or assets neither
here nor in Greece
Hopefully this will be the final
step before we can finalise the loan. Please read the email, call me if you have
any other questions
even though we have discussed these items on multiple
(b) From G (via email) to N:
No worries, this is what we discussed and the same as what we have told
mum and dad and Andrew.
I understand it and agree we have talked about it. We are always happy to
on the email chain, the email was provided to the Respondent on 28 March
X died on 19 April 2021.
accordance with the matters deposed to in paragraphs 28, 29 and 92 of the
Respondent’s affidavit sworn 7 February 2025, the
Respondent says that he
believed that Mr and Mrs X were aware of the loan transaction including as at 20
and 22 March 2019 when the
Respondent signed the First and Second
Acknowledgements. Given the email exchange between N and G in paragraph 41
above, the Respondent
says that Mr and Mrs X were aware of the loan transaction.
[This is a disputed fact. The Applicant contends, based on the unchallenged
affidavit evidence of Mrs X, that Mr and Mrs X were not aware of the loan
transaction.]
Company did not repay the loan in accordance with the Loan Agreement.
14 December 2022, the mortgagee served a notice on Mrs X demanding payment of
the monies owing pursuant to the Loan Agreement,
being $174,173.27.
14 February 2025, N had repaid $196,219 being the balance of the monies owing
pursuant to the Loan Agreement. [The Applicant’s
position is that it
accepts that N repaid $196,219 by 14 February 2025, however, the evidence does
not establish whether this was
the entirety of the balance of the monies owing]
On 4 April 2025, a Discharge of Mortgage was lodged at the ACT Land Titles
Clients of the Respondent in the loan
transaction
respect to the relationship between the Respondent and Mr and Mrs X in relation
to the loan transaction:
(a) there was no express retainer between the Respondent and Mr and Mrs X in
relation to the loan transaction;
(b) the Respondent received all instructions from N and the Respondent dealt
only with N and at no time with Mr and Mrs X; and
(c) the Respondent did not speak to Mr and Mrs X about the loan, did not provide
any advice to them in relation to the loan, and
did not seek their confirmation
Applicant and Respondent have not been able to locate any direct authority as to
whether the attorney, the donor or both are clients
in circumstances where a
legal practitioner acts on instruction from an attorney (e.g. N).
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
define ‘client’ as
respect to the solicitor or the solicitor's law practice means a person (not an
instructing solicitor) for whom the solicitor
is engaged to provide legal
services for a matter.
Act defines ‘client’ as
(a) this Act generally—includes a person to whom or for whom legal
services are provided; and
(b) for division 3.2.7 (Costs assessment)—see section 294; and
(c) for part 3.5 (Mortgage practices and managed investment schemes)—see
section 369.”
relation to the loan transaction, the Respondent acted as solicitor
(a) N in his personal capacity with respect to N’s purchase of the
Griffith Unit;
(b) N in his personal capacity as guarantor;
(c) N in his capacity as attorney for Mr and Mrs X; and
(d) the Company as borrower.
to the matters stated in paragraphs 48,50 and 51 above, the Respondent was also
engaged by N (as attorney) to provide legal services
for Mr and Mrs X in
relation to the Mortgage and Guarantee and, as such, Mr and Mrs X were
for whom the solicitor was engaged to provide legal services
for a matter
the Mortgage and Guarantee, and as such were clients of the Respondent in
relation to the Mortgage and Guarantee.
The gravamen of the
the time of acting in relation to the loan transaction, the Respondent was
unfamiliar with the limitations in
sections 34
Attorney Act 2006
) which provide that:
(a) a power of attorney does not authorise the attorney to execute an assurance
or other document, or do anything else, that would
result in a benefit being
given to the attorney, unless the power of attorney expressly authorises the
giving of a benefit of that
kind to the attorney (POAA,
section 34)
(b) an attorney is not authorised to enter into what is defined as a
‘conflict transaction’ unless expressly authorised
to do so in the
power of attorney (POAA,
section 42).
and Mrs X’s EPAs did not authorise N as attorney to receive a personal
benefit or to enter into a conflict transaction.
the outset of the Applicant’s investigation of the complaint against the
Respondent, the Respondent freely and openly admitted
that he had been unaware
of the restrictions in POAA
sections 34
. The Respondent was of the
mistaken understanding that N (acting as attorney) was entitled to do anything
that Mr and Mrs X were
capable of doing (within the bounds of the POA).
Respondent said in his 30 August 2022 letter to the Law Society responding to
the complaint that, had the Respondent been aware
sections 34
when acting in the loan transaction, he would have advised N that N was not
authorised under the EPAs to execute the Mortgage and
Guarantee on behalf of Mr
and Mrs X where N was to benefit personally from the loan because N was not
expressly authorised to do
so under the EPAs.
Application set out the following charges (
(a) Charge 1: Conduct in relation to acting for N as attorney
(Application page 12, paragraph 47) – That the Respondent failed to
deliver legal services competently and diligently in breach
of Rule 4.1.3 by
failing to act with competence and diligence by failing to advise N in his
capacity as the attorney for Mr and Mrs
X that he could not execute loan
documents as attorney for Mr and Mrs X in light of
sections 34
(b) Charge 2: Conduct in relation to Mr and Mrs X
(Application page 13,
paragraphs 48(a) – (c)) – That the Respondent:
(i) failed to deliver legal services competently and diligently in breach of
Rule 4.1.3; and/or
(ii) failed to act in the best interests of his clients, Mr and Mrs X, in the
loan transaction in breach of Rule 4.1.1; and/or
(iii) failed to provide clear and timely advice to Mr and Mrs X to assist them
to understand relevant legal issues and to make informed
choices about the
matter in breach of
(c) Charge 3: Conflict of interest
(Application page 14, paragraph 49)
– That the Respondent failed to avoid a conflict between his duties owed
to two or more
current clients in breach of
in circumstances where he
acted for the guarantors (N, and Mr and Mrs X) and the borrower Company in the
loan transaction.
(d) Charge 4: Dishonest conduct in relation to the lender and its
(Application page 15, paragraphs 50(a) – (d)) – That
the Respondent:
(i) engaged in conduct, in the course of practice or otherwise, which
demonstrates that the solicitor is not a fit and proper person
to practise law,
or which is likely to a material degree to be prejudicial to, or diminish the
public confidence in, the administration
of justice or bring the profession into
disrepute in breach of
(ii) failed to be honest in all dealings in the course of legal practice in
breach of Rule 4.1.2; and/or
(iii) failed to deliver legal services competently and diligently in breach of
Rule 4.1.3; and/or
(iv) failed to avoid any compromise to their integrity and professional
independence in breach of Rule 4.1.5.
The Respondent’s position as to the Charges
Charge 1: Conduct in relation to acting for N as attorney
Respondent admits that:
(a) With respect to the Loan Transaction, N was a
client of the Respondent, both in N’s own right and also in N’s
as attorney for Mr and Mrs X;
(b) The Respondent was aware that the loan benefitted N (as the loan was for
purposes including to enable N to purchase a unit for
N’s sole benefit and
for N to repay some of his unspecified debts); and
(c) The Respondent did not advise N that:
(i) N was not authorised as attorney to do anything that would result in a
benefit to himself, per POAA
and the EPAs’ terms; and
(ii) the loan was a “conflict transaction” vis-à-vis
N’s personal interests and his role as attorney and
that N was not
authorised to enter into a conflict transaction per POAA
EPAs’ terms.
these reasons, the Respondent admits having breached Rule 4.1.3 by failing to
deliver legal services competently and diligently
by failing to advise N (in
N’s capacity as attorney for Mr and Mrs X).
Conduct in relation to Mr and Mrs X
Respondent admits that, in addition to his engagement as in paragraph 59(a)
above, the Respondent was engaged by N (as attorney)
to provide legal services
for Mr and Mrs X in relation to the Mortgage and Guarantee and, as such,
Mr and Mrs X were clients of the
Respondent in relation to the Mortgage and
Respondent admits that he did not speak with, advise or seek confirmation from
Mr and Mrs X in relation to the Mortgage and Guarantee.
Respondent admits that he:
(a) exchanged a Loan Agreement; and
(b) signed the First and Second Acknowledgements,
each of which contained statements and representations which could only have
been correct if the Respondent had spoken with, advised
and sought confirmation
from Mr and Mrs X in relation to the Mortgage and Guarantee which the Respondent
admits he did not do. As
such, those statements and representations were
Respondent admits that, by reason of the matters in paragraphs 62 and above, he
breached Rules 4.1.1, 4.1.3 and 7.1 by:
(a) not speaking with, advising or seeking confirmation from Mr and Mrs X
in relation to the Mortgage and Guarantee; and
(b) signing the First and Second Acknowledgements which contained statements and
representations which were false because they stated
that the Respondent had
spoken with, advised and sought confirmation from Mr and Mrs X in relation
to the Mortgage and Guarantee
when the Respondent had not done so.
Charge 3: Conflict of interest
Respondent repeats paragraph above and admits that:
(a) the Respondent acted for N (in N’s personal capacity) and also
provided legal services for Mr and Mrs X (via N as attorney)
in relation to the
Mortgage and Guarantee;
(b) the interests of N and Mr and Mrs X were adverse insofar as (i) the
Loan Transaction provided a direct benefit to N and (ii)
the Loan Transaction
was secured via a mortgage and guarantees provided by Mr and Mrs X. As such,
there was a conflict of interests
between the interests of N (in N’s
personal capacity) versus the interests of Mr and Mrs X; and
(c) Mr and Mrs X had not given informed consent to the Respondent acting for N
and Mr and Mrs X in relation to the Loan Transaction.
these reasons, the Respondent admits that he breached Rule
Charge 4: Dishonest conduct in relation to the lender and
its solicitors
Respondent admits that he signed the First and Second Acknowledgements which
contained statements and representations which were
false insofar as they stated
that the Respondent had spoken with, advised and sought confirmation from
Mr and Mrs X when the Respondent
had not done so and that, having received
that advice, Mr and Mrs X had then authorised N as attorney to sign the Loan
Respondent says that, at the time he signed the First Acknowledgement, the
Respondent:
(a) was aware that he was signing a document titled 'Acknowledgement of Legal
Advice by Proposed Guarantor';
(b) read and understood paragraphs 1 and 2;
(c) glanced at paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 but did not read them, in the belief that
they were standard paragraphs commonly appearing in
a document of this kind.
[This is a disputed fact. The Applicant contends that the Respondent read
paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 and that
his evidence that he only glanced at them is so
implausible that it cannot be accepted.];
(d) was aware that he was signing a document that conveyed to the reader that
the Respondent had provided legal advice to Mr and
Mrs X as guarantors of a loan
from the Trust to the Company;
(e) believed that, by providing advice to N as
attorney for Mr and Mrs X, the Respondent had provided advice to the guarantors
indicated in the First Acknowledgement; and
(f) was of the mistaken understanding that:
(i) N (acting as attorney) was entitled to do anything that Mr and Mrs Xi were
capable of doing (within the bounds of the POA) including
seeking and receiving
legal advice with respect to the Mortgage and Guarantee; and
(ii) by providing advice
on the Mortgage and Guarantee to N (as attorney), the Respondent had provided
advice to Mr and Mrs X on the
Mortgage and Guarantee.
Respondent further says that, when he signed the Second Acknowledgement,
(a) handwrote on the document “- N and E” next to the words
“(b) Driver Licence” in paragraph 2;
(b) did not carefully read the Second Acknowledgement, believing that the terms
of the Second Acknowledgement were substantively
in the same terms as the First
Acknowledgement. [This is a disputed fact. The Applicant contends that the
Respondent read paragraphs
3, 4 and 5 and that his evidence that he did not
carefully read the Second Acknowledgement is so implausible that it cannot be
accepted.];
(c) held the other beliefs stated in paragraph above as when he signed the First
Acknowledgement.
Respondent now appreciates and acknowledges that his understandings in
paragraphs 68(e) and 68(f) above were wrong.
Respondent accepts that the contents of the First and Second Acknowledgements
could only have been true if the Respondent had
spoken with, advised and sought
confirmation from Mr and Mrs X personally, which the Respondent had not
Respondent acknowledges that the First and Second Acknowledgements contained
statements and representations which were false because
they falsely conveyed to
the reader an impression that the Respondent had directly spoken with, advised
and obtained confirmation
from Mr and Mrs X when he had not done so and, having
received that advice, Mr and Mrs X then authorised N to sign the Loan Documents.
Respondent acknowledges that this breached rule 4.1.3.
the matters set out in paragraphs 67 to 72 above, the Respondent:
(a) says that he did not provide the signed First and Second Acknowledgements
with the express knowledge that they contained false
information. [This is a
disputed fact. The Applicant contends that the Respondent read the
Acknowledgements and knew that they contained
false information; alternatively,
by not reading the Acknowledgements, the Respondent was recklessly indifferent
to the truth or
falsity of what he was certifying.];
(b) acknowledges that he did not pay close attention to the specific wording in
paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of the First and Second Acknowledgements
on the mistaken
assumption that he was signing a form to the effect as Schedule 4 Part 2:
Acknowledgement of Legal Advice by Proposed
Guarantor which is an approved form
Legal Profession Uniform Legal Practice (Solicitors)
(NSW). [This is a disputed fact. See subparagraph 74(a) above.]
(c) Whilst the ACT does not prescribe equivalent forms to those NSW prescribed
forms, it is common practice for ACT lenders to require
guarantors to sign an
Acknowledgement reflecting the same terms as that NSW form (and which is so
commonly used that it has been
incorporated into the Respondent firm’s
document management system as a precedent form). When he signed the First and
Acknowledgements, the Respondent assumed that (apart from the fact that
he signed the form rather than the clients) the terms of
the form were otherwise
the standard terms of the NSW form (above), the Respondent’s firm’s
precedent form (reflecting
the NSW form) and equivalent forms used by ACT
lenders (commonly reflecting the NSW form);
(d) accepts that, in signing the First and Second Acknowledgements, he was
careless (or reckless, in the sense of grossly negligent)
as to whether or not
they created a misleading impression. [This is disputed by the Applicant. See
subparagraph 74(a) above.]; and
(e) denies having breached Rules 4.1.2, 4.1.5 and 5.1 as stated in Application
paragraph 50. [This is disputed by the Applicant.
The Applicant contends that
the Respondent breached Rules 4.1.2, 4.1.5 and 5.1.]
Characterisation
Respondent accepts that his conduct, as admitted by him in relation to each of
Charges 1, 2 and 3, constitutes unsatisfactory
professional conduct within the
meaning of section 386 of the Act when each charge is considered both
individually and globally.
[This is disputed by the Applicant. The Applicant
contends that the conduct the subject of Charges 1, 2 and 3 should be
characterised
as professional misconduct within the meaning of subsections
387(1)(a) and 387(1)(b) of the Act when considered globally.]
Respondent accepts that his conduct as admitted by him in relation to Charge 4
constitutes professional misconduct within the
subsection 387(1)(a) of the Act, as a substantial failure to reach or
maintain a reasonable standard of competence and
diligence. [This is disputed by
the Applicant. The Applicant contends that the conduct the subject of Charge 4
should be characterised
as professional misconduct within the meaning of both
subsections 387(1)(a) and 387(1)(b) of the Act.]
Respondent denies that his conduct as admitted by him in relation to Charge 4
constitutes professional misconduct within the meaning
subsection 387(1)(b) of the Act, as conduct that would, if established,
justify a finding that the Respondent is not a fit and
proper person to engage
in legal practice. [This is disputed by the Applicant. See paragraph 76
Appendix B1: Applicant’s Case Outline
Australian Capital Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal
No OR 8 of 2024
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital
Legal Practitioner 082024
APPLICANT’S CASE OUTLINE
of issues for determination
1.1 The parties have agreed on the
issues for determination as identified in the document dated 17 March 2025.
legislation and Rules
Legal Profession Act 2006
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
(ACT), rules 4.1,
5.1, 7.1 and 11.
Authorities
(1889) 14 App. Cas. 337, esp., at 374.
Fidock v Legal Profession Complaints Committee
[2013] WASCA 108
esp., at [93] - [100].
Giudice v Legal Profession Complaints Committee
[2014] WASCA 115
esp., at [2], [95]-[100], [102] and [156].
Hughes & Vale Pty Ltd v New South Wales (No 2)
[1955] HCA 28
Law Society v Ford (No 2)
[2024] ACTSCFC 2
, esp., at [120]-[122]
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
, esp., at [65]-[69].
v Legal Practitioners Conduct Board
(2016) 125 SASR
, esp., at [42], [43] and [77].
of Argument
4.1 The applicant's arguments are set out in the
outline of submissions dated 3 March 2025.
4.2 The most controversial issue remaining for determination is whether the
respondent's conduct was dishonest in signing the acknowledgement
advice on 20 March 2019 and 22 March 2019, or alternatively on one of those
occasions: the acknowledgments as signed by
the respondent are at AT1 pp 52-53
and pp 61-62.
4.3 The respondent’s evidence that he did not read paragraph 5 of the
acknowledgement before signing it is so implausible that
it cannot be accepted
at face value. Amongst other things, the respondent is a solicitor of
considerable experience and is respected
for his diligence and integrity. It
cannot seriously be doubted that he understood the importance of signing a
document which certified
the giving of legal advice by him. However, the factual
determination as to whether the respondent read paragraph 5 of the
acknowledgement
before signing it will need to await the completion of the
evidence, including the cross-examination of the respondent.
4.4 Irrespective of whether the respondent read paragraph 5 of the
acknowledgement before signing it, there should be a finding that
his conduct
was dishonest.
4.5 If the Tribunal finds that the respondent read paragraph 5 of the
acknowledgement before signing it, then it necessarily follows
respondent knew that he was certifying something which was untrue. The
respondent accepts as much in [65] and [68] of his
affidavit. On this factual
finding, the respondent engaged in deliberate dishonesty being the first specie
of dishonesty identified
by Lord Herschell in
Derry v Peek
(1889) 14 App.
Cas. 337 at 374.
4.6 If the Tribunal finds that the respondent did not read paragraph 5 of the
acknowledgement before signing it, then it should be
inferred that he did so
with reckless indifference to the truth or falsity of what he was certifying
being the alternative specie
of dishonesty identified by Lord Herschell. By
failing to read paragraph 5 of the acknowledgement before signing it, the
could not have been sure as to the truth of what he was certifying
and therefore consciously disregarded the risk of certifying something
4.7 On repeated occasions, Courts have been emphatic in stating that honesty
is a fundamental requirement for the practice of law.
If the Tribunal finds that
the respondent’s conduct in respect of charge 4 was dishonest, it is
conduct which indicates unfitness
to practice within the definition of
professional misconduct stated in s 387(1)(b) of the LPA.
4.8 Even if the Tribunal finds that the respondent’s conduct was
grossly negligent as contended by the respondent, it involved
such a grave
departure from the standards of competence and diligence required of a solicitor
so as to indicate unfitness to practice
within the definition of professional
misconduct stated in s 387(1)(b) of the LPA.
4.9 If the Tribunal finds that the respondent’s conduct was dishonest,
whether knowingly or recklessly, the appropriate sanction
should involve a
period of exclusion from legal practice so as to publicly mark for the
profession the seriousness of the misconduct.
5.1 The orders which are sought by the applicant
(a) suspension for a period of six months pursuant to s 425(3)(b) of the LPA;
(b) a fine of $20,000 pursuant to ss 425(5)(a) and 427(1)(b) of the LPA;
(c) a public reprimand pursuant to s 425(3)(e) of the LPA; and
(d) that the respondent within 12 months undertakes a course in legal ethics
approved by the applicant pursuant to s 425(5)(b) of
D A Moujalli N J Olson
Counsel for the applicant
Counsel for the applicant
Ground Floor Wentworth Chambers/ Ground
Floor Wentworth Chambers/
Burley Griffin Chambers
Burley Griffin Chambers
Instructed by Katie Binstock and Samuel Harper of Thomson Geer
Appendix B2: Applicant’s Submissions on breach, characterisation and
penalty for Hearing on 26 March 2025
Australian Capital Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal
No OR 8 of 2024
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital
Legal Practitioner 082024
APPLICANT’S SUBMISSIONS ON BREACH, CHARACTERISATION AND PENALTY
FOR HEARING ON 26 MARCH 2025
Introduction
1.1 These are
the written submissions on behalf of the applicant in relation to breach,
characterisation and penalty provided pursuant
to the orders of the Tribunal
made on 6 November 2024.
proceeding has been set down for hearing on 26 March 2025.
are four remaining issues in dispute, with the first, second and fourth
being significantly inter-related:
, whether the conduct the subject of charge 4 of the application
dated 7 May 2024 (Application) involved:
carelessness in the sense of gross negligence and breached rule 4.1.3 of the
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
contended by the respondent; or
dishonesty and breached rules 4.1.2, 4.13, 4.1.5 and 5.1 of the Rules in
addition to rule 4.1.3, as contended by the applicant.
whether the conduct the subject of charge 4 of
the Application should be characterised as:
(a) professional misconduct within the meaning of
subsection 387(1)(a)
Legal Profession Act 2006
) only, as contended by the
respondent; or
professional misconduct within the meaning of both
subsections 387(1)(a)
(1)(b) of the Act, as contended by the applicant.
, whether the conduct the subject of charges 1, 2 and 3
of the Application should be characterised as:
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct within the meaning of
of the Act,
as contended by the respondent; or
professional misconduct within the meaning of
of the Act, as contended
by the applicant.
the appropriate sanction to be imposed under
the Act depending on the Tribunal’s determination as to breach and
characterisation of the respondent’s conduct.
1.4 Reference
will be made below to the following:
(a) the Application;
(b) amended response dated 22 November 2024 (
Amended Response
(c) the respondent’s admissions attached to the Amended Response
(d) the respondent’s affidavit made on 7 February 2025 (Respondent
background relevant to remaining issues in dispute
1.1 Many of the
facts set out in the Application are admitted by the respondent. For that
reason, the facts set out below are confined
to those which are of most salience
for determining the issues remaining in dispute.
1.2 In March
2018, the respondent provided legal services to E and L by advising on and
preparing their wills and enduring powers
of attorney (
). Both Mr and
Mrs X appointed their sons, G and N X, to be their attorneys under their
respective EPAs: Admissions [4]-[8]. Without
intending disrespect and to avoid
confusion, G and N will be referred to by their first names.
respondent gives evidence that in early 2019, N phoned him to advise of the
following matters:
(a) N intended to buy an apartment in Kingston;
(b) Mr and Mrs X would be helping him with the deposit;
(c) money was to be borrowed from a private lender to help with the deposit and
to consolidate some of N and Mr and Mrs X’s
(d) Mr and Mrs X were going to Greece; and
(e) N would be signing for them under the EPAs: Respondent affidavit [29].
1.4 In March
2019, the respondent received various documents described as Loan Documents in
paragraph 30 of the Application: see also
Amended Response at [4(d)].
1.5 The Loan
Documents were intended to give effect to the advancement of a loan to a company
of which N was a shareholder and the
repayment of the loan being guaranteed by
Mr and Mrs X,
1.6 On 20 March
2019, the respondent signed a document described as “Acknowledgment of
Legal Advice by Proposed Guarantor”
First Acknowledgment
AT1 at 52-53.
1.7 The First
Acknowledgement identified Mr and Mrs X as guarantors.
1.8 Paragraph 5
of the First Acknowledgement stated:
After receiving the above
advice the guarantors freely and voluntarily authorised their attorney to sign
the loan documents.
1.9 On 20 March
2019, the respondent sent the Loan Documents including the First Acknowledgement
to the solicitors for the lender:
Respondent affidavit [46].
1.10 On 22 March
2019, the respondent received an email from the lender’s solicitor, which
acknowledged receipt of the Loan
Documents: Exhibit AT1 at 54-55. Point 3 of the
email stated:
Acknowledgement
of Legal Advice by Proposed Guarantor for E and L– we enclose revised
acknowledgement noting the insertion of
N’s name in paragraph 5, and point
1(iii) updated to Annexure to Mortgage, and please advise what identification
should be circled;
1.11 Paragraph 5
of the Acknowledgement of Legal Advice by Proposed Guarantor (AT1 at 56-57)
attached to the email of 22 March 2019
Second Acknowledgement)
After receiving the above advice the guarantors
freely and voluntarily authorised their attorney N to sign the loan
1.12 On 22 March
2019, the respondent signed and dated the Second Acknowledgment, and handwrote
in paragraph 2 “
” next to the words “(b)
Driver License”: Amended Response [22.b.iii] .
respondent signed the Second Acknowledgment without speaking with, advising or
seeking confirmation from Mr and Mrs X: Admissions
1.14 The First
and Second Acknowledgements contained statements and representations which were
false because they conveyed to the
reader an impression that the respondent had
directly spoken with, advised and obtained confirmation from Mr and Mrs X when
was not the true position: Admissions [65].
1.15 On 27 March
2019, the respondent sent the Second Acknowledgement to the lender’s
solicitor: Exhibit AT-1 at 60.
legal principles
The protective jurisdiction conferred by the
LPA in relation to the legal profession
3.1 The object
of disciplinary action against a lawyer is not punitive or to exact retribution,
it is to protect the public and the
reputation of the profession:
General for the Commonwealth; Re a Barrister and Solicitor
(1972) 20 FLR 234
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Giles
[2020] ACTSCFC 1
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of NSW v Thomson
[2018] NSWCA 230
, cited with approval by a Full Court of the Supreme
Court of the ACT in
The Council of The Law Society of ACT v Hoyle
Society (NSW) v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
at 441, Mahoney JA said the
following in relation to protection of the public:
relevant sense, the protection of the public is in my opinion not confined to
the protection of the public against further
default by the solicitor in
question. It extends also to the protection of the public against similar
defaults by other solicitors
and has, in this sense, the purpose of publicly
marking the seriousness of what the instant solicitor has done.
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner
(Alveer Singh)
[2019] ACAT 27
, Presidential Member Symons cited
the decision of QCAT in
Legal Services Commissioner v Smith
[2014] QCAT
where the following was said:
The primary purpose of
disciplinary proceedings is to protect the public. The purpose is furthered, and
the public interest is served,
if the effect of an order made is to deter other
practitioners from engaging in professional misconduct. Whilst the primary aim
not to punish the legal practitioner, a significant consideration in relation
to penalty is the deterrent element. Practitioners
must appreciate that conduct
which is unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct carries
with it a serious risk,
and so should be deterred from such conduct.
The importance of honesty for the practice of law
3.4 The Courts
have been emphatic that the highest standards of integrity and trustworthiness
are essential qualities for the practise
(ACT) v Bangura
[2024] ACTSCFC 1
, the Supreme Court
of the ACT in a Full Court decision recently reiterated that the public interest
requires that those who practise
as lawyers must be held to the highest
standards of honesty and integrity.
South Wales Bar Association v Sahade
[2007] NSWCA 145
, the NSW Court
of Appeal stated that a willingness to engage in dishonest conduct in the
practice of law “will usually give
rise to heightened concern” as to
a person’s fitness to practise law.
3.7 Spigelman CJ
NSW Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
[20] (cited with approval by the ACT Court of Appeal in
Legal Practitioner v
Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2015] ACTCA 20
and by a Full
Court of the Supreme Court of the ACT in
[19] Honesty and integrity are important in many spheres of
conduct. However, in some spheres significant public interests are involved
the conduct of particular persons and the state regulates and restricts those
who are entitled to engage in those activities and
acquire the privileges
associated with a particular status. The legal profession has long required the
highest standards of integrity.
[20] There are four interrelated interests involved. Clients must feel
secure in confiding their secrets and entrusting their most
personal affairs to
lawyers. Fellow practitioners must be able to depend implicitly on the word and
behaviour of their colleagues.
The judiciary must have confidence in those who
appear before the courts. The public must have confidence in the legal
by reason of the central role the profession plays in the
administration of justice. Many aspects of the administration of justice
on the trust by the judiciary and/or the public in the performance of
professional obligations by professional people.
Dishonesty in the form of reckless indifference to the truth
3.8 A person may
engage in dishonest conduct by making a false statement
“(1) knowingly,
or (2) without belief in its truth, or (3) recklessly, careless whether it be
true or false”
Derry v Peek
(1889) 14 App Cas 337 at 374 per
Lord Herschell. This principle has been applied in disciplinary cases involving
misconduct on the
part of solicitors e.g., see
Fiddock v Legal Profession
Complaints Committee
[2013] WASCA 108
, esp., at [93] - [100].
seriousness of dishonest conduct is not minimised where it involves reckless
indifference to the truth or falsity of a statement
as opposed to making a
knowingly false statement. As Lord Herschell explained in
Derry v Peek
374, making a statement with reckless indifference to its truth or falsity is to
make a statement with no real belief in its truth.
Such conduct cannot be
reconciled with the standards and values of a profession committed to honesty
and the truth. As the Supreme
Court of the ACT said in a Full Court decision in
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Bandarage
[2019] ACTSCFC 1
, misleading conduct, whether reflective of dishonesty or recklessness, is
antipathetic to the practice of law.
Character references from
third parties
3.10 Character
references can only provide the Tribunal with limited assistance.
3.11 It is the
Tribunal which has the ultimate responsibility for determining the appropriate
penalty where misconduct is proven.
As Basten JA (with whom Mason P and
Santow JA agreed) stated in
The Council of the New South Wales Bar
Association v Sahade
[2007] NSWCA 145
The relevance
of the affidavit material must be understood in a practical way. Tribunals
dealing with professional discipline are
routinely supplied with character
references ... On the ultimate issues, the Tribunal must form its own views and
is entitled to
disregard, or at least give little weight, to the views of
3.12 A similar
view was expressed by MacKenzie J of the Queensland Court of Appeal in
Barristers Board v Young
[2001] QCA 556
, who stated the following in
relation to character references at [48]:
The references ...
suggest that the respondent is well thought of by friends and workmates and has
innate qualities upon which she
could build if the predicted outcome of
treatment occurs. As against this, the respondent demonstrated ... conduct of a
is the antithesis of what the authorities referred to in paras [42]
and [43] require of a Barrister. There is authority that it is
the intrinsic
character of the person under inquiry that should be the focal point. .. In Re
Bell (Full Court; Motion 622 of 1991,
6 December 1991, unreported), Williams J
said that what is in issue is the person's intrinsic character, not necessarily
good fame either within the profession or the community at large.
That was a case where a former practitioner was seeking reinstatement,
principle is, in my opinion, also relevant in an application to strike off ...
First issue: whether the respondent’s conduct the subject of charge
4 was dishonest
respondent gives evidence that he “
did not carefully read
paragraph 5 of the First and Second Acknowledgements: Respondent Affidavit [62]
and [67]. The respondent accepts that had
he read paragraph 5 of the First and
Second Acknowledgements, he would have realised that by signing the documents he
the false impression that he had directly advised Mr and Mrs X about
the Loan Documents when that was not the true position: Respondent
respondent’s evidence that he did not read paragraph 5 cannot be accepted
because it is inherently implausible for
the following reasons:
3.14.1 when he
signed the acknowledgements, the respondent understood their legal nature and
effect: Admissions [22.1.b];
3.14.2 in the
email of 22 March 2019, the lender’s solicitor specifically alerted the
respondent to the fact that paragraph
5 of the acknowledgement had been revised:
Exhibit A1 at 54;
3.14.3 paragraph
5 only comprised two lines;
circumstances where a number of practitioners have giving character references
attesting to the respondent’s high
standards of professionalism, it is
implausible that the respondent failed to read the two lines of paragraph
3.14.5 knowing
the legal nature and effect of the document he was signing; and
3.14.6 having
been specifically alerted to the revision of that paragraph;
3.14.7 having
signed both the First and Second Acknowledgement the respondent had two
opportunities to read paragraph 5 of the acknowledgement;
respondent indicated on the Second Acknowledgement how he had identified
“E” for the purpose of the Second
Acknowledgement: Exhibit A1 at
3.15 If the
Tribunal finds that the respondent did read paragraph 5 of either the First or
Second Acknowledgements, it follows that
the respondent’s conduct was
dishonest in signing a document which he knew stated a false position.
3.16 Even if the
Tribunal accepts the respondent’s evidence that he did not carefully read
paragraph 5 of the First and Second
Acknowledgements, he was nonetheless
recklessly indifferent to the truth or falsity of what he was certifying.
3.17 If the
respondent signed the First and Second Acknowledgements without knowing the
contents of paragraph 5, he did so with “
no real belief of the truth of
” in the sense referred to by Lord Herschell in
Derry v Peek
(1889) 14 App Cas 337 at 374.
solicitor, the respondent can be taken to have known that others should be able
to trust his word in his professional dealings.
The respondent can also be taken
to have known of the importance of the First and Second Acknowledgements to the
legal interests
of the lender, N and Mr and Mrs X. Prior to signing the Second
Acknowledgement, he had specifically been advised by the lender’s
solicitor that paragraph 5 had been revised. In not reading paragraph 5, before
he signed the Second Acknowledgement, he did not
satisfy himself as to the
nature or effect of the revision that had been made. Notwithstanding the
revision having been brought to
his attention, he persisted in not reading the
document to satisfy himself as to the truth of what he was certifying. By not
what he was certifying, the respondent cannot have cared whether what he
was certifying was true or false.
Second issue: the
characterisation of conduct the subject of charge 4
respondent’s conduct the subject of charge 4 should be characterised as
professional misconduct within the meaning
of both s 387(1)(a) and 387(1)(b) of
3.20 To fall
within the definition of professional misconduct as stated in s 387(1)(b) of the
LPA, the conduct must indicate unfitness
to engage in legal practice. As stated
by Kitto J in
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of NSW
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
at 297 the concept of unfitness “
depend upon
one’s conception of the minimum standards demanded”
by the role
and functions performed by lawyers.
3.21 Honesty is
a fundamental requirement for legal practice. In
Council of the Law Society
of the ACT v Bandarage
[2019] ACTSCFC 1
it was said that misleading
conduct, whether reflective of dishonesty or recklessness, is antipathetic to
the practice of law. It
would therefore follow that if the Tribunal finds that
the respondent’s conduct was dishonest, such conduct is indicative of
unfitness to engage in legal practice so as to bring the conduct within the
definition of s 387(1)(b) of the LPA.
3.22 Even if the
Tribunal finds that the conduct was gross negligence but not dishonest, the
First and Second Acknowledgements significantly
affected the legal interests of
the lender, N and Mr and Mrs X. As the Full Court observed in
Law Society v
Ford (No 2)
[2024] ACTSCFC 2
, competence and diligence are
necessarily of fundamental important to the practice of law. Having regard to
the importance of the
acknowledgements, the respondent’s failure to read
what he was certifying must be taken to have fallen so far below the minimum
standards demanded of solicitors so as it indicate unfitness.
Third issue: the characterisation of conduct the subject of
charges 1, 2 and 3
3.23 The conduct
the subject of charges, 1, 2 and 3 involved on the part of the respondent, among
other things:
3.23.1 a failing
to apprehend a significant conflict of interests between the interests of N, on
the one hand, and of Mr and Mrs X,
on the other;
3.23.2 a failing
to give the appropriate advice which this conflict of interest necessitated; and
3.23.3 a failing
to satisfy himself as to whether Mr and Mrs X gave informed consent to a
transaction which significantly affected
their legal interests.
3.24 The conduct
the subject of charges 1, 2 and 3 fell so far below the minimum standards
demanded of solicitors so as to warrant
the characterisation of the conduct as
professional misconduct.
Fourth issue: the appropriate
3.25 If the
Tribunal makes a finding of dishonesty, including a finding that the respondent
acted with reckless indifference as to
the truth or falsity of what he was
certifying, the appropriate penalty should include a suspension from legal
practice. Having regard
to the fundamental importance of honesty for legal
practice, dishonest conduct warrants a period of suspension for the purposes of
both general and personal deterrence. As the authorities recognise, the Tribunal
need not be satisfied that the respondent is presently
unfit to practice to make
a suspension order.
v Legal Profession
Complaints Committee
[2017] WASCA 192
, Murphy and Beech JJA
A suspension order may also be a valuable measure by way of general
personal deterrence, for the protection of the public and the
maintenance of the reputation and standards of the legal profession,
without concluding that the conduct demonstrated or should be characterised as
indicating that the practitioner was not a fit
and proper person.
suspension order entails greater denunciatory and deterrent effect than a
reprimand and fine
[emphasis added]
authorities recognise the seriousness of dishonest conduct by a legal
practitioner and the critical importance of deterring
such conduct. In
particular, reference can be made to the observations in:
South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
(2001) 52 NSWLR 279
(Spigelman CJ) that many aspects of the administration of justice depend
on the trust by clients, fellow practitioners, the judiciary
and/or the public
in the honesty and integrity of lawyers;
Society of NSW v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
at 445 (per Mahoney JA)
that the administration of justice would be seriously impeded if solicitors
cannot assume that they can rely
on the word of another colleague; and
3.26.3 Legal
Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2018] ACTCA 19
(per Mossop and Collier JJ, Robinson A) that confidence of all participants
in the administration of justice required that the word
of solicitors must be
able to be trusted to be true and that solicitors will not make false statements
or create misleading impressions.
Bolton v Law Society
[1993] EWCA Civ 32
[1994] 2 All ER 486
at 491- 492, the English Court
of Appeal stated the following in relation to the imposition of a suspension
(with emphasis added):
Any solicitor who is shown to have
discharged his professional duties with anything less than complete integrity,
probity and trustworthiness
must expect severe sanctions to be imposed upon him
by the Solicitors Disciplinary Tribunal. Lapses from the required high standard
may, of course, take different forms and be of varying degrees. The most serious
involves proven dishonesty, whether or not leading
to criminal proceedings and
criminal penalties. In such cases the tribunal has almost invariably, no matter
how strong the mitigation
advanced for the solicitor, ordered that he be struck
off the Roll of Solicitors. ... Only in a very unusual and venial case of this
kind would the tribunal be likely to regard as appropriate any order less severe
than one of suspension.
3.28 A further
relevant consideration is that the respondent’s conduct had a significant
adverse impact on the legal interests
of Mr and Mrs X in that the guarantee was
produced without their knowledge or informed consent.
3.29 Notwithstanding
the character references which attest to the respondent’s high standards
of professionalism, it remains
for the Tribunal to determine the appropriate
penalty, especially having regard to the public interest which underlies legal
disciplinary
proceedings: see
Council of the Law Society (ACT) v LP 12
(2018) 14 ACTLR 45
[2018] ACTCA 60
per Murrell CJ and
3.30 Having
regard to all of the above considerations, a suspension is
D A Moujalli NJ Olson
for the applicant Counsel for the applicant
Ground Floor Wentworth
Chambers/ Ground Floor Wentworth Chambers/
Burley Griffin Chambers
Burley Griffin Chambers
Instructed by Katie Binstock and Samuel Harper of Thomson Geer
Appendix C1: Respondent’s written outline of submissions on facts,
charges, characterisation and sanction to be determined at
Australian Capital Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
Applicant and
Legal Practitioner 082024
Respondent’s written outline of submissions on facts, charges,
characterisation and sanctions to be determined at hearing
to the Tribunal’s Orders of 11 November 2024 and 21 February 2025, the
Respondent provides these submissions in advance
of the hearing on breach,
characterisation and penalty at 10am Wednesday 26 March 2025. The Respondent
notes that he will be giving
oral evidence on 26 March
Respondent is a 63-year-old solicitor, admitted to legal practice in 1986, who
has continuously practised law in the ACT for almost
39 years and who has
continuously held an unrestricted practising certificate since 1989. The
Respondent is a legal practitioner
director of an ACT incorporated legal
practice, and he works predominantly in property and commercial law.
complaint which is the subject of this proceeding is the first conduct complaint
and occupational disciplinary action against
the Respondent, apart from a
‘firm based’ complaint
to which the Respondent was
joined as the firm’s then managing partner although he was not directly
involved in the subject
of that complaint.
Respondent acted for N in relation to a conveyance and N’s dispute with a
builder in around 2014.
The Respondent acted for Mr and Mrs X in
2018 when the Respondent arranged their wills and for their sons N and G to be
as their attorneys via enduring powers of attorney
Both before and after the Respondent’s
professional dealings with N and Mr and Mrs X, the
Respondent’s affidavit sworn 7 February 2025, paragraph
Respondent’s letter to the Applicant 30 August 2022,
paragraph 51, at SWH-137-138.
Respondent’s affidavit sworn 7 February 2025, paragraph
Respondent’s affidavit sworn 7 February 2025, paragraphs
Respondent knew and had intermittent contact with the X family via his
involvement in the Canberra Greek community.
its Application for Disciplinary Action dated 6 May 2024, the Applicant brought
professional conduct charges concerning the Respondent
acting in relation
(a) N’s intended purchase of a residential unit in Griffith, ACT. The
Respondent accepted instructions from N in around November
2018. Contracts were
exchanged on 8 April 2019 although the contract was later rescinded;
(b) in early 2019 to March 2019, a $250,000 loan from a
. The Company’s directors and shareholders were N and Mr and
Mrs X, with N’s daughter I
as alternate director.
early 2019, N advised the Respondent that the purpose of the loan was to (a)
consolidate some debts for himself and Mr and Mrs
X and (b) enable Mr and Mrs X
to assist N with a deposit on the Griffith unit.
Both from N and
lawyers representing the Trust, the Respondent understood that Mr and Mrs X
were, or were going, overseas and therefore
N would sign Loan Documents as
attorney for Mr and Mrs X.
N told the Respondent that Mr and Mrs X
were aware of and supported the loan and mortgage.
acting on the loan transaction, the Respondent dealt only with N (apart for when
the Respondent met with both N and I to sign
loan documents), and the Respondent
had no contact with Mr and Mrs X.
There was no express retainer
between the Respondent and Mr and Mrs X.
March 2019, the Respondent received loan documents from the Trust’s
lawyers which provided for a $250,000 loan from the Trust
to the Company,
secured via personal guarantees from N and Mr and Mrs X and secured via a
mortgage over Mr and Mrs X’s family
on 1 May 2019.
Respondent arranged for I’s appointment as alternate director and on 20
March 2019 the Respondent met with N and I to sign
loan documents which the
Respondent witnessed. On that same date, the Respondent signed
Respondent’s affidavit sworn 7 February 2025, paragraphs
16, 18 and 27.
Application for Disciplinary Action, paragraphs 7-10 and 32.
Application for Disciplinary Action, paragraph 11.
Application for Disciplinary Action, paragraph 14.
Application for Disciplinary Action, paragraph 14.
Application for Disciplinary Action, paragraph 14.
Application for Disciplinary Action, paragraphs 16-17, 34(a)
Application for Disciplinary Action, paragraph 18.
Application for Disciplinary Action, paragraphs 30, 31 and
Acknowledgment of Legal Advice by Proposed Guarantor (
Acknowledgment
) which the Respondent sent together with the signed loan
documents to the Law Firm. Paragraph 5 of the First Acknowledgment stated:
“5. After receiving the above advice the guarantors freely and
voluntarily authorised their attorney to sign the loan documents.”
days later, the Law Firm emailed the Respondent requiring other things including
a revised Acknowledgment of Legal Advice by Proposed
Guarantor (
Acknowledgment
) which, as observed in the Law Firm’s cover email,
inserted N’s name into paragraph 5 which
“5. After receiving the above advice the guarantors
freely and voluntarily authorised their attorney N to sign the loan
documents.”
Respondent signed the Second Acknowledgment on 22 March 2019 and emailed that to
the Law Firm on 27 May 2019 together with a separate
Acknowledgment of Legal
Advice by Proposed Guarantor signed by N dated 25 March 2019.
Applicant’s charges and the Respondent’s position
its Application for Disciplinary Action dated 6 May 2024, the Applicant brought
professional conduct charges, paraphrased as:
– The Respondent failed to deliver legal services
competently and diligently by failing to advise N that he could not execute
documents as attorney for Mr and Mrs X because of the constraints in
of Attorney Act 2006
sections 34
, thereby breaching rule
– Despite the absence of a formal retainer or any
transaction,
Mr and Mrs X were the Respondent’s clients in relation to the
loan transaction. As such, by various failures to advise and
communicate with Mr
and Mrs X, by signing the Acknowledgment and by exchanging the Loan Agreement,
the Respondent failed to deliver
legal services competently and diligently to Mr
and Mrs X (
), failed to act in their best interests in relation
to the loan transaction (
) and failed to provide clear and
timely advice to Mr and Mrs X to assist them to understand relevant legal issues
and to make informed
– The Respondent had a conflict of interest between
the interests of N (in receiving part or all the loan funds) versus Mr and
who provided guarantees and a mortgage, thereby breaching
- By signing the Acknowledgment which contained terms which
could only have been true had the Respondent provided advice to all guarantors
(including Mr and Mrs X), the Respondent engaged in conduct demonstrating that
he is not a fit and proper person to practise law
or which is likely to a
material degree to be prejudicial to or diminish public confidence in the
administration of justice or bring
the profession into disrepute (
), failed to be honest in all dealings in the course of legal practice
), failed to deliver legal services competently and diligently
) and failed to avoid any compromise to his integrity and
professional independence (
). The Respondent signed the
Acknowledgment either knowing that it contained false information or,
alternatively, he was recklessly
indifferent as to whether it created a
misleading impression.
his Amended Response, the Respondent admitted alleged facts and rules breaches
Charges 1, 2 and 3
other than that the Respondent does
not admit that Mr and Mrs X were unaware that he was acting for N in relation to
the purchase
of the Griffith unit.
relation to
, by his Amended Response
withdrawal of his admission of a breach of rule 4.1.2 as stated in his affidavit
sworn 7 February 2025,
the Respondent admits alleged facts
that he signed the Acknowledgment knowing that it contained
false information) and a breach of
breaches of
4.1.2, 4.1.5 and 5.1
as contended by the Applicant.
relation to Charge 4, the Respondent’s position includes that
(a) was aware that he was signing a document that conveyed to the reader that
the Respondent had provided legal advice to Mr and
Mrs X as guarantors of a loan
from the Trust to the Company;
(b) admits that the Acknowledgments contained statements and representations
which were false insofar as they stated that the Respondent
had spoken with,
advised and sought confirmation from Mr and Mrs X when the Respondent had not
done so and that, having received
that advice, Mr and Mrs X had then authorised
N as attorney to sign the Loan Documents;
Amended Response dated 22 November 2024, paragraphs 19, 20,
Amended Response dated 22 November 2024, paragraph 32(a).
Amended Response dated 22 November 2024, paragraphs 21-23.
Respondent’s affidavit sworn 7 February 2025, paragraphs
Amended Response dated 22 November 2024, paragraph
Amended Response dated 22 November 2024, paragraph 22(f).
(c) was of the mistaken understanding that:
(i) N (acting as attorney) was entitled to do anything that Mr and Mrs X were
capable of doing (within the bounds of the EPAs) including
seeking and receiving
legal advice with respect to the mortgage and guarantee; and
(ii) by providing advice on the mortgage and guarantee to N (as attorney), the
Respondent had provided advice to Mr and Mrs X as
indicated in the
Acknowledgment;
(d) read and understood paragraphs 1 and 2 but only glanced at paragraphs 3, 4
and 5 believing that they were standard paragraphs
commonly appearing in a
document of this kind;
(e) acknowledges that he did not pay close attention to the specific wording in
paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of the Acknowledgment on the
mistaken assumption that he
was signing a form to the effect as Schedule 4 Part 2: Acknowledgment of Legal
Advice by Proposed Guarantor
which is an approved form under
Legal Profession Uniform Legal Practice (Solicitors) Rules 2015
(i) Whilst the ACT does not prescribe equivalent forms to those NSW prescribed
forms, it is common practice for ACT lenders to require
guarantors to sign an
acknowledgment reflecting the same terms as that NSW form. Such a form is so
commonly used that it has been
incorporated into the Respondent firm’s
document management system as a precedent form; and
(ii) When he signed the Acknowledgment, the Respondent assumed that the terms of
the form were otherwise the standard terms of the
NSW form (above), the
Respondent’s firm’s precedent form (reflecting the NSW form) and
equivalent forms used by ACT lenders
(commonly reflecting the NSW form).
Amended Response dated 22 November 2024, paragraph
22(b)(vii).
Amended Response dated 22 November 2024, paragraphs 22(b)(ii)
and 22(b)(iv).
Amended Response dated 22 November 2024, paragraph 22(h).
Principles regarding ‘dishonesty’
4.1 relevantly provides:
“A solicitor must also be honest and courteous
in all dealings in the course of legal practice.
Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
unsurprisingly do not attempt to define “honest” or
“dishonest”. The legal issue in this case is what is
meant by those
Applicant refers interchangeably to “dishonesty”,
“recklessness” and “misleading conduct.”
Each term has different shades of meaning.
Legal Services Commissioner v Brereton
[2011] VSCA 241
, a solicitor, who
was a director of a seller and also acted for the seller, received the
buyer’s deposit into his trust account
and then disbursed trust monies to
himself and an associate before the release of the deposit. Amongst other
things, he was charged
with common law misconduct via misappropriation. The
Victorian Court of Appeal held:
(a) Whilst there was some doubt as to whether the charge of misappropriation
required dishonesty, as the Commissioner had relied
upon accusations of
dishonesty, it was necessary to apply the appropriate test for
‘dishonesty’ as set out in
Peters v The Qu
(1998) HCA 7
(1998) 192 CLR 493
- see paragraph
(a) As the party alleging dishonesty, the Commissioner bore the onus of proving
dishonesty to the requisite (
) standard; it did not fall to the
practitioner to prove that he acted honestly.
requirements of
were summarised by the trial judge in
and quoted in the appeal
“The steps involved in this formulation
are: (1) identify the knowledge, belief, or intent which is said to render the
dishonest; (2) determine whether the accused (or defendant in the civil
context) subjectively had that knowledge, belief or intent;
and (3) determine
whether, on that account, the acts were objectively dishonest according to the
standards of ordinary and decent
(that is reasonable and honest)
Berger v Council of the Law Society (NSW)
[2019] NSWCA 119
, a solicitor
was charged with professional misconduct and unsatisfactory professional conduct
arising from, among other things, purporting
to act under a power of attorney
without authority because of the death of the grantor of the power, and acting
as the executor of
Applicant’s submissions on breach, characterisation and
penalty for hearing on 26 March 2025, paragraph 3.9.
Legal Services Commissioner v Brereton
[2011] VSCA 241
Legal Services Commissioner v Brereton
[2011] VSCA 241
Peters v The Queen
[1998] HCA 7
192 CLR 493
Although this case concerned the elements of offence of conspiracy to defraud,
an important aspect of the decision concerned
the test for dishonesty.
rejected the English Court of Appeal’s test for
dishonesty in
[1982] EWCA Crim 2
[1982] QB 1053
namely – a person is
dishonest if what he did was dishonest by current standards of ordinary and
reasonable honest people and
the person must have realised it was dishonest by
those standards. The
test focuses on the actual knowledge, belief
and intent of the accused.
Legal Services Commissioner v Brereton
[2011] VSCA 241
estate without authority in favour of himself.
The Court of
Appeal affirmed that “[t]he common law of Australia about the meaning of
‘dishonesty’, unless a specific
statutory definition applies, has
been clear since
Peters v The Queen
finding against the appellant, the Court of Appeal cited the earlier decision of
Kumar v Legal Services Commissioner
[2015] NSWCA 161
case, Leeming JA held that “there was and is no plausible explanation
inconsistent with deliberate dishonesty”.
is consistent with the finding of the High Court in
Macleod v The Queen
[2003] HCA 24
(2003) 214 CLR 230
that “fraudulently” and
“dishonestly” are synonymous; reflecting the requirement of a
knowledge, belief or
intention that the act of the accused was
it is settled that recklessness can amount to dishonesty. To amount to
recklessness, what is required is a subjective “awareness
of the risk in
each case, that the statement made...may be untrue but that [the risk was
consciously] disregarded... in those circumstances”.
Court of Appeal
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society (ACT)
[2018] ACTCA 19
gives the example that a person may be guilty of
recklessness if they were to certify that they had completed a minimum of 10
of professional development, where their state of mind was that they were
not sure the hours had been completed. This would demonstrate
advertence to the possibility of the statement made being untrue and a conscious
decision to disregard that risk”.
is a key distinction to be drawn between negligence, and indifference to the
truth, such that a reckless statement can be regarded
as dishonest. As was held
Pollard v Director of Public Prosecutions
(1992) 28 NSWLR 659
there is a distinction:
“...between negligent or
careless statements, which he treated as honest and on the other hand,
recklessness as to the truth,
that is to say some indifference to truth and
which was to be regarded as being dishonest”.
Berger v Council of the Law Society (NSW)
[2019] NSWCA
Berger v Council of the Law Society (NSW)
[2019] NSWCA
Peters v The Queen
[1998] HCA 7
(1998) 192 CLR 493
Berger v Council of the Law Society (NSW)
[2019] NSWCA
Kumar v Legal Services Commissioner
[2015] NSWCA 161
Peters v The Queen
[1998] HCA 7
(1998) 192 CLR 493
Berger v Council of the Law Society (NSW)
[2019] NSWCA 119
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society (ACT)
[2018] ACTCA 19
, [68] and [71]; citing
Guidice v Legal Profession
Complaints Committee
[2016] WASCA 159
; and G E Dal Pont,
Solicitors Manual
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 2005) at [35,035]. Note that
Du Pont observes that a false or misleading statement without the relevant
intention or belief is not indicative of dishonesty.
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society
[2018] ACTCA 19
Pollard v Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth)
at 672; citing
Angus v Clifford
, the NSW Supreme Court was citing
[1931] HCA 23
(1931) 45 CLR
at 354, to the effect that, if a representation is false, “it may be
shown to have been...made...with a dishonest indifference
Giudice v Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee
[2014] WASCA 115
solicitor was charged with professional misconduct by filing a client affidavit
in Family Court proceedings which he knew was
false or with recklessly disregard
as to whether the statement was true or false. The Western Australian Court of
Appeal held that
this required a subjective assessment of the solicitor’s
actual state of mind as to whether he either “wilfully disregarded
truth or falsity of the relevant portion of the affidavit or, put another way,
had closed his mind to the question of whether
it was true or
Put another way, the subject assessment was one of
“not caring in the [practitioner’s] own heart and conscience whether
it was true or false”.
Court held that acting recklessly involved two components: (1) a finding that
the relevant part of the affidavit was false, and
(2) “a finding that the
practitioner recklessly disregarded the truth or falsity of the relevant portion
of the affidavit”.
Court held that the solicitor would have recklessly disregarded whether a
statement in the affidavit was true or false if: (1)
at the time of filing, he
was aware that the statement was untrue/false and (2) he consciously disregarded
. Both elements concerned the solicitor’s actual
state of mind.
The second element (“consciously
disregarded”) connotes that the solicitor “wilfully or deliberately
shut his eyes
to, or excluded from contemplation, the risk that the statement
was untrue or false”.
Put another way, recklessness can only
be made out if it is established that the solicitor’s actual state of mind
was “indifference”
or “not caring” about the truth of
the statement.
Why the Respondent was not dishonest
as alleged with respect to Charge 4
the time that the Respondent signed and emailed the First Acknowledgment to the
Law Firm Partners on 20 March 2019, he had glanced
at but did not read
paragraphs 3, 4 and 5, instead believing that they were standard paragraphs
commonly appearing in a document
of this kind.
receiving the Second Acknowledgment from the Law Firm on 22 March 2019 which
included a cover email from the Law Firm pointing
out the insertion of N’s
name into paragraph 5, the Respondent did not carefully read the Second
Acknowledgment as it appeared
to be in the same terms as the First
Acknowledgment.
Giudice v Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee
[2014] WASCA 115
Giudice v Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee
[2014] WASCA 115
Giudice v Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee
[2014] WASCA 115
Giudice v Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee
[2014] WASCA 115
Giudice v Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee
[2014] WASCA 115
Giudice v Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee
[2014] WASCA 115
Giudice v Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee
[2014] WASCA 115
, [44] and [130].
Amended Response, paragraph 22(b)(iv); Respondent’s
affidavit sworn 7 February 2025, paragraph 59.
Respondent’s affidavit sworn 7 February 2025, paragraph
5 in both the First and Second Acknowledgments were tailored to suit the unique
circumstances of this loan, i.e. that N
would sign loan documents as attorney
for Mr and Mrs X who were guarantors.
Respondent was inexperienced in advising guarantors signing loan documents via
an attorney exercising a power of attorney.
He was familiar with
typical ‘standard’ forms of similar acknowledgments which do not
involve an attorney signing loan
documents on behalf of a
Respondent believed that the First and Second Acknowledgments simply contained
terms typical of acknowledgments/certificates of
advice to guarantors, which
would not ordinarily have contained a provision such as. paragraph 5) requiring
that he speak directly
with Mr and Mrs X about the guarantees.
Respondent also positively believed that, by advising N (as attorney) about the
guarantees, the Respondent had thereby advised
the guarantors (including Mr and
Mrs X) as required by the First and Second Acknowledgments.
the party asserting that the Respondent was dishonest, the Applicant bears the
of proving dishonesty, to the requisite
, and it does not fall to the Respondent to prove that he acted
these circumstances:
(a) The Respondent did not sign the First and Second Acknowledgments knowing
that he had made a false representation that he had
personally advised Mr and
Mrs X when he had not done so.
(b) The Respondent was not reckless in that he had not wilfully disregarded the
truth or falsity or closed his mind as to whether
he had personally advised Mr
Applicant submits that it is implausible that the Respondent did not read
paragraph 5. These issues will no doubt be covered in
oral evidence by the
Respondent, and detailed submissions are more appropriate after that evidence.
Suffice to say that the Respondent
submits that his affidavit sets out a
plausible explanation for signing the acknowledgements inconsistent with
dishonesty.
Applicant submits that the Respondent has admitted that, when he signed the
Acknowledgments, he understood their legal nature
and effect, citing
“Admissions [22.1.b].” This reference is incorrect. The Applicant
appears to be referring to Amended
Response paragraph 22(b.
submission misrepresents what is stated
Respondent’s affidavit sworn 7 February 2025, paragraph
Amended Response, paragraph 22(h); Respondent’s affidavit
sworn 7 February 2025, paragraphs 60-62.
Amended Response, paragraphs 22(b)(vi) and 22(b)(vii);
Respondent’s affidavit sworn 7 February 2025, paragraph 63.
Legal Services Commissioner v Brereton
[2011] VSCA 241
Applicant’s submissions on breach, characterisation and
penalty for hearing on 26 March 2025, paragraph 4.2(a).
in Amended Response paragraph 22(b). The Respondent does not admit to
understanding the legal nature and effect of the acknowledgements
Respondent denies that he was deliberately dishonest or so reckless as to amount
to dishonesty. The Respondent did not breach
rules 4.1.2 or 4.1.5 which require
a finding that the Respondent acted dishonestly in signing the Acknowledgments.
The Respondent
has admitted that he was careless by signing the Acknowledgments
without having properly read them, including paragraph 5.
Respondent denies breaching rule 5.1 by signing the
Acknowledgments.
Characterisation
Unsatisfactory
professional conduct
unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an Australian legal practitioner happening in
connection with the practice of law that falls short of the standard
competence and diligence that a member of the public is entitled to expect of a
reasonably competent Australian legal practitioner.
See also s 389 (Conduct capable of being unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct).
statutory definition of ‘
professional misconduct
(1) In this Act:
professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, if
the conduct involves a substantial or consistent
failure to reach or maintain a
reasonable standard of competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner whether happening in connection
with the practice of law or happening otherwise than
in connection with the
practice of law that would, if established, justify a finding that the
practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice.
(2) For finding that an Australian legal practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice as mentioned in subsection
(1), regard may be
had to the suitability matters that would be considered if the practitioner were
an applicant for admission to
the legal profession under this Act or for the
grant or renewal of a local practising certificate.
See also s 389.
Amended Response, paragraph 23.
Amended Response, paragraph 24.
Legal Profession Act 2006
section 386.
Common Law, ‘
professional misconduct
...where a professional engages in behaviour that
would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or dishonourable by professional
who are of good repute and competency that constitutes professional
misconduct...Such conduct requires more than mere negligence,
though it may be
constituted by gross negligence or recklessness.
its Application for Disciplinary Action, the Applicant contends that the
Applicant’s conduct which is the subject of Charges
1-4 (inclusive),
considered globally or in each case, is professional misconduct either within
Legal Profession Act 2006
section 387
or at common
or is otherwise unsatisfactory professional conduct as defined
section 386.
In its written outline of submissions, the
Applicant contends that:
(a) the Respondent’s conduct in relation to
Charges 1-3 (inclusive)
should be characterised as professional misconduct, although the Applicant
does not say whether that should be professional misconduct
and/or 387(1)(b);
(b) the Respondent’s conduct in relation to
characterised as professional misconduct within the meaning of
section 387(1)(a)
a substantial or consistent failure to reach or
maintain a reasonable standard of competence and diligence
section 387(1)(b)
conduct...that would, if
established, justify a finding that the practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice
Respondent instead contends:
(a) the Respondent’s conduct in relation to
Charges 1-3
(inclusive)
, considered individually and globally, constitutes
unsatisfactory professional conduct within LPA
section 386
(b) the Respondent’s conduct in relation to
characterised as professional misconduct within the meaning of LPA
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the
Australian Capital Terri
[2014] ACTSC 13
, Refshauge J at [77].
Application for Disciplinary Action dated 6 May 2024, paragraph
Application for Disciplinary Action dated 6 May 2024, paragraph
Applicant’s submissions on breach, characterisation and
penalty for hearing on 26 March 2025, paragraph 6.2.
Applicant’s submissions on breach, characterisation and
penalty for hearing on 26 March 2025, paragraph 5.1.
Amended Response dated 22 November 2024, paragraph 68.
section 387(1)(b).
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner 20215
(Occupational Discipline)
[2022] ACAT 34
, an experienced solicitor
erroneously advised Mrs Smith (who held an EPA for her mother) that she and her
husband could borrow $400,000
from Mrs Smith’s mother to temporarily
reduce their mortgage, borrowed from surplus funds after Mrs Smith sold her
house to pay a nursing home bond. The solicitor failed to advise
Mrs Smith that the loan was impermissible per
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
sections 34
Legal Practitioner 20215
, the solicitor was charged with and conceded
breaches of
of the repealed
Legal Profession
(Solicitors) Rules 2007
(a) failing to treat Mrs Smith fairly and in good faith, having regard to her
dependence upon him – rule 1.1;
(b) failing to act with competence and diligence by failing to advise Mrs Smith,
in her capacity as her mother’s attorney,
that the loan was not permitted
by the POAA – rule 1.2;
(c) acting for more than one party to the transaction, namely Mr and Mrs Smith
(in their personal capacity as borrowers), and Mrs
Smith (in her capacity as her
mother’s attorney i.e. the lender), where their interests were in conflict
– rule 7.2.
Legal Practitioner 20215
, the parties jointly submitted and the ACAT
accepted that the solicitor’s conduct was properly characterised as
unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
Respondent’s conduct in relation to Charges 1-3 (inclusive) is broadly
comparable to that in
Legal Practitioner 20215
and should similarly be
characterised as conduct falling short of the standard of competence and
diligence that a member of the public
is entitled to expect of a reasonably
competent Australian legal practitioner, but not within the common law or
statutory definitions
of professional misconduct.
Amended Response dated 22 November 2024, paragraph 69.
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner
20215 (Occupational Discipline)
[2022] ACAT 34
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner
20215 (Occupational Discipline)
[2022] ACAT 34
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner
20215 (Occupational Discipline)
[2022] ACAT 34
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner
20215 (Occupational Discipline)
[2022] ACAT 34
, at [29] and [44].
Respondent adopts the Applicant’s submissions as regards the protective
purpose of disciplinary proceedings.
Respondent submits that appropriate sanctions under LPA section 425
(a) The Respondent is publicly reprimanded.
(b) The Respondent is to pay a fine in the order of $10,000.
(c) Within 12 months, the Respondent is to undertake a course in legal ethics
approved by the Applicant.
(d) The Respondent further offers to participate in legal ethics or similar
educational sessions to share with other members of the
profession the lessons
learnt from this matter particularly regarding the pitfalls of busy practice
even for experienced practitioners.
Respondent will seek to be heard as to the appropriate order as to costs to be
made under LPA section 433.
Philip Strickland SC Athol Opas
Forbes Chambers Blackburn Chambers 21 March 2025
Applicant’s submissions on breach, characterisation and
penalty for hearing on 26 March 2025, paragraphs
3.1 to 3.3 (inclusive).
Appendix C2: Respondents case outline – summary of issues for
determination, relevant legislation, authorities and summary of
argument, filed
Australian Capital Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
Applicant and
Legal Practitioner 082024
Respondent’s case outline – summary of issues for
determination, relevant legislation, authorities and summary of argument
accordance with Orders of Senior Member Neville made 20 March 2025, the
Respondent provides the following case outline.
Summary of issues
for determination at hearing
to be determined at hearing are set out in the parties’ joint Statement of
Real Issues in Dispute dated 17 March 2025.
legislation
Legislation
directly relevant to the matter is:
Legal Profession Act 2006
sections 386
(1)(b) – definitions of ‘unsatisfactory professional
conduct’ and ‘professional misconduct’;
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
), rules 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 4.1.3, 4.1.5, 5.1, 7.1 and 11;
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
sections 34
Authorities
Pollard v Director of Public Prosecutions
(1992) 28 NSWLR 659
Peters v The Qu
[1998] HCA 7
(1998) 192 CLR 493
Giudice v Legal Profession Complaints Committee
[2014] WASCA 115
Macleod v The Queen
[2003] HCA 24
(2003) 214 CLR 230
Legal Services Commissioner v Brereton
[2011] VSCA 241
(2011) 33 VR
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital
[2014] ACTSC 13
Kumar v Legal Services Commissioner
[2015] NSWCA 161
Guidice v Legal Profession Complaints Committee
[2016] WASCA 159
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society (ACT)
[2018] ACTCA
Berger v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2019] NSWCA
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner 20215
(Occupational Discipline)
[2022] ACAT 34
G E Dal Pont,
Solicitors Manual
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 2005) at
Summary of argument
Applicant’s four charges and the Respondent’s position on those
charges are summarised in paragraphs 12-15 of the
Respondent’s written
submissions filed 21 March 2025.
key issue for the Tribunal to determine at hearing is, in relation to Charge 4,
whether the Respondent was dishonest and thereby
breached Rules 4.1.2,
and 5.1 of the Rules (as contended by the Applicant) when the Respondent signed
the First and Second Acknowledgments (the
Acknowledgments
Respondent says that he was careless (and thus breached Rule 4.1.3) but that he
was neither deliberately nor recklessly dishonest
in signing the Acknowledgments
and therefore he did not breach Rules 4.1.2, 4.1.5 and 5.1 by signing the
Acknowledgments.
the party asserting that the Respondent was dishonest, the Applicant bears the
onus of proving dishonesty, to the requisite
standard, and it
does not fall to the Respondent to prove that he acted honestly in signing the
Acknowledgments.
Respondent refers to paragraphs 16-28 of his written submissions filed 21 March
2025 with respect to relevant principles and authorities.
to why the Respondent was not dishonest in signing the Acknowledgments, the
Respondent refers to paragraphs 29-39 of his written
submissions of filed 21
March 2025.
characterisation
of his conduct:
(a) The Respondent contends that his conduct in relation to Charges 1, 2 and 3
constitutes ‘unsatisfactory professional conduct’
(LPA section 386)
but not ‘professional misconduct’ as contended by the Applicant.
(b) The Respondent contends that his conduct in relation to Charge 4 constitutes
‘professional misconduct’ per LPA section
387(1)(a) (“
substantial or consistent failure to reach of maintain a reasonable standard of
competence and diligence
”) but not (as contended by the Applicant) per
LPA section 387(1)(b) (“
conduct...that would, if established, justify a
finding that the practitioner is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal
, the Respondent submits that appropriate sanctions
under LPA section 425 are:
(a) The Respondent is publicly reprimanded.
(b) The Respondent is to pay a fine in the order of $10,000.
(c) Within 12 months, the Respondent is to undertake a course in legal ethics
approved by the Applicant.
(d) The Respondent further offers to participate in legal ethics or similar
educational sessions to share with other members of the
profession the lessons
learnt from this matter particularly regarding the pitfalls of busy practice
even for experienced practitioners.
See T 73. In the same place,
the further comment was made that ... “it is not contended that this
practitioner is unfit [to
continue to practise].” Curiously,
notwithstanding these appropriate comments, as set out in the Statement of
Agreed Facts
(at pars.75-77), the Applicant pressed for the Respondent to be
found to be in breach of
s.387(1)(b)
Legal Profession Act 2006
which refers specifically to “professional misconduct” which would,
if established, “justify a finding that the
practitioner is not a fit and
proper person to engage in legal practice.” More is said throughout these
reasons on this regularly
appearing incongruity.
Throughout these reasons, while
there will be regular reference either to “Charge ...”, or, from
time to time, the parlance
shifts to “count ...”. Nothing turns on
any change in language in this regard.
See T 66, 67 & 70
respectively.
Roberts-Smith v Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd
(Reopening Application)
[2025] FCAFC 66
Formally, I should note that an
Amended Application under
Legal Profession Act 2006
was filed by the Applicant on 20 March 2025. The amendments noted in this
Amended Application all relate to matters concerning
charge 4. A Further
Amended Response was filed by the Respondent on 21 March 2025.
Documents regarding these
matters were at Tab 8 of the Respondent’s Tender Bundle. The relevant
document is an Affidavit of
a lawyer who was instructed by Mr N. X to arrange a
discharge of mortgage for the loan there specified; the loan was secured by a
mortgage over the family home of the X family in Watson ACT, and in relation to
which Mr and Mrs X were guarantors.
See T 18-22.
King v The Queen
[1986] HCA 59
(1986) 161 CLR 423
For example, Rule 62 of the
ACT Bar Rules states (emphasis added): “
A prosecutor must fairly assist
the court to arrive at the truth, must seek impartially to have the whole of the
relevant evidence
placed intelligibly before the court, and must seek to
assist the court with adequate submissions of law to enable the law properly
be applied to the facts.”
See G. E. Dal Pont,
Lawyers’ Professional Responsibility
(Sydney: Thomson Reuters/Lawbook Co. 2025) at par.23.65, citing
Services Commissioner v Adamakis
[2013] VCAT 1970
The correspondence referred
to below is at pp.129-138 of exhibit SWH1.
The Respondent’s
Senior Counsel noted this in his oral submissions; see T 85.
See the comments by McCallum
CJ quoting and confirming this responsibility in
Council of the Law Society
of the ACT v ACAT
[2025] ACTSC 251
The lengthy entanglements
between the witness and Counsel for the Applicant are at T 28-35.
T 49. See also T 50
regarding (a) the Respondent’s belief, at the relevant time,
that he was advising N as his parents’ attorney, (b) the
signing of the
second acknowledgment, (c) the distinction between “failing to read
something and failing to read it properly”,
and (d) the Respondent’s
direct denial that in signing the acknowledgments he knew that what he was
certifying was untrue (T
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
Neat Holdings Pty Ltd v
Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd
[1992] HCA 66
(1992) 67 ALJR 170
at 170-171 (Mason CJ, Brennan,
Deane, Gaudron JJ).
The bulk of the documents
here referred to were contained within Exhibit SWH1, to the Affidavit of Mr SW
Harper, affirmed 4th December
2024. Page references are to the relevant
document in this Exhibit.
Pages 125-128 of SWH1.
See p.129 of SWH1.
See pp.130-138.
SWH1 140-149.
SWH1 150-152.
SWH1 153-154.
SWH1 155-156.
SWH1 161-163.
SWH1 179-186.
See SWH1 187 –
The letter of 25th January
2024 is at SWH1 218-219.
See the details set out in
p.2 of the letter; SWH1 219.
SWH1 220-224.
Smith v New South Wales
Bar Association
[1992] HCA 36
(1992) 176 CLR 256.
176 CLR at 270. There are
multiple other, similar examples of such statements, which I need not note,
except perhaps the comments
by the NSW Court of Appeal in
Law Society of NSW
(1988) 24 NSWLR 204
at 211 (Kirby P) and at 224 (Clarke
JA). Kirby P said (at 211; emphasis added)): “But the duty of this Court
is to consider
that conduct carefully and to measure the matters proved against
the specific charges which were brought. The Court must protect
the public. But
it must do so in proceedings which are fair to the solicitor. Upholding fair
procedures, including for solicitors charged with professional
misconduct, is
part of the fabric of the law by which the Court defends the public
.” For his part, Clarke JA said (at 220; internal citations
omitted): “...
because of the grave nature of the charges there must be
clear proof of the facts
said to give rise to the misconduct so as to induce
“on a balance of probabilities, an actual persuasion of the mind as to
[their] existence”.
The authorities here include
Commonwealth v Fernando
[2012] FCAFC 18
(2012) 200 FCR 1
prominently political controversies ventilated in
Ashby v Slipper
[2014] FCAFC 15
219 FCR 322
(Mansfield and Gilmour JJ), as well as the two remarkable
decisions in the
Roberts-Smith
litigation itself.
Metaxis v Legal
Profession Complaints Committee
[2020] WASCA 27.
Their Honours’
comments are, of course, similar to those made by Clarke JA in
quoted above, where his Honour said: “(at 220;
internal citations omitted): “...
because of the grave nature of the
charges there must be clear proof of the facts
said to give rise to the
misconduct so as to induce “on a balance of probabilities, an actual
persuasion of the mind as to
[their] existence”.
Kumar v Legal Services
Commission of NSW
[2016] NSWCA 161.
See p.1 of these
Roberts-Smith v Fairfax
Publications Pty Ltd
(Reopening Application)
[2025] FCAFC 66
See T 86 & 98.
Again, see pars.54-69 of the
Respondent’s Affidavit, filed 7 February 2025.
See pars.40-46.
The Respondent’s Case
Outline (filed 26 March 2025) notes most of the same sections and provisions as
in that from the Applicant
but is not quite as expansive as the latter.
A Solicitor v Council of
the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
Among many decisions, see
Weaver v Law Society of New South Wales
[1979] HCA 35
(1979) 142 CLR 201
J; all other members of the Court agreeing);
Wentworth v New South Wales Bar
Association
(1992) 176 CLR 239
at 252 (Deane, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron
Re a Legal Practitioner
(1981) 55 FLR 405
Among many places, see
Ziems v Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
at 286 (Dixon CJ);
Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
(1994) NSWLR 408
at 441 (Mahoney JA).
See the comments by the Full
Court of the ACT Supreme Court in
(1996) 134 FLR 294
(Miles CJ, Gallop & Higgins JJ).
See, for example, the brief
comments by Deane J in
Smith v New South Wales Bar Association
[1992] HCA 36
at 270, and the cases his Honour there discusses. The cautionary
comments by the plurality (Brennan, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron
JJ) at [30]
– [40] regarding belief or non-belief of the evidence of a witness, the
lawyer in question in particular, are salutary.
A Solicitor
at [16] (Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby & Callinan JJ).
The Council of the Law
Society of the ACT v ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal
[2025] ACTSC 251
Peters v The Queen
[1998] HCA 7
(1998) 192 CLR 493
See, for example,
v The Queen
[2003] HCA 24
(2003) 214 CLR 230
), and more recently, the NSW
Court of Appeal in
Berger v New South Wales Law Society
(2019) NSWCA 119
(Payne JA; Meagher JA and Simpson AJA agreeing).
[100] and earlier at [18]. Also in
, see the informative
discussion of
by the plurality (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ)
at [35] – [38]. See also the application of
[2020] VSCA 313
Berger v Council of the Law Society (NSW)
[2019] NSWCA 119
Legal Practitioner v
Council of the Law Society (ACT)
[2018] ACTCA 19
Derry v Peek
14 App Cas 337.
Nocton v Lord
[1914] UKLawRpAC 31
[1914] AC 932.
Relevant references are set
out in Australia’s own
locus classicus
Meagher, Gummow &
Lehane’s Equity: Doctrines & Remedies
(Sydney: LexisNexis Butterworths, 2015) at [12-030] (
Peters v The Queen
192 CLR at [18]. See also the comments in
Legal Practitioner v Council
of the Law Society (ACT)
[2018] ACTCA 19
, [66], [68] and [71]
(emphasis added) regarding the necessity that the accused had an
“awareness of the risk in each case,
that the statement made ... may be
but that [the risk was consciously] disregarded
Pollard v Director of Public Prosecutions
(1992) 28 NSWLR 659
discussing the difference between negligence and indifference to the truth,
which can lead to a reckless statement being
regarded as dishonest.
Legal Profession
(Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
(ACT), glossary of terms.
Legal Profession Act
(ACT), dictionary.
Per the definition of
“client” in the
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules
(ACT), glossary of terms.
RTF format (1.35 MB)
Signed PDF/A format