The Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Lester [2022] ACTSCFC 1 (25 November 2022)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
The Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Lester
[2022] ACTSCFC 1
Hearing Date:
Elkaim, Loukas-Karlsson and Kennett JJ
(a) Pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2006
(ACT) and/or
the Court’s inherent jurisdiction, the Defendant’s name (William
Frederick Lester) be removed from the roll
of people admitted to the legal
profession maintained by the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory
pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2006
(b) The defendant is to pay the plaintiff’s costs of the proceedings,
except that each party is to pay its own costs of the
Catchwords:
– LEGAL PROFESSION – Where the plaintiff
seeks an order to remove the defendant’s name from the roll of the Supreme
Court of the Australian Capital Territory – where the Supreme Court of
Tasmania had made a recommendation that the Supreme
Court of the Australian
Capital Territory do so – where such an order must be made by a Full Court
– defendant removed
from the roll
Legislation Cited:
Judiciary Act 1903
Legal Profession Act 2006
Legal Profession Act 2007
Legislation Act 2001
Supreme Court Act 1933
Cases Cited:
Gypsy Jokers Inc v Commissioner of Police
[2008] HCA 4
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v Lester
[2021] TASSC
North Australian Aboriginal Legal Aid Service Inc v Bradley
218 CLR 146
South Australia v Totani
[2010] HCA 39
Wainohu v New South
[2011] HCA 24
243 CLR 181
Texts Cited:
Thomas Prince and Perry Herzfeld,
Interpretation
(Thomson Reuters,
The Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
(Plaintiff)
William Frederick Lester (Defendant)
Representation:
D Moujalli (Plaintiff)
A Bucknell (Defendant)
Thomas Geer (Plaintiff)
Rachel Bird and Co (Defendant)
File Number:
SC 208 of 2022
Elkaim and Loukas-Karlsson JJ
plaintiff filed an originating application dated 24 June 2022. The plaintiff,
the ACT Law Society, seeks an order that the defendant’s
name be removed
from the roll of people admitted to the legal profession in the ACT.
Supreme Court Act 1933
(ACT) says that such an order can only
be made by the Full Court.
application arises from a recommendation by the Supreme Court of Tasmania made
on 8 September 2021 that the defendant be removed
from the ACT roll of
practitioners.
application is supported by two affidavits of Mr Samuel Harper affirmed on 24
June 2022 and 21 July 2022 respectively.
Notice of Intention to Respond was lodged on behalf of the defendant on 12 July
2022. The notice says that
The defendant submits to the orders of the Court [except as to costs].
Legal Profession Act 2006
(ACT) is as follows:
If a corresponding disciplinary body makes a recommendation or order that a
person’s name be removed from the roll of lawyers
under this Act, the
Supreme Court must order the removal of the name from the local roll.
to the Dictionary to the above Act a “corresponding disciplinary
body” includes:
(b) the Supreme Court of another jurisdiction exercising—
(i) its inherent jurisdiction or powers in relation to the control and
discipline of any Australian lawyer; or
(ii) its jurisdiction or powers to make orders under a corresponding law of the
other jurisdiction in relation to any Australian
Supreme Court of Tasmania is clearly a corresponding disciplinary body.
first affidavit of Mr Harper annexes the decision of Brett J on the application
of the Legal Profession Board of Tasmania (the
Board) for the Court to determine
three complaints arising from the conduct of the defendant (
Legal Profession
Board of Tasmania v Lester
[2021] TASSC 41).
J sets out the three complaints made by the Board at [4]:
4 The complaints can be summarised as follows:
(a) A complaint made by Mrs S on 2 November 2017. Mrs S engaged the respondent
in respect of workers compensation proceedings between
2011 and 2017. The
complaint asserts gross delay and dishonesty. The gravamen of the dishonesty
allegation is that from 2012, the
respondent led Mrs S to believe that he had
commenced workers compensation proceedings on her behalf in the Workers
Rehabilitation
and Compensation Tribunal (the Tribunal) when he had not done,
and did not do so until January 2017. He maintained that pretence
dishonesty was discovered by Mrs S in October 2017. The complaint asserts an
ongoing and systemic course of dishonest conduct
which involved numerous lies
told to Mrs S and the falsification of documentation intended to support those
(b) A complaint made by the Board concerning the failure of the respondent to
disclose a relevant disciplinary order made by the
ACT Law Society, when
applying to renew his practising certificate in Tasmania in 2016 and 2017.
(c) A complaint by the Board in relation to the respondent's failure to comply
with a requirement imposed on him by an investigator
under s 572 of the Act.
J found that each complaint was established. Professional misconduct was found
in respect of the first and third complaint.
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
was found in respect of the second complaint. His Honour concluded as follows:
74 In conclusion, I am satisfied to the
that the respondent is not, and will not be for an indefinite time, a fit and
proper person to carry on practice as a legal
practitioner. In view of that
finding, the only appropriate outcome is that his name be removed from the roll
of practitioners. Any
sanction short of striking off would be inconsistent with
this Court's duty to maintain proper professional standards. In arriving
conclusion, I have been particularly influenced by the nature and extent of the
respondent's dishonesty in respect of Mrs
S, and other aspects of dishonesty to
which I have referred, as well as my concerns in respect of the respondent's
insight into that
aspect of his conduct. I have also taken into account the
findings made in respect of the second and third complaints, and the gross
in Mrs S's matter. It is not appropriate in my view to fashion or suggest
separate sanctions for each complaint and discrete
conduct within a complaint.
Although clearly the imposition of sanctions has punitive effect, their purpose
is not punitive, but
responds to the protective purposes already discussed. The
order must respond to the totality of the conduct, and any suggestion
individual sanction might be imposed for a discrete aspect of that conduct would
be without context and unhelpful. Accordingly,
the sanction of striking off will
be imposed as a response to the totality of the conduct.
75 Because of the jurisdictional position arising from the respondent's
admission in the ACT, the appropriate order is that this
Court recommends to the
Supreme Court of the ACT that the practitioner be removed from the roll of
practitioners entitled to practice
before that Court. I order that that
recommendation be made.
Harper’s second affidavit annexes a copy of the sealed orders of the
Supreme Court of Tasmania. They are:
(a) guilty of professional misconduct in respect to complaints 1 and 3;
(b) guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct in respect of complaint 2.
appropriate sanction is that his name be removed from the roll of legal
practitioners.
Court recommends to the Supreme Court of the ACT that the Practitioner be
removed from the roll of practitioners entitled to
practice before that
above recommendation having been made by the Supreme Court of Tasmania, the
mandatory direction under
requires this Court to “order the
removal of the name from the local roll”.
should be added here that in written and oral submissions the plaintiff raised
the question of whether or not the use of the word
did actually impose a mandatory direction. Learned counsel contrasted
this section with
where the word “may” is employed. He
suggested that the effect of
Legislation Act 2001
that “the meaning of “must” stated in
displaced by a manifest contrary intention”.
could not offer any explanation as to why the legislature might have made the
distinction. In fact, to the contrary, the deliberate,
and contrasting, use of
the mandatory direction would seem to indicate an intention on the part of the
Legislature that the Court
is subject to a mandatory requirement.
is not however necessary to decide the issue in this matter. This is because it
is patently obvious from the facts set out in the
decision of Brett J that
removal of the defendant from the roll is necessary. The order sought can be
equally made under the inherent
460(2). This was reinforced during the hearing by the defendant’s
solicitor stating
in clear terms that his client’s position had moved from
not resisting any order to positively consenting to the order, specifically
the basis of the findings made by Brett J.
is not necessary to set out the facts and findings of Brett J. They are plainly
set out in his judgment which, as mentioned above,
is annexed to the first
affidavit of Mr Harper. The conduct described is of such a nature that removal
from the roll inevitably follows.
relation to costs, the plaintiff says that the costs of the proceedings should
be paid by the defendant. That is said to be the
normal order of this Court. The
defendant responds by referring to a letter sent to the plaintiff’s
solicitors on 24 August
2022 in which the defendant says that he consents to the
order for his removal from the roll and suggests that each party pay its
costs. He also says that the matter could be appropriately dealt with by a
solicitor, therefore not necessitating the appearance
of counsel.
Court of course has a wide discretion in respect of costs and is bound to
attempt to reach a just result. The application was
made at the instigation of
the Supreme Court of Tasmania. But more importantly it arose from the conduct of
the defendant.
the other hand, armed with the defendant’s consent, and knowing that the
orders could be made under the Court’s inherent
necessity for counsel, and perhaps even written submissions, is doubtful.
this background the following costs order seems appropriate: that the defendant
pay the plaintiff’s costs of the proceedings,
except that each party pay
its own costs of the hearing.
propose the following orders:
(a) Pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2006
(ACT) and/or
the Court’s inherent jurisdiction, the Defendant’s name (William
Frederick Lester) be removed from the roll
of people admitted to the legal
profession maintained by the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory
pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2006
(b) The defendant is to pay the plaintiff’s costs of the proceedings,
except that each party is to pay its own costs of the
agree with the orders proposed by Elkaim and Loukas-Karlsson JJ and with their
reasons. I add the following observations.
plaintiff, while seeking an order removing the defendant’s name from the
roll of practitioners, submitted that the Court
had a discretion whether to make
such an order under
Legal Profession Act 2006
(Legal Profession Act). The defendant ultimately consented to the proposed
order, and submitted that s 460(2) is to be read
literally: that is, it involves
a mandatory direction to the Court.
Herzfeld and Thomas Prince, in
Interpretation
Thomson Reuters, 2020) at [4.210], give examples of cases in which it has been
held that the word “must” can
be construed as conferring a
discretion rather than imposing an obligation. However, the learned authors
describe that conclusion
as “doubtful”, and perhaps justifiable only
by way of correction of a drafting mistake.
this jurisdiction,
Legislation Act 2001
(Legislation Act) provides that the word “must”, when used in
relation to a function, means that the function “is
required to be
exercised”.
Section 146(3)
provides that
is a “determinative
provision”, which means that it can be displaced only expressly or by a
“manifest contrary
intention”. A literal reading of s 460(2) sits
uneasily with the maintenance of the Court’s inherent jurisdiction (s
462), and leads to the strange result that this Court is bound by the
recommendation of a court or tribunal in another State or Territory
it has no supervisory jurisdiction (see the definition of “corresponding
disciplinary body” in the Dictionary
Legal Profession Act
However, I doubt whether these considerations are enough to constitute a
contrary intention.
argument concerning the operation of
may also have a constitutional
dimension. In
Legal Profession Board of Tasmania v W
[2011] TASSC 67
, Evans J expressed the view (obiter) that the equivalent provision to
Legal Profession Act 2007
(Tas) was unconstitutional. This
was on the basis that the provision directed the outcome of an exercise of power
by the Supreme
Court of a State and was inconsistent with its institutional
integrity. His Honour cited
Wainohu v New South Wales
[2011] HCA 24
243 CLR 181
, [44], [105],
South Australia
[2010] HCA 39
, [62], [69], [427], [443]
Gypsy Jokers Inc v Commissioner of Police
[2008] HCA 4
234 CLR 532
the light of
North Australian Aboriginal Legal Aid Service Inc v Bradley
[2004] HCA 31
218 CLR 146
, [27]-[29], that conclusion, if correct, is arguably
applicable to the Supreme Court of a Territory.
no constitutional argument was relied on before us and notices have not been
issued under
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth). In these
circumstances it would be inappropriate to express any concluded view. In any
event it is not clear (in the light
Legislation Act
solution to any invalidity of s 460(2) would be to construe “must”
as meaning “may”.
may therefore be that consideration should be given to amending s 460(2).
issues I have noted above do not require resolution in this case because the
Court’s inherent jurisdiction is preserved.
I agree with Elkaim and
Loukas-Karlsson JJ that the conduct described in the reasons of Brett J amply
justifies making the order
sought in the exercise of that
I certify that the preceding thirty-one [31] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Court.
RTF format (166 KB)
Signed PDF/A format