Director-General, Community Services Directorate v NW and LW [2023] ACTCC 3 (26 October 2023)
CHILDRENS COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Director-General, Community Services Directorate v NW and LW
[2023] ACTCC 3
Hearing Date(s):
10 & 11 October 2023
Magistrate Theakston
Catchwords:
CARE AND PROTECTION
– child welfare – extension
application – best interests of young person – allocating parental
responsibility
Legislation Cited:
Children and Young People Act
Cases Cited:
WS v Director-General, Community Services Directorate
[2018] ACTSC
CP v Director-General of Community Services
[2017] ACTSC 394
Director-General ACT Child and Youth Protective Services (Applicant)
LK (Respondent’s mother)
Independent children’s representative
Representation:
Steven Robinson (Applicant)
LK, self-represented (Respondent’s mother)
Bridie Harders (Independent children’s representative)
ACT Government Solicitor (Applicant)
LK, self-represented (Respondent’s mother)
Legal Aid ACT
(Independent children’s representative)
File Number:
CP 156 of 2022
CP 157 of 2022
Introduction
matter involves two siblings currently the subject of care and protection orders
for the period of two years. The Director-General
(DG) seeks an extension of
those orders until the young persons turn 18 years of age, with the DG having
sole responsibility for
daily and long-term care responsibilities.
mother opposed that application and filed a cross-application seeking that the
DG’s application be dismissed. The fathers
of the siblings did not
participate in the proceedings.
independent children’s representative supported the application by the DG
in relation to the older daughter, and recommended
two-year orders for the
younger son, with provisions for a further psychiatric assessment of the mother
and which would allow for
the possibility of future restoration. The daughter
expressed a wish to remain in her foster care placement, and the son expressed
the wish to return to his mother’s care.
will initially describe the background to these proceedings, followed by the
relevant legal principles to be applied. I will then
summarily deal with the
cross-application and the questions of leave, and make a brief assessment of the
evidence, before addressing
the following issues:
with schooling;
with mental health and cannabis use;
with contact;
presumption
consideration
of application for NW; and
consideration
of application for LW.
older daughter, NW, is 14 years of age. The younger son, LW, is 12 years of age.
They have an older brother, KW, who is 17 years
of age. There are also three
older adult siblings.
May 2019, the family, consisting of LK (the mother), NW, LW and KW, moved from
NSW to the ACT.
was a history of child concern reports to authorities before and after that
move, relating to each of the young persons, including
related to significant
and persistent conflict between KW and the mother. KW had challenging
behavioural issues, and the mother
experienced considerable difficulties
parenting him. She sought support from various organisations, including CYPS.
Between and
including February and May 2020, KW was voluntarily placed into
respite care.
5 June 2020, the mother called CYPS and stated, ‘I’m done. You can
take them all, you win’. CYPS officers attended
to find the children
packing their bags. The mother indicated she was unable to continue to care for
the young persons. Emergency
action occurred and the three young persons were
placed into foster care.
3 December 2021 Special Magistrate Campbell, as she was then, made final care
and protection orders for each of the young persons
for the period of two years,
which included provisions for contact, residence, supervision, discussions,
access to the mother’s
residence, drug testing and daily and long-term
care responsibility being shared between the mother and the DG. When doing so,
Honour made the following findings:
young persons had missed a significant amount of schooling, and any
mother had demonstrated a negative view about education.
was significantly behind his peers academically and the mother had not sought
any assistance or support to address his obvious
learning difficulties and that
lack of intervention had a significant impact upon his development.
mother’s neglect in relation to education had caused significant harm to
the wellbeing and development of the young persons.
mother had a history of multiple presentations for depression, anxiety and
stress, and presented to CYPS and other support services
as overwhelmed by the
demands of parenting.
mother had experienced delusions about seeing her ex-partner and sensing he was
in the house.
mother was diagnosed as suffering from major depressive disorder but did not
accept that diagnosis.
mother did not engage in recommended psychological therapy.
mother had regularly required vast amounts of support in regulating or
de-escalating her emotions and had exhibited erratic and
hostile behaviour
during supervised contact visits.
mother had sent a number of aggressive and threatening messages to her first
CYPS case worker, including to his, and his partner’s,
private Facebook
organisations had withdrawn their assistance due to the mother’s
aggressive behaviour.
mother believed her mental health was directly attributable to the grief that
had been caused by CYPS actions and her mental health
would improve if the young
persons were restored to her care.
mother often behaved in a way that sabotaged the support she was receiving,
which lead to the cessation of that support.
mother’s unpredictable behaviour seemed to move rapidly and without
obvious explanation from cooperation and positive engagement
to outright
hostility, and it was very likely that the mother’s interactions with the
young persons had followed a similar
at the time of the hearing the mother was willing to care for the young persons,
she was not able to do so.
the purpose of these proceedings, I adopt those findings.
statutory framework in the Territory for care and protection proceedings has
been described as not being complex:
WS v Director-General, Community
Services Directorate
[2018] ACTSC 144
. However, the character,
structure and number of relevant provisions within the
Children and Young
People Act 2008
, and how they may or may not interrelate, could not be
described as simple or intuitive. For example, some provisions create a right
for parties to apply for orders, others provide a power for the court to make
orders and others again - and often more than one,
described the criteria for
making an order. On top of that there are various lists of principles to be
applied and a range of procedural
restrictions. Additionally, there is a degree
of duplication between provisions, which may lead to uncertainty and subsequent
inconsistent
application. Due to the scale of these provisions, I have
reproduced them in the schedule, rather than within the text of these
the context of the present applications, I understand the legislation provides
as follows. The DG, as a party to the existing
care and protection orders may
apply for an extension of the existing orders, but must do so with leave –
and the court must
grant that leave:
Separately, the mother, as a
party to the application, may cross-apply for different provisions within the
proposed orders, but
must do so with leave, and the court can only grant that
leave if satisfied there are reasonable grounds for believing the different
provisions are in the best interest of the young persons:
mother has only sought in her cross-application for the DG’s application
to be dismissed.)
court may extend the order if satisfied that it is in the best interests of the
young persons to do so:
Additionally, or possibly instead thereof,
the court may extend the parental responsibility provisions within the existing
and protection orders, if those provisions were, as in this case, for two
years or less and the court is again satisfied that it
is in the best interests
of the young persons to do so:
. It may be important to note
that this second jurisdiction, on the face of the provision, relates
specifically to the parental responsibility
provisions, and not the existing
care and protection orders more generally. There is a presumption, rebuttable
– in limited
circumstances, that it is in the best interests of the young
persons to be subject to parental responsibility provisions, in relation
daily and long-term care, until the age of 18 years, because here the DG has had
an aspect of daily care responsibility since
emergency action was taken on 5
June 2020 and the young persons have been living with a carer under a care and
protection order since
early June 2020:
. The presumption
is only rebutted if the mother satisfies the court that she is
‘likely’ to be able to resume care during
the period of the
extension and separately it is in the best interests of the young persons for
her to do so:
The term ‘likely’ must be read in
light of the care and protection principles that parents have the primary
responsibility
for the care and protection of their children and priority should
be given to supporting parents to perform that role:
I have differentiated the jurisdictions provided by
proceed on the basis that where that presumption in the second jurisdiction is
triggered and remains undisturbed, and due
to the inclusion of the daily care
responsibility within that presumption, the court may then readily find it is
also in the best
interest of a young person to extend the order in relation to
the other associated conditions such as residence, contact and supervision.
Additionally,
the authority referred to above –
, provides that an order
extending, amending or revoking a care and protection order is, itself, a care
and protection order and therefore,
before the court makes any such order, it
must comply with the conditions precedent listed in
That is, the court
must also consider the care plan prepared by the DG and be satisfied, in
addition to the best interest test,
young persons are in need of care and protection; and
provisions within the orders are necessary to ensure the care and protection of
the young persons.
doctrine of precedent requires this court to follow that approach adopted in
. However, I note there are strong arguments to the contrary,
including in particular when there is an application to revoke a care
protection order. That is, it would be incongruous to read the Act as requiring
a positive finding that a young person was in
need of care and protection before
the court could revoke such an order because, they were not in need of that care
and protection.
However, that incongruity does not arise in the present case
where there is an application to extend the order.
young person is in need of care and protection if:
have been or are being abused or neglected or there is a significant risk of
abuse or neglect; and
one with parental responsibility is willing and able to protect the young person
from the abuse or neglect:
CP v Director-General of Community Services
[2017] ACTSC 394
, that ‘neglect’, as defined at
to be the failure
to provide a necessity of life, must include a failure to provide education of
Additionally,
there are other defined examples of when a young person is in need of care and
protection, but none are relevant here.
In particular, the abandonment example
does not appear to apply, notwithstanding the mother at one stage surrendering
persons to the DG. That is because I read that example from the
legislation as being part of a broader description where those with
responsibility are, at the time of the hearing, unwilling or unable to provide
care. It is an example of when a young person
may be in need of care and
protection and not an example of abuse or neglect of itself:
s 345(2)(b).
Put another way, it is not applicable in circumstances as here where there may
have been abandonment in the past, but the parent
now wishes to care for the
young person.
relation to the best interest test, a list of mandatory considerations is
provided at
The court is also required to have regard to the
principles applying to the Act and those applying to care and protection
proceedings
The cross-application and leave
described above, the Act provides for cross-applications, where a respondent
seeks orders with different provisions. That is not
the case here. The mother
simply seeks that the court dismiss the DG’s application. I will deal
with her position while considering
the DG’s application, and consequently
there is no work for the cross-application to do. Accordingly, I will not grant
for that cross-application and will dismiss the same. As required, I will
grant leave for the DG’s application and then determine
the issues between
the parties within that principal application.
The DG’s and mother’s positions
basis of the DG’s application is that both young persons remain at risk of
neglect. In particular:
Educational
neglect of NW and LW, in that both young persons have had very poor attendance
at school and any homeschooling, which
had been conducted, has not been
registered in the Territory.
and developmental neglect of LW, in that he has been diagnosed with a mild
intellectual disability and a developmental language
disorder, and there is a
risk of a profound and long-lasting impact without immediate intervention; and
the mother denies these conditions
existed before LW was taken into care and has
demonstrated a general inability to maintain effective relationships with
service providers.
abuse of NW and LW, in that:
June 2020, the mother told the young persons to pack their bags as they were
going to be taken by CYPS;
August 2020, the mother threatened the young persons during a supervised contact
August, telling the young persons that contact was a waste of time and they were
better off in foster care; and
2020 to February 2023, not adequately engaging in available contact
opportunities with the young persons.
mother suffers from poor mental health, including failing to engage in
recommended treatment, engaging in aggressive and threatening
conduct to service
providers and CYPS officers, and being involuntarily admitted to the Adult
Mental Health Unit at Canberra Hospital
in late 2022.
mother’s position is that she:
good reason to homeschool her children and did so effectively;
a crisis when her son LW behaved very poorly and she sought support from
psychosis, due to consuming medication as prescribed, at about the time she
surrendered the young persons; and
since suffered poor mental health, including depression, due to her difficult
interactions with CYPS.
The evidence
have carefully read and listened to the evidence and formed the view that where
there is inconsistency between the mother’s
evidence and that of
DG’s, I prefer the latter. There are a number of inconsistencies within
the mother’s reporting
that suggest she is not a reliable historian.
Examples include, attesting in her affidavit that she had no history of mental
issues, but volunteering a history during her evidence; suggesting she is
of aboriginal decent, while not providing any basis for
the same and her parents
denying any awareness of the same; and the inconsistency about the
children’s exposure to domestic
violence by the mother’s former
partner, and when he left the relationship.
Issues with schooling
Unfortunately,
the concerns contained within Magistrate Campbell’s findings appear to
have continued. During this hearing,
the mother showed no insight into the
value of traditional school-based education and insisted that LW’s
learning difficulties
arose only since he was placed into out of home care. I
do not accept that and prefer and accept the evidence that the difficulties
pre-existed LW going into care. The mother continued to embrace the merits of
rigour what would be
involved with such schooling. The mother also volunteered during the hearing
that she continues to regularly
use cannabis and was under the influence of the
same on the first day of the hearing. Considering her demonstrated challenges
parenting and mental health, and LW’s learning difficulties, I was
unpersuaded she could effectively conduct the role of teacher
defer to the wishes of LW in relation to whether
he attended a traditional
school, with the various additional supports available there, or whether he
would remain at home and purportedly
be home schooled.
note the mother’s concerns that LW was only attending school for a couple
of hours each day, and that were he to be restored
to her care, she would be
able to home school him for longer periods, including at flexible times that
better suited his needs.
(Unfortunately, the evidence was unclear if that rate
of attendance had recently increased.) While I accept that in the best of
circumstances, that may be possible, I do not accept that the mother, with her
current challenges, would be able to provide a better
arrangement for learning
than what has been put in place by the DG, and I also strongly doubt her
capacity to consistently perform
that role. Additionally, I note and accept the
evidence, that under the current arrangements, LW receives the benefits of a
learning support assistant and play therapist, and his school and
foster carers received the assistance of a behavioural therapist.
While funding
could be made available for the latter two services to be provided –
should there be restoration, the mother’s
history with dealing with
service providers suggests there is a strong likelihood those relationships
would quickly break down.
mother’s historic approach and continuing attitude to traditional
schooling would also impact NW’s attendance were
there to be restoration.
Prior to going into care, NW’s attendance was very poor. Following going
into care, she has quickly
settled well into school and has expressed a strong
desire to remain with her foster carers and school peer group.
to the above circumstances, I find that there remains a significant risk that
both young persons would suffer educational neglect,
to a significant degree,
were they to be restored to the mother’s care.
Issues with mental health and cannabis use
indicated above in Magistrate Campbell’s findings, the mother was
diagnosed with a major depressive disorder. She continues
to contest that
diagnosis but did not provide any expert evidence to the contrary. During the
two years since the final orders,
the mother did not engage in the recommended
treatment, nor did she provide any independent evidence of what treatment she
had received.
The mother was also admitted involuntarily to the Adult Mental
Health Unit in late 2022 and discharged with recommended support
from ACT Mental
Health Services. She did not engage in that support.
mother also admitted to regularly self-medicating with cannabis and being under
the influence of the same on the first day of
the hearing.
Issues with contact
has been very limited contact between the mother and the young persons since the
2021 orders. The reasons are not completely
clear. The COVID lockdown
prevented in-person contact for a period of time and the mother did not
participate during that period
in remote contact. She indicated she did not
have access to a computer and her phone was too old to download the required
application.
It remains unclear why alternative arrangements could not have
been made, for example phone contact. The correspondence in evidence
communications between CYPS and the mother were unproductive, with aggressive
response by the mother in response to professional
that the mother sought to record her interactions with CYPS, and following
concerns about threatening
behaviour, CYPS obtained a workplace protection
order, and the mother was restricted to interacting with CYPS by email with a
senior CYPS officer. Notwithstanding those difficulties, infrequent
supervised in-person contact has recommenced, with attendances
in February,
July, and September this year. The contact appeared to be positive, without any
issues identified. Additionally, both
young persons have, at times, contacted
the mother using their own electronic resources. That contact also appears to
has expressed a clear desire to remain with her foster carers. LW has expressed
a strong desire to return to the care of the mother.
What is clear, is that the
intervening two years since the last final order has not resulted in any
improvement in the relationship
between the mother and the young
Presumption threshold
described above, circumstances exist to trigger, for both young persons, the
presumption provided at
that it is in the best interests of the young
persons to be subject to parental responsibility provisions, in relation to both
and long-term care, until the age of 18 years. I will now turn to whether
the mother has established that she is ‘likely’
to be able to resume
care during the period of the extension and separately it is in the best
interests of the young persons for
her to do so.
Consideration of application for NW
relation to NW, it would be difficult for me to positively find that it would be
in the best interests for her to be restored to
the mother’s care. The
very difficult circumstances in which she was removed from the mother’s
care are in stark contrast
to her settled and positive arrangements in her
foster care placement and healthy engagement with school and school peers.
Unsurprisingly,
NW has expressed a desire to remain with the current
arrangements. Additionally, the carers are available to provide an ongoing
long-term placement. The possibility that the mother may be able to provide
adequate and stable care is just that, only a possibility.
It would depend upon
improvements in her mental health, where such improvements are uncertain and
depend upon many factors, possibly
including addressing the mother’s
cannabis use. Any improvement attained may also be unstable, as such conditions
are notoriously
chronic in nature. I have formed this view taking into account
the various principles and considerations, including particularly
mother’s primary responsibility to care for NW, and that priority must be
given to supporting her to do so; the need to
ensure NW is not at risk of
neglect or abuse, her wishes, the likely effect on continuing the current
settled arrangements compared
with restoration and the uncertainty associated
with that, the importance to NW of having a settled, stable and permanent living
arrangement, and the importance of making a decision to facilitate that at the
earliest appropriate opportunity.
those reasons, I am strongly of the view that the presumption is not rebutted
and separately in any event, it is in NW’s
best interests for her to
remain in her current care arrangements and for orders to be made. It is also
in her best interests for
the final order to extend until she turns 18 years of
age, as opposed to a shorter period of time, as this will provide the best
degree of permanency.
have considered the DG’s care plan for NW. It appears appropriate and I
note it anticipates the long-term continuation of
the current foster care
placement, and the facilitation of meaningful contact with the mother,
NW’s siblings and extended family,
each in line with NW’s wishes. I
also expressly find that NW remains in need of care and protection due to past
neglect and a future risk of significant abuse and neglect, namely in
relation to her education and emotions, and no-one with parental
responsibility
is willing and able to protect her from the same. I am also satisfied in the
circumstances, that sole parental responsibility,
residence, contact and
supervision provisions to the DG are necessary.
Consideration of application for LW
determination for LW is not as clear as for NW. While LW is stable in his
foster care placement, his engagement in school is incomplete.
At best he is
only attending part-time each day. There are significant behavioural and
learning difficulties, and he appears to
be becoming more resistant to attending
school. Support to LW and to his carers and teachers is in place, and some
appear to be
linked to his current placement and would therefore need to be
replaced should restoration occur. He is not in a common placement
with NW, so
keeping him together with his sister is not a consideration. He has also
expressed a consistent desire to return to
the mother’s care. In short,
he has complex learning and behavioural needs and is not enjoying school, but
has a stable placement
and would like to return to his mother.
Independent Children’s Lawyer has suggested two-year orders, with an
assessment provision and provisions that provide the
mother may select from a
list of available psychiatrists to perform the assessment, and provisions that
provide for a new caseworker,
who has not had any involvement in the matter; all
with the hope of facilitating restoration. Those proposed provisions are
to address concerns the mother has about the appropriateness and
impartiality of psychiatrists and case workers. However, the need
provisions in order to attempt an assessment and allow communication between the
mother and CYPS underscores the difficulties
and distrust the mother has with
engaging with CYPS and other service providers. This occurs in the context of
significant mental
health instability and continued cannabis use. It also
follows a period of two years with only limited contact between the mother
LW, which was limited at least in part due to the way the mother interacted with
CYPS and other support services. It followed
the mother voluntarily
surrendering LW along with his two siblings, albeit where KW was particularly
difficult to parent.
is hard to not have sympathy for LW’s desire to return to the mother and
to not entertain some glimmer of hope that the mother
will do what is necessary
to become able to care for LW. However, the presumption applies, and I need to
be satisfied that the mother
is ‘likely’ to be able to resume care
during the period of the extension and separately it is in the best interests of
the young persons for her to do so. Even assuming that ‘likely’
here may be equivalent to something closer to a ‘real
possibility’,
it is difficult to positively find that that is the case. It could be said it
would be much easier for the mother
to care for one child, rather than the
three, which was the case when she fell into crisis and surrendered the children
However, the behavioural difficulties LW is exhibiting are not trivial
and have included police attendance at the school. The mother
has also not
effectively engaged with CYPS to date, nor a number of other support services.
That is likely to continue, even with
a change of personnel. She has also been
consistently resistant to engaging in mental health treatment, including as
recommended
as part of the last proceedings and following her discharge from
hospital late last year. There is no basis to be optimistic that
will engage differently to how she has done before. The policy behind the
presumption is presumably to prioritise the
importance of the considerations
involving stability and the need to settle arrangements as early as appropriate.
The legislature
appears to have determined that two years of care and protection
orders is enough time to allow a parent to engage in support, make
improvements
and demonstrate they are likely to be able to assume the care of the young
person. That has not happened here, and
I find accordingly. The presumption
has not been rebutted.
have also considered the DG’s care plan for LW. It also appears
appropriate and similarly to NW’s anticipates the long-term
continuation
of the current foster care placement, and the facilitation of meaningful contact
with the mother, LW’s siblings
and extended family, each in line with
LW’s wishes. I also expressly find that LW remains in need of care and
protection due
to past abuse and neglect and a future risk of significant abuse
and neglect, namely in relation to his education, development and
Further, no-one with parental responsibility is willing and able to protect him
from the same. Again, and similarly to
NW, I am also satisfied in the
circumstances, that the assignment of sole parental responsibility, residence,
provisions to the DG are necessary. Finally, I consider
that this outcome to be in the best interests of LW and have taken into
the various considerations and principles that are applicable, including in
particular that it is the mother’s primary
responsibility to care for LW,
and that priority must be given to supporting her to do so; the need to ensure
LW is not at risk of
neglect or abuse, his wishes, the likely effect on
continuing the current settled arrangements compared with restoration and the
uncertainty associated with that, the importance to LW of having a settled,
stable and permanent living arrangement, and the importance
of making a decision
to facilitate that at the earliest appropriate opportunity.
Accordingly,
I make the following orders for both young persons:
Director-General has leave to make an application to extend the final care and
protection orders in relation to the young person.
care and protection order dated 3 December 2021 is amended to read as
final Care and Protection Order is made until the young person attains 18 years
of age, with the following provisions for that same
a) The Director-General is authorised to decide with whom the young person may
have contact;
b) The Director-General is authorised to decide where the young person may
c) The young person is placed under the supervision of the Director-General;
d) The daily care responsibility for the young person is transferred to the
Director-General; and
e) The long-term care responsibility for the young person is transferred to the
Director-General.
I certify that the preceding forty-one [41] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Decision of his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Alyssa Zanardo
Date: 21 February 2024
applying to Act
(1) In making a decision under this Act in
relation to a child or young person, a decision-maker must have regard to the
principles where relevant, except when it is, or would be, contrary to
the best interests of a child or young person:
(a) the child’s or young person’s sense of racial, ethnic,
religious, individual or cultural identity should be preserved
and enhanced;
(b) the child’s or young person’s education, training or lawful
employment should be encouraged and continued without
unnecessary interruption;
(c) the child’s or young person’s age, maturity, developmental
capacity, sex, background and other relevant characteristics
considered;
(d) delay in decision-making processes under the Act should be avoided
because delay is likely to prejudice the child’s or
young person’s
In addition to these general principles, the following principles
also apply:
(a) for the care and protection chapters—care and protection
principles (see s 350);
(b) for ch 20—childcare services principles (see s 730).
(2) A decision-maker exercising a function under this Act must, where
practicable and appropriate, have qualifications, experience
or skills suitable
to apply the principles in subsection (1) in making decisions under the Act in
relation to children and young
In this Act:
, of a child or young person, means—
(a) physical abuse; or
(b) sexual abuse; or
(c) emotional abuse (including psychological abuse) if the child or young
person has experienced the abuse or is experiencing the
abuse in a way that has
caused or is causing significant harm to their wellbeing or development; or
(d) emotional abuse (including psychological abuse) if—
(i) the child or young person has seen or heard the physical, sexual or
psychological abuse of a person with whom the child or young
person has a
domestic relationship, the exposure to which has caused or is causing
significant harm to the wellbeing or development
of the child or young person;
(ii) if the child or young person has been put at risk of seeing or hearing
abuse mentioned in subparagraph (i), the exposure to
which would cause
significant harm to the wellbeing or development of the child or young
In this Act:
, of a child or a young person, means a failure to
provide the child or young person with a necessity of life if the failure has
or is causing significant harm to the wellbeing or development of the
child or young person.
Examples—necessities of life
care treatment
are children and young people
at risk of abuse or
For the care and protection chapters, a child or
young person is
at risk of abuse or neglect
balance of probabilities, there is a significant risk of the child or young
person being abused or neglected.
Examples—when a child is at risk of abuse or neglect
is 3 months old and the director‑general has already received 5 reports
drug users and Jane was born with
neonatal withdrawal syndrome. Jane’s parents have agreed to work with the
director‑general
to address their drug use. However, they have not
actually made the changes they agreed to make. Jane’s parents do not have
practitioners or other community support people.
is 7 years old and in the full-time care of his mother. He has never had any
has a mental illness
characterised by episodes of psychosis. When Michael’s mother has been
unwell, she has locked Michael
and herself in the home for weeks at a time.
Michael’s mother attempted suicide by driving off a bridge with Michael in
is 9 years old and is in the sole care of his father. Since Tom was
6 years old, the director‑general has received reports
Tom’s father calls him derogatory names and yells at him, often in the
presence of other people. Tom’s school counsellor
reports that Tom
appears anxious, is fearful of loud noises in the school environment and
regularly cries. Tom is assessed as being
at risk of childhood depression by
the school counsellor.
is 13 years old and regularly goes missing from home to avoid the constant
fighting between her mother and stepfather. Amy is
engaging in indiscriminate
sexual activity and regularly consumes alcohol and illicit drugs which she pays
for with money received
in exchange for sexual services. Amy has intentionally
overdosed on medication 3 times and each overdose has required medical
Amy’s parents consider that she is now making her own choices
and there is nothing they can do to help her.
are children and young people
in need of care and
(1) For the care and protection chapters, a
child or young person is
in need of care and protection
(a) the child or young person—
(i) has been abused or neglected; or
(ii) is being abused or neglected; or
(iii) is at risk of abuse or neglect; and
(b) no-one with parental responsibility for the child or young person is
willing and able to protect the child or young person from
the abuse or neglect
or the risk of abuse or neglect.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), a child or young person is in need of
care and protection if—
(a) there is a serious or persistent conflict between the child or young
person and the people with parental responsibility for the
child or young person
(other than the director‑general) to the extent that the care arrangements
for the child or young person
are, or are likely to be, seriously disrupted;
(b) the people with parental responsibility for the child or young person
are dead, have abandoned the child or young person or cannot
be found after
reasonable inquiry; or
(c) the people with parental responsibility for the child or young person
are sexually or financially exploiting the child or young
person or not willing
and able to keep the child or young person from being sexually or financially
is in best interests of child or young person?
(1) For the care
and protection chapters, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child or
young person, a decision-maker
must consider each of the following matters that
are relevant to the child or young person:
(a) the need to ensure that the child or young person is not at risk of
abuse or neglect;
(b) any views or wishes expressed by the child or young person;
(c) the nature of the child’s or young person’s relationship
with each parent and anyone else;
(d) the likely effect on the child or young person of changes to the
child’s or young person’s circumstances, including
separation from a
parent or anyone else with whom the child has been living;
(e) the practicalities of the child or young person maintaining contact with
each parent and anyone else with whom the child or young
person has been living
or with whom the child or young person has been having substantial contact;
(f) the capacity of the child’s or young person’s parents, or
anyone else, to provide for the child’s or young
person’s needs
including emotional and intellectual needs;
(g) for an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander child or young
person—that it is a high priority to protect and promote the
or young person’s cultural and spiritual identity and development by,
wherever possible, maintaining and building
the child’s or young
person’s connections to family, community and culture;
(h) that it is important for the child or young person to have settled,
stable and permanent living arrangements;
(i) for decisions about placement of a child or young person—the need
to ensure that the earliest possible decisions are made
and stable placement;
(j) the attitude to the child or young person, and to parental
responsibilities, demonstrated by each of the child’s or young
person’s parents or anyone else;
(k) any abuse or neglect of the child or young person, or a family member of
the child or young person;
(l) any court order that applies to the child or young person, or a family
member of the child or young person.
(2) For the care and protection chapters, in deciding what is in the best
interests of a child or young person, a decision-maker
may also consider any
other fact or circumstance the decision-maker considers relevant.
and protection principles
(1) In making a decision under the
care and protection chapters in relation to a child or young person, a
decision-maker must apply
the following principles (the
protection principles
) except when it is, or would be, contrary to the
best interests of a child or young person—
(a) the primary responsibility for providing care and protection for the
child or young person lies with the child’s or young
parents and other family members;
(b) priority must be given to supporting the child’s or young
person’s parents and other family members to provide for
the wellbeing,
care and protection of the child or young person;
(c) if the child or young person does not live with their family because of
the operation of this Act—contact with their family,
and significant
people, must be encouraged, if practicable and appropriate;
(d) if the child or young person is in need of care and protection and the
child’s or young person’s parents and other
family members are
unwilling or unable to provide the child or young person with adequate care and
protection (whether temporarily
or permanently)—it is the responsibility
of the government to share or take over their responsibility;
(e) if the child or young person does not live with the child’s or
young person’s parents because of the operation of
this Act—the
safety and wellbeing of the child are more important than the interests of the
(f) a court should make an order for a child or young person only if the
court considers that making the order would be better for
the child or young
person than making no order at all.
(2) The care and protection principles must be applied in addition to the
principles under section 9 (Principles applying to Act)
and section 10
(Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children and young people principle).
The Maori children and young people principle may also apply if
an order or proceeding is transferred to the ACT from New Zealand
(see s 678).
care and protection order
In this Act:
care and protection order
(a) means an order about the care and protection of a child or young person;
(b) may contain any of the following provisions:
(i) a contact provision;
(ii) a drug use provision;
(iii) an enduring parental responsibility provision;
(iv) an ACAT mental health provision;
(v) a residence provision;
(vi) a short-term parental responsibility provision;
(vii) a long-term parental responsibility provision;
(viii) a specific issues provision;
(ix) a supervision provision.
and protection order—application by
director‑general
The director‑general may apply to
the Childrens Court for a care and protection order for a child or young person
if the director‑general
believes on reasonable grounds that the child or
young person is in need of care and protection.
Statements, documents and reports must be included in the
application (see s 696).
Oral applications may also be made (see s 698).
and protection order—cross-application for different
(1) A party to a proceeding for a care and
protection order for a child or young person may cross-apply for a different
to be included in the order, different terms in a provision in the
order or a different order, if the party—
(a) believes on reasonable grounds that the different provision, terms or
order is in the best interests of the child or young person;
(b) has leave of the Childrens Court to cross-apply.
Example—different term in provision in order
An order includes a residence provision about with whom the child must live.
A party may cross-apply for the residence provision
to provide for the child to
live with a different person.
(2) If a party seeks the leave of the Childrens Court to cross-apply, the
court may give leave only if satisfied that there are reasonable
grounds for
believing that the different provision, terms or order is in the best interests
of the child or young person.
Statements, documents and reports must be included in the
application (see s 696).
Oral applications may also be made (see s 698).
and protection order—criteria for making
Childrens Court may make a care and protection order for a child or young person
if the court—
(a) is satisfied that the child or young person is in need of care and
protection; and
(b) has considered the care plan prepared by the director‑general for
the child or young person; and
(c) is satisfied that—
(i) the provisions included in the order are necessary to ensure the care
and protection of the child or young person; and
(ii) making the order is in the best interests of the child or young
(2) The Childrens Court must include in a care and protection order, on
application or its own initiative, any of the following provisions
Childrens Court is satisfied is in the best interests of the child or young
(a) a contact provision;
(b) a drug use provision;
(c) an enduring parental responsibility provision;
(d) an ACAT mental health provision;
(e) a residence provision;
(f) a short-term parental responsibility provision;
(g) a long-term parental responsibility provision;
(h) a specific issues provision;
(i) a supervision provision.
(3) However, the Childrens Court must not include in a care and protection
order an enduring parental responsibility provision unless
satisfied that the
criteria mentioned in section 482 (Enduring parental responsibility
provision—criteria for making) are met.
(4) Unless the Childrens Court orders otherwise, the director‑general
must give a copy of a care plan provided for a proceeding
to each other party to
the proceeding.
(5) The Childrens Court—
(a) must not merely accept the admission of the parties to the proceeding
that the child or young person is in need of care and protection;
(b) must satisfy itself that the child or young person is in need of care
and protection.
In a proceeding for a care and protection order, a fact is
proved if it is proved on the balance of probabilities
(see s 711).
The court may make an order imposing an obligation on a person
only if the person agrees to it, has been given an opportunity to be
heard about
it or cannot be found (see s 718).
(6) The Childrens Court may include a provision in a care and protection
order on application by a party to the proceeding or on
its own initiative.
(7) If the Childrens Court intends someone to make decisions about where the
child or young person lives, the court must include
a residence provision in the
care and protection order.
and protection order—extension and amendment
applications
(1) A person may apply to the Childrens Court for
extension or amendment of a care and protection order, or a provision in a care
and protection order, if the person—
(a) believes on reasonable grounds that the extension or amendment is in the
best interests of the child or young person; and
(b) has the leave of the Childrens Court to make the application.
(2) The Childrens Court must give leave to someone who was a party to the
proceeding in which the care and protection order was made.
(3) However, the Childrens Court may give leave to someone to apply more
than once in a 12-month period only if satisfied that there
significant change in any relevant circumstances since the care and protection
order was made or last extended or amended.
Statements, documents and reports must be included in the
application (see s 696).
Oral applications may also be made (see s 698).
and protection order—criteria for extensions and
(1) The Childrens Court may, by order, extend or
amend a provision in a care and protection order if satisfied that extending or
amending the order as proposed is in the best interests of the child or young
(2) The court may extend a provision in a care and protection order for as
long as the court considers appropriate.
(3) The court may amend a provision in a care and protection order in any
way the court considers appropriate, including—
(a) substituting a provision with a different provision; or
(b) including an additional provision.
The length of a care and protection order may be extended if
the Childrens Court makes an annual review report order about an annual
report for a child or young person who is subject to a care and protection order
(see pt 14.3).
In a proceeding for a care and protection order, a fact is
proved if it is proved on the balance of probabilities
(see s 711).
The court may make an order imposing an obligation on a person
only if the person agrees to it, has been given an opportunity to be
heard about
it or cannot be found (see s 718).
(4) This section is subject to section 477 (Short-term parental
responsibility provision—extension).
short-term parental responsibility provision
care and protection chapters:
short-term parental responsibility provision
means a parental
responsibility provision in a care and protection order that is not longer
(a) for a child who is younger than 2 years old when the order is
made—1 year; and
(b) in any other case—2 years.
The length of a care and protection order is dealt with in
parental responsibility provision—extension
Childrens Court may extend a short-term parental responsibility provision in a
care and protection order (the
extension decision
) if satisfied
that extending the provision is in the best interests of the child or young
(2) However, for subsection (1) it is a rebuttable presumption that it is in
the best interests of the child or young person for
the child or young person to
be subject to a long-term parental responsibility provision if—
(a) for a child who is younger than 2 years old when the extension
decision is made—
(i) the director‑general has had an aspect of daily care
responsibility or long-term care responsibility for a total of at
1 year before the extension decision is made; and
(ii) the child or young person has been living with a stated person under a
care and protection order for a total of at least 1 year
extension decision is made; or
(b) in any other case—
(i) the director‑general has had an aspect of daily care
responsibility or long-term care responsibility for—
(A) the 2 years immediately before the extension decision is made;
(B) a total of at least 2 years in the 3 years immediately before
the extension decision is made; and
(ii) the child or young person has been living with a stated person under a
care and protection order for—
(A) the 2 years immediately before the extension decision is made;
(B) a total of at least 2 years in the 3 years immediately before
the extension decision is made.
(3) To rebut the presumption, a person who is a parent of the child or young
person, or someone else who has had parental responsibility
for the child or
young person during the term of the order, must satisfy the Childrens Court
(a) the person is likely to be able to resume care of the child or young
person during the period of extension; and
(b) it is in the best interests of the child or young person for the person
to resume care of the child or young person during the
period of extension.
(4) In subsection (2):
stated person
(a) the carer under the care and protection order; or
(b) one parent to the exclusion of another parent; or
(c) a family member who is not a parent.
A short-term parental responsibility provision may be extended,
amended or revoked under pt 14.5.
If an application has been made to the Childrens Court for a
care and protection order and the application is adjourned, any parental
responsibility provision that is in force at the time of the adjournment may be
extended until the end of the adjournment or revoked
(see s 431).
long-term parental responsibility provision
care and protection chapters:
long-term parental responsibility provision
means a parental
responsibility provision in a care and protection order that—
(a) is in force until the child or young person is 18 years old; and
(b) transfers daily care responsibility and long-term care responsibility
for the child or young person to the director‑general
or another stated
person, unless the order states that a particular aspect of responsibility is
transferred.
A parental responsibility provision that transfers daily care responsibility
for a child or young person to the director‑general
until the child or
young person is 18 years old but does not transfer long-term care
responsibility to the director‑general.
The length of a care and protection order is dealt with in
RTF format (256 KB)
Signed PDF/A format