Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Bandarage [2019] ACTSCFC 1 (18 March 2019)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Bandarage
[2019] ACTSCFC 1
Hearing Date(s):
Murrell CJ, Loukas-Karlsson J and Walmsley AJ
Pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2006
Respondent Chanaka Nihal Bandarage’s name is removed from the roll of
people admitted to the legal profession maintained
by the Supreme Court pursuant
of the said Act.
The order made by Mossop J on 12 July 2017 anonymising the
Respondent’s name is vacated.
Catchwords:
LEGAL PRACTITIONERS
– DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDING –
Application for removal from the roll of legal practitioners – When ACAT
recommended
that the practitioner’s name be removed from the roll –
Where the practitioner was subject to multiple disciplinary proceedings
Whether the practitioner is a fit and proper person to practise law
Legislation Cited:
Human Rights Act 2004
Practitioners Act 1970
Legal Profession Act 2006
Cases Cited:
A Solicitor v Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
Allinson v General Council of Medical Education and Registration
[1894] UKLawRpKQB 36
[1894] 1 QB 750
Attorney-General v Bax
[1998] QCA 089
[1999] 2 Qd
Barristers’ Board v Darveniza
[2000] QCA 253
of the Law Society of New South Wales v Parente
[2019] NSWCA
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v The Legal Practitioner
‘Y’ (Occupational Discipline)
[2012] ACAT 40
the Law Society of the ACT v The Legal Practitioner ‘Y’
(Occupational Regulation)
[2013] ACAT 8
Council of the Law Society of
the ACT v The Legal Practitioner ‘X’ (Occupational Discipline)
[2012] ACAT 34
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v The Legal
Practitioner ‘X’ (Occupational Discipline)
[2012] ACAT
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v LP 12
[2018] ACTCA 60
Guidice v Legal Profession Complaints Committee
[2016] WASCA 159
In re a Complaint
(Unreported, Professional
Conduct Board of the ACT Law Society, 21 December 2006)
Law Society of New
South Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Law Society of South
Australia v Murphy
[1999] SASC 83
Law Society of the ACT v Powrie
[2017] ACTSCFC 4
12 ACTLR 184
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law
Society of the ACT (No 2)
[2015] ACTSC 317
Legal Practitioner v
Council of the Law Society of the ACT (No 2)
[2016] ACTCA 67
Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT (No 3)
[2017] ACTCA
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
Legal Practitioner v Council of
the Law Society of the ACT
[2016] ACTCA 46
Legal Practitioner v
Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2017] HCASL 2
Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2018] ACTCA
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2018] HCASL 339
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of
[2018] HCASL 340
Legal Practitioner v Law Society of the
Australian Capital Territory
[2018] ACTSC 351
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Le Poidevin
[2001] SASC 242
83 SASR 443
Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
52 NSWLR 279
South Wales Bar Association v Evatt
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
Re Maidment
(1992) 23 ATR 629
Southern Law Society v Westbrook
[1910] HCA 31
(1910) 10 CLR
Strik v The Netherlands
, Communication No. 1001/2001, UN Doc
CCPR/C/76/D/1001/2001 (29 June 1999)
The Law Society of the Australian
Capital Territory v The Legal Practitioner (Occupational Discipline)
The Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v The Legal
Practitioner (Occupational Discipline)
[2011] ACAT 51
Wentworth v New
South Bales Bar Association
(1992) 176 CLR 239
Ziems v Prothonotary of the Supreme Court (NSW)
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR
Texts Cited:
General Comment No. 32 – Article 14: Rights to equality before
courts and tribunals and to a fair trial
, UN Doc CCPR/C/GC/32 (23 August
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Council of the Law Society of the ACT (Applicant)
Chanaka Nihal Bandarage (Respondent)
Representation:
Mr N Beaumont SC (Applicant)
Self-represented (Respondent)
Phelps Reid Lawyers (Applicant)
Self-represented (Respondent)
File Number(s):
SC 44 of 2017
Introduction
1. Relying on
Legal Profession Act 2006
(LPA), the Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory (the
Council) asked the Full Court to order that
the practitioner’s name be
removed from the local roll of practitioners.
2. In 1996, the practitioner
was admitted to practice in the ACT and NSW. From 1998, he held an unrestricted
practising certificate.
Apart from a 12-month period when he practised in NSW,
the practitioner held an unrestricted practising certificate in the ACT from
1998 until 30 June 2012, when it was not renewed.
3. Between 2006 and 2013,
the practitioner was the subject of four ACT disciplinary proceedings relating
to conduct that had occurred
between 2005 and 2009 (and, on one occasion, in
4. At the conclusion of the fourth disciplinary proceedings in
February 2013, under s 425(3)(a) of the LPA, the ACT Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (the Tribunal) recommended that the practitioner’s name be
removed from the local roll of practitioners.
5. The Council commenced the
present proceedings on 10 April 2017, but the hearing of the proceedings was
delayed by appeals against
the Tribunal’s decisions in the third and
fourth disciplinary proceedings, and by interlocutory applications.
Interlocutory application in the removal proceedings
6. In interlocutory proceedings relating to this application,
the practitioner sought a variety of orders, including an order that
the removal
application be heard by a bench consisting only of “interstate
judges”: Legal Practitioner v Law Society
of the Australian Capital
[2018] ACTSC 351 (Recusal
Decision). The practitioner argued that
particular judges (especially Burns, Mossop and Elkaim JJ, but also Murrell CJ)
had displayed
actual or apprehended bias towards him: see Recusal Decision at
[23]–[25]. In relation to Murrell CJ, the practitioner relied
correspondence between himself and the Registrar, and contended that her
Honour’s role in appointing Admissions Board
members gave rise to
apprehended bias: at [29]. Further, the practitioner canvassed a concept of
“institutional bias”,
contending that all judges of the Court were
biased towards him, or a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend
might not bring an impartial and unprejudiced mind to the resolution
of matters involving him.
7. Murrell CJ decided that a fair-minded lay
observer would not conclude that, as head of jurisdiction, she would not afford
him fairness
and impartiality: Recusal Decision at [37]. Her Honour refused the
application that the Full Court application be heard by “interstate
judges”, inter alia because the evidence disclosed no basis for reasonable
concern about “institutional bias”,
even if “institutional
bias” could legitimately found a complaint of bias: at [43]–[51].
Her Honour observed that
the practitioner’s distrust of resident judges of
the Court seemed to arise primarily from the fact that some had made decisions
adverse to him, and the practitioner’s perception that they may do so in
the future: at [48].
Basis of removal application
8. Section 425(3) of the LPA provides:
ACAT may make the following orders in relation to the Australian legal
practitioner:
(a) an order recommending that the name of the practitioner be removed from
the local roll;
9. Section 431(3) of the LPA provides:
(3) If the ACAT makes an order recommending that the
name of an Australian legal practitioner who is a local lawyer be removed from
the local roll—
(a) a copy of the order may be filed in the Supreme Court; and
(b) the Supreme Court may order the removal of the name from the roll.
10. The Council sought an order that:
Pursuant to
section 431(3)
Legal Profession Act 2006
, the [practitioner’s] name be removed
from the roll of people admitted to the legal profession maintained by the
Supreme Court
pursuant to
of the said Act.
11. The grounds of the original application referred to the
Court’s inherent jurisdiction to discipline local lawyers, which
expressly preserved by s 462 of the LPA:
of Supreme Court not affected
The inherent jurisdiction and
powers of the Supreme Court in relation to the control and discipline of local
lawyers are not affected
by anything in this chapter, and extend to—
(a) local legal practitioners; ...
12. However, at the hearing, the Council sought to rely on an
Amended Originating Application filed on 11 January 2019 that omitted
reference to the Court’s inherent jurisdiction from the grounds and
substituted a reference to s 431 of the LPA. The Council
had been granted leave
to file the amended application by the Deputy Registrar on 20 December 2018,
after the Recusal Decision was
handed down.
13. The practitioner objected,
saying that it was too late for the Council to seek to amend the original
application. He did not
advance any substantive reason why the Court should
refuse the amendment, merely asserting that the Council had failed to lodge the
amended application within the period for filing.
14. The question of
whether the amended application was filed out of time was left unanswered at the
15. The court record indicates that the Deputy Registrar granted
leave for the Council to file the amended application without specifying
within which it must be filed. Consequently, the amended application was not
filed out of time. Further, the court record
indicates that the order granting
leave to file the amended application was made by consent. There was every
reason for the practitioner
to have given consent. From the outset, the removal
order had been sought “pursuant to
section 431(3)
Legal Profession
”; the amendment merely brought the grounds into line with the
order sought.
16. Under the Court’s inherent jurisdiction, and under
of the LPA, the ultimate question is the same. It is whether the
practitioner is a fit and proper person to be a legal practitioner
of the Court;
whether the Court should hold out the practitioner as a fit and proper person to
be entrusted with the duties and responsibilities
of a legal practitioner: A
Solicitor v Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
216 CLR 253
17. On the other hand, there is an important procedural distinction
between an application under
of the LPA and an application that invokes
the Court’s inherent jurisdiction. On an application under the statute,
decides the issue on the basis of the Tribunal’s findings of
fact. Where proceedings rely on the Court’s inherent jurisdiction,
Court decides the background facts for itself.
18. In the course of the
hearing, there was a discussion concerning this distinction, but the
practitioner did not seek to rely on
it, and did not contend that the Council
should call the background evidence afresh. Had he done so, in the context of
the numerous
appeals questioning critical findings of fact that have been made
by the Tribunal, it is most unlikely that the Court would have
favoured the
New evidence on the strike off application
19. The practitioner sought to rely upon a bundle of materials
lodged shortly before the hearing. The bundle included a letter of
support from
the complainants in the fourth disciplinary proceedings, character references,
and media reports concerning high profile
cases in which the practitioner had
achieved success for disadvantaged clients. The bundle also contained pictures
of the practitioner
with various politicians and photocopies of the
practitioner’s testamur. A June 2012 letter from a medical practitioner
that disciplinary proceedings had caused the practitioner to feel
“depressed and anxious”, and that he experienced “fear
anxiety” in relation to his future.
20. Apart from the letter of
support from the complainants and a letter from Ms Cook, who described herself
as “Branch Manager,
Australian Government (retired)”, most of the
character references were at least two decades old.
21. One may question
the relevance of some of the materials to the issue of whether the practitioner
is currently a fit and proper
person, but the material was admitted without
objection as Exhibit 1.
22. Further, the practitioner was allowed to read an
affidavit dated 29 January 2019, in which he argued that the Recusal Decision
was erroneous in a number of respects. The affidavit also annexed
correspondence between the practitioner and the Court (concerning
vacation of
the Full Court hearing, alleged errors in the Recusal Decision and the need to
anonymise the practitioner’s identity),
and elaborated on allegations of
bias and apprehended bias on the part of the Tribunal and the Court.
the conclusion of the Full Court hearing, the practitioner was permitted to file
further short written submissions addressing
matters that had been raised during
the hearing. Further submissions were filed on 25 February 2019. While they do
not constitute
evidence, the submissions do imply a somewhat greater willingness
by the practitioner to address the real issues founding the application
History of disciplinary proceedings
First disciplinary proceedings (Barrister
24. In 2006, a barrister made a complaint under the Legal
Practitioners Act 1970 (ACT) (the 1970 Act) that, when filing an affidavit
an amended application in the Federal Magistrates Court on behalf of a client in
an immigration matter, the practitioner had
indicated that the client was filing
in person, i.e. that the practitioner was not involved in the matter. He had
then justified
his action to the barrister by saying that:
matters have poor prospects. If the client had filed the document, it is harder
for the Minister to get costs order against
the Solicitor
25. The practitioner informed the Professional Conduct Board of
the Law Society of the ACT (the Board), being the relevant disciplinary
under the 1970 Act, that he had not intended to mislead the Federal Magistrates
Court about whether there was a solicitor on
the record but understood that he
may have done so.
26. In the disciplinary proceedings, the practitioner was
represented by counsel. He did not contest the fact that the conversation
recorded above at [
] was accurate,
although he “had no recollection of what had been said in that telephone
conversation”: In re a Complaint
(Unreported, Professional Conduct Board
of the ACT Law Society, 21 December 2006) (Barrister Decision) at [11].
27. The Board was “comfortably satisfied” of the material facts
founding the complaint, most of which had been agreed
between the parties: at
[15]. It found that the practitioner’s conduct was unsatisfactory
professional conduct that was “at
the more serious end of the
scale”: at [20].
28. Although the practitioner’s conduct during
the first disciplinary proceedings was not itself the subject of a complaint,
its decision the Board criticised the practitioner for repeatedly seeking an
extension of time (Barrister Decision at [24]–[25]),
suggesting that the
complainant had acted in a blameworthy or even fraudulent manner (at [28],
[30]–[32]) and lacking candour
towards the ACT Law Society (the Society)
(at [34]). Regarding the allegation of fraud by the complainant, the Board
observed that:
... the Practitioner sought to blame someone else for his misconduct even up
until the hearing, illustrates ... that he (still)
does not fully appreciate his
ethical responsibilities as a legal practitioner.
32. These assertions by the Practitioner were outrageous, all the more so in
light of the fact that no evidence was put forward
on the Practitioner’s
behalf to support any of his assertions.
29. After these matters were brought to his attention, the
practitioner instructed counsel to unreservedly withdraw the allegations
fraud against the complainant: Barrister Decision at [31].
30. The Board
reprimanded the practitioner and required him to undertake an ethics course: at
[36]. We assume that he did so.
31. We note that the Board’s findings
were accepted into evidence and treated as relevant by the Tribunal in deciding
the penalty
in the second disciplinary proceedings: see below at [
Second disciplinary proceedings (E/T Complaint)
32. In 2008, former conveyancing clients of the practitioner
(purchasers) complained that he had deliberately reconstructed a duplicate
letter on their conveyancing file, so that the terms of the original letter
would be seen neither by them nor by the solicitors whom
they subsequently
instructed on the conveyance.
33. In response to a courteous suggestion from
the vendors’ solicitors that, as the practitioner was unfamiliar with
conveyancing practice, he might care to engage Queensland agents to
assist him, on 8 January 2008 the practitioner had written:
regret the [suggestion to engage an agent of] your letter. Exposition of such
arrogance is quite unnecessary.
34. When the clients directed the practitioner to forward their
conveyancing file to new solicitors, he removed the copy letter containing
sentence from the file and replaced it with a copy letter in which the offending
sentence did not appear. Other minor changes
were also made: The Law Society of
the Australian Capital Territory v The Legal Practitioner (Occupational
Discipline)
[2010] ACAT 69 (E/T
Liability Decision) at [42].
Tribunal observed that, during the proceedings, the practitioner’s
“answers to questions were often non-responsive
and tangential” and,
at times, “argumentative”, even taking into account the
practitioner’s understandable
stress and anxiety caused in relation to the
proceedings: E/T Liability Decision at [27] and [29]. The Tribunal observed
practitioner obfuscated and that his evidence “[had often been]
confused and confusing”: at [32]–[33].
36. Nevertheless, in
general, the material facts had been agreed between the parties: at
37. The practitioner admitted that he had changed the letter because he
had not wanted the clients’ new solicitors to see it
in its original form:
E/T Liability Decision at [90]. He said that he had been motivated by desire to
calm tensions rather than
a desire to mislead: at [51].
38. The Tribunal
rejected the practitioner’s submission that he had been entitled to do
what he wanted with the letter, because
it had been his property and his clients
had terminated his retainer. The Tribunal was “concerned that this
submission suggests
that the Respondent does not understand that his actions
involved deceit”: E/T Liability Decision at [95].
39. The Tribunal
found that the practitioner’s conduct had been both misleading and
deceptive, and that the practitioner had
breached his duty to be open and frank
in his dealings with the Law Society: E/T Liability Decision at [97]. The
Tribunal characterised
the practitioner’s conduct “as being at the
higher end of unsatisfactory professional conduct” due to the
of deception of both the client and the Law Society”: at
40. In its decision on penalty (The Law Society of the Australian
Capital Territory v The Legal Practitioner (Occupational Discipline)
[2011] ACAT
Penalty Decision)), the Tribunal recalled its concern that the
practitioner did not appreciate that his behaviour had involved deceit:
Penalty Decision at [45]. It was also concerned that the practitioner had not
learned from the first disciplinary proceedings:
41. Having regard
to the seriousness of the matter, the practitioner’s lack of insight, and
the context of the first disciplinary
proceedings, the Tribunal imposed a public
reprimand and a fine of $3000, and ordered the practitioner to pay the
costs: E/T Penalty Decision at [47], [49] and [51].
appeal, Penfold J set aside the finding that the practitioner’s conduct
had misled the Society, but otherwise upheld
the Tribunal’s determination
of unsatisfactory professional conduct and the penalties imposed.
Third disciplinary proceedings (SD/MG Complaint)
43. The third disciplinary proceedings revolved around a
conveyancing transaction in which the practitioner had acted for a couple,
44. Because SD’s middle name appeared on the mortgage, but not
the transfer delivered to the couple’s mortgagee, the mortgagee
register the transfer. The Tribunal found that, on 21 February 2008, the
mortgagee’s lawyers had asked the practitioner
for an amended transfer
that included SD’s middle name, as well as the original contract for sale.
On 28 April 2008, the practitioner
had responded by providing the incorrect
contract for sale (one that related to another property), further delaying the
and transfer of title to SD and MG: Council of the Law Society of the
ACT v The Legal Practitioner ‘X’ (Occupational
Discipline)
ACAT 34 (SD/MG
Liability Decision) at [6]–[9].
45. On 20 November
2008, the practitioner informed his clients that he had not received the
mortgagee’s February request for
the original contract for sale. He said
that he had first been asked for the original contract of sale on 28 April 2008,
the mortgagee’s lawyers had given no reason for the request:
SD/MG Liability Decision at [19].
46. Responding to the
practitioner’s communication of 20 November 2008, by an email of the same
date, SD informed the practitioner
that if he did not address the
complainants’ grievance, they would ask the Society to review the matter:
SD/MG Liability Decision
at [22], [121].
47. In a letter of 21 November
2008, the practitioner admitted to the complainants that he had made mistakes
and offered to compensate.
The offer was repeated in a letter dated 23 November
2008: SD/MG Liability Decision at [20]–[21], [122]. The complainants
responded with a particularised claim for compensation on 30 November 2008,
noting that they had already met with the Society: SD/MG
Liability Decision at
[22]–[23], [124].
48. In a letter dated 9 December 2008, the
practitioner offered to settle the claim on a compromise basis (by paying about
cent of the compensation claimed), but his offer was not accepted by the
complainants: SD/MG Liability Decision at [24], [125].
49. On 10 December
2008, the complainants formally complained to the Society. The Society wrote to
the practitioner on 12 December
2008 notifying him of the complaint: SD/MG
Liability Decision at [27]–[28].
50. Prior to the practitioner learning
of the complaint, on 12 December 2008 he wrote to the complainants, reiterating
his offer and
stating that he was giving consideration to communicating with
SD’s employer to ask whether SD had been paid wages for the
times that SD
claimed to have been working on the conveyancing problem. The complainants
forwarded that letter to the Society: SD/MG
Liability Decision at
51. The Society’s complaint to the Tribunal
proceeded on three main grounds. First, that the practitioner had failed to
and promptly discharge the retainer from his clients, in that he had
been negligent (in the sense of failing to meet the requisite
standard of
competence and diligence). Second, that he had engaged in misleading conduct
(by making deliberate or reckless misrepresentations
to SD, MG and the Society).
And third, that the practitioner had engaged in threatening and intimidating
conduct (in threatening
to contact SD’s employer).
52. The Tribunal
found that the conveyancing mistakes were “more than human error of a busy
practitioner that would be reasonable
to excuse”, amounting to
unsatisfactory professional conduct: SD/MG Liability Decision at
53. The Tribunal found that the statements blaming the mortgagee were
deliberate (or, at the very least, that they were reckless)
misrepresentations,
amounting to professional misconduct: SD/MG Liability Decision at [94], [96] and
54. The Tribunal found that the practitioner’s 12 December
letter to the complainants was an attempt to dissuade them from pursuing
complaint against him by suggesting that their conduct was “perhaps
improper, or in some way fraudulent”, and threatening
SD’s employer if a complaint was made: SD/MG Liability Decision at [128],
[134]. At [137], the Tribunal said:
threat was made by the [practitioner] on only one occasional and was not carried
out. However, it must be viewed seriously since
it was an attempt to coerce and
manipulate his clients to avoid a complaint. The Tribunal takes the view that
this conduct constitutes
professional misconduct.
55. The Tribunal handed down its penalty decision on 31 August
2012: Council of the Law Society of the ACT v The Legal Practitioner
(Occupational Discipline)
[2012] ACAT 60 (SD/MG
Penalty Decision). The Tribunal
questioned the extent to which the practitioner was remorseful (at [12]) and
noted the two prior
disciplinary proceedings.
56. The Tribunal observed
that adverse findings had been made against the practitioner in the fourth
disciplinary proceedings (discussed
below), but there had not yet been a
decision on penalty. In those circumstances, the Tribunal decided to disregard
the fourth disciplinary
proceedings: SD/MG Penalty Decision at [18]–[19].
57. The Tribunal ordered that the practitioner not be granted a local
practising certificate for three months. In making that order,
the Tribunal
said (at [33]):
loss of a practising certificate would have a profound effect on a
practitioner’s capacity to resume his or her practise,
depending on the
period of suspension. A period of three months could be seen as a watershed
period after which successful resumption
of practise would ... become
increasingly difficult.
58. The Tribunal noted that, at the conclusion of the
suspension period, the practitioner would have to reapply for a practising
certificate
and would not necessarily be granted one: SD/MG Penalty Decision at
59. The practitioner appealed against both the finding of liability and
imposition of penalty by the Tribunal. The details of the
appeal are set out
Fourth disciplinary proceedings (O/U Complaint)
60. In 2010, the fourth set of disciplinary proceedings was
instigated following a complaint by former clients of the practitioner,
husband and wife, who had retained the practitioner to undertake two
conveyancing transactions during 2009.
61. The first transaction involved
the conveyance of a Lyneham property from the husband’s name into the
joint names of the
husband and wife. The practitioner had to ensure that the
couple was charged only nominal stamp duty on the transaction. The transaction
had to be undertaken promptly so that the Lyneham property became available as
security for the couple’s purchase of a Kaleen
property, the second
transaction in which the practitioner was instructed.
62. The statutory
declaration that the practitioner lodged to support the stamp duty exemption on
transfer of the Lyneham property
was deficient; it included unnecessary material
and omitted essential material. In particular, the Tribunal found that the
practitioner
should have included a copy of the couple’s marriage
certificate. As a consequence, the discharge of the mortgage over the
property was delayed, delaying the settlement of the Kaleen property, and the
complainants had to pay penalty interest and
vendor costs totalling $1428.77:
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v The Legal Practitioner ‘Y’
(Occupational Discipline)
[2012] ACAT 40 (O/U
Liability Decision) at
63. In a discussion with the complainants on 23 June 2009,
the practitioner blamed the ACT Revenue Office for the delay: O/U Liability
Decision at [135].
64. By a letter dated 3 July 2009, the practitioner
provided an inaccurate and incomplete report to the complainants; among other
things, the report misstated the fees and disbursements, and failed to mention
that the complainants were required to pay penalty
interest and associated
vendor costs: O/U Liability Decision at [26].
65. On 20 July 2009, the
complainants complained to the Society: O/U Liability Decision at [27].
66. On 18 August 2009, the practitioner wrote to the Society, stating that
he was “not in the country” on 3 July 2009,
and sought to blame
banks and the ACT Revenue Office for the errors. The letter was attached to an
affidavit filed in the Tribunal
on 2 February 2011. In fact, on 3 July 2009,
the practitioner had been working in his office; he did not travel overseas
days later: O/U Liability Decision at [138]–[157].
4 September 2009, the practitioner wrote to the complainants purporting to
correct earlier errors and omissions. The Tribunal
observed that some errors
remained in the later letters: O/U Liability Decision at [29],
[121]–[122].
68. Before the Tribunal, the Council relied on four
grounds. First, that the practitioner had failed to act with competence and
(by failing to competently undertake the conveyances and properly
report to the complainants). Second, that he had failed to administer
practice efficiently and properly (relying on the same matters). Third, that he
had failed to act honestly and fairly (by falsely
telling the complainants that
others were responsible for the delay). And fourth, that he had failed to be
open and frank in his
dealings with the Society (letter of 18 August 2009), and
engaged misleading and deceptive conduct towards the Tribunal (affidavit
February 2011).
69. The Tribunal criticised both the content of the
practitioner’s evidence and the manner in which he had given it.
relation to the manner in which the practitioner had given evidence, the
Tribunal observed in O/U Liability Decision at [43]:
behaviour of the Practitioner throughout the proceedings was very often
inconsistent with his professional duty to cooperate reasonably
in the process
and avoid an unduly combative approach.
At [75], the Tribunal observed:
the Practitioner contumaciously
ignored and or declaimed the Tribunal’s directions, comments, advice and
rulings. Regrettably,
throughout the hearing, his demeanour and conduct
appeared to the Tribunal to be recalcitrant at times and often combative at
And, at [82]:
The Tribunal’s assessment
of the Practitioner’s evidence and oral submissions was that for much of
it, it consisted of
inadmissible and sometimes evasive evidence, unhelpful
submissions and irrelevant and occasionally offensive comments. The Tribunal
found that some of the evidence that he gave was, at best given with scant
regard for its truth or accuracy and, at worst with reckless
disregard to the
truth of what he was saying...
71. At [74], the Tribunal described the manner in which the
practitioner had put his case to the Tribunal as follows:
Put at its highest, the tenor
of his case was that he was a very busy sole practitioner, who had really done
nothing wrong, but if
he had, then what he had done or failed to do amounted to
simple, but honest mistakes for which others, in the main, were responsible
that the charges brought by the Society were indicative of a well orchestrated
and an unwarranted persecution of him.
72. In relation to the first and second grounds, the Tribunal
concluded that, considered as a whole, the practitioner’s conduct
conveyances was unsatisfactory professional conduct because it fell short of the
standard of competence and diligence that
a member of the public was entitled to
expect of a reasonably competent practitioner: O/U Liability Decision at
[129]–[130].
73. In relation to the third ground, the Tribunal rejected
the practitioner’s suggestion that the ACT Revenue Office had lost
documents. It also rejected the practitioner’s proposition that the
incoming mortgagee for the Lyneham property had been
responsible for securing
the discharge of the earlier mortgage and that, by failing to do so, it had
caused delay. The Tribunal
found that, in blaming others for the delay in
settlement when it was his fault, the practitioner had failed to act honestly
fairly towards his clients. The Tribunal characterised the conduct as
unsatisfactory professional conduct “of a fairly high
order”: O/U
Liability Decision at [137].
74. In relation to the fourth ground, the
Tribunal said:
beggars belief that the Practitioner could possibly have forgotten that he was
still in the office as of [3 July 2009], and
indeed that he did not arrive at
his destination until five days later on 8 July 2009.
156. The Practitioner’s oral evidence and his tone, demeanour, and
characteristic evasiveness, reinforces the conclusion that
arises from the
surrounding circumstances outlined above, namely that he engaged in a deliberate
act of dishonesty, or, in the alternative,
at the very least was reckless in
making on his affirmation a false statement to the Tribunal.
158. To attempt to mislead the Society, and then this Tribunal in affirmed
evidence is, in each case, professional misconduct of
a high order. The same is
true recklessly making so false a statement to the Society, and of recklessly
giving false evidence in
disciplinary proceedings, concerning the Practitioner
and as to a material matter.
159. Either alternative (deliberate or reckless), each charge would justify a
finding that the Practitioner is not fit and proper
to engage in legal
160. Further, under the common law definition which section 387 encompasses,
each charge (4.1 and 4.2) on either alternative of deliberate
recklessness would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful and dishonourable
conduct by practitioners of good repute and
competency.
75. The Tribunal found the practitioner guilty of
unsatisfactory professional conduct in relation to the first three grounds, and
professional misconduct in relation to the fourth ground.
76. On 8 February
2013, the Tribunal delivered its decision on penalty: The Council of the Law
Society of the ACT v The Legal Practitioner
‘Y’ (Occupation
Regulation)
[2013] ACAT 8 (O/U
Penalty Decision), concluding that the
practitioner was not a fit and proper person to remain on the roll of
practitioners. At [50],
the Tribunal said:
critical feature of the significant disciplinary history and a common
characteristic of the offences is that of misleading and
deceptive conduct.
That conduct is dishonest conduct.
77. At [58]–[60], the Tribunal observed:
58. The respondent’s
significant disciplinary history, the apparent failure of the impact of earlier
disciplinary proceedings
and the penalties imposed on him to alter his
professional conduct, the essentially dishonest nature of many of the charges
and the subject of adverse findings in respect of them further suggest to
the Tribunal that the respondent has no insight into his
misconduct.
59. The Tribunal therefore cannot be confident that the respondent appreciates
the nature of his wrongdoing. The Tribunal regards
his expressions of remorse
as hollow. ...
60. The degree to which a lawyer appreciates the seriousness of the misconduct
is a relevant factor in the extent to which the Tribunal,
exercising a
protective jurisdiction, might choose between the alternatives of suspension or
removal from the roll...
78. At [71], the Tribunal acknowledged that not every finding
of professional misconduct will lead to an order that the lawyer’s
removed from the roll, but observed that removal should be considered where
conduct had demonstrated unfitness to practise
and the defect had not been
addressed. In that context, the Tribunal observed that:
74. None of [the previous]
penalties and sanctions appears to have had the least impact or deterrent effect
on the respondent. He
appears unreformed. It is improbable, in the
circumstances, that such a penalty as suggested by the respondent [suspension,
and a costs order] would have any effect on him, despite his
protestations to the contrary.
75. On the other hand, such a penalty as suggested by him... would pose a great
risk to the community because it necessarily contemplates
a return to
79. The Tribunal concluded that the appropriate sanction was an
order recommending that the practitioner’s name be removed from
O/U Penalty Decision at [77].
Appeals against the third and fourth disciplinary
proceedings
80. The practitioner appealed against the findings of liability
and the penalties imposed by the Tribunal in the third and the fourth
disciplinary proceedings.
81. On 5 November 2015, Burns J dismissed both
appeals: Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2015] ACTSC
303 FLR 17 (SD/MG
Burns J Appeal), in relation to the third matter, and
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT (No 2)
[2015] ACTSC
Burns J Appeal), in relation to the fourth matter.
practitioner appealed to the Court of Appeal against the decisions of Burns J in
both proceedings. In connexion with the
appeals, the Council obtained a
security for costs order from Robinson AJ: Legal Practitioner v Council of the
Law Society of the
[2016] ACTCA 46.
After an unsuccessful application to
stay that order, the practitioner failed to comply with it: Legal Practitioner v
the Law Society of the ACT (No 2)
[2016] ACTCA 67.
83. Meanwhile, the practitioner had sought special leave to appeal to the
High Court against a variety of interlocutory orders affecting
the appeals. On
2 February 2017, the application was refused: Legal Practitioner v The Council
of the ACT Law Society
[2017] HCASL 2.
84. On 25 May 2017, Robinson AJ
allowed the practitioner’s application to extend the time to lodge the
security sum: Legal Practitioner
v Council of the Law Society of the ACT (No 3)
[2017] ACTCA 25.
Ultimately, the practitioner complied with the security for
costs order.
85. On 29 June 2018, the Court of Appeal (Mossop and Collier
JJ, Robinson AJ) dismissed the appeals against the decisions of Burns
Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2018] ACTCA 26 (SD/MG
Appeal) and Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
ACTCA 19 (O/U
CoA Appeal).
86. In SD/MG CoA Appeal, the Court of Appeal
discussed the distinction between statutory unsatisfactory professional conduct
and statutory
professional misconduct. It noted that the definition of
unsatisfactory professional conduct in s 386 of the LPA and the s 387 definition
of professional misconduct were each an inclusive definition, and that, as
recognised by s 389 of the LPA, unsatisfactory professional
conduct could be
elevated to “professional misconduct”: at [60]–[63] and [75].
At [77], the Court of Appeal observed:
conduct which would otherwise be “unsatisfactory professional
conduct” is elevated by subs (a) to professional
misconduct where it
involves a substantial or consistent failure to reach and maintain a reasonable
standard of competence and diligence.
87. The Court of Appeal was satisfied that the Tribunal’s
findings (which had been examined and accepted by Burns J) were consistent
the conclusion that the practitioner’s conduct demonstrated a substantial
failure to maintain a reasonable standard of
competence and diligence, as
contemplated by s 387(1)(a).
88. At [82] of SD/MG CoA Appeal, the Court
observed that the common law test for professional misconduct as set out in
General Council of Medical Education and Registration
[1894] UKLawRpKQB 36
[1894] 1 QB 750
(conduct that would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful and dishonourable by
professional brethren of good repute and competency)
remained relevant to an
assessment of statutory professional misconduct, and stated:
to the extent that ACAT was satisfied that [the practitioner] had deliberately
sought to threaten or intimidate his clients
it would be curious if such conduct
could not fall within the definition of “professional
misconduct”...
89. In O/U CoA Appeal, the Court of Appeal examined the manner
in which Burns J had dealt with the fourth ground relied upon in the
disciplinary proceedings (deliberately or recklessly misleading the Society and
misleading and deceptive conduct towards the
Tribunal). In O/U Burns J Appeal
at [108], Burns J had said that:
... [The practitioner]
submitted that there is a significant difference between deliberately misleading
and recklessly misleading
the Society. In my opinion, there is no merit in this
submission. It is apparent from the reasons of the ACAT, at [156], that the
primary finding was that the practitioner deliberately misled the Society. The
ACAT then went on to say that, in the alternative,
he was reckless “at the
very least”. Whilst there is a difference between recklessly and
deliberately misleading, the
Tribunal was correct, in these circumstances, to
conclude that recklessly misleading the Society, and recklessly giving false
in an attempt to mislead the Tribunal, would nonetheless justify a
finding of professional misconduct.
90. The Court of Appeal observed that his Honour had
erroneously assumed a “primary finding” of deliberateness by the
Tribunal, but that the Tribunal’s reasons had been ambiguous in that
regard: O/U CoA Appeal at [60]. At [59], the Court of
Appeal observed:
59. There are five matters to
notice in [paragraph 108 of
O/U Burns J Appeal
]. First, the passage in
[156] [of the Tribunal’s decision] is capable of ambiguity as to what
finding was made by the Tribunal
against the appellant to the requisite
standard. Second, presumably the primary judge meant that the finding was that
the appellant
deliberately misled or was reckless both towards the Society
and the Tribunal
. Third, it is not accurate to say, and the appellant
was not charged with, “recklessly giving false evidence in an attempt
mislead the Tribunal”. Fourth, primary judge has not, other than by an
unvarnished conclusion, matched the conduct found
to the standard of
professional misconduct set out in the inclusionary definition under
Legal Profession Act
. Fifth, the appellant is entitled to a precise
finding as to his conduct, for he faces being struck off the roll as a result of
his conduct. A finding of “recklessness” as opposed to
“deliberateness” may be of benefit to him in seeking
to resist that
application.
91. The Court of Appeal proceeded to consider the meaning of
“recklessness” in the context of professional disciplinary
where it was alleged that a practitioner had engaged in professional misconduct.
The Court noted that a finding of recklessness
as to falsity (as opposed to
knowledge of falsity) may influence the severity of disciplinary action: O/U CoA
Appeal at [67]. The
Court approved the explanation of
“recklessness” in Giudice v Legal Profession Complaints Committee
[2016] WASCA 159
: that recklessness means subjective awareness that
there is a risk that a statement is false and a conscious decision to disregard
92. At [69]–[72] of O/U CoA Appeal, the Court of Appeal
69. ...Whether
[the practitioner’s reckless making of a false statement to the Tribunal]
amounts to professional misconduct
requires an analysis of all the proved
circumstances.
70. Those circumstances are that the appellant was answering a complaint made
against him by client where his answer, he knew, would
be material to the Law
Society’s further actions and deliberations. It concerned a relevantly
recent matter within his own
knowledge and a matter that could easily be
verified by documents in his possession. There was time to carefully consider
The same comments apply with the necessary changes to the swearing
of an affidavit to be used by the appellant in the Tribunal hearing.
statement, that he was not in the country at the relevant time, was a statement
made to the perceived advantage of the
appellant himself.
71. Given that the finding of recklessness implies that the appellant was aware
of the risk in each case, that the statement made
by him may be untrue but that
he disregarded that risk in those circumstances, then that conduct is correctly
characterises professional
misconduct.
72. ... It is clear that the system for administration of justice relies heavily
upon the integrity of the profession and the discharge
of the duties falling
upon members of the profession. Members must be able to command the confidence
of all the participants in
the administration of justice. Elements of that
confidence are that the word of the member must be able to be trusted to be true
and that the member will not make false statements or create misleading
impressions.
73. The conduct engaged in by the appellant, justifies a finding that the
appellant is not a fit and proper person to engage in legal
practise. This is
so whether the conduct is measured directly against the statute or the test
derived from conduct which “would
be reasonably regarded as disgraceful or
dishonourable by his professional brethren of good repute and competency”.
Allinson v General Council of Medical Education and Registration
[1894] UKLawRpKQB 36
93. The practitioner sought special leave to appeal in both the
third and fourth disciplinary matters, but in November 2018 the High
refused leave: Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
(dismissing appeal from
[2018] ACTCA 26)
and Legal Practitioner v
Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2018] HCASL 340
(dismissing appeal from
[2018] ACTCA 19).
The Council’s submissions on the application for removal
from the roll
94. The Council contended that the practitioner is not a fit
and proper person, principally because of repeated failure to display
and honesty in the conduct of his practice and in his dealings with disciplinary
bodies. The Council argued that the practitioner
has continued to demonstrate a
lack of insight into his misconduct and to deny it, although all appeals from
findings of misconduct
have been exhausted.
The practitioner’s submissions on the application for
removal from the roll
95. We hope that we have done no disservice to the practitioner
by grouping his submissions in the following way.
1. Submissions about procedure in the Court
96. The practitioner said that he was disadvantaged in that the
Court had not acceded to his written request to vacate the hearing
February 2019 and relist the matter nine days later, when he anticipated being
in Australia and able to appear in person.
2. Submissions about the conduct that the Full Court can
take into account
97. The practitioner submitted that, on the application for
removal, the Full Court could only consider the conduct that had been
subject of the fourth disciplinary proceedings (the proceedings in which the
removal recommendation had been made), and that
the removal proceedings were not
concerned with the conduct that was the subject of earlier disciplinary
proceedings. He noted that
he had identified this error in December 2018
correspondence to the Court.
98. The practitioner relied on
Human Rights Act 2004
(ACT) (Human Rights Act), which enacts Art 14.7 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), arguing that
Tribunal’s reliance on its findings in earlier disciplinary proceedings
contravened his right not to be tried or punished
again for an offence for which
he had already been finally convicted in accordance with law.
practitioner submitted that, in proceedings under the LPA, the Court could not
consider the proceedings relating to the first
disciplinary proceedings as those
proceedings had been conducted under the 1970 Act, which had been repealed by
the LPA. In particular,
the practitioner noted that, under s 148 of the LPA,
the Law Society’s register of disciplinary action was restricted to
disciplinary
action taken under the LPA.
3. Submissions about errors made by the
100. The practitioner argued that the Tribunal had erred in
relying on his demeanour to support a finding that his evidence lacked
credibility, particularly in the fourth disciplinary proceedings.
practitioner submitted that the Tribunal had erred in relying upon his failure
to show sufficient remorse for conduct; as
he had not admitted deliberate lying,
he could not offer remorse for doing so. He noted that he was remorseful
concerning “the
agony that the clients underwent due to the delay in the
conveyance”.
4. Submissions about unfair treatment by the Tribunal, the
Court and others
102. The practitioner repeated submissions made to the
Tribunal, and on appeal in the third and fourth disciplinary proceedings, that
he had not received fair, just and reasonable hearings. He submitted that the
unfairness was greater in the fourth disciplinary
proceedings. The
practitioner’s past difficulties with the former ACT Attorney-General (Mr
Corbell), the ACT Law Society,
and the Tribunal and its Presidents (particularly
former President Crebbin and Deputy President Donohue) were summarised in the
practitioner’s
written submissions to the Full Court of 31 January
103. The practitioner submitted that, in the past, he has not received
justice from the Court: hearings have not been fair and just;
the Court has
rejected attempts to file documents electronically; the Court has made
oppressive orders against him (including costs
orders); judges have
“avoided investigating the critical issue” of whether the
practitioner deliberately misled the Society
and the Tribunal, refusing to
revisit the Tribunal’s credibility findings; the Court has been prejudiced
in favour of the Law
Society, and it has been “impossible to obtain
decisions against the Law Society” because judges are seemingly beholden
to the Law Society in relation to their appointment to the Court and
“career advancement”.
5. Submissions based on Court’s inherent
104. The practitioner pointed out that the Court retained its
inherent disciplinary jurisdiction in relation to the legal profession:
the LPA. He called upon the Court to use its inherent jurisdiction to
“quash” the decision in the fourth disciplinary
proceedings, and
reject the Tribunal’s recommendation that he be removed from the roll of
practitioners.
6. Submissions about whether the Court should order removal
from the roll
105. The practitioner submitted that, in his case, removal from
the roll was a disproportionate penalty for the conduct that was the
the fourth disciplinary proceedings.
106. The practitioner noted that, in the
third disciplinary proceedings, the Tribunal had made two findings of
professional misconduct
and that, in the fourth disciplinary proceedings, it had
made only one finding of professional misconduct. Contrasting the penalties
that had been imposed, the practitioner argued that the Full Court should not
impose a greater penalty (removal from the roll) for
a lesser matter (only one
finding of professional misconduct).
107. The practitioner submitted that
the circumstances of the fourth disciplinary proceedings were significantly less
serious than
those in Law Society of the ACT v Powrie
[2017] ACTSCFC 4
184 (Powrie)
because, in his case, the incorrect representation was made to the
Society “by way of a letter only” and the Tribunal
was “unsure
whether the misleading conduct amounts to deliberateness or recklessness”,
whereas in Powrie the practitioner
had deliberately misled a court.
practitioner submitted that, when dealing with the third disciplinary
proceeding, and especially at [33] of SD/MG Penalty
Decision, the Tribunal had
expressed a desire that the practitioner would return to practise after the
three month suspension period
that it imposed by way of penalty. Inferentially,
the practitioner suggested that the Full Court should enable this aspiration to
be realised.
109. The practitioner characterised removal from the roll as
“an extraordinarily high punishment for a minor mishap”,
the mishap of making an innocent mistake (as opposed to a deliberate or reckless
misstatement). Further, he argued that
the “higher sentence” of
removal should be reserved for deliberate (as opposed to reckless)
110. In relation to the finding of professional misconduct that the
Tribunal had made in the fourth disciplinary proceedings, the
practitioner
submitted that his statement that he was out of the country on 3 July 2009 had
been a negligent and “innocent”
mistake, rather than a deliberate or
reckless statement, and that the Tribunal had placed undue reliance on that
small mistake.
111. The practitioner asked the Court to take into account
that he had “lost everything” which was, itself, a
punishment.
Consideration of practitioner’s submissions
112. Each of submission 1–5 raises a matter that is not
properly raised in these proceedings, as the only issue is whether the
practitioner is a fit and proper person to remain upon the local roll of
practitioners. However, we will briefly address each of
submissions
1. Submissions about procedure in the Court
113. First, the practitioner said that he had been
disadvantaged because the Court had not acceded to his written request to vacate
the hearing date of 11 February 2019 and relist the matter nine days later, by
which time he would have returned from overseas and
would be able to appear in
114. The practitioner did not file an application to vacate the
hearing date, despite having had ample notice of the hearing date;
it had been
tentatively allocated at the end of the hearing on 11 December 2018, and
confirmed by the Deputy Registrar on 20 December
115. In any event,
the practitioner was not disadvantaged by being overseas at the time of the
hearing. The proceedings did not involve
contested facts. The Court must
consider whether, given the established facts, the practitioner is a fit and
proper person to remain
upon the local roll. In relation to the making of
submissions, the practitioner was not disadvantaged. He filed written
submissions.
He was present throughout the hearing via an audio connection and
he supplemented his written submissions with substantial oral
submissions. At
the end of the hearing, he was given an opportunity to file further written
submissions addressing the principles
espoused in the authorities contained in
the Council’s list of authorities dated 8 February 2019. He filed those
submissions
on 25 February 2019.
2. Submissions about the conduct that can be taken into
116. The practitioner submitted that, as the application for
removal was based on the Tribunal’s recommendation in the fourth
disciplinary proceedings, the Full Court could consider only the conduct that
had been the subject of those disciplinary proceedings,
and could not take into
account the conduct that had been the subject of earlier disciplinary
proceedings.
117. This submission proceeded on the mistaken premise that
removal from the roll of local practitioners is a “penalty”
upon a practitioner in relation to particular conduct and which must be
proportionate to that conduct in the same way that,
in criminal proceedings, a
particular punishment must (inter alia) reflect the objective seriousness of a
particular crime.
118. The primary purpose of any legal disciplinary
proceedings is protective, not punitive; such proceedings are primarily designed
to protect the public from misconduct by lawyers: Wentworth v New South Wales
Bar Association
(1992) 176 CLR 239
at 252. In Law Society of South Australia v
[1999] SASC 83
, Doyle CJ said:
Court is concerned to protect the public, not to punish a practitioner who has
done wrong, although of course the removal of the
practitioner’s name from
the Roll will operate as a punishment. The Court acts to protect the public and
the administration
of justice by preventing a person from acting as a legal
practitioner, and by demonstrating that the person is, by reason of his
conduct, not fit to remain a member of a profession that plays an important part
in the administration of justice and in which
the public is entitled to place a
great trust.
119. The protective function of disciplinary proceedings finds
statutory expression in s 6 of the LPA, which states that a purpose
(a) to provide for the regulation of legal practice
in the ACT in the interests of the administration of justice and the protection
of consumers of the services of the legal profession and the public
120. That purpose is repeated in relation to Chapter 4 of the
LPA, which concerns complaints and discipline. Within Chapter 4, s
The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
(a) to provide a nationally consistent scheme for the discipline of the legal
profession in the ACT, in the interests of the administration
of justice and for
the protection of consumers of the services of the legal profession and the
public generally;
121. Undoubtedly, disciplinary proceedings may have incidental
punitive consequences, but they are not in the nature of criminal or
quasi-criminal proceedings. This distinction was emphasised in the recent Court
of Appeal decision in The Council of the Law Society
of the Australian Capital
Territory v LP 12
[2018] ACTCA 60
(Murrell CJ and Burns J).
to the argument based on the
Human Rights Act
(which imports art 14.7 of
the ICCPR) provides that:
not to be tried or punished more than once
No-one may be tried
or punished again for an offence for which he or she has already been finally
convicted or acquitted in accordance
123. The jurisprudence of international courts and tribunals
“may be considered in interpreting [a] human right”:
Human Rights
The Human Rights Committee, the independent treaty body
established to supervise the application of the ICCPR, observed in its General
Comment No. 32 – Article 14: Rights to equality before courts and
tribunals and to a fair trial, UN Doc CCPR/C/GC/32 (23 August
2007) at [57]
[The guarantee under art 14.7]
applies to criminal offences only and not to disciplinary measures that do not
amount to a sanction
for a criminal offence within the meaning of article 14 of
the Covenant.
124. See also Strik v The Netherlands, Communication No.
1001/2001, UN Doc CCPR/C/76/D/1001/2001 (29 June 1999) at [7.3].
125. The use
of the words “offence”, “convicted” and
“acquitted” in
Human Rights Act
is consistent with that
interpretation. As disciplinary proceedings are not concerned with
“offences”, the human right
recognised by
has no bearing on the
issues in this case.
126. In determining whether a practitioner is currently
a fit and proper person, the Court must consider all relevant prior conduct
well as any evidence of change that might inform current fitness to practise.
Findings of wrong conduct must be “viewed
in the context of earlier
findings of [wrong] conduct”, especially if the earlier findings relate to
wrong conduct of a similar
[2001] SASC 242
83 SASR 443
(Doyle CJ). A history of wrong conduct
predicts incapacity to change, as does a lack of remorse and insight into past
wrong conduct.
In Powrie, the Court relied upon previous reckless conduct, as
well as later dishonest conduct and the failure to demonstrate remorse
insight into the wrongfulness of conduct in finding that the
practitioner’s unfitness was not transient or amenable to
correction, and
it was appropriate to order that his name be removed from the roll: at
127. Consequently, in these proceedings, it is irrelevant
whether the practitioner’s conduct occurred during the currency of
or at an earlier time.
3. Submissions about errors made by the Tribunal in
assessing credit and remorse
128. The practitioner argued that the Tribunal had erred in
relying on his demeanour to support a finding that his evidence lacked
credibility (particularly in the fourth disciplinary proceedings). Further, he
contended that the Tribunal had erred in relying
upon the practitioner’s
failure to show sufficient remorse for allegedly dishonest conduct; he said
that, as he had not admitted
deliberate lying, he could not offer remorse for
doing so. However, he had expressed remorse in relation to “the agony
the clients underwent due to the delay in the
conveyance”.
129. Under the statutory disciplinary scheme, it is the
role of the Tribunal to make findings of fact and determine how the facts
be characterised: Powrie at [79].
130. In exercising its statutory function
under s 431(3), the Full Court must apply the Tribunal’s findings of fact,
any findings as to the practitioner’s state of mind or motive in
relation to relevant conduct, and any findings that the conduct
unprofessional conduct or professional misconduct: Powrie at [83]–[84].
The Court cannot make findings inconsistent with
those made by the
131. In relation to the Tribunal’s decisions, the legislature
has provided a comprehensive regime of appeal, a regime of which
practitioner took full advantage. On appeal to Burns J, from his Honour to the
Court of Appeal, and in the unsuccessful attempt
to obtain special leave to
appeal to the High Court, the practitioner fully ventilated his complaints about
the Tribunal’s
findings of fact (including its findings as to his state of
mind) and, on this application for removal, those issues cannot be re-agitated.
4. Submissions about unfair treatment by the Tribunal, the
Court and others
132. The practitioner repeated submissions made to the
Tribunal, and on appeal in the third and fourth disciplinary proceedings, that
he had not received fair, just and reasonable hearings.
133. In relation to
allegations of actual and apprehended bias by the Tribunal or this Court, it has
been open to the practitioner
to apply to the relevant Tribunal members and
judicial officers to recuse themselves and, on occasion, he has done
134. In determining the question of fitness to practise, no question
arises concerning the fairness of earlier, related proceedings.
This Court must
decide for itself whether the practitioner is fit to practise. The Court is not
bound by a Tribunal recommendation
that a practitioner’s name be removed
from the roll; it must make its own determination of whether the relevant
conduct warrants
removal of the practitioner’s name from the roll: Powrie
5. Submissions based on Court’s inherent
135. Calling in aid s 462 of the LPA, the practitioner asked
the Court to use its inherent jurisdiction to “quash” the
in the fourth disciplinary proceedings and reject the Tribunal’s
recommendation that he be removed from the roll of
practitioners.
Court does not accede to this request. First, the practitioner’s reliance
upon the Court’s inherent jurisdiction
was not the subject of an
application; it was merely the subject of submission. Second, s 462 of the LPA
preserves the Court’s
inherent jurisdiction to discipline practitioners.
It does not create a right to “quash” a Tribunal recommendation;
rather, it creates a path by which practitioners may be disciplined that is
independent of the statutory path that the Council has
taken in this
General Principles to be applied in deciding a statutory
application for removal
137. Section 431(3) of the LPA gives the Court statutory
discretion to remove the name of a local lawyer from the local roll if the
Tribunal has recommended that the practitioner’s name should be removed.
Under s 425(3) of the LPA, if the Tribunal finds
a practitioner guilty of
unprofessional misconduct or professional misconduct, the Tribunal may recommend
that the practitioner’s
name be removed.
138. As stated above at [
] and below at [
], the Court is not bound by the
Tribunal’s recommendation of removal and is required to form its own
independent assessment
of whether, given the conduct that has been proven, the
practitioner is a fit and proper person to practise law: Ziems v Prothonotary
the Supreme Court (NSW)
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
; Powrie at [87].
139. Although it
is not our task to determine whether the practitioner’s conduct amounted
to unprofessional conduct or professional
misconduct within the meaning of the
LPA, it is instructive to consider the range of conduct that may be so
classified.
140. Under the LPA, unsatisfactory professional conduct is
defined in s 386 as follows:
unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an
Australian legal practitioner happening in connection with the practice of law
that falls short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal
practitioner.
141. Professional misconduct is defined in s 387 of the LPA as
(1) In this Act:
professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner,
if the conduct involves a substantial or consistent
failure to reach or maintain
a reasonable standard of competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner whether happening in
connection with the practice of law or happening otherwise than
in connection
with the practice of law that would, if established, justify a finding that the
practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice.
142. As these definitions are inclusive, recourse may be had to
the common law, both for the purpose of understanding the type of
conduct that
may amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct and
for the purpose of understanding what
it means to be “not a fit and proper
person” to practise law.
143. The personal attributes of a
practitioner are integral to an assessment of whether the person is a fit and
proper person to practise
law. When discussing the importance of honesty and
integrity to the practice of law, in New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
52 NSWLR 279 (Cummins)
, Spigelman CJ said:
are four interrelated interests involved. Clients must feel secure in confiding
their secrets and entrusting their most personal
affairs to lawyers. Fellow
practitioners must be able to depend implicitly on the word and behaviour of
their colleagues. The judiciary
must have confidence in those who appear before
the courts. The public must have confidence in the legal profession by reason
the central role the profession plays in the administration of justice. Many
aspects of the administration of justice depend on
the trust by the judiciary
and/or the public in the performance of professional obligations by professional
144. A willingness to engage in dishonest conduct often compels
a finding of unfitness to practise: The Council of the New South Wales
Association v Sahade
[2007] NSWCA 145 (Sahade)
. Even if it does not
rise above recklessness or neglect, persistent misconduct will ordinarily
justify a finding of unfitness to
practise: Law Society of South Australia v
[1999] SASC 83.
A penalty of suspension is usually inappropriate if
there is a finding of unfitness of practice: Attorney-General v Bax
[1999] 2 Qd R 9
, 22 (Pincus JA).
145. Insight into previous wrongdoing is
another personal attribute that is important to an assessment of whether a
person is a fit
and proper person to practise law. A legal practitioner’s
failure to appreciate the gravity of misconduct may be indicative
of unfitness
to practise: Southern Law Society v Westbrook
[1910] HCA 31
(1910) 10 CLR 609
, 626 (Isaacs J);
New South Wales Bar Association v Evatt
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
, 184; Re Maidment
(1992) 23 ATR 629
, 642 (Legoe J); Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
, 472 (Giles AJA).
146. At common law, professional
misconduct includes conduct in the pursuit of professional activities that is
reasonably regarded
by professional colleagues of good repute and competency as
disgraceful or dishonourable: Sahade at [54]. In the context of professional
disciplinary proceedings, reference may be made to “good fame” in
the sense of good reputation. Reputation is relevant
to the purposes of
disciplinary powers, which include “to maintain public confidence in the
integrity and honesty of the profession”:
Council of the Law Society of
New South Wales v Parente
[2019] NSWCA 33 (Parente)
(Basten and Meagher
JJA) and [49] (Brereton JA).
147. A finding of professional misconduct does
not, of itself, demand an order removing a practitioner’s name from the
A Solicitor v Council of Law Society (NSW)
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
Powrie at [87].
148. Removal from the roll is reserved for the most serious
cases of wrong conduct, where the character and conduct of the practitioner
assessed to be inconsistent with the privileges of further practice; suspension
may be adequate in those cases where a legal practitioner
has fallen below
proper standards, but not to the extent that would indicate that the
practitioner lacks the necessary attributes
of a person entrusted with the
responsibilities of legal practice: Barristers’ Board v Darveniza
149. In general, removal is appropriate only where the underlying
reason for disqualification is permanent, or at least of indefinite
Cummins at [25]–[27]; Parente at [33]. In Parente at [34], Basten and
Meagher JJA indicated that, where a practitioner
has manifested a serious
character flaw that would justify removal, it is for the practitioner to
affirmatively satisfy the court
that the unfitness was, or is, of limited
Summary of conduct findings by the Board and Tribunal
150. We summarise the findings in relation to the
practitioner.
151. The Board found:
2006, the practitioner sought to inaccurately indicate on documents filed in the
Federal Magistrates Court that his client
was self-represented. This was
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
(b) During the 2006 Board proceedings, the practitioner displayed a lack of
candour, and alleged that the complainant had been at
fault. Later, he withdrew
the allegation.
152. The Tribunal found:
(a) When acting for purchasers on 8 January 2008, the
practitioner wrote a letter to the vendor’s solicitor containing the words
“Exposition of such arrogance is quite unnecessary”. On 10 January
2008, he created another version of the letter (removing
the sentence) before
handing the file to new solicitors. The Tribunal characterised this conduct as
misleading and deceptive towards
the client and other practitioners, and in
breach of the practitioner’s duty to be open and frank in his dealings
Law Society. The conduct was at the higher end of unsatisfactory
professional conduct.
(b) In early 2008, the practitioner omitted a client’s middle name on a
transfer document, and the mortgagee was unable to
register the transfer. After
being notified on 21 February 2008, the practitioner failed to remedy the error.
In response to a request
by the mortgagee’s solicitors, on 28 April 2008
the practitioner provided an incorrect contract for sale to the mortgagee.
error was not rectified until 31 October 2008. These actions were negligent,
and amounted to unsatisfactory professional conduct.
(c) On 20 November 2008, the practitioner informed his clients that he had not
received the mortgagee’s 21 February 2008 letter,
and that the
mortgagee’s lawyer had not given reasons for the request of 28 April 2008.
The first misrepresentation was deliberate,
and the second was reckless
“at the very least”. The actions were professional misconduct.
(d) On 12 December 2008, the practitioner wrote to his clients threatening to
an attempt “to coerce
and manipulate his clients to avoid a complaint”, amounting to
professional misconduct.
(e) In 2009, the practitioner drafted a deficient statutory declaration to
support a stamp duty exemption, causing delay in settlement
of a property sale
and resulting in his clients incurring penalty interest. In a letter dated 3
July 2009, the practitioner provided
an inaccurate report to the clients, and he
omitted to mention the penalty interest. Some of the errors were repeated in a
dated 4 September 2019. These actions were unsatisfactory professional
(f) In a discussion with his clients on 23 June 2009, the practitioner blamed
the ACT Revenue Office for the delay in settlement.
In a letter to the Law
Society dated 18 August 2009, he blamed banks and the ACT Revenue Office. This
was unsatisfactory professional
conduct “of a fairly high
(g) In the 18 August 2009 letter, the practitioner misrepresented to the Law
Society that he had not been in the country on 3 July
2009. The same letter was
attached in a sworn affidavit filed with the Tribunal on 2 February 2011. This
conduct was “a deliberate
act of dishonestly, or in the alternative, at
the very least was reckless” (note that the Court of Appeal said that this
a finding of recklessness). The Tribunal (and the Court of Appeal)
characterised the conduct as professional misconduct.
(h) As to the practitioner’s evidence in the second disciplinary
proceeding in 2010, the Tribunal observed that the practitioner
“obfuscating”, and expressed concern that he “[did] not
understand that his actions involved deceit”.
The Tribunal found that he
had not learned from the first disciplinary proceedings.
(i) In its third penalty decision dated 31 August 2012, in light of the
practitioner’s disciplinary history, the Tribunal questioned
the extent to
which he was remorseful.
(j) In its fourth liability decision dated 28 June 2012, the Tribunal criticised
the practitioner’s manner as being “inconsistent
professional duty”, “recalcitrant” and
“combative”, and said that the practitioner had displayed
“scant regard” for the truth in his evidence. The Tribunal noted
that, during the hearing, the practitioner had insisted
that he had done nothing
wrong or, if he had, that it had been an honest mistake.
(k) In its final decision on penalty dated 8 February 2013, the Tribunal found
that the practitioner had shown “no insight
into his misconduct”,
that “his expressions of remorse [had been] hollow”, and that he
“[had appeared to
be] unreformed”.
153. It is arguable that, considered individually, none of
these matters is sufficiently serious to warrant removal from the roll,
particularly given the passage of time since the conduct occurred.
154. Considered collectively, the conduct establishes that, over three years
(between January 2008 and February 2011), the practitioner
engaged in negligent
conduct (towards his clients), reckless and misleading conduct (towards his
clients, other solicitors, the Law
Society and the Federal Magistrates Court),
attempted coercion of a former client, and dishonest conduct (towards his
155. The Tribunal found that, as at February 2013, the practitioner
continued to lack insight or show remorse in relation to his conduct,
he had not learned from earlier disciplinary proceedings.
practitioner has had ample opportunity to reflect on past wrongdoing and
demonstrate a change of attitude. Because of the
practitioner’s numerous
appeals, six years have passed since the Tribunal recommended that he be removed
from the roll, and
eight years have passed since the most recent wrong conduct
occurred in February 2011.
157. Regrettably, in connection with the
December 2018 application, the practitioner continued to display a lack of
insight and appreciation
of wrongdoing. He did not grasp that the adverse
findings of the Tribunal and judicial officers did not reflect unfairness;
they reflected the fact that his conduct warranted adverse
158. The new material placed before the Full Court through Exhibit
1 and the practitioner’s affidavit of 29 January 2019 does
not assist the
practitioner; it does not demonstrate that he has developed insight since 2013.
159. During the Full Court hearing in February 2019, the practitioner
continued to maintain that he was and is the victim of an orchestrated
against him, rather than the victim of his own lack of judgement about proper
conduct. He obstinately continued to deny
any wrongdoing. With regard to the
third disciplinary proceedings, he said:
made the alteration and I’m sorry for that, but I did not mislead the Law
Society, that’s wrong finding and I’m
not going to say sorry for
something I did not do.
160. He maintained that the letter of 18 August 2009 was sent
neither deliberately nor recklessly.
161. We reproduce a portion of the
transcript of the hearing on 11 February 2019:
PRACTITIONER: ... I've been dragged on and on and on and labelled that I have
misled or lied to the tribunal, and actually, your
Honour, the letter –
it's a letter that I wrote on 18 August to [the Law Society], it's just a letter
saying just one sentence,
that on that day I was not in the country.
that's only the one semantic error.
And then what happened when I was asked
to respond to the – when I was asked to provide a response to the
application in the
tribunal, I just attached that letter to [the Law Society], I
just attach to an affidavit and file it. So I didn't make any new
representations, I didn't make any new, I just – at that time, even I
didn't know this was not the case. When I filed it in
the tribunal, I didn't
even know at that time that I was still in the country. This came out about
some several months after.
So now they are saying that you have lied to the Law Society, you have lied to
the Tribunal. So they are trying to compare me –
that's who he is, in the
same line with Powrie – Powrie who went and deliberately lied to the
magistrate and Mr Beaumont says,
hey, you have done the same thing ...
So this is the game they are playing and it's very difficult for me. I have
been always doing it on my own from the very beginning.
But I don't regret
doing that, because I had some legal representations and that put me in further
deep water. So I am happy that
I have done it and my conscience is clear, your
Honour. My conscience is clear. I have done the best I could. I know I'm
to go, but that's up to other people, but I – I can still be –
put my head up, I can still walk straight, because my
conscience is clear.
am honest, I am innocent – 100 per cent innocent.
The whole world may say that I am a liar and I got thrown out of the profession
and people will pick up stones, throw stones at me,
but I can look into
anybody's eyes, because
I have not committed this offence
, and even I
have lost the confidence and the trust in the society and everything,
say that you guys are the crooks. You guys are the crooks, I am not the crook,
and I am saying that all the time. You guys
are the crooks, I am not the
(Emphasis added)
162. Later, the practitioner said the following:
THE PRACTITIONER: No, no, I
just want to clear and make it clear that
I’m remorseful. I have been
that and I want to learn from them and given the chance, I will definitely
improve and read what the tribunal and the courts have said so I have no qualms
the staff and there was delay
and also there were other parties contributed a bit so I am not going to have a
dog fight for that.
But I’ll continue to have a dog fight with ground four
[the ground
concerning the 18 August letter] and that nobody can change that. Nobody can
change that, even my father comes and tells
me I do not do that because
that’s the gospel truth, your Honour, that’s the gospel truth.
I’m 100 per cent honest...
... It’s not a criminal matter, I know it’s not criminal, but
it’s more than a criminal matter. It’s like
I have really paid a
huge price ...
(Emphasis added)
163. These extracts illustrate that, since 2013, there has been
no real change in the practitioner’s understanding of the duty
owed by practitioners, or the fact that such candour is fundamental to public
confidence in the profession. He still
fails to appreciate that, whether it
reflects dishonesty or recklessness, misleading conduct is antipathetic to the
practice of law.
164. The Court accepts that the practitioner has talent and
is generally well motivated, particularly in relation to helping the
underprivileged.
He is respected in Sri Lankan and Canberra communities. We
also accept that, for cultural reasons, it may be more difficult for
practitioner to accept and learn from adverse findings than is the case for
165. However, acceptance and learning are critical to the
practitioner’s fitness to practise. Although the practitioner has
years to reflect on his conduct, we discern no significant engagement with the
issues identified by the Board, the Tribunal
and this Court. The most recent
submissions filed by the practitioner do offer a glimmer of hope in that regard,
but not more.
Consequently, we are not satisfied that, if allowed to continue
to practise, the practitioner would do so with the necessary honesty
candour, and we conclude that these deficiencies will be of indefinite duration.
166. Accordingly, we see no option but to order that the practitioner be
removed from the roll.
167. The practitioner’s approach to the
removal proceedings also raises questions about his appreciation of legal issues
procedures, but we merely note this concern.
Anonymising the name of the practitioner
168. On 12 July 2017, Mossop J ordered that, until further
order, the practitioner be referred to as “the Legal Practitioner”
in any document filed for the purposes of the proceedings before him and any
listing notice given by the Registrar.
169. As all appeals from the
Tribunal have been exhausted, and it has been finally decided that the
practitioner is guilty of the
relevant conduct, there is no statutory (or other)
reason to maintain suppression of the practitioner’s name: see s 423A of
the LPA and [54] of the Recusal Decision. We vacate the order affording
170. The orders of the Court are:
(a) Pursuant
Legal Profession Act 2006
(ACT), the Respondent
Chanaka Nihal Bandarage’s name is removed from the roll of people admitted
to the legal profession maintained
by the Supreme Court pursuant to
(b) The order made by Mossop J on 12 July 2017 anonymising the
Respondent’s name is
I certify that the preceding one hundred and seventy [
] numbered paragraphs are a true copy of
the Reasons for Judgment of their Honours Chief Justice Murrell, Justice
Loukas-Karlsson
and Acting Justice Walmsley.
RTF format (447 KB)
Signed PDF/A format