OL v EH [2025] ACTMC 8 (17 March 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
[2025] ACTMC 8
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Chief Magistrate Walker
Section 44A
Family Violence Act 2016
(ACT) does not apply to
an extension of a final family violence order. A young person who was once
protected by an order for a fixed
period, and who has since become an adult,
will not properly be included in the new form of the order.
Catchwords:
FAMILY VIOLENCE ORDERS
–– inclusion of child in extended
family violence order where child now over the age of 18 years -
Violence Act
Legislation Cited:
Family Violence Act
Sexual, Family and Personal Violence Legislation Amendment Bill 2023
(ACT) cl 10
Family Law Act 1975
OL (First Applicant)
ML (Protected Person)
EH (Respondent)
Representation:
Self-Represented (Applicant)
Self-Represented (Respondent)
File Numbers:
FVO 163 of 2022
FVO 270 of 2025
MAGISTRATE WALKER:
Introduction
application before me is an application made by OL to amend a family violence
order by way of extending that order for a further
two years. The application
was filed in court on 9 December 2024 and has been extended on a temporary basis
to the date of contested
Matter History
21 February 2022, an interim family violence order was made in which OL and her
daughter, ML, who at the time was a child, were
named as protected persons. EH
is the respondent. He is the ex-husband of OL. He is not the biological father
22 August 2022, the interim family violence order was made final on a
“by consent and without admissions
” basis. I will refer to
the final order as the “
original order
5 July 2024, an application was made to amend the original order by extending
it. That original order was amended by way of temporary
extension on 15 August
2024, 28 October 2024 and 18 December 2024. The last of those extensions was
until 4.00 pm today.
and EH attended for their hearing unrepresented, and each gave evidence and was
cross-examined by the other with the assistance
of a Registrar.
Preliminary Issue
preliminary issue arises. That is as to whether an amended order, if granted,
may lawfully include ML as a protected person. ML
was 17 years old when the
original order was made and is now 19 years of age.
to the insertion of
section 44A
Family Violence Act 2016
, the original order would arguably have ceased to protect ML
when she turned 18 years of age.
of the Act provides:
(1) This section applies if:
(a) the court makes a family violence order; and
(b) a protected person is a child when the order is made.
(2) To remove any doubt, the order continues in force in accordance with
the terms of the order and this Act when the protected
person becomes an
provision makes it clear that a family violence order continues in its extant
form despite a protected person turning 18. What
is less clear is the effect of
an amendment to the original order, particularly when the amendment sought is as
to the length of
the order. That is, whether the original order which is amended
by extension, as is sought in this case, is an order which
section 44A
to continue in force with the named “child” as a protected person.
of the Act provides:
(1) The Magistrates Court must, on application, amend a final order (the
original order) by extending it for a stated period unless
satisfied that a
protection order is no longer necessary to protect the protected person from
family violence by the respondent.
(2) If the parties consent to the application to amend the original order, the
Magistrates Court must amend the original order without
considering the matter
mentioned in subsection (1).
extension is contested in this case.
extension of the original order is an amendment. The length of the order is one
of the terms of the order. I have concluded that
a term of the order is not a
condition. I have had regard to
sections 41
of the Act in making this
determination.
of the Act provides:
A final order made as a consent order may
contain a condition that a final order made other than as a consent order may
contain, but
it is not necessary for the court to consider whether the condition
is necessary.
of the Act provides:
A condition in a family violence order may
have effect for a period stated in the family violence order that is shorter
than the period
of the order.
I observe on an obiter basis that conditions may also be terms of an order, and
I have regard to
of the Act in doing
that is not a matter that I
need to determine in the context of this application.
conclude that an amendment which extends an order changes the terms of the
further conclude that
section 44A
of the Act does not apply to an extension of
the order. Consequently, a young person who was once protected by an order for a
period, and who has since become an adult, will not properly be included
in the new form of the order.
whilst the original order continues to protect the child even though they turn
18 during the life of that order, when extension
is sought, the now adult will
be required to seek an order in their own right if that is their wish. This
means that when the applicant
is required to turn their mind to the order, at
the same time they will be prompted to consider the position of the
but that they are not required, because of
contemplate that during the life of the original order.
This ruling, of
course, would not prevent that “child” relying on the history of the
earlier application and orders.
am buoyed in my interpretation of
section 44A
of the Act by a reading of the
Sexual, Family and Personal Violence Legislation Amendment Bill 2023
(ACT) revised explanatory statement, which in its overview
The Bill protects family and children by several amendments
made to streamline family violence proceedings. In particular, the Bill
this in the amendment to allow final family violence orders to continue
operating after a protected person turns 18 years
of age. Currently, the
Violence Act 2016
is silent on whether an order continues once a protected
person turns 18 years of age, leading to inconsistent interpretations by
and justice system actors as to whether the order continues and whether the
protected person remains protected or must re
apply for a new protection order.
The amendment (what is now
section 44A
Family Violence Act 2016
(ACT)) aims to address this issue to keep the family unit and children safe.
explanatory statement specifically addresses clause 10, which is the new
, and says the following –
This clause inserts a new
section into the
Family Violence Act 2016
(ACT) to explicitly provide
that a family violence order continues to be in force even when the protected
person attains the age
of 18. The section applies when the court makes a family
violence order and a protected person listed on that order is a child when
order is made, that the life of the order is to continue even after the
protected person turns 18 years old.
The amendment explicitly clarifies that turning 18 years old does not stop
the enforceability of the order. The order will remain
in force until the end
stated time or it is withdrawn by the applicant or protected person, an
extension is made by the court or
new orders are made by the court.
interpolate that the explanatory statement identifies an extension as a point in
time at which the order will be affected, having
regard to the protected person
having turned 18.
clause may impact a child who is a protected person under a family violence
order where the respondent is the parent, while being
subject to an order or
parenting plan made under the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) which contain
exceptions to allow contact or communication between the child and their
the parenting order or plan expires when a child or protected person turns 18
and the family violence order extends beyond the
child’s or protected
birthday, the protected person may need to seek
an amendment of the family violence order if they wish to have contact with the
parent after they turn 18 years old.
reviewed this explanatory statement, it is clear to me that
section 44A
Act operates to provide continued protection to a young person after they turn
18, during the life of the existing order.
To interpret the section to extend to
including the “child”, now an adult, in any future, i.e. extended,
order has the
potentially adverse outcome of reducing their agency in respect to
what protection they may as adults wish to have.
arrived at this conclusion, I propose to consider the application currently
before me as applying to OL
I certify that the preceding twenty-five [25] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Decision of her Honour Chief
Associate to Chief Magistrate Walker (Maddy Holloway)
Date: 2 April 2025
of the Act provides
(1) This section applies if –
(a) a court intends to make a protection order; and
(b) the respondent is before the court.
(2) On making the protection order (other than a consent order), the court
must explain to the respondent, in language likely to be
readily understood by
the respondent –
(a) the purpose, terms and effect of the order; and
Explaining the effect of the order includes explaining any
consequence that will automatically flow from the making of the order.
example, if relevant, that any firearms licence of the respondent will
automatically be cancelled or suspended.
(b) the consequences that may follow if the respondent fails to comply with
the order; and
(c) how the order may be amended or revoked; and
(d) that the order may be enforced or amended anywhere in Australia or New
(3) Before making a consent order, the court must explain to the protected
person, in language likely to be readily understood by
the person, the matters
mentioned in subsection (2) (a) to (d).
(4) A failure of the court to comply with this section in relation to a
protection order does not affect the validity of the order.
RTF format (200 KB)
Signed PDF/A format