Agius v JB Slab Pty Ltd [2025] ACTMC 2 (21 February 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Agius v JB Slab Pty Ltd
[2025] ACTMC 2
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Magistrate Lawton
See order [47]
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL LAW
– INDUSTRIAL SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE –
Judgement and Punishment – Sentence – General deterrence –
Failing to comply with a health and safety duty – Exposure to risk of
death or serious injury or illness
Legislation Cited:
Work Health and Safety Act
Building Act
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Cases Cited:
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW)
[2017] NSWCCA 96
SafeWork NSW v Modco Homes
[2024] NSWDC 656
Agius v Transport Canberra and City Services Directorate
Smithers v Capitol Chilled Foods (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2023] ACTMC 5
Grey v Agnew Building Supplies Pty Ltd
[2023] ACTMC 13
Foster v Better Building Holdings Pty Ltd
[2022] ACTIC 2
Jacqueline Agius (Informant)
JB Slab Pty Ltd (Defendant)
Representation:
S Janackovic (DPP)
J Maher (Defendant)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Legal on London (Defendant)
File Number:
CAN 41055/2024
MAGISTRATE LAWTON:
defendant, JB Slab Pty Ltd, pleaded guilty on 17 December 2024 to an offence of
failing to comply with a health and safety duty
pursuant to s 32 of the
Health and Safety Act
’). This is a
category 2 offence arising from an incident in Taylor in the Australian Capital
Territory on 24 May 2022.
maximum penalty for a category 2 offence when committed by a body corporate is
$1,500,000.
defendant’s business involved carrying out specialist concreting works
including the construction of formwork, and the pouring
and installing of
concrete slabs, walls, driveways and footpaths. The defendant’s sole
director was Mr Jasvir Singh.
defendant is a person conducting a business or undertaking (“PCBU”).
The defendant relevantly has a duty to ensure
the provision and the maintenance
of a work environment without risks to health and safety and safe systems of
work as well as adequate
information, training and instruction to its workers.
defendant was engaged to carry out works at a residential construction site in
Taylor. Both Mr Atinderpal Singh and Mr Manpreet
Sidhu were engaged to undertake
work on the site.
12 May 2022 and 24 May 2022, Rediwall panels had been constructed on the site in
an ad-hoc manner. A bracing technique was
used to affix the timber walers to the
top section of the Rediwall, affix timber plates to the cured concrete slab and
affix timber
members between the timber waler and timber plate at an angle. Some
of these pieces of timber were screwed together. Some of the
timber pieces had
been used multiple times beforehand.
23 May 2022, a certifier had taken photographs of the site and completed a
Building Inspector Record where it was indicated that
the building work complied
Building Act
. The record also indicated that it was
‘OK to pour concrete and proceed with work’.
defendant undertook further work on the Rediwall. However, the final bracing
arrangements for the Rediwall were inconsistent with
the manufacturer’s
recommendations.
24 May 2022, Mr A Singh and Mr Sidhu commenced work on the site with Mr Jasvir
Singh arriving later in the day. On this date, the
workers were tasked to pour
wet concrete into the Rediwall panels.
defendant had placed an order for Dincel Mix concrete to be delivered to the
site, and two concrete trucks to deliver the concrete
to the site. Once the
first concrete truck arrived, the wet concrete mix was unloaded into the
concrete pump. One person was operating
the pump whilst Mr A Singh used the hose
to pour the concrete into the Rediwall panels. Mr Jasvir Singh and Mr Sidhu
assisted with
this process.
second load of concrete was delivered later that day, and the concrete mix was
unloaded into the concrete pump. Towards the end
of this process, the concrete
pump operator beeped the concrete truck horn to indicate that the transfer of
concrete from the truck
to the pump should stop.
western Rediwall had begun to bow. Mr Sidhu was standing on the outside of the
Rediwall when it begun to collapse onto a natural
embankment with him becoming
trapped between the collapsed wall and the embankment.
were made to free Mr Sidhu by picking up the collapsed wall however it was too
heavy to lift. Mr Paul Santos was working
up the road and heard screaming which
prompted him to drive his bobcat to the site where he began shifting the soil
and lifting the
wall. Another person on site used a concrete cutter to cut the
wall and the steel reinforcement bars. Mr Sidhu was eventually freed.
was notified of the incident.
Sidhu saw a medical practitioner the following day, complaining of pain for
which he was prescribed pain medication. Mr Sidhu attended
practitioner on subsequent occasions where he complained of neck and back pain
for which he was prescribed pain medication.
Furthermore,
Mr Sidhu saw a consultant orthopaedic surgeon in January 2023. Mr Sidhu’s
medical history and various scans led
the consultant orthopaedic surgeon to form
an opinion that Mr Sidhu had likely sustained contusions to his back, however,
his cervical
and lumbar spondylosis was age-related and degenerative, and
therefore was not materially contributed to by the incident.
subsequent WorkSafe investigation revealed a range of issues at the site.
structural engineer also completed an inspection of the site. The structural
engineers report observed that there were no fixings
between the timber walers
and panel joints; no connection at the corner between the back Rediwall and the
collapsed Rediwall; some
panels were unrestrained; reused timber had been used
with the spacing between screws and previous screws being less than recommended
by the Timber Design Code; some sections of the timber were splitting; some
timber props were comprised of two separate timber members
screwed together;
failed fixing connections between timber members were evident and these
presented as localised tears out of screws
from the timbers.
findings indicated an “over-stressed condition being subjected to the
temporary bracing did not meet the minimum requirements set out by Rediwall nor
Dincel, as the correct braces were not used at
was opined by the structural engineer that an unexpected lateral force (such as
an unexpected movement from the concrete pump or
activities from tradesman
during concrete placement) would likely result in the collapse of the wall as
the temporary bracing was
unable to prevent the overturning of the wall.
is reasonable to expect that had the Rediwall been equipped with appropriate
bracing, it would have remained stable notwithstanding
unexpected construction
Failures of the Defendant
defendant had a primary duty of care to ensure, so far was reasonably
practicable, the health and safety of the workers engaged
by the defendant and
of workers whose activities in undertaking the work were influenced or directed
by the defendant whilst the
workers were at work in the business or undertaking,
pursuant to s 19(1)(a) of the
included ensuring, so far as was reasonably practicable, the provision and
maintenance of a safe work environment free from risks
to health and safety, and
of safe systems of work, and the provision of any information, training,
instruction or supervision that
is necessary to protect all persons from risks
arising from the workplace.
the work environment was inherently unsafe as the defendant had failed to
implement and enforce Safe Work Method Statement
identifying the risk of formwork collapse and the control measures to mitigate
this risk. The defendant’s
SWMS titled “Concrete Slab
Construction” was silent on formwork collapse. As explored earlier, the
formwork was not braced
in accordance with the manufacturer’s
recommendations. Further, the defendant had failed to provide appropriate
materials to
brace the Rediwall. The defendant was required to use competent and
qualified workers to brace the formwork, however, a worker who
completed a wall formwork course had braced the Rediwall.
terms of the provision of training, the defendant did not ensure the workers had
completed the relevant training. It was Mr Sidhu’s
first day at work for
the company, however, he had not yet completed the General Construction
Induction training. Mr Sidhu and Mr
A Singh had both not been inducted to a SWMS
which identified the risk of formwork collapse. The defendant did not conduct
meetings, or other safety discussions, other than providing informal
instructions to workers. The defendant’s informal instructions
Singh were poor in relation to bracing techniques given that he had limited
experience in formwork construction, nor had
he completed any relevant training.
Objective Factors
penalty imposed must be one which serves the overall purpose of the
. The purpose of the
is to ensure the safety, health, and
welfare of workers and others on worksite premises. Additionally, s 3 of the
provides that workers should be afforded the highest level of
protection from harms to their health, safety, and welfare from hazards
risks which may arise at work.
must consider principles of sentencing as set out in
(Sentencing) Act 2005
With regard to these sentencing principles and those
set out in s 3 of the
, it is evident that the sentence I impose
must reflect the principles of both general and specific deterrence. All
employers must
ensure a safe workplace for their workers.
Nash v Silver City Drilling (NSW)
[2017] NSWCCA 96 at [53] Basten JA
provides that the risk to be assessed is not the risk of consequence to the
extent that a worker
is in fact injured, but rather the risk which arises from
the failure to take reasonably practicable steps to avoid the injury from
occurring. His Honour stated “the conduct in question is the failure to
respond to a risk of injury, conduct which will be
more serious, the more
serious the potential injuries, regardless of whether they are likely to
materialise”.
fact that an injury has occurred does not necessarily mean that the seriousness
of the breach should be assessed in that context.
the occurrence of any accident resulting in death or injury of a particular
kind, may inform an assessment of both the existence
of the risk as well as the
nature and seriousness of the risk.
objective seriousness of a risk will also be assessed where there is an obvious
and foreseeable risk to health and safety where
appropriate measures were not
taken despite being available and feasible.
SafeWork NSW v Modco Homes
[2024] NSWDC 656
Strathdee DCJ
objective seriousness of the offence,
which I will now detail.
(a) The potential consequences of the risk. Consequences may range from mild to
catastrophic. Offending will be more serious where
potential injuries are severe
regardless of whether they are likely to materialise.
(b) The availability of steps to minimise or eliminate the risk.
(c) Whether those steps are complex, burdensome, or mildly inconvenient. If
mitigating steps could have easily been taken, the offending
will be more
(d) Whether the risk was known or ought reasonably to have been known or
identified by the offender.
(e) Whether the risk was an obvious or clear one.
(f) The vulnerability of workers exposed to the risk.
I have previously noted in
Agius v Transport Canberra and City Services
Directorate
[2024] ACTMC 17
Smithers v Capitol Chilled Foods
(Australia) Pty Ltd
[2023] ACTMC 5
Grey v Agnew Building
Supplies Pty Ltd
[2023] ACTMC 13
, how and why the failure occurred
is relevant to sentencing as in assessing the defendants culpability it is
relevant to know why
the failure came to be, whether that be as a result of a
failure to abide by systems in place by management or a failure of management
establish and implement adequate safety systems and procedures in the first
make the following findings as to the seriousness of risk.
risk of the worker being seriously injured or killed as a result of a collapsed
wall resulting from improper construction was
high. The gravity of the risk was
significant as there was potential for serious injury or fatality.
appropriate measures to avoid any risk would not have entailed significant
burden or cost. The system and method for which
the wall was constructed was
ad-hoc and contrary to the manufacturer’s requirements and
recommendations. The Rediwall could
have been easily constructed properly as the
requirements were not complex, burdensome nor mildly inconvenient. The SWMS was
in regard to formwork collapse. Proper training was not provided to the
workers. Implementing updated procedures and training which
included reference
to these risks would not have been complicated or expensive. Mitigating steps
could have easily been taken, which
makes the offending more serious.
the certifier approved further work on the site, the defendant’s moral
culpability and responsibility should not be
reduced because of the
certifier’s actions. The certifier approved the pouring of the concrete on
the site notwithstanding
the state of the defendant’s formwork. This was
evidently a substandard approval, however, does not absolve the defendant of
duty to ensure the health and safety of its workers.
Ultimately,
with regard to ss 14 and 16 of the
the defendant is unable to
transfer its duty to another entity. The defendant had to comply with its duty
of the standard required
regardless of whether another
entity held a work health and safety duty at the same time.
was noted by Chief Magistrate Walker in
Foster v Better Building Holdings Pty
[2022] ACTIC 2 at [30] that shared culpability does not result in some
form of apportionment but rather is relevant only in considering
the culpability
of the defendant in relation to the facts of a particular case.
appears to me that the risks of the improper construction of the Rediwall as a
result of the lack of adequate training was apparent.
This is apparent from the
construction not complying with the manufacturer’s construction
requirements.
regard to the relevant principles, the extent of the duty owed was significant
and the extent of the risk of health and safety
was also significant, as
demonstrated by the injuries to Mr Sidhu. The likelihood of a risk of particular
harm eventuating was high.
The risk was a consequence of the failure of the
defendant to implement safe work methods, provide appropriate materials to brace
the Rediwall, to use competent and qualified workers to brace the Rediwall and
to provide adequate training to the workers.
Accordingly,
the objective gravity of the seriousness of the breach is high. I consider the
starting point for the penalty to be
imposed to be
Subjective Factors
now turn to the subjective factors of the defendant. The defendant comes before
the Court with no antecedents relating to work health
and safety breaches. I
note that I am sentencing the corporate entity and the prior criminal history of
its director, Mr Jasvir
Singh, is not relevant in my view.
defendant entered the plea of guilty at the fifth mention. It is agreed between
the Parties that the defendant should be entitled
to a full 25% discount for its
has been a demonstration of remorse by the defendant as provided in Mr Jasvir
Singh’s letter to the Court. The defendant
has also taken steps to ensure
that this risk has been eliminated in the future by undertaking the appropriate
training and other
occupational work and safety courses. This particular work is
now outsourced by the defendant to a sub-contractor who is better qualified
undertake this particular work.
the defendant has indicated a plea of guilty at an early stage, there is an
indication of both remorse and contrition and a
full acceptance of
responsibility. The defendant has taken considerable steps to ensure that the
risk is eliminated in the future.
In these circumstances, I am prepared to
afford the maximum discount of 25% to the defendant.
defendant is convicted and fined $225,000.
I certify that the preceding forty-seven [47] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Sentence of his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Pia Beohm
Date: 21 February 2025
RTF format (196 KB)
Signed PDF/A format