An Application for Admission by B as a Legal Practitioner [2016] ACTSCFC 2 (14 November 2016)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
An Application for Admission by B as a Legal Practitioner
[2016] ACTSCFC 2
Hearing Date:
Refshauge, Penfold and Burns JJ
Upon B making the required affirmation:
Court orders that B be admitted as a lawyer of this Court on the following
conditions:
(a) That, for
the next 12 months, he submit to random urinalysis at his own expense when
directed to do so by the ACT Law Society
on no more than 8 occasions, the
results of such urinalysis to be submitted at B’s direction directly to
the Chief Executive
Officer of the ACT Law Society;
(b) That for
the next 2 years B consult every 6 months with a consultant psychiatrist,
at his own expense, as to his mental health
and fitness for legal practice;
consultant psychiatrist is not Dr Ingrid Butterfield, B supply to the
psychiatrist a copy of Dr Butterfield’s report
of 12 August 2016 and
the report of Dr Joe Garside dated 30 March 2016;
authorise the psychiatrist he consults in accordance with condition (c) to
provide a report on his mental health and fitness
for legal practice to the
Chief Executive Officer of the ACT Law Society;
ensure that each psychiatrist he consults in accordance with condition (c) have
access to a copy of each report that has
previously been prepared in accordance
with these conditions;
(f) That B not
apply within the next 2 years for admission as a lawyer to any other
authority a copy of these
conditions;
(g) That, if B
seeks employment within the next 2 years in any position for which his admission
as a lawyer is a necessary or desirable
qualification, he give a copy of these
conditions to the prospective employer.
Court directs that the name of B be entered on the Roll of
Practitioners.
Catchwords:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES –
LAWYERS – Qualifications and
admissions – legal practitioner – application for admission to
practice – suitability
matters – matters relevant to good fame and
character of the applicant – disclosure of mental illness –
of an offence committed in the United States of America –
disclosure of deportation and ban from the United States of America
disclosure of past illicit drug use – fit and proper person –
admission to practice subject to conditions –
Legal Profession Act 2006
Legislation Cited:
Legal Profession Act 2006
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), rr 3605,
Cases Cited:
Dixon v Legal Practice Board of Western Australia
[2012] WASC 79
Doolan v Legal Practitioner’s Admission Board
[2013] QCA 43
Ex parte Lenehan
[1948] HCA 45
(1948) 77 CLR 403
Law Society of New South
Wales v CQS
[2016] NSWCATOD 100
Re an Application by L for Admission
as a Legal Practitioner
[2015] ACTSCFC 1
Re Application
for Admission as a Legal Practitioner
[2004] SASC 426
(2004) 90 SASR 551
[1998] ACTSC 131
(1998) 136 ACTR 1
Watts v Legal Services Commissioner
[2016] QCA 224
B (Applicant)
Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory (Respondent)
Representation:
Mr R Barnett (Applicant)
Mr R Reis (Respondent)
In person (Applicant)
Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory (Respondent)
File Number:
A 11001 of 2016
1. The applicant made application for admission as a legal
practitioner under the
Legal Profession Act 2006
(ACT). Ordinarily, the name of
an applicant for admission would be published. In this case, however, because
of mental health issues
involved in this application, the Court has taken the
step of anonymising the applicant’s name. As the New South Wales Civil
and Administrative Tribunal said in Law Society of New South Wales v CQS
NSWCATOD 100
, anonymisation may be appropriate as:
there remains a real risk that
stereotypical negative attitudes may hinder the employment by firms or
engagement by clients of lawyers
who have mental health conditions such as
depression or bipolar disorders.
2. As required under
and (b) of the
Legal Profession
, the applicant is over the age of 18 years, has attained the approved
academic qualifications specified in the Act and the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), and has satisfactorily completed the approved practical legal training
requirements.
3. In his application for admission, however, he very properly
made disclosure of certain matters described as “suitability
matters” under
Legal Profession Act
. These are matters which
the Court is required to consider under
of that Act when deciding whether
an applicant for admission is a fit and proper person to be admitted to the
legal profession.
4. As explained by the Full Court in Re Del Castillo
[1998] ACTSC 131
applicant’s duty is to place before the court any matter that might
reasonably be regarded by the court as touching on the
question of fitness to
5. Failure to disclose such matters is usually evidence of such
a lack of candour and frankness that it would disentitle the applicant
6. The applicant made a number of disclosures. That is not
uncommon. A number of them were of traffic offences, which are, of course,
breaches of the criminal law. The applicant also disclosed a debt to Centrelink
which he accrued. Finally, the applicant had been
made bankrupt as a result of
debts he had accrued on credit cards and for utility bills but had been
discharged a number of years
ago. The applicant explained details of each
matter disclosed.
7. In view of the facts and circumstances disclosed,
however, the Court did not consider that, by themselves or in combination, they
warranted a finding that the applicant was not now a fit and proper person to be
admitted to practise.
8. The applicant, however, disclosed some other
offences which were attributed or related to a mental illness with which he had
diagnosed. The most concerning of these was an offence committed in
9. The applicant has a long-term psychiatric history, starting at age
22. He has been diagnosed with a schizoaffective disorder or,
alternatively, a
bipolar affective disorder with psychotic symptoms when manic. He has had a
substance abuse disorder, which probably
exacerbated his condition in the
10. He has been known to Mental Health Services since 1998 and has had
various admissions to a psychiatric unit variously since 2004
until as recently
11. The 2010 offence arose out of the applicant accepting
involvement in a University Exchange Program where he was to attend a university
in the United States of America (the USA) for six months.
12. The applicant
booked his flight to the USA to depart on 1 January 2010. He also applied for a
student visa and attended the US
Consulate in Sydney on 20 December 2009 for
that purpose. He completed a form he was given but answered “no” to
as to whether he had ever been diagnosed with a mental illness. He
gave the following explanations for this answer:
had been told by [my] original psychiatrist that I did not have to disclose my
mental health status.
intending on seeking a second opinion of my mental health in the USA.
not in a financial position to do a return trip to Sydney with further
documentation should it be requested.
mental illness I have has a characteristic of denial of belief that I have a
mental illness.
felt that I would be discriminated against for having a mental illness based on
the stigma I had experienced when disclosing my
mental illness in the
13. He was then granted a visa and travelled to the USA,
commencing his university studies there apparently successfully. He was
compliant with treatment which involved fortnightly injections of anti-psychotic
medication.
14. Apparently someone made the authorities aware of his mental
health status. He considers it may have been a former girlfriend
with whom he
had a “toxic relationship” and to whom he made some apparently
unwelcome approaches by email.
15. In any event, he was arrested by US
Federal authorities and charged with being “inadmissible of entry or
adjustment seeking
admission or other benefit by fraud”. This offence
apparently carries a maximum penalty of 25 years imprisonment and a fine
000. He was remanded in custody and ultimately pleaded guilty.
sentenced to imprisonment for the time he had been in custody and was deported
with a ban on re-entering the USA for 10
17. Clearly, the lapse of
judgement, deception, and the part played by his mental illness in these events
caused the Court some concern.
18. The applicant disclosed that, since 1993,
he had consumed various illicit drugs. He had used cannabis daily from 1993
until 1998,
after which he used it on a “casual” basis until ceasing
to use after 2000. He had used “magic mushrooms”
in 1993 and 1996,
a total of five doses of LSD (Lysergic Acid Diethylamide) in 1996 and 1998,
doses of cocaine on seven occasions
in 1998, 2000 and 2008-9, one dose of GHB
(gamma-Hydroxybutyric acid) in 1998, one dose of heroin in each of 2000, 2003
and between
2004 and 2007, weekend use of ecstasy (3, 4-methylenedioxy
methylamphetamine) and, in 2008-9, two doses of Ice (methamphetamine).
19. There was some concern about this prior use of drugs, even though that
seemed to have abated recently.
Fit and proper person
Legal Profession Act
provides that, in addition to the academic and
practical legal training qualifications, a person is only suitable for admission
the legal profession if they are a fit and proper person to be
21. The reason for this is not difficult to understand. As Doyle
CJ said in Re Application for Admission as a Legal Practitioner
[2004] SASC 426
practitioner is an officer of the court. The public would expect, and the
public interest requires, that only persons of good character
be given that
status. By admitting a person as a legal practitioner the court holds that
person out to the public as a fit person
to be entrusted by the public with
their affairs and confidences, and as a person in whose integrity the public can
be confident.
As well, the role of the legal profession in the administration
of justice requires that it be comprised of persons whose conduct
undermine confidence of the ordinary member of the public in the profession or
the administration of justice.
22. As Rich J remarked in Ex parte Lenehan
[1948] HCA 45
(1948) 77 CLR 403
The fact that a person is a
solicitor of the court gives him a stamp of trustworthiness and marks him as a
person in whom confidence
may be reposed.
23. Past misconduct does not necessarily disentitle a person
from being admitted so long as the court can be satisfied that, despite
misconduct, the person is, in fact, of good character. Indeed, the fact that a
person has been able to overcome difficulties
that have caused or contributed to
conduct in the past may be a measure of the underlying character of the
24. It also needs to be said that a mental illness or impairment is
not of itself a bar to admission as a legal practitioner. That
is not the test.
The test is whether the applicant is able satisfactorily to carry out the
inherent requirements of practice as a
legal practitioner. This, of course,
must be assessed in the light of the applicant’s mental health: Doolan v
Legal Practitioner’s
Admission Board
[2013] QCA 43
25. Regrettably, there are cases where professional misconduct by a
legal practitioner has been caused or contributed to by mental
impairment. See,
for example, Watts v Legal Services Commissioner
[2016] QCA 224
, where the
deterioration of Mr Watts’ mental health in highly stressful circumstances
led to him misusing trust account moneys.
26. This is particularly relevant
to professional practice, such as legal practice which can be very stressful
from time to time.
27. A recognition by the person that he or she has a
mental impairment which needs to be addressed can be important in ensuring that
it does not create problems in conducting legal practice. See, for example,
Dixon v Legal Practice Board of Western Australia
[2012] WASC 79
Present application
28. Since the offence committed in the USA, the
applicant has completed his law degree including each of the courses prescribed
r 3605 of the
Court Procedures Rules
and completed an approved court of
practical legal training required under r 3607D. That he has done so
successfully is relevant
to an assessment of his character.
29. In addition,
he disclosed no further offences since that date. He had, as well as completing
his qualifications, been employed
in various government instrumentalities during
30. The applicant deposed that he had not used any illicit drugs
since 2009. This was supported by the results of urinalysis conducted
31. The applicant relied on the affidavits of persons who had
known him for five, 25 and 33 years respectively. Each deposed to being
aware of the suitability matters that the applicant had disclosed but
nevertheless expressed the view that he was a person of honesty
and integrity
and that this view was shared by others. They expressed the opinion that he was
a person of good fame and character.
32. On the other hand, the course of his
mental condition since 2010 has caused the Court some concern.
applicant provided two medical reports. The first was authored by a medical
officer (with a diploma of the Board of Psychiatry
and Neurology) from the
Detention Centre where he was held in custody in the USA. She said in the
report, dated 3 March 2010, that
he told her he had been taking his
medication as required, and she described him, on the last evaluation, to be
pleasant and co-operative,
without suicidal or homicidal ideations or any
psychotic symptoms.
34. The second report dated 30 March 2016 was from the
applicant’s treating doctor whom he had been seeing since June 2014.
reported that, when he saw him in 2014, he was mildly thought disordered with
vague, persistent delusional ideas.
35. He reported, however, that there had,
since early 2015, been progressive improvement with resolution of his psychotic
over the previous 12 months, so that he was no longer being
disorganised, he was able to reflect with insight on his past psychotic
symptoms, and he was compliant with oral medication to which his treatment
regime had been changed.
36. The report also referred to some
“excellent prognostic factors” which included excellent response to
medication, cessation
of drug use (which had contributed to the psychotic
illness), willingness to engage in psychiatric treatment and compliance with
such treatment, excellent pre-morbid level of function and success in obtaining
a law degree, and excellent insight.
37. The report said that the
applicant’s psychotic illness had been “in remission for over
12 months” and expressed
the opinion that he “does not have any
ongoing features of a mental illness that would interfere with his capacity to
as a solicitor”.
38. While the author of the report was described
as a “Senior Career Medical Officer, Psychiatry”, and while the
found the report helpful, it considered that a report from a consultant
psychiatrist was required in the circumstances, especially
given the relative
recency of relevant symptoms.
39. Accordingly, the admission proceedings were
adjourned for the purpose of obtaining such a report. A report was then
dated 12 August 2016 by a psychiatrist, Dr Ingrid
Butterfield.
40. Dr Butterfield examined the applicant and had access to his
psychiatric history which she summarised. She noted his regular attendance
appointments with his usual treating doctor, his adherence to oral medication
and his demonstrated good insight into the need
for medication and the benefits
of taking it.
41. She then reported on a review of his symptoms which were
“consistent with current mental health” and that there were
“no indications that there are likely to be any difficulties with
treatment adherence in the future”.
42. The author then reported and
review, [the applicant] had an unremarkable mental state examination aside from
some understandable and normal anxiety. He presented
as having a normal rate,
rhythm and tone of speech with an organized thought form and good insight into
his illness.
At this stage he does not have any features which are suggestive of an
incapacity to work as a solicitor. I understand from talking
to [the applicant]
that he will be subject to initial ongoing conditions of his registration and
this would be prudent in the short
to medium term but I have no hesitation at
this time in confirming he has no psychiatric symptoms which would cause me
concern were
he admitted to the Bar.
The Admission Board
43. The Legal Practitioners Admission
Board (the Board) is established under
Legal Profession Act
of that Act sets out the purposes of the Board, which include that it
advise this Court of whether an applicant is eligible for admission
and proper person to be admitted having regard to all the suitability matters in
relation to the applicant to the extent
appropriate.
44. The role of the
Board is essential and, indeed, the burden on the Court were it required to
undertake that task itself without
such assistance would be
impossible.
45. In this case, after requiring detailed further affidavit
material about the matters the applicant disclosed, the Board issued
compliance certificate under
Legal Profession Act
that the applicant
was eligible for admission, a fit and proper person to be admitted, that the
application was in accordance with
the admission rules and that there were no
grounds for refusing to give a compliance certificate.
46. The certificate is
significant and important. The decision, however, rests with the Court. This
Court said in Re an Application
by L for Admission as a Legal Practitioner
[2015] ACTSCFC 1
The Board plays an important part in the governance of the legal profession and
its views derived from the accumulated experience
of its members deserves
respect and due consideration. The significant place of such a Board is
described by Stawell CJ in
[1878] VicLawRp 199
(1878) 4 VLR (L) 509
at 511. It is an approach
that has been since followed. See
[1976] VicRp 38
[1976] VR 406
[1979] VicRp 40
[1979] VR 381
Victorian Lawyers RPA
[2001] VSC 429
Board of Examiners
[2005] VSC 250
Nevertheless,
as Doyle CJ pointed out in
In the Matter of an Application for Admission as a
Legal Practitioner
(1997) 195 LSJS 482
remains the function of the Court to decide for itself whether the statutory
requirements for admission are satisfied’.
[1981] 2 NSWLR 372
ultimate issue in this case is whether L has satisfied the Court of his good
character and fitness for admission ...
47. The Court takes seriously the compliance certificate issued
by the Board and, of course, takes it into account.
Consideration
appears from the material before the Court that, despite relatively recent
mental ill health, the applicant has now reached
a stage where his mental health
is under control and relatively stable. Importantly, not only is the applicant
compliant with his
relevant treatment regime but he is showing insight into his
condition and the need for the treatment, including insight into the
benefits of
49. The opinion of appropriate medical experts is positive, though
there is some residual cause for hesitation in that the description
situation in March 2010 was more positive than that described by his treating
doctor at the beginning of 2014. That calls
for some caution in the
Court’s approach.
50. Nevertheless, the most recent psychiatric opinion
is positive and optimistic. It justifies admission but with some conditions
monitor the applicant for a period of time after admission.
51. While the use
of illicit drugs has been modest and there has been no use for more than five
years, the risk of use again should
the stress of legal practice lead to a
reversion to their use cannot be entirely discounted. This is especially so
because of the
deleterious effect such use had had on the applicant’s
mental health.
52. In Re an Application by L for Admission as a Legal
Practitioner at [29]-[32], this Court concluded that it had power to impose
conditions on admission.
53. Given that the Court has some concerns that the
immediate post-admission period may provide some risk to the applicant and,
to the public, and that some further period of stability and
continuing improvement in the applicant’s condition is required,
considers that the applicant’s admission as a legal practitioner should be
subject to conditions.
54. The Court prepared draft conditions which it
circulated to the applicant and the Law Society of the ACT. Both agreed that the
conditions were appropriate.
55. Accordingly, the Court will admit the
applicant on conditions substantially in accordance with the draft
conditions.
certify that the preceding fifty-five [55] numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Judgment of their Honours Refshauge,
Penfold and Burns.
Date: 14 November 2016
RTF format (249 KB)
Signed PDF/A format