Law Society of the ACT v Stubbs [2017] ACTSCFC 3 (9 August 2017)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Law Society of the ACT v Stubbs
[2017] ACTSCFC 3
Hearing Date:
Murrell CJ, Mossop and Collier JJ
Defendant’s name to be removed from the roll of practitioners.
Defendant to pay the plaintiff’s costs.
Catchwords:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES
LAWYERS – Complaints and
discipline – application to remove practitioner from the roll of
practitioners following ACAT
recommendation – professional misconduct
– unsatisfactory professional conduct – false representations to Law
– acting contrary to client instructions – misleading the
Court – whether defendant is a fit and proper person
Legislation Cited:
Evidence Act 2011
Legal Profession Act
ss 11(1)(c)
Cases Cited:
A Solicitor v The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
216 CLR 253
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Legal
Practitioner
[2010] ACAT 46
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v
Legal Practitioner S
[2012] ACAT 29
Council of the New South Wales Bar
Association v Slowgrove
[2009] NSWADT 150
Law Society of the ACT v
Legal Practitioner
[2011] ACAT 57
Law Society of the Australian
Capital Territory v Burns
[2012] ACTSC 91
Legal Practitioner v Council
of the Law Society of the ACT (No 2)
[2011] ACTSC 207
Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2014] ACTSC
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2017] ACTCA 6
Legal Profession Complaints Committee v in de Braekt
[2013] WASC 124
Legal Services Commissioner v Rushford
[2012] VSC 632
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
52 NSWLR 279
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v Sukkar
[2007] NSWCA 341
The Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2014] ACTSC 50
Law Society of the ACT (Plaintiff)
Stephen Raymond Stubbs (Defendant)
Representation:
Mr N Beaumont SC with Ms T Power (Plaintiff)
Mr J O’Keefe (Defendant)
Phelps Reid Lawyers (Plaintiff)
John O’Keefe (Defendant)
File Number:
SC 543 of 2010
application
1. The defendant is admitted as a legal practitioner under the
Legal Profession Act 2006
(ACT) (LPA).
2. The Law Society of the Australian
Capital Territory (the Law Society) applies pursuant to
of the LPA for
the defendant’s name to be removed from the local roll of practitioners.
The application is not opposed.
3. Pursuant to
of the LPA, on
4 August 2010 the Australian Capital Territory Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (the Tribunal) ordered that the defendant’s
local practising
certificate be cancelled forthwith and recommended that his name be removed from
the local roll: Council of the
Law Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner
[2010] ACAT 46.
The Tribunal proceedings were the subject of unsuccessful
appeals to the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal: Legal Practitioner
Council of the Law Society of the ACT (No 2)
[2014] ACTSC 9
; Legal Practitioner
v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2015] ACTCA 20.
4. Following a
second set of proceedings, on 23 August 2011 the Tribunal made a second
recommendation that the defendant’s name
be removed from the local roll:
Law Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner
[2011] ACAT 57.
These proceedings
were the subject of unsuccessful appeals to the Supreme Court and the Court of
Appeal: Legal Practitioner v Council
of the Law Society of the ACT
[2014] ACTSC
; Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2017] ACTCA 6.
5. In a third set of proceedings, on 15 May 2012 the Tribunal made a third
recommendation that the defendant’s name be removed
from the local roll:
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner S
[2012] ACAT 29.
These proceedings were the subject of an unsuccessful appeal to the Supreme
Court: The Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society
An appeal to the Court of Appeal was abandoned.
6. Pursuant to s
431(3) of the LPA, if the Tribunal makes an order recommending that the name of
a local lawyer be removed from the
local roll, a copy of the order may be filed
in the Supreme Court. The Court may order the removal of the name from the
these proceedings, copies of the three relevant orders have been
7. The current amended application under s 431(3) of the LPA is
supported by affidavits of Robert Anthony Reis, the Professional Standards
Manager employed by the Law Society, sworn on 17 August 2010, 27 November
2015, 26 June 2017 and 17 July 2017.
Tribunal proceedings
First Tribunal proceedings
LP 6 of 2008 (Client N)
8. During an investigation by the Law Society into a complaint
made by the defendant’s former client, N, the defendant falsely
represented that he had had a personal relationship with N that predated his
retainer. He also falsely represented that he had acted
for her pro bono when
in fact the matter had been funded by Legal Aid.
9. The Tribunal found that
the defendant’s conduct demonstrated dishonesty and a serious lack of
integrity and that his attempt
to cover up and/or minimise the seriousness of
his conduct when dealing with the Law Society was “preposterous”.
10. The Tribunal found that the conduct amounted to unprofessional
LP 1 of 2009 (Client C – Grounds 1 and 2)
11. Contrary to the instructions of his client, C, the
defendant consented to the Supreme Court setting aside a restraining order.
Later, he falsely represented to the Law Society that C had been present in
court and had instructed him to consent to the setting
aside of the order.
12. The Tribunal found that the defendant’s conduct of acting contrary
to instructions went to the very heart of the solicitor/client
relationship and
that falsely representing to the Law Society that instructions had been given
showed a lack of candour and frankness
in the defendant’s dealings with
his professional body. The conduct demonstrated that the defendant could not be
his clients, his colleagues, the public, his professional association
or the courts.
13. The Tribunal found that the conduct amounted to
professional misconduct.
LP 1 of 2009 (Client C – Ground 3)
14. The defendant attempted to intimidate a potential witness
from giving evidence in disciplinary proceedings against him.
Tribunal found that, of itself, the defendant’s attempt to deter the
witness from giving evidence in the disciplinary
proceedings justified a finding
that the defendant was not fit and proper to remain on the roll. The Tribunal
regarded this finding
as the gravest of all the findings made against the
defendant in the first proceedings. The Tribunal stated that the conduct
fundamental flaws in the defendant’s character of
“dishonesty, disloyalty and a manifold contempt for his ethical duties
the Society, his clients and the administration of justice.”
Tribunal observed that the defendant continued to deny his misconduct and showed
no insight into the serious nature of the
conduct, which went to the very heart
of the duties and obligations of a legal practitioner.
17. The Tribunal was
comfortably satisfied that the appropriate penalty for the matters addressed in
the first proceedings was to
order that the defendants’ practising
certificate be cancelled forthwith and to recommend that his name be removed
roll of practitioners.
Second Tribunal proceedings.
18. The defendant purported to appear for V at the hearing of a
bail application in the Magistrates Court. He had no instructions
When the Law Society investigated the complaint, the defendant misrepresented
that, prior to appearing, he had been instructed
by V in the cells and that he
held a signed Legal Aid application to appear for her.
19. The Tribunal
stated that, although the Magistrate was not significantly misled, any
misleading of a court was a serious matter.
20. The Tribunal found that the
defendant lacked an appreciation of the importance of his professional
obligations to the courts and
the Law Society. The Tribunal concluded that his
actions had involved dishonesty and deliberate deception.
21. The Tribunal
found that the conduct amounted to professional misconduct and recommended that
the defendant’s name be removed
from the roll of local practitioners.
Third Tribunal proceedings
22. The defendant falsely represented to a third party that it
had erroneously caused a credit reporting agency to adversely list
his client,
threatened legal proceedings if the listing was not reversed, and offered a
financial inducement of $2000 to have the
listing reversed. He also offered an
employee of the third party a financial inducement of $500 if she would reverse
listing "without telling the boss".
23. The Tribunal found that
the defendant failed to appreciate his professional obligations and failed to
grasp the serious nature
of his misconduct.
24. The Tribunal considered
that the offers of financial inducement amounted to professional misconduct and
that the other conduct
constituted unsatisfactory professional conduct. The
Tribunal recommended that the defendant's name be removed from the roll.
Criminal convictions
25. Following a jury trial in December 2016, the defendant was
convicted of 14 counts of dishonestly obtaining property by deception.
counts related to dishonestly obtaining a total of $25 620 from a client's
mother by telling her that he was not in receipt
of a Legal Aid grant. Three
counts related to obtaining $4013 in Legal Aid grants in relation to the same
matter by telling the
ACT Legal Aid Commission that he was not in receipt of
private funds for the matter.
26. In March 2017, the defendant was sentenced
to three years and one month’s imprisonment.
27. The defendant has
appealed against the convictions and sentences. The appeal is to be heard in
November 2017.
28. Although the Law Society referred to the convictions and
sentences, it does not seek to rely upon them in order to establish that
defendant is not a fit and proper person to be a member of the legal profession.
Consideration
29. The Law Society relies on the Court's statutory
is separate from the Court's inherent jurisdiction, which is
preserved by s 462 of the LPA: Law Society of the Australian Capital
Territory v
[2012] ACTSC 91
30. In exercising its statutory
independently decides
whether it should accept the Tribunal's recommendation of
removal from the roll: Legal Services Commissioner v Rushford
[2012] VSC 632
31. The Court’s disciplinary jurisdiction is
protective, not punitive: A Solicitor v The Council of the Law Society of New
[2004] HCA 1
216 CLR 253
(Solicitor v Law Society of NSW);
Council of the New South Wales Bar Association v Slowgrove
[2009] NSWADT
32. The issue for the Court is whether the defendant is a fit and proper
person to remain on the local roll: Solicitor v Law Society
of NSW at [15].
33. Honesty and integrity are essential characteristics in a legal
practitioner because clients must feel secure when entrusting their
affairs to legal practitioners, fellow practitioners must be able to depend on
their colleagues, the judiciary must have
confidence in legal practitioners, and
the public must have confidence in the profession as a whole: New South Wales
Bar Association
[2001] NSWCA 284
52 NSWLR 279
Legal Profession Complaints Committee v in de Braekt
[2013] WASC 124
34. The defendant has repeatedly demonstrated serious dishonesty and a
fundamental lack of integrity in his dealings with courts,
clients, the Law
Society, and a third party. He has not demonstrated insight, remorse or
contrition in any of the numerous proceedings
before the Tribunal or this Court.
35. We accept the Law Society's submission that the findings of the Tribunal
demonstrate conclusively that the defendant is not a
fit and proper person to be
entrusted with the important duties and grave responsibilities associated with
being a legal practitioner.
36. Pursuant to s 431(3) of the LPA, we direct
that the defendant's name be removed from the roll.
Submissions
37. In relation to the question of costs, the defendant submits
that the Court should make no order for costs on three bases:
defendant has never filed any material in response to the Law Society’s
application;
(b) on 18 July 2017, the defendant gave an indication to the Law Society that
the application would not be opposed; and
(c) there was nothing that the defence could have done to minimise the time and
resources expended by the Law Society. For example,
it was not a case where the
defendant could have cooperated by signing consent orders.
In summary the defendant submits that he has not impeded the
Law Society’s making of the application and has not submitted at
that the orders should not be made.
38. The Law Society submits that the
Court should award costs in its favour as it had a statutory duty to bring the
proceedings.
Consideration
39. The defendant now submits that he does not oppose the
making of the order. However, over a number of years and until very recently,
the defendant contested the factual bases relied upon by the Law Society by
appealing the decisions of the Tribunal. The most recent
appeal was dealt with
in March of this year.
40. The defendant has also made a number of
successful applications to vacate these proceedings. Again, this shows it is
only recently
that the defendant has decided to consent to removal from the
41. These proceedings were necessitated by the defendant’s
misconduct on numerous occasions. The material that was filed in
support of the
application is not excessive. It consists of the various decisions of the
Tribunal and this Court that may be relevant
to the Court exercising its
discretion on the application.
42. The Law Society has given an indication
of its costs. It will be a matter for the assessor to determine whether those
reasonable. It is not apparent to the Court that the Law Society
proposes to make an unreasonable claim.
43. The defendant should pay the
plaintiff’s costs.
certify that the preceding forty-four [43] numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Judgment of their Honours Chief
Justice Murrell, Justice
Mossop and Justice Collier.
Date: 31 August 2017
RTF format (229 KB)
Signed PDF/A format