Inquest into the death of Jessica Hilary Bovill [2025] ACTCD 1 (26 February 2025)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Matter Title:
Inquest into the death of Jessica Hilary Bovill
[2025] ACTCD 1
Decision Date:
Coroner Archer
See [89]-[91], [94]-[95], [98]-[102]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– manner and cause of death – severe
diffuse hypoxic brain injury – severe hypernatremia and metabolic
caused by treatment errors – treatment of amitriptyline overdose
– failure to consult official toxicology guidelines
dosage monitoring – excessive sodium load effects – unrestrained
access to sodium bicarbonate
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
Case Cited:
R v Doogan; Ex Parte Lucas Smith & Ors
[2005] ACTSC 74
File Number:
CD 334 of 2020
CORONER ARCHER:
Hilary Bovill died at the Canberra Hospital (“TCH”) on 11 December
I will, with respect, refer
to her as Jessica in these findings.
found her unconscious on the kitchen floor at their
William as Bill in these findings. Jessica had consumed amounts of
amitriptyline, a Tricyclic anti-depressant
(“TCA”), in overdose
quantities. An ambulance was called, and she was admitted to the Emergency
Department (“ED”)
at TCH. During the treatment for that overdose,
she was administered sodium bicarbonate in doses that were far in excess of
therapeutic
requirements. As a result, she suffered brain swelling and
consequential neurological injury, which was eventually consistent with
death. Organ donation was arranged for the following days.
the reasons that follow, I find that an error in sodium bicarbonate dosage
caused Jessica’s death.
was 43 years old at the time of her death. She is survived by her husband
William (“Bill”) and her three children.
PART 1 - PROCEDURAL HISTORY
death was referred to the Coroner on the day of her death, pursuant to
Coroners Act 1997
(“the Act”), as the circumstances of the death were unknown.
the direction of Coroner James Stewart, a post-mortem examination was conducted
by Professor Johan Duflou, forensic pathologist.
The examination consisted of an
external examination, a toxicological analysis of Jessica’s ante-mortem
bloods, and a review
of the medical records of Jessica’s admission and
generally. The results of Professor Duflou’s examination are addressed
Required findings
Jessica’s death fell within the terms of
of the Act, the
Coroner was required to hold an inquest into the manner and cause of
Jessica’s death and make findings that
are required by
of the Act.
That section of the Act relevantly provides:
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find, if possible—
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the person has
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
(i) state whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection
with the inquest or inquiry; and
(ii) if a matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the matter.
Stewart had carriage of the investigation after Jessica’s death was
referred to the Court. As no findings had been made
by the time of my
appointment as the Territory’s dedicated coroner in March 2022,
responsibility fell to me to complete the
investigation into Jessica’s
death and to make the findings required by
of the Act.
police coronial report was prepared. Professor Duflou provided an autopsy
report. Bill provided a series of documents, including
a detailed summary of the
events surrounding Jessica’s death, her physical and mental health
history, and the work-related
injuries she had sustained. That document was
forwarded to the Court on 24 March 2021. Bill also provided commentary on some
expert reports the Court had received. Relevant work injury documents
were obtained from insurers.
Court obtained two expert reports, from:
(a) Professor Alison Jones, specialist physician and clinical toxicologist;
(b) Professor Olaf Drummer, forensic pharmacologist, and toxicologist.
the ACT Government Solicitor’s Office (“ACTGS”), a statement
dated 4 May 2023 was received from Dr TX, an
ED specialist. Dr TX was the
clinician responsible for prescribing medications to Jessica upon her admission
to TCH (including the
administration of sodium bicarbonate). ACTGS also provided
information about the operation of the Toxicology Hotline at TCH. Solicitors
acting on Bill’s behalf in civil proceedings provided a report from Dr
George Skowronski, Associate Professor of Critical Care
at the St George
Clinical School of the University of NSW.
medical records were also obtained.
Scope of the investigation
investigation I am empowered to conduct in relation to Jessica’s death is
not without boundaries. As I have noted in recent
findings, the concept of
“manner and cause” of someone’s death is not capable of
precise definition. It does not
permit an investigation that deals with all
matters having a tangential connection to a
Concepts of
“remoteness” must be borne in mind when matters that properly
contextualise the cause of death are considered.
considerations also apply in relation to s 3BA of the Act. Pursuant to that
provision, I have a responsibility to ensure that
the objects of the Act are
carried out in a way that recognises that the family and friends of a deceased
person have an interest
in having all reasonable questions about the
circumstances of that person's death answered. However, that responsibility does
set aside the limitations s 52 of the Act places on my power to investigate.
this case, it is clear that Jessica had faced challenges arising from the
difficulties she experienced in a number of her workplaces
and the way in which
Comcare was dealing with those issues. Undoubtedly, the physical and
psychological sequalae of those challenges
was a factor in the decision Jessica
took to commit the act of self-harm that caused her to be taken to TCH. However,
to establish necessary context for that decision, it is beyond the
scope of this inquest to investigate that workplace injury history
significant detail.
was satisfied, for the purposes of s 34A of the Act, that the manner and cause
of Jessica’s death were sufficiently disclosed,
and, therefore, a hearing
was unnecessary. My decision not to conduct a hearing and the reasons for that
decision were provided to
Bill in writing when provisional findings were sent to
his solicitors on 13 December 2024. Having arrived at that decision, consistent
with my obligations under s 34A(3) of the Act, I also provided the Chief Coroner
with a written notice of that decision, including
the grounds for it. In the
context of the s 55 process (described below), Bill, the Territory, and Dr TX
confirmed that a hearing
was not required.
Provisional findings & the section 55 process
13 December 2024, provisional findings were sent to Bill’s solicitors and
the ACTGS. Those findings contained a comment adverse
to a person identifiable
from my proposed findings, namely Dr TX and the Territory. Consistent with my
obligations under s 55 of
the Act, I invited those persons to make a submission
in relation to the proposed comment or give me a written statement in relation
letter dated 16 January 2025, the ACTGS provided a response on behalf of the
Territory. The Territory acknowledged and accepted
the comments and criticisms
made in the provisional findings. A statement from Ms Janet Zagari, Deputy Chief
Officer of Canberra
Health Services, dated 15 January 2025 was provided to the
Court. Pursuant to s 55(3) of the Act, a request was made that I attach
findings a copy of Ms Zagari’s statement. I have acceded to that request
but have not included the attachments that were
referred to by Ms Zagari.
email was received on behalf of Dr TX. The submission contained in it sought an
amendment to what is now paragraph 50 of these
findings. It was submitted
Dr TX was unaware that the eTG advice had been updated in
August 2020 (approximately 3-4 months prior) to include a limitation to
maximum dosing of sodium bicarbonate.
submission caused the Court to request Therapeutic
Guidelines,
the company responsible
for the production and distribution of the guidelines, to produce the relevant
versions of the guidelines
that operated in effect before and after August 2020.
Hitherto, the two versions of the guideline had not been available. The
made on Dr TX’s behalf stands to be considered in light of the
fact that there was in the (pre-August 2020) Guidelines a limitation
The terms of the pre-August 2020 Guidelines were forwarded to Dr TX with an
invitation to make further submissions. The reply that
was received indicated
that Dr TX “wishes to withdraw the submission made in relation to the
Section 55 adverse comment”.
I find that Dr TX was at all times unaware
that the Guidelines (in either their pre or post August 2020 form) contained
maximum dosing
limitations and that the initial submissions made on her behalf
in respect of the s 55 process did not accurately reflect the terms
change that occurred to the Guidelines in August 2020, though noting that
obtaining the point-in-time version of the Guidelines
was difficult.
provided a notated version of the provisional findings and a detailed analysis
of Dr TX’s statement.
amendments were made to my findings as a result of those submissions.
PART 2 – JESSICA’S BACKGROUND, MENTAL HEALTH
HISTORY, AND ACT OF SELF-HARM
was born in Queensland in 1977. Her parents separated when she was young. She
remained with her mother in Queensland. She
met Bill during her course of study
in molecular biology at the University of Queensland in Toowoomba. Their married
life was spent
living in Queensland and, from 2004, in South Australia. In 2010,
they moved to Canberra. They had three children together, born
in 2001, 2004,
2017, Jessica began working at the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation (“CSIRO”). Her work
there was exacting and
demanding, involving laboratory work both at the Black Mountain facility and the
University of Canberra. As
a result of that work, Jessica sustained injury,
first reported to CSIRO in February 2019. The injury eventually developed into
Regional Pain Syndrome (“CRPS”). Thereafter, Jessica lived
with significant pain and other symptoms, including weakness
in her right arm
and shaking hands. Her ability to perform duties associated with her work and to
undertake everyday tasks was significantly
compromised.
also had diabetes, which was managed by medication (insulin) and lifestyle
modifications.
history of the management of Jessica’s CRPS in various workplaces and her
interaction with their insurers is complex. Over
(a) the pain associated with the injury itself;
(b) issues surrounding how her condition was managed or accommodated in the
(c) how the injury was assessed; and
(d) what treatments would be paid for by her employers and their insurers
caused Jessica considerable distress. In the months before her act of
self-harm, Jessica’s mental health deteriorated significantly
variety of reasons, including pressures associated with the Comcare process.
enjoyed a good therapeutic relationship with her GP. She was continuing to see a
psychologist, and referrals were made by
her to the Access Mental Health Team.
In October, she was visited by the Home Assessment Acute Response team
and a detailed assessment was conducted. Amongst other
interventions, including referral to counselling services, HAART sought to
assist Jessica with dispensing medications.
2 November 2020, Bill contacted HAART to discuss practicalities associated with
Jessica’s medication issues. He asked if
he could collect a week’s
worth of supply from the chemist.
6 November 2020, a letter was sent to her home address by HAART, advising her
that her file was being closed and that she should
follow up with her GP.
11 November 2020, Jessica called HAART “upset and teary”. She
indicated that she was safe and that the Comcare process
was stressful. Her file
was not re-opened.
12 November 2020, Jessica attended a regular session with her psychologist. A
program of weekly sessions was arranged. Jessica
did not attend, and the
psychologist contacted Bill, who indicated that he was taking a month of
personal leave to spend time with
Jessica at home.
responsibility for medication oversight was taken over by Bill. He re-stocked
the pill container of the various medications from
a supply that was kept hidden
from Jessica eventually in a kitchen cupboard, which he thought Jessica would
unlikely open.
6 December 2020, the family spent time at home together and, amongst other
things, put up a Christmas tree.
the following day (7 December 2020), Bill and Jessica talked about going to the
hospital. According to Bill, he encouraged Jessica
to go to the hospital, but
she was reluctant to go.
in their bed. He went looking for her. He found
Jessica unconscious on the
kitchen floor. She was breathing but unconscious. Bill later reported to the
police that he found on top
of the microwave a box of 50 gm amitriptyline
tablets. He told police that
30 tablets were
He was of the view that
the remainder of the contents of the medication supply was not touched. If this
amount of amitriptyline (30
tablets) was consumed, it would amount to a dose of
1.5 grams or 24 mg/kg.
“000” call was made. Bill commenced cardiac compressions. ACT Fire
and Rescue arrived at the scene first. CPR was continued,
but stopped shortly
after as Jessica was breathing. No shocks were delivered.
police report records that Bill indicated that apart from the amitriptyline,
there would have been the following (unconsumed)
medications in the
(a) 40 tablets of 150mg Venlafaxine (Efexor-XR);
(b) 15 Lantus Solostar insulin pens;
(c) 15 tablets of 10 mg Ezetimibe;
(d) 7 tablets of 300mg Gabapentin (Neurontin);
(e) 24 tablets of 1000mg Metformin (Metex XR); and
(f) 21 tablets of 100mg Palexia.
was transported to TCH and arrived at the ED of TCH at 0747
PART 3 – JESSICA’S MEDICATION REGIME
– AMITRIPTYLINE
her overdose, Jessica was taking a range of medications to address her
depression and pain. Those drugs included amitriptyline
(Endep), which is
commonly used for depression and treatment of neuropathic pain. The prescribed
dose was 25 mg tablets, up to three
tablets at night before bed.
his expert report, Professor Drummer described amitriptyline – its
characteristics, dosages, and effects – in these
Amitriptyline is a tricyclic antidepressant [TCA] that inhibits the neuronal
reuptake of noradrenaline and serotonin. It also
has anti-cholinergic activity
and affects sodium channels in the myocardium, and in overdose it blocks
alpha-adrenoceptors causing
hypotension.
5.2. It is indicated for major depression, panic disorder, neuropathic pain
and enuresis.
5.4. Maximum blood concentrations of the drug after oral ingestion usually
occur within 4-6 hours; although ingestion of overdose
amounts will prolong
absorption due to its anti-cholinergic properties and possibly rate-limiting
absorption rate.
5.7. Patients given an oral 150 mg dose daily developed an average
amitriptyline and nortriptyline steady-state plasma concentration
of about 0.1
mg/L (range 0.04-0.16) and 0.1 mg/L (range 0.02-0.24), respectively.
5.10 Plasma (blood) levels of the drug can be useful to determine the
possible extent of poisoning, although there is not a good correlation
plasma concentration and toxicity (including any associated ECG changes),
however plasma level monitoring is useful to determine
if levels are still
rising or falling when patients are in hospital. This can then assist in
on-going management of the overdose.
5.14. The use of excessive doses can progressively cause anxiety, ataxia,
tachycardia, alterations in blood pressure, arrhythmias,
seizures, and coma. ECG
changes are one of the more symptomatic signs, including prolongation of the QTc
and QRS intervals. A QRS
duration of >100 msec is an indicator of an overdose
to drugs like amitriptyline (tricyclic anti-depressants). Ischaemic changes
the CNS or swelling of the brain are not listed as an expected adverse
of the first diagnostic procedures that was undertaken upon her admission after
her overdose was the taking of blood at 0750 hours.
autopsy, the blood taken at 0750 hours was subject to a toxicological analysis.
Amitriptyline was found at a level of 1.0 mg/L,
Venlafaxine at 0.46 mg/L, and
Tapendotal at approximately 0.04 mg/L. According to Professor Drummer, as a
general proposition, a
level of 1.0 mg/L of amitriptyline was 4 to 10 times
above the therapeutic level.
PART 4 – TREATMENT OF THE
description of the clinical course that followed after Jessica’s admission
to the ED is derived from the account subsequently
given by Dr TX and the
clinical records.
TX was what was styled as a “D1 Consultant” at the ED. This meant
that she was on-call at home prior to the commencement
of her shift at 0800
hours on 8 December 2020.
0733 hours (she was not at TCH), Dr TX received a call from an ED Registrar, who
told her that the ACT Ambulance Service (“ACTAS”)
had alerted the ED
to an incoming patient, who, as they understood, had taken a tricyclic
anti-depressant overdose. It was unclear
how much of the tricyclic
anti-depressant she had taken, or when it had been consumed. She was told that
Jessica had been assessed
as being 8/15 on the Glasgow Coma Scale, which,
according to Dr TX, is at the threshold of a patient requiring intubation and
ventilation.
TX assessed that Jessica had ingested an overdose of amitriptyline. In her
statement, Dr TX indicated that she was “familiar
with the principles of
TCA overdose”,
and the last
case of TCA overdose she had been involved in was approximately 12 months ago.
She said she consulted the “relevant
literature”
to ensure that
there had been “no changes to treatment/management recommendations”
since she dealt with a TCA overdose
The literature she
consulted online and before arriving at TCH was a publicly accessible website
called “LITFL” (Life
in the Fast Lane), which, according to Dr TX,
is “the internet presence of a community of practice of Australasian
specialists”.
TX summarised the advice given on the website in the following
Relevantly, LITFL advised that in cases of significant TCA
overdose, treatment included cardiac monitoring with the administration
of intravenous 2 meq / kg of sodium bicarbonate, repeated 3-5 minutely until
such time as the ECG QRS complex narrowed (i.e.
QRS narrowing was the endpoint
of treatment).
TX said that advice was “consistent with [her] understanding of the
treatment principles of tricyclic overdose”. She
Sodium bicarbonate bottles each contain 100 mls of an 8.4%
solution of sodium bicarbonate. Each 1 ml contains 1 mmol bicarbonate or
bicarbonate. This meant that in the case of a 70 kg adult, each
‘dose’ would be approximately 1.5 x 100 ml bottles
(specifically 150
ml), repeated every 3-5 minutes, until the ECG QRS complex
statement included a screenshot of the relevant page on LITFL. A significant
additional patient management issue listed on that
page but not referred to by
Dr TX was to “hyperventilate to maintain a pH of 7.50-7.55”. As it
was to be seen, the administration
of sodium bicarbonate would normally be
associated with an increase in pH levels.
48. Referencing other sources, Dr TX said in her
In a TCA overdose, if widening of the QRS is >
100m/s, treatment with sodium bicarbonate is recommended. A wider QRS again
160ms) indicates an increased risk of lethal ventricular arrhythmias.
There are also other QRS abnormalities typically seen in TCA
overdose cardiac
Dr TX arrived at the ED and assessed Jessica, she noted, amongst other things,
the following:
(a) that the ECG monitoring indicated an abnormally widened
(b) “abnormal involuntary movements”, “consistent with
episodic posturing” (indicating, in her view that
“severe brain
injury may have already occurred” “by some
mechanism”);
(c) a deteriorating GCS level (now
(d) that she was tachycardiac.
TX did not seek further guidance from the digital treatment guidelines that were
available at TCH’s computer system as to
how to treat critically unwell
patients who had suffered TCA overdoses. Those guidelines were entitled
Therapeutic Guidelines: Toxicology and Toxinology, Tricyclic
antidepressant (TCA) poisoning
” (“the Guidelines”). They
relevantly identified the key investigations for TCA poisoning, namely ECG,
analysis, and, significantly, serum potassium concentration in
patients treated with serum alkalinisation (sodium bicarbonate). Serum
alkalinisation was recommended when QRS widening was progressive and associated
with symptoms such as breathing or circulatory compromise
(for example,
arrythmias, hypotension) or central nervous system depression. As to how much
sodium bicarbonate to use, the advice
For serum alkalinisation,
in adults and children, use:
sodium bicarbonate 8.4% 1 to 2 mL/kg up to 100 mL (1 to 2 mmol/kg up to 100
mmol) intravenously, every 3 to 5 minutes, titrated to
a narrowing of the QRS
complex and aiming for a serum pH between 7.45 and 7.55.
Maximum total dose
is 6 mL/kg (6 mmol/kg). Urgently seek advice from a clinical toxicologist if
there is inadequate response to the
maximum total
hyperventilation by intubation and mechanical ventilation, aiming for a serum
pH between 7.45 and 7.55 (typically by maintaining partial
pressure of arterial
carbon dioxide [PaCO
] between 30 and 35 mmHg).
warning that “serum alkalinisation can cause hypokalaemia due to
intracellular potassium shift – monitor the serum
potassium concentration
and replace potassium if required, aiming for normal serum potassium
concentration” was repeated.
to August 2020, the relevant part of the Guidelines read:
widening and sodium channel blockade
Continuous ECG monitoring and regular 12-lead ECGs are required to assess QRS
widening. When QRS widening is progressive and associated
with a decompensation
in airways, breathing or circulation (see #[Toxicology: general approach/QRS
widening]), intravenous boluses
of sodium bicarbonate and concurrent
hyperventilation therapy (by intubation and mechanical ventilation) should be
used to increase
the pH to a target of 7.45 to 7.55. Use:
sodium bicarbonate 8.4% (= 1 mmol/mL) 1 to 2 mmol/kg IV bolus, every 3 to
5 minutes, titrated to a narrowing of the QRS complex. If
no response, urgently
seek advice from a poisons information centre. Maximum total dose 10 mmol/kg
hyperventilation following intubation and mechanical ventilation (where
indicated).
the time of Jessica’s death there was no onsite toxicology service
available at TCH. However, at the time and today doctors
at TCH had/have access
at any time of day to a Toxicology Hotline run by the Westmead Hospital Poisons
Information Centre. The Poisons
Information Centre is staffed by pharmacists and
scientists with poisons specialisations. The Poisons Information Centre also
clinical toxicologists from around Australia who provide specialised
advice in respect of the medical management of human
. Dr TX did not consult
that service.
TX gave directions to begin the infusion of sodium bicarbonate and to insert a
second IV canula in Jessica’s other arm to
facilitate the administration
of sodium bicarbonate through both arms so as “to more rapidly facilitate
the appropriate initial
dose of approximately 150
No total dose of
sodium bicarbonate was directed, and nursing staff were told to give sodium
bicarbonate until they were told to
stop. She directed that the administration
of IV sodium bicarbonate be continued with 100 ml vials, rather than the smaller
vials. That started at 0751 hours. The evidence in the inquest suggests
that vials of sodium bicarbonate were obtained from a variety
of locations,
including the resuscitation trolley, trolleys elsewhere in ED, and ACTAS staff
(who obtained them from their re-stocking
her statement, Dr TX described what the process of treatment then was. That
description was generally by reference to events rather
than time, making more
difficult an assessment of the objective measures that existed of
Jessica’s metabolic status when treatment
decisions were made.
records suggest that Jessica was commenced on sodium bicarbonate at 0755 hours.
A venous blood gas sample
reported at 0755 hours showed: pH 7.24; pCO2 56 mmHg; pO2 26 mmHg; Na+ 132
mmol/L; K+ 4.5 mmol/L; CI- 101 mmol/L; Ca++ 1.09mmol/L;
Glucose 15.2 mmol/L;
Lactate 3.3 mmol/L; and HCO3 19.7 mmol/L. The report showed reference levels
identifying low and high ranges.
The pH result was between the low and
critically low levels. The Na+ (sodium) level was also between the low and
critically low levels.
Potassium (K+) was around normal.
0858 hours, blood gases were reported in these ranges: pH 7.64; pCO2 64 mmHg;
pO2 41 mmHg; Na
156 mmol/L; K
3.4.mmol/L; CI
99 mmol/L; Ca
0.84mmol/L; Glucose 11.1 mmol/L; Lactate 4.9
mmol/L; and HCO3 19.7 mmol/L. The pH result was beyond the critically high
7.55. The Na+ (sodium) level was also beyond the critically high level
of 155. Potassium was just below the low (3.5) reference range.
appears that Dr TX reviewed this result. She noted that “[Jessica] had
become metabolically alkalotic with the administration
of the sodium
bicarbonate”. She noted that the QRS “remained prolonged”,
although it had narrowed. She noted Jessica’s
serum sodium level to be
elevated at 160 mmol/L,
“likely as a result of the sodium load in the sodium bicarbonate”.
The readings did not prompt a review of the treatment
being administered
notwithstanding the targets outlined in the Guidelines. The rationale for that
approach was that the QRS “remained
prolonged although it appeared
narrower than previously (it was 123
milliseconds)”.
0910 and 0911 hours the administration of two further bags of bicarbonate was
commenced. Dr TX suggested that around 0915 to 0920
hours, she was asked by a
nurse whether further bicarbonate bottles should be
administered:
considered this issue in light of my initial recommendation to continue
administration of sodium bicarbonate until the QRS
narrowed. The QRS had
narrowed, but was still abnormally wide; the patient was now intubated; she had
maintained greater Cardiovascular
stability; and was now alkalotic.
42.3. I advised that I did not think further bicarbonate was indicated at
spoke to a colleague, Dr KD, after the last bags were administered:
KD and I had a brief discussion about the elevated sodium level on the gas and
the persistently prolonged QRS and QT interval on
the cardiac monitor. Dr KD
advised she would ring the Toxicology Hotline to discuss the situation and
obtain guidance on further
best practice management.
TX then left the area briefly to attend to other tasks. Dr TX described what
then happened (noting there was no timing references):
my return I saw Dr KD sitting at the Resus staff station with a number of blood
gases and ECGs in front of her. I have worked with
Dr KD for 15 years and
thought she looked very concerned. She advised me that it appeared that a total
of 16 of the 100 ml sodium
bicarbonate bottles had been administered, and that
on discussion with the Toxicology Hotline staff, they were concerned that this
represented the administration of a critical sodium load, particularly in the
context of the raised sodium level on the blood gas.
The concern was whether
this placed Ms Bovill at risk of central pontine myelinolysis (CPM), a condition
where the nerve sheath of
brainstem cells becomes damaged with the rapid shift
of water out of the cells into the more salt concentrated blood, where the
level is high.
until that point, I had lost situational awareness of how much sodium
bicarbonate had been administered, given the other issues
I was addressing. I
had not considered the implications of the corresponding salt load. My focus had
been on ensuring we managed
the acute and immediately life-threatening risk of
cardiac instability with a primary goal of narrowing the QRS using sodium
bicarbonate.
her distress from the mistake she realised she had made, Dr TX stepped out of
her care role, and the responsibility for Jessica’s
care was assumed by
0951 hours (it is assumed after Dr TX had stepped aside from Jessica’s
care) blood gases were reported in these ranges: pH
7.76; pCO2 54 mmHg; pO2 38
168 mmol/L; K
2.2 mmol/L; CI
0.69 mmol/L; Glucose 11.3 mmol/L; Lactate 9.8 mmol/L;
and HCO3 63.1mmol/L. The pH level was above the critical range (7.55). Potassium
was significantly below the critically low reference range of 2.9. Sodium was
above the critical level (155).
is not clear from the evidence as to how much sodium bicarbonate was eventually
administered and Dr TX was unable to say with
There was a
discrepancy between the medication chart (1180 mmols), the fluid balance chart
(1500 mmols), and the clinical notes (1600
a result of the administration of this amount of sodium
bicarbonate,
Jessica suffered
severe hypernatremia
metabolic alkalosis.
metabolic alkalosis in turn resulted in
hypokalaemia.
An attempt was
made to address those issues. It was known that there were significant risks
associated with treating the overdose
of sodium bicarbonate either
conservatively or more aggressively. The risks and benefits of treatment options
were discussed within
the treating team.
was then administered. Jessica was transferred to the ICU, where she remained
sedated and intubated. She was cooled, given
insulin, administered IV
noradrenaline, and commenced on dialysis. A brain scan was conducted at 2218
hours on 8 December 2020. It
showed possible ischaemic changes without oedema. A
further scan, conducted at 0630 hours on 9 December 2020, showed “rapid
interval development of diffuse cerebral and cerebellar oedema” with uncal
herniation and compression of the midbrain. A further
MRI scan, conducted at
1046 hours on 10 December 2020, showed diffuse hypoxic ischaemic injury with
uncal and tonsillar herniation.
Neurological advice was that no intervention was
death was declared by the ICU consultant at 1545 hours on 11 December 2020.
note made by Dr NT, ICU staff specialist, at 1747 hours (with errors included)
summarised the advice given to Jessica’s family
in the following terms:
Written in retrospect
I met with the family at 16:00 hours after the perfusion scan was reported and
was consistent with Brain death. Jessica was declared
brain dead at 15:45 when
the second specialist reviewed the scans and certified her dead.
I first introduced myself to the family and later updated again all the events
and progress from the time she was found unconscious
in the Kitchen at home. I
told them Jessica presented with significant signs and symptoms of severe TCA
overdose. I explained them
these signs and the ECG changes she had on her
presentation.
I also explained the potential neurotoxicity and cardiac toxicity of a severe
TCA overdose. I told them the doctors in ED noticed
that Jessica had seizures as
they were planning to intubate her and that she was at risk of arrhythmias as
well. She was treated
with bicarb injections to stabilize her ECG changes.
During this she did get a very high dose of bicarb in a very short time which
let to severe derrangements in her acid base and electrolytes. Toxicology were
consulted after this and they also mentioned that
Jessica had very high dose of
bicarb therapy. Their advise was to get renal specialist input for urgent
The Renal specialist also expressed his concerns about the potential risks
benefits of IHD vs, conservative therapy. There were challenges
on both ways,
with conservative fluid therapy with dextrose would mean that Jessica would need
insulin therapy and that would push
her K down further and increase risk of
arrhythmias. It was felt, given her Na rise was acute (few hours), it would be
to treat the severe electrolyte/acid base derrangements with
I also explained them given that Jessica had seizures in ED, with the
electrolyte derrangements (low Ca), could have worsen her seizures
which given
that she was sedated and paralysed would be difficult to pick (Non convulsive
status). This in addition to the rapid
acid-base, osmolar shifts from high dose
bicarb, put Jessica at risk of brain swelling, which unfortunately she
I then explained to the family that given worsening brain swelling, led to
decrease and later no blood flow in her brain given the
pressures in the skull
would rise from the brain swelling. I explained the MRI findings from yesterday,
they said that Jessica was
having one but were not aware of the reports.
I than explained why we did a nuclear perfusion scan. I than explained them the
results and that she was pronounced death at 15:45
I also later told them we were quite concerned how Jessica got high dose of
bicarb and that the hospital has already started a root
cause analysis on how
someone would get this high dose of bicarb. I told them if they wish to speak to
a hospital representative,
they were happy to come and discuss the matter with
them. Bill at this point expressed that he read about the TCA overdose, and
people do survive even with 6gm OD of TCA and Jessica had taken about 1.5
gm. He expected Jessica to get better and return home.
I said, I agree with his
assessment, but unfortunately, things have not turned out that way.
I also explained to the family, given that there was a medication error where
Jessica got very high dose bicarb therapy, we will
refer her to the coroner who
will conduct their own investigation to assess how much the above error
contributed to her death. The
hospital will continue with its own investigation
and that they will be updated the finding of the same.
family agreed to an organ donation process.
PART 5 – EXPERT ANALYSIS OF TREATMENT
following part sets out the views of the experts and my findings in respect of
three issues:
(a) Was the amitriptyline overdose appropriately treated?
(b) What caused Jessica’s death?
(c) Would Jessica have survived but for the overdose of sodium bicarbonate?
A. Was the amitriptyline overdose appropriately treated?
her expert report, Professor Jones summarised the central features of TCA
overdose management in the following way:
(a) Appropriate clinical risk assessment of the likely timing and estimated
total amount ingested;
(b) Proper management of the airway (including intubation) to address central
nervous system depression;
(c) Administration of activated charcoal within 4 hours of ingestion to inhibit
the absorption of the medication;
(d) Prevention and management of cardiac arrythmias. This involves correcting
any hypoxia, addressing electrolyte abnormalities,
hypotension,
Intravenous sodium
bicarbonate “is the mainstay of treatment in tricyclic antidepressant
poisoning as it resolves cardiac arrhythmias”.
Jones then explained how cardiac arrythmias may emerge:
principal mechanism of amitriptyline cardiotoxicity is sodium channel blockage
resulting in slowing of depolarisation of the cardiac
action potential through
the myocardium and conducting tissue. Clinically this may present as
prolongation of the QRS complex on
the ECG (> 120 msec), QTc prolongation on
the ECG and as potentially life-threatening arrhythmias.
Professor Jones’ opinion, each of these issues was addressed in
Jessica’s care:
(a) She was identified as having an airway at risk and was correctly intubated
and ventilated.
(b) She was assessed by ECG for cardiac arrythmia and had her blood pressure and
heart rate continuously monitored.
(c) She was administered activated charcoal. Whilst it is likely that Jessica
had presented 4 hours after ingestion of the amitriptyline
overdose, use of this
treatment was unlikely to have caused Jessica any harm.
(d) She was administered sodium
bicarbonate.
Jones and the other experts agreed that the amount of sodium bicarbonate that
was administered was excessive. Associate
Professor Skowronski indicated that:
The generally recommended target is to achieve a blood pH of around
7.5, using a combination of bicarbonate and mild hyperventilation,
raises pH by increasing the removal of CO2 from the blood. Most guidelines
recommend a loading dose of 1-2mmol/kg body
weight – around 100mmol in an
average adult, followed, if needed, by a further 100mmol by infusion over some
with the opinion of the experts, I find that although the broad parameters of
the treatment of the amitriptyline overdose
were appropriate, an excessive
amount of sodium bicarbonate was administered.
B. What caused
Jessica’s death?
was realised by treating doctors that sodium bicarbonate had been infused in
overdose quantities. The subsequent clinical course
was consistent with that
fact. Treatments were directed at reversing the effects of the sodium
bicarbonate overdose. At the time,
it was the opinion of treating clinicians
that there was a causative association between the excessive administration of
sodium bicarbonate
(and attempts to reverse it) and Jessica’s terminal
Professor Skowronski described Jessica’s decline and then death in these
terms (after noting the volume of sodium
bicarbonate that had been
administered):
This was a very large quantity of sodium bicarbonate,
given over a short time (7.55 am to 9.11 am). It resulted in the expected
of severe hypokalaemia, hypernatremia, hypocalcaemia and metabolic
alkalosis. Of these, the hypernatremia, peaking at a serum sodium
concentration
of 169mmol/l between 11.29 am and 12.11 pm, is likely to have been the main
contributor to Mrs Bovill’s brain
injury, as this is a well-known
complication of severe hypernatremia.
In brief, the main mechanism of injury is that this very high concentration
of blood sodium draws water out of brain cells by osmosis,
causing shrinkage. As
the high sodium level is corrected with treatment, brain cells may swell to
significantly larger than their
original size. This brain swelling raises the
pressure inside the skull, impeding blood flow and hence oxygen supply to the
It is this limitation of blood flow and oxygen supply that results in
damage, or even death, of the brain.
The rapidity of correction can also be a factor in the development of brain
swelling, though this is generally considered to be a
more important issue when
the hypernatremia has developed over a long period.
alternative hypothesis explored during the inquest was that Jessica’s
death was directly caused by the original amitriptyline
overdose. For that to be
so, symptomology referable to the original overdose must have caused the hypoxic
brain injury that was the
cause of her death. Professor Jones discussed this
possibility in her report, although she did so only at an abstract level. She
indicated that it was possible that respiratory depression and the coma Jessica
suffered might have caused her death if she had not
been intubated and cared for
at TCH. Those factors could have caused hypoxia. Hypotension and cardiac
arrythmias (noting her prolonged
QRS and QTc indicating risk) are an additional
potential cause of death in amitriptyline poisoning. Professor Jones indicated
“additional expertise from ICU and renal physicians is required to
comment on the effects of fluid, pH and tonicity shifts
on possible cerebral
oedema, as a consequence of excess intravenous bicarbonate administration in
this case”.
am of the view that Associate Professor Skowronski was qualified to provide that
commentary. Apart from the passages already quoted
as to the cause of
Jessica’s death, he was asked specifically to consider whether Jessica
would have suffered the same neurological
injury if she had not been
administered the sodium bicarbonate. He regarded that as very unlikely:
In my opinion it is very unlikely, for reasons I have alluded to previously. In
This was not a
massive overdose, and the expected mortality would be low. In a 2019 national
audit of 2381 US cases of amitriptyline
overdose, only 10 deaths were
Brain swelling
is not a characteristic feature of tricyclic overdose, unless complicated by a
major hypoxic insult.
There is no
history in her presentation of cardiac or respiratory instability sufficient to
explain hypoxic brain injury of this severity.
The amount of
sodium bicarbonate administered greatly exceeds the usual clinical dosage.
The pattern of
neurological injury is completely consistent with the severe electrolyte
disturbance seen in this case, which in turn
is an expected consequence of the
very large dose of sodium bicarbonate administered.
should be added that the heart arrhythmias that can be associated with deaths
from amitriptyline overdoses were not seen in this
case, despite the abnormal
with that opinion, I find that the cause of Jessica’s death was the
neurological injury caused by the administration
of the very large dose of
sodium bicarbonate.
C. Would Jessica have survived but for the overdose of sodium
bicarbonate?
this question substantially overlaps the question addressed above and clearly
involves an element of speculation. However,
there are observations that can be
made generally of amitriptyline overdoses that put Jessica’s overdose into
a statistical
his expert report, Professor Drummer stated the following
propositions:
(a) The mortality from amitriptyline overdose is higher than for most drugs,
although this is very much dependent on the dose, co-morbidities,
treatment received in hospital and how soon after ingestion medical treatment
(b) There is no dose or blood concentration of amitriptyline that will
necessarily not be fatal or indeed cause death. While the
dose is an important
factor individual sensitivities (age, co-morbidities, other drugs etc) play a
role, but importantly appropriate
early medical intervention is critical,
particularly when large doses are consumed.
(c) When taken well in excess of a recommended dose, amitriptyline can cause
death. The greatest risk of life-threatening symptoms
usually occurs at doses in
excess of 10 mg/kg, although lower doses can be toxic, particularly when acute
medical attention is not
sought and in medically vulnerable people, including
those on other drugs.
(d) The use of excessive doses can progressively cause anxiety, ataxia,
tachycardia, alterations in blood pressure, arrhythmias,
seizures, and coma. ECG
changes are one of the more symptomatic signs, including prolongation of the QTc
and QRS intervals. A QRS
duration of >100 msec is an indicator of an overdose
to drugs like amitriptyline (tricyclic anti-depressants). Ischaemic changes
the CNS or swelling of the brain are not listed as an expected adverse outcome.
Drummer also reviewed a number of studies where amitriptyline overdoses had
(a) In one review, initial signs seen in emergency departments that were
associated with a fatal outcome were coma (61%), tachycardia
(55%), hypotension
(50%), respiratory depression (39%), and seizures (39%) with QRS prolongation
present in 28% and major arrhythmias
(b) A study of 40 consecutively hospitalised patients due to tricyclic
anti-depressants, including amitriptyline, monitored 13 patients
with levels
greater than 1 mg/L which is about 4-10 times the optimal concentration for
therapeutic treatment. Of these 13 patients
7 had ingested amitriptyline alone
with doses ranging from 1.1 to 2.2 grams and all had a QRS interval of >100
msec. Other cardiac
abnormalities reported included ventricular tachycardia
(>120 bpm, n=7), right bundle-branch block (n=4), atrial and ventricular
pre-mature contractions, junctional arrhythmia, and idioventricular arrhythmias.
Ten became unconscious and 3 had cardiac arrests.
Sodium bicarbonate infusion
was apparently not used in these patients. Only two of the patients died. There
was no mention of cerebral
ischemia or oedema in these
(c) Another publication involved a review of 110 patients who had overdosed on
amitriptyline and were admitted to hospital. The most
common symptoms were sinus
tachycardia, altered mental state and hypotension followed by respiratory
depression requiring ventilatory
support. About half of these patients had taken
over 500 mg amitriptyline, although individual doses were not reported, and
measurements were not conducted. Bicarbonate was not administered to any
of these patients, and no patient
Drummer’s conclusion was:
7.10. Death from amitriptyline
overdose can occur, even with proper medical intervention in hospitals even with
lower doses, however
most overdose admissions to hospital for this drug do
survive. However, what cannot be ascertained with any certainty is whether
survival would necessarily have occurred in Ms Bovill’s case if
bicarbonate was not given. The blood concentration of amitriptyline,
high, could have risen further on the day of her admission due to continuing
absorption, or if the amount ingested was
less and/or she had taken the drug
much earlier in the night it may have been already near the peak
concentration.
conclude from this overview and the information provided by Associate Professor
Skowronski that amitriptyline overdoses can be fatal.
We do not know when
Jessica ingested the amitriptyline. A significant delay between ingestion and
treatment can be a factor relevant
to whether the person survives. The amount of
amitriptyline taken by Jessica was significant and, without treatment,
life-threatening,
but it was not as high as it was in other cases involving
overdoses not leading to death. Her condition when admitted to TCH was
The symptoms that were suffered by Jessica at the time of her admission are
associated with the symptoms of patients who
have died from amitriptyline
overdoses and those who have survived. In the quoted reviews, the incidence of
fatal outcomes of those
treated in a hospital setting is a relatively small
percentage of cases, even when serum levels of amitriptyline are higher (and
some cases much higher) than those in Jessica’s case.
the quoted reviews, where overdose has resulted in death, death has not been
attributed to, or associated with, cerebral ischemia
note and accept Associate Professor Skowronski’s opinion that it is likely
that Jessica would have survived but for the sodium
bicarbonate overdose.
However, I cannot exclude the possibility that Jessica would still have died
from the amitriptyline overdose
if she had been appropriately treated at TCH.
The reasonable survival prospects she had were lost because of the
administration of
sodium bicarbonate in excessive
quantities.
PART 6 – FORMAL FINDINGS
the basis of the material available to me in the inquest, and particularly in
light of the opinions expressed by Associate Professor
Skowronski, I find that
Jessica’s death was a sequela of the use of an excessive amount of sodium
bicarbonate in the treatment
of her initial overdose of amitriptyline. I find
that there was no suggestion of symptoms prior to admission of a severity that
have caused hypoxic brain injury of the type that caused Jessica’s
death. Such brain injury is not associated in any published
reviews with deaths
caused by TCA overdose.
do not accept the suggestion that hypoxic brain injury had occurred prior to the
administration of sodium bicarbonate at the direction
of Dr TX. If seizures were
present at the time of Jessica’s admission to TCH, that is a symptom
consistent with TCA overdose
Accordingly,
for the purposes of s 52(1) of the Act, I find that:
Jessica Hilary
Bovill died at the Canberra Hospital at about 1545 hours on or about 11 December
2020. She died of severe diffuse hypoxic
brain injury caused by the
administration of a supratherapeutic level of sodium bicarbonate in the context
of the treatment of a
self-inflicted and deliberate overdose of amitriptyline.
PART 7 – MATTERS OF PUBLIC SAFETY
Dr TX’s standard of clinical practice
her statement, Dr TX drew attention to the fact that the outcomes in
Jessica’s case had been the subject of review by practitioners
TCH and associated with the Poisons Information Centres in Queensland and
An article was published in
2022, noting “a concerning trend of iatrogenic bicarbonate poisoning
occurring in patients presenting
following overdose of drugs with sodium
blocking action”.
Jessica’s case (de-identified) was one of the cases used to highlight that
trend. From those case studies and information available
to the Poison
Information Centres, the authors identified the following common errors in the
treatment of TCA overdoses:
(a) Forgetting the importance of ventilation when giving bicarbonate therapy.
Bicarbonate may paradoxically worsen the pH with rising
pCO2 in the
unventilated patient. Gently hyperventilate, aiming for a low normal
pCO2 to assist in reaching the target pH range.
(b) Aiming for an unrealistic QRS target (e.g. 100–120 ms) rather
than a target pH range. The QRS often remains prolonged
120–140 ms) for 24–48 h following severe TCA overdose.
Furthermore, in sodium channel blockade because
of non-TCA medications, the QRS
prolongation may not respond to bicarbonate at all.
(c) Not performing blood gas analysis regularly to ensure the target pH and
pCO2 are met and iatrogenic harm is avoided. Complications
like severe
hypokalaemia can often go unrecognised and can contribute to haemodynamic
instability.
(d) Treating a broad complex QRS that is not secondary to sodium channel
blockade but is rather a pre-existing interventricular conduction
authors went on to recommend that practitioners dealing with TCA overdoses use
the guidance provided by the Guidelines, and that
they discuss such cases with
the poisons centre or a local toxicologist.
TX, whilst undoubtedly busy, made clinical decisions based on inadequate
consultation and without reference to available and authoritative
guidance and the Poisons Information Centre. Whilst the online guide (LITFL) was
no doubt useful in its content, it did
not contain the explicit warnings that
were contained in the Guidelines. The Guidelines were available to practitioners
should have been consulted. Advice should have been sought from a
toxicologist much earlier. The amount of sodium bicarbonate administered
in excess of the suggested maximum dosage. The level of serum alkalinisation was
not appropriately monitored, and the continued
administration of sodium
bicarbonate occurred in the face of blood gas results suggesting they had
already reached critical levels.
find that the actions of Dr TX contributed to the cause of Jessica’s
information provided to me does not enable me to say whether Dr TX’s
clinical practice on that day was reflective of a general
shortfall in
professional competence and, therefore, giving rise to a matter of public
shall cause my findings to be forwarded to the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency (“AHPRA”), so that issue
can be appropriately
investigated.
Other matters of public safety
otherwise find that issues of public safety do arise from the inquest I have
conducted. I make the following comments and
recommendations.
(i) Guidance and advice in treating TCA
was a lack of mandatory requirement to seek toxicological advice from the
Poisons Information Centre in respect of TCA overdoses,
and to consult the
Guidelines in the case of a TCA overdose.
recommend that processes at TCH be reviewed to ensure that ED staff are alerted
to the need to:
(a) seek out any such advice from a toxicology consultant at the Poisons
Information Centre when patients present to the ED with
a potential TCA
overdose; and/or
(b) consult the Guidelines or other officially approved advice as to the
treatment of such cases.
(ii) Access to sodium bicarbonate
the course of Jessica’s treatment, there appeared to have been
unrestrained access to large amounts of sodium bicarbonate
from a variety of
sources. This reality may not have provided a situational alert to nursing staff
that a large amount of sodium
bicarbonate was being administered.
recommend that processes be reviewed with a view to limiting the availability of
sodium bicarbonate to a central point of supply.
respect of these recommendations, I note the contents of Ms Zagari’s
statement. My findings will, for the purposes of s 57
of the Act, constitute my
report to the Attorney-General of the inquest I have conducted. Any response by
the Attorney-General or
another Minister to my report must be made in accordance
with the terms of s 57(4) of the Act.
express my condolences to Jessica’s family and apologise to them for the
time taken to publish these findings. I acknowledge
that a delay in the
resolution of coronial proceedings has added to the trauma of the family
associated with the passing of a much-loved
wife and mother.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and four [104] numbered paragraphs
are a true copy of the reasons for findings of his Honour
Associate: Markus Ching
Date: 26 February 2025
Those responsible for
Jessica’s care formally determined on that day that there had been an
irreversible cessation of all function
of her brain. It is likely she had
suffered brain death at an earlier time.
R v Doogan; Ex Parte
Lucas Smith & Ors
[2005] ACTSC
Therapeutic Guidelines is
an independent not-for-profit organisation. It develops and publishes the
Therapeutic Guidelines
, which is extensively adopted and used in
Australian medical and pharmacy schools, public teaching hospitals, and in
community medical
and pharmacy
Bill maintained, in response
to the s 55 notice and throughout the inquest, that Jessica would have survived
the amitriptyline overdose.
He has consistently maintained that it was the
negligence of Dr TX that caused Jessica’s death.
In submission in the context
of the provisional findings process Bill suggested that the number of
amitriptyline pills missing was
between 21 and 30.
Professor Drummer, Expert
Forensic Report in the matter of Jessica Bovill deceased, dated 24 April 2024,
The QRS or QRS
is the combination of three of the graphical deflections seen on
a typical electrocardiogram (ECG). It corresponds to
the depolarization
of the right and left ventricles of the
heart and contraction of the large ventricular muscles. Ventricular
depolarization refers
to the time taken for the electrical stimulation and
relaxation of the ventricles during a complete cycle of heart contraction and
relaxation. In adults, the QRS complex normally lasts 60 to 100 msec: Yasar
Sattar and Lovely Chhabra,
Electrocardiogram
(StatPearls Publishing, 5
Statement of Dr TX
dated 4 May 2023, [17].
However, see
paragraphs [50]-[52] and footnote 20.
Statement of Dr TX, dated 4
May 2023 [17.1].
Ibid [19.8]. The
notes made by Dr TX (prepared in retrospect) refer to shaking consistent with
seizures at the time of her initial
assessment. The Registrar’s notes do
not mention seizures at that point of time. Neither ACTAS nor nursing records
such a reference. Whilst seizures are a common feature of amitriptyline
overdoses seizures are also a feature of the disturbance
caused by sodium
bicarbonate overdose (noting that the administration of sodium bicarbonate began
at 0755 hours). The presence of
seizures does not necessarily indicate that
brain damage has occurred.
Ibid [19.9].
Ibid [19.10].
Meaning a fast heart rate.
The guidelines had been amended in August 2020 to include this maximum dosage
guidance. The guidelines were not accessible to Dr
TX on her phone, but they
were accessible online at TCH. Emphasis added.
Information provided by
ACTGS by letter dated 5 November 2024. This was the service that Dr KD
Statement of Dr
TX, dated 4 May 2023 [24.2].
A blood gas test measures oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in the blood. The
test can also show blood pH levels and lung
The printout
appearing in the TCH records (at page 182) is timed at 0858 hours and suggests
the reading was 156.
Statement of Dr TX, dated 4 May 2023,
Ibid [48.1].
Advice was received from
Professor Drummers as to the extent of the overdose:
The amount of bicarbonate required will depend on a patient’s clinical
state that includes monitoring her blood pH, ECG and
her electrolytes and while
recommendations are for a maximum bicarbonate dose, such as 396 mL (6 mmol/kg x
66 kg body weight) for
the current version of eTG or 660 mL for the previous
version in 2020; it is vital that titration of bicarbonate infusion occurs
stops when her blood pH, ECG and electrolytes have improved sufficiently. This
process is likely to take some time to allow for
appropriate monitoring of these
vital signs and allow her body to respond to the bicarbonate infusion(s).
It is not possible to come up with a number of how many times her bicarbonate
dose was exceeded given we don’t know what bicarbonate
dose she needed;
arguably she may not have needed much, if any. Based on the maximum recommended
dose using the 2020 eTG guideline
(660 mL) and assuming she was only given 1180
mL bicarbonate her dose was 1.8 times the recommended, or almost 3 times the
recommended dose using the amended eTG
High sodium
levels in the blood. Here it peaked at 169 mmol/L. A normal blood sodium level
is between 135 and 155 milliequivalents
per litre (mEq/L). Severe hypernatremia
is considered to be >160.
Metabolic alkalosis is a disorder whereby the pH of tissue is elevated beyond
the normal range (7.35–7.44 to
A low level of
The blood becoming
too acidic.
Professor Skowronski noted that “most guidelines recommend bicarbonate
treatment, given the ECG changes she exhibited
and the transient hypotension,
though some intensivist would be more conservative, reserving bicarbonate for
clinically significant
manifestations of cardiotoxicity”. He went on to
say that had he been treating Jessica “I would likely have withheld
the absence of persistent hypotension or cardiac rhythm disturbance, though I
acknowledge this would put me at odds with many
guidelines”.
Drummer, Expert Forensic Report in the matter of Jessica Bovill deceased, dated
24 April 2024, [5.15].
Biggs et al, ‘Tricyclic Antidepressant Overdose: Incidence of
(1977) 238(2)
Cahfer Güloglu et
al, ‘Analysis of Amitriptyline Overdose in Emergency Medicine’
(2011) 28(4)
Emergency Medicine Journal
Katherine Isoardi and
Angela Chiew, ‘Too Much of a Good Thing: Bicarbonate Toxicity following
Treatment of Sodium Channel Blocker
Overdose’ (2022) 34
Medicine Australasia
RTF format (453 KB)
Signed PDF/A format