Inquest into the death of Stanley McIntyre [2025] ACTCD 5 (12 August 2025)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Inquest into the death of Stanley McIntyre
[2025] ACTCD 5
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Coroner Archer
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– death in care – pulmonary emphysema
– whether issue with quality of care, treatment, and supervision –
whether matter of public safety arises
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
Mental Health Act 2015
Crimes Act 1900
Texts Cited:
Royal Commission into Victoria’s Mental Health System
Report, March 2021)
Representation:
Counsel Assisting the Coroner
Xiao Lin King
File Number:
CD 181 of 2021
CORONER ARCHER:
Introduction
23 June 2021, the death of Stanley McIntyre was reported to the Australian
Capital Territory (
) Coroner’s Court. I will, with respect,
refer to Mr McIntyre as Stanley in these findings.
the time of his death, Stanley was 63 years old and was subject to a Psychiatric
Treatment Order (
), which was made by the ACT Civil and Administrative
) on 1 February 2021 for a period of 6 months. Forensic
pathologist, Professor Johan Duflou, performed a post-mortem examination and
opined that the cause of Stanley’s death was pulmonary
coroner’s jurisdiction in relation to Stanley’s death arises under
Coroners Act 1997
), which provides:
(1) A coroner must hold an inquest into the manner and cause of death of a
person who—
(i) dies in care or custody.
of the Act, a “in care” means a person subject to an order
Mental Health Act 2015
). Given Stanley was subject to a PTO (
65) at the time of his death, his death is within the coroner’s
a hearing into Stanley’s
death must not be dispensed with.
the conclusion of the inquest, including the hearing for the inquest, I must
make the findings that are required by s 52 of
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find, if possible—
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the person has
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
(i) state whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection
with the inquest or inquiry; and
(ii) if a matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the
find a “cause” of death in any given case, a coroner is required to
consider what physiologically produced that result.
Separately, a finding as to
the “manner” of death involves a consideration of the circumstances
in which the death took
place. If a matter of public safety arises, I can
comment on it.
, where applicable, I must also make findings as to the
quality of care, treatment, and supervision of the deceased person that, in
opinion, contributed to the cause of their death. Section 74 of
does not require a coroner in cases to which this section applies to always make
findings about the quality of care, treatment and
supervision of the deceased.
What the section calls for is for findings to be made when shortfalls in the
quality of care, treatment
and supervision of the deceased “contributed to
the cause of death”. That shortfall does not need to be the only matter
that caused the death.
Course of the Inquest / Hearing
Jane Campbell had carriage of Stanley’s matter after it was referred to
the Court. As no findings had been made by the
time of my appointment as the
Territory’s dedicated coroner in March 2022, I assumed carriage of the
matter to complete the
investigation of Stanley’s death.
brief of evidence was completed by the Australian Federal Police (
the direction of the court. It contained interviews with Stanley’s younger
brother (‘Stanley’s brother’)
and Stanley’s mental
health case manager Mr Steven Keed. It also contained extensive records
subpoenaed from Canberra Health
) and ACT Housing.
hearing into Stanley’s death was conducted on 13 December 2024. Ms King
appeared as counsel assisting. The brief of evidence
was tendered and marked as
an exhibit. I was also provided with a copy of Ms King’s written
submissions.
other person sought leave to appear. Stanley’s brother who advocated
tirelessly for Stanley throughout the coronial process,
was unable to attend the
hearing. He had a point of view in respect of the circumstances of
Stanley’s death which is referred
Stanley Mcintyre – His Life and Mental Health
was born on 28 May 1958 in New South Wales (
). Stanley’s medical
records contain little information about his early childhood. The records
indicate that Stanley reported
to clinicians that he and his family moved to
Canberra around 1970.
review of Stanley’s medical records also disclosed that Stanley had a
lengthy history of severe and treatment resistant schizophrenia.
Stanley was
first diagnosed with schizophrenia in 1979, when he was 21 years old.
Stanley’s brother recalled that Stanley began
to develop a psychiatric
illness after he left high school in year 10 and returned from an overseas trip
to Europe with his friends.
From early on in his treatment history, clinicians
considered Stanley’s schizophrenia to be severe and chronic. Beginning in
the 1980s, Stanley had had frequent psychiatric hospital admissions, including
in-patient stays at the now closed
Brian Hennessy House
in 1999 and 2003.
Despite treatment with anti-psychotic medication, he was often profoundly
thought-disordered, experienced psychosis,
and lacked insight into his
condition. His illness was further complicated by alcohol abuse and illicit drug
use dating back to the
with the severity of his illness, Stanley had a history of treatment whilst
subject to PTOs involving a mixture of in-patient
care and treatment within the
community. At the time of his death, Stanley was subject to a PTO and was being
managed in the community
by the City Mental Health (
Stanley’s treatment plan involved attending CMH every three weeks for a
Haloperidol 75 mg depot injection (anti-psychotic),
every six weeks for a
psychiatric review with Dr Bree Wyeth, and weekly welfare visits from his case
manager, Mr Steven Keed.
Keed had been Stanley’s case manager for three years prior to his death.
He described Stanley as the most complex patient
he had ever worked with, as his
illness had meant that he was forgetful, delusional, and at times threatening
and aggressive towards
clinicians and support workers. Stanley was poor at
engaging with the community mental health team. He would often miss appointments
and depot injections, which, according to Mr Keed, had made it very difficult to
maintain consistent support services for Stanley.
It is evident from the medical
records that Mr Keed was one of the few people Stanley trusted.
mental health prior to his death was described in the application for a PTO,
dated 27 January 2021, by psychiatrist
Dr EK Rodrigo, in the following terms:
Mr McIntyre has demonstrated a poor baseline functioning, usually with some form
of psychotic symptoms, both as an in-patient and
in the community. Mr McIntyre
suffers from a co-morbid alcohol use disorder.
Stanley is orientated and alert, but has no insight into his condition,
initially he seemed to have little to no understanding of
his situation
including the fact that he is facing charges.
In the community he has been passively accepting his depot injection, but his
recent presentation suggests a relapse despite this,
he currently lacks the
capacity to make a choice regarding his treatment.
In general Stanley presents as malodorous and profoundly thought disordered, and
incontinence of urine. The consumer is tangential,
with loose associations and
flight of ideas. Stanley suffers from grandiose delusions, for example, he
believes he is one of the
psychiatrists working here or he is a Police officer.
last in-patient admission was between 24 February and 11 March 2021
‘the February 2021 admission’
). At the time, he was facing
criminal charges relating to failing to appear in court, trespass, and indecent
exposure. He had been
transported to the Adult Mental Health Unit (
at The Canberra Hospital (
) under an order made pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT). That section empowers the Magistrates Court to
order an accused person to be taken involuntarily to a mental health facility
for the purpose of deciding whether the accused needs immediate treatment or
care because of mental impairment.
to discharge, Stanley was reviewed by psychiatrist Dr Vinod Chopra, who noted
that he was calm and co-operative, but still had
ongoing delusions about being a
doctor and lacked insight into his mental illness. Dr Chopra prepared a final
discharge report, which
described Stanley’s schizophrenia as treatment
resistant. Dr Chopra opined that due to his mental illness, Stanley was unfit
stand trial in court and incapable of independent living.
11 March 2021, Stanley was discharged from AMHU back to his ACT Housing unit,
where he lived alone. The discharge plan indicated
that at the time of
discharge, the CMH treating team was working on arranging suitable supported
accommodation for Stanley.
medical records also indicate that in the period following his last hospital
admission until his death, Stanley was
up to date with his depot medication, and
his mental state was considered by clinicians to be at his baseline.
Stanley’s Physical Health
complete picture of Stanley’s physical health before his death is
difficult to ascertain from his medical records. This may
reflect the fact that
Stanley resisted attending medical appointments and participating in physical
examinations. He lacked insight
into not only his mental health, but also his
physical health. He was an unreliable historian regarding his health.
is clear that the CMH clinicians recognised and were concerned about the risks
Stanley’s mental illness and lifestyle posed
to his physical health.
Stanley’s medical records demonstrate that the CMH team made efforts to
engage Stanley with a General
Practitioner (
). Between 2019 and his
death, Stanley saw GP Dr Paul Appleton on four occasions.
11 May 2021, about a month before Stanley passed, he was diagnosed with Chronic
Obstructive Airways Disease (
) by Dr Appleton. COAD refers to a broad
category of progressive lung diseases involving restricted breathing. One
significant cause
of COAD is smoking. Stanley’s medical records indicate
that he had a long history of being a moderate to heavy smoker, and
his many years of engagement with community mental health services, clinicians
had made efforts to encourage him to quit
smoking. Those efforts were
unsuccessful, and Stanley was still a smoker at the time of his death.
Stanley’s COAD was not diagnosed until 11 May 2021, his medical records
indicate that he had been suffering from some
form of lung disease for many
years prior:
(a) In January 1986, Stanley presented to the hospital with sudden chest pain
and was diagnosed with pneumothorax (a collapsed lung).
A left upper lobectomy
(removal of the left upper lobe of the lung) was performed. Stanley had a normal
recovery post-surgery and
had good “air entry”.
(b) In May 1998, a chest X-ray report stated that “the lungs show marked
changes of obstructive airways disease but are otherwise
Subsequent chest X-ray reports in July 1999 stated the “chest was
(c) In June 2019 and March 2020, Dr Appleton examined Stanley's chest and noted,
on both occasions, “poor AE (air entry) but
(d) In November 2020, Stanley presented to the then Calvary Hospital following a
sudden collapse in public. A chest CT-scan showed:
Either massive bullous (air pocket) or there is complete collapse of the right
upper lobe, with a bullous favoured, there is a very
large gas containing
structure at the right lung apex and no normal lung is seen there.
(e) A subsequent chest X-ray conducted during that presentation showed:
No pneumothorax. Marked bullous change within the right upper lobe and a few
presumed peripheral paraseptal emphysematous lesions
of the left lung and also
within the right mid to lower zone. Increased bronchovesicular markings in the
mid and lower zones consistent
(f) On 11 May 2021, Dr Appleton diagnosed Stanley with COAD and prescribed
Stanley Anora Ellipta inhaler medication. Dr Appleton
noted “chest poor AE
and wheeze”.
review of Stanley’s medical records in the year prior to his death
revealed that Stanley did not report breathing difficulties
to his treating
clinicians. During the February 2021 admission, Stanley reported to clinicians
that he was in peak physical health
and had a “white brain, white lung,
and white heart”. He denied having any chest pain, palpitations, or
shortness of
breath. Surprisingly, his vitals, checked daily during his
admissions, were within normal ranges. His oxygen saturation levels were
93% and 97%, and his respiratory rate was between 14 and 17 breaths per minute.
consultation with Dr Appleton on 11 May 2021 was his last GP visit before he
passed. The consultation notes from that
visit did not record how significant or
advanced Dr Appleton considered Stanley’s COAD to be. The only other
physical health
concerns Stanley was suffering from at the time were
incontinence and a recently operated-on fractured elbow.
Housing and Other Support in the Community
the months prior to Stanley’s death, the CMH team was working on getting
him more daily living support. Following his last
hospital admission, Stanley
was living alone in an ACT Housing unit. He was receiving a disability pension
and had a basic National
Disability Insurance Scheme (
) package in
place. That package included weekly frozen meal deliveries, occupational
therapy, and some cleaning services. The records
suggest that Stanley had lived
in ACT Housing accommodation for most of his adult life.
CMH team recognised that due to his mental illness, Stanley was incapable of
completing many daily living tasks, including cooking,
cleaning, and maintaining
his physical health. As indicated in the hospital discharge plan on 11 March
2021, the CMH team, and in
particular Mr Keed, were working on moving Stanley
into a form of ”supported accommodation”. Mr Keed explained that
accommodation would involve support workers being available on
residence to provide 24/7 support to Stanley.
and Mr Keed provided statements to the Court that addressed the nature and
concept of supported accommodation. They explained
that for Stanley to be moved
into supported accommodation, he would have needed a supported independent
living plan (
). Stanley’s basic NDIS package did not include a
SIL. Mr Keed explained that obtaining further NDIS support for supported
accommodation
would require a stable relationship between Stanley and NDIS and
more consistent participation in assessments, so that Stanley’s
could be assessed. Unfortunately, due to Stanley’s behavioural
difficulties discussed above, that was a slow and difficult
records demonstrate that despite apparent challenges, Mr Keed was persistent in
getting Stanley a more comprehensive NDIS plan.
During the last three months of
Stanley’s life, Mr Keed had successfully organised weekly early morning
NDIS home visits and
assessments for Stanley. Those visits had to occur early in
the morning, as Stanley would frequently leave his unit after 8 a.m.
unlocatable for the rest of the day. Mr Keed attended those home visits himself
to assist Stanley with developing a relationship
with the NDIS workers. The
impression gained from the records is that due to Mr Keed’s efforts,
progress (albeit slow) was
being made to get further daily living support for
Stanley’s Death – 2 to 22 June 2021
last contact with CMH was on 2 June 2021, when he arrived at the CMH clinic
mistakenly thinking he had his depot injection
scheduled on that day. He was, in
fact, not due for an injection until 15 June 2021. A nurse observed Stanley
looked tired and took
his vital signs:
Blood Pressure 143/81 mmHG
Heart Rate 125 beats/m
SPo2 92 % RA
Temperature 36.8
Respiration rate 21 b/m
nurse requested that Stanley stay and take a rest, so that some further
monitoring of his vitals could be conducted. Stanley stayed
for a while watching
TV and then left without notifying anyone. This was the last time he was seen
records indicate that Mr Keed went on leave for two weeks shortly after
Stanley’s presentation on 2 June 2021. On 15 June
2021, Stanley did not
attend CMH for his scheduled depot injection. Staff members noted his absence
and decided to wait a few days
to see if he would attend later. The recorded
plan was to wait until 21 June 2021 before initiating breach of PTO proceedings.
18 June 2021, Stanley had still not attended CMH for his depot injection.
Clinicians from CMH attended his flat to conduct a welfare
check, but no one
answered his door. A notification of breach of his PTO and a letter requesting
him to attend CMH immediately were
left at his door.
21 June 2021, when Stanley did not attend his psychiatric appointment, CMH
reported him missing to police. A nurse made another
one responded at the door. Enquires were made of Stanley’s neighbour, who
thought they had last
seen him between three and seven days prior. Later that
day, police attended unit 1 in Elimatta Street to conduct a welfare check.
went to Stanley’s old unit. Stanley had moved into another unit in the
same complex in August 2020.
22 June 2021, Mr Keed, having just returned from leave, heard about
Stanley’s missing person status, and decided to conduct
a welfare check
himself. Stanley had previously verbally consented to Mr Keed using a spare key
to access his unit. Mr Keed used
the spare key to access the unit at Unit and
located Stanley on the lounge. It was clear that Stanley had been deceased for
records demonstrate that it was not unusual for Stanley to miss his depot
injection and medical appointments. Mr Keed noted that
it was also not unusual
for Stanley not to respond to visitors knocking on his door. In these
circumstances, I am satisfied that
CMH had raised appropriate concerns with the
relevant agencies when Stanley did not attend his appointments and took
reasonable steps
to locate Stanley and check on his welfare.
The Manner and Cause Of Stanley’s Death
Stanley’s death, Professor Johan Duflou, forensic pathologist, conducted a
post-mortem examination and provided a
written report, dated 16 August 2021. The
post-mortem examination included an internal examination, medical records
review, and toxicological
analysis. The central findings made by Professor
Duflou were that:
(a) The direct cause of death was pulmonary emphysema.
(b) Stanley’s body showed signs of moderate decomposition changes,
suggesting that he had been deceased for around one to two
weeks prior to him
being found.
(c) Both lungs showed very advanced pulmonary emphysematous damage, with the
majority of the upper lobe of the right lung replaced
with bullae (large pockets
(d) Additionally, there were some naked eye changes in the lung, which would
suggest a possible small tumour in the right lung and
also possible pneumonia.
This could not be confirmed on microscopy, given the state of the body.
(e) Toxicological testing of the tissues revealed a modest level of alcohol, all
of which might have been the result of post-mortem
generation of the
(f) No other significant natural disease process of a type expected to cause
sudden death was identified.
Duflou further explained that given the state of the body, he was not able to
determine whether there was a viral or bacterial
infection process in the lungs.
In either the infection could have exacerbated Stanley’s COAD.
Duflou also observed that persons with severe schizophrenia, like Stanley,
generally have a higher death rate and that in
a percentage of those cases, no
anatomical or toxicological cause of death would be identified. Having said
that, Professor Duflou
remained of the view that the most likely cause of
Stanley’s death was pulmonary emphysema.
is a type of COAD. It is a chronic lung condition, whereby the alveoli (tiny air
sacs) in the lungs become enlarged and
damaged, impeding the transportation of
oxygen around the body. It is considered to be a progressive disease, occurring
slowly over
time. As a type of COAD, emphysema is often caused by smoking.
Symptoms include shortness of breath, coughing, and fatigue, although
people may not notice any symptoms until the disease has destroyed half or more
than half of their lung tissue. The damaged
lung tissue caused by emphysema is
not able to be reversed by treatment. The goal of treatment, therefore, is
simply to manage the
symptoms to provide a better quality of life and to slow
down the progression of the disease. Standard treatment and management include
ceasing smoking, inhaler medication, and oxygen therapy (via portable oxygen
tanks). Whilst medication can be an important part of
a treatment plan, ceasing
smoking is the best way to slow down the progression of the disease.
proximity of Stanley's diagnosis of COAD to his death suggests that his
emphysema was advanced at the time of diagnosis. I note
that Professor Duflou
could not exclude the possibility of Stanley having suffered a viral or
bacterial illness that exacerbated
his COAD. Based on the available evidence, I
am unable to say whether there was an unreasonable delay in the diagnosis and
of Stanley’s lung disease. If there was any delay, the evidence
suggests that it would have been due to the difficulties clinicians
encountered
in trying to physically examine Stanley, Stanley’s unreliable reporting of
symptoms, and his relatively normal
oxygen saturation levels and respiratory
rate in the year prior to his death.
Stanley was diagnosed with COAD, it appears that he was commenced on appropriate
treatment, that is, inhaler medication. Mr Keed
addressed Stanley's inhaler use
in his statement. He said that he was aware that Stanley was prescribed the
inhaler to take on an
as-needed basis. He added that he had seen Stanley use the
inhaler once or twice when he visited, but he could not make any further
as to how reliable Stanley was in using the inhaler. In respect of
Stanley’s smoking, the records show that mental
health clinicians had
tried to encourage Stanley to stop smoking long before his diagnosis of
Mr Keed emphasised, the treatment of a patient like Stanley is a complex
undertaking. A PTO made under the
is limited to authorising the
compulsory psychiatric treatment of a patient. It does not empower the Court, or
anyone for that matter,
to involuntarily subject the patient to treatment in
respect of their physical health or substance addiction.
Stanley’s long-standing smoking habit, his limited capacity to change his
lifestyle (attributable to his mental illness),
and the fact that emphysema is
not curable, I do not find that an earlier diagnosis would have made a material
difference to his
life and the cause of his death. I accept that the clinicians
involved in Stanley’s care had done what they could and used
they had to address Stanley’s mental and physical health issues. At the
time of his death, there were ongoing efforts
to move Stanley into
accommodation, in which he would likely have access to more support and
services. I do not find any matter of
public safety arises with respect to the
diagnosis and treatment of Stanley’s lung disease.
Section 3BA of the Act
provides that as far as is practicable, the objects of
must be carried out in a way that “recognises that the
family and friends of a deceased person have an interest in having all
reasonable questions about the circumstances of the person’s death
answered”. It is in that context that I address the
concerns raised by
Stanley’s brother.
the inquest process, Stanley’s brother raised a number of specific and
general concerns regarding the care Stanley
received from ACT Housing and ACT
Mental Health. Those concerns arose from his experience in trying to support
Stanley over a long
period of time in difficult circumstances. Stanley’s
brother maintained that some of those institutional deficiencies might
contributed to Stanley’s poor health and eventual death.
Stanley’s ACT Housing unit
brother described the condition of Stanley’s ACT housing unit prior to and
at the time of his death as “squalid”
and “filthy”. He
believed that environment contributed to Stanley’s poor health and
ultimate death.
accept that the unit was often very untidy and unclean. The explanation for that
is set out above. I acknowledge that the records
show that Stanley struggled to
maintain his ACT Housing unit. Despite the efforts of CMH clinicians to teach
and encourage him to
clean, piles of rubbish were often found in his unit. In
the years prior to his death, there were multiple occasions where his unit
found to be cockroach infested. The ACT Housing records confirm that
Stanley’s brother raised concerns with ACT Housing
maintenance issues with Stanley's unit.
7 August 2020, ACT Housing moved Stanley within the Elimatta Street housing
complex. Stanley had lived in his unit for at least
the last 5 years. CHS
advised the Court that Stanley was moved because his unit was “barely
habitable due to insect infestation,
fifth and rubbish’”. An annual
inspection of Stanley’s new unit occurred on 4 May 2021 (approximately 1
month prior
to his death). The inspection report noted there was a cockroach
infestation again, the kitchen benches needed cleaning and there
was mould in
the bathroom and toilet. The condition of other areas of the house was noted as
the 7 August 2020 inspection, ACT Housing notified the CMH and NDIS team about
the condition of Stanley's unit. Mr Keed
advised that the CMH team had tried
putting “cockroach bombs” in the unit, but Stanley had thrown them
out. CMH was also
trying to organise a forensic clean through NDIS, but Stanley
was resisting engagement and assistance. The medical records suggest
2021, as Stanley developed a relationship with NDIS workers, he was accepting
some cleaning assistance. The best accommodation
for Stanley may not have been
in a unit living on his own and moves were on foot to change Stanley’s
housing arrangements at
the time of his death. Given Stanley’s
sensibilities around accepting the assistance of others it is difficult to
how he might have adapted to different living arrangements.
experience highlights the complexities of effectively accommodating those who
suffer with mental illnesses and particularly
those who suffer a severe mental
illness that does not always require in-patient treatment. It is well accepted
that ensuring access
to appropriate housing is an important aspect of
community-based care of those suffering mental illnesses. The effective
of that housing requires a close co-operation between mental health
clinicians, authorities responsible for community housing and
national support
agencies including NDIS. It is an issue that is being pursued at a national
level through the work of the National
Mental Health Commission and other
research and policy initiatives.
do not find that the unsatisfactory aspects of Stanley’s living
arrangements contributed to the cause of his death.
Hospital admission: 23 December 2020 to 19 January
brother raised concerns regarding events that occurred during Stanley’s
hospital admission between 23 December
2020 to 19 January 2021 (‘
December 2020 admission’
The Fractured Elbow
was involuntarily admitted to AMHU for psychiatric treatment on 23 December
2020. On 4 January 2021, in AMHU, Stanley fractured
his left elbow.
Stanley’s brother expressed the view to me that Stanley reported to him
that someone caused this fracture
“bashing” him.
is no evidence that an assault caused Stanley's fractured elbow. The medical
records document that Stanley elbow fracture was
caused by a fall at AMHU on 4
January 2021. The fall was witnessed by a clinician who recorded that Stanley
had “tripped over
crocs and landed on his left elbow with a head
strike”. The records show that Stanley required surgery but refused
while in hospital and following discharge into the community.
elbow fracture was reviewed again by orthopaedic clinicians during the February
2021 admission discussed at [17].
It was again determined that he required
surgery. On this occasion, an assessment was made that he lacked the capacity to
to the surgery, and consent was obtained from the ACT Public Trustee and
Guardianship. Stanley underwent surgery for his elbow fracture
on 27 February
2021. The records indicate that surgery went well, and follow-up appointments
with a fracture clinic were part of
his discharge plan.
Mental State on Discharge
respect to the December 2020 admission, Stanley was discharged from AMHU on 19
January 2021. A psychiatrist reviewed him prior
to discharge and opined his
mental state was “at baseline and as good as we have ever seen him”
but that “he remains
delusional and insight less and will be a challenge
to manage” and that he required supported accommodation. Stanley’s
brother stated to me that this assessment of Stanley’s mental state was
inconsistent with the later commentary about the support
he required in the
community and he questioned whether Stanley should have been discharged.
discussed at [12-20], clinicians considered Stanley’s baseline mental
state was poor and involved psychotic symptoms and
delusion. The mental health
assessment made reflects the recognition by clinicians that Stanley, even at his
best, required intensive
support in the community. The medical records from 19
January 2021 show that Stanley was eager for discharge and was still subject
a PTO in the community. The PTO regime would at the very least facilitate the
administration of anti-psychotic medications. However,
the legislative
requirements for involuntary detention under the
, suggested there
were no grounds for Stanley to be involuntarily detained further.
Webster Pack Medication
brother observed that Stanley had some medication in the form of webster packs
and that Stanley could not read the
writing on the packs. He expressed concern
that Stanley did not know what medication he was taking.
exact medication that was provided to Stanley in the webster packs is not
apparent from the medical records. Mr Keed discussed
Stanley’s webster
pack medication in his interview with police on 29 June 2021. He explained that
the medications contained
in the packs were not psychiatric medications or
medication that Stanley needed to take on a regular basis. Rather, they were
medications
such as pain killers or Valium, which were prescribed to Stanley on
an as-needed basis. Mr Keed confirmed that Stanley would eat
his medication like
“smarties” if given to him all at once. To prevent this, CMH
clinicians would only give Stanley one
to two days of his medication at a time
in webster packs.
my view, CMH clinicians were appropriately monitoring and managing Stanley
webster pack medication.
General Concerns Regarding ACT Mental Health
brother raised some general concerns in respect of the ACT mental health system.
He stated that Stanley and the staff
of ACT Mental Health had been let down by
“insufficient funding, staffing and infrastructure which has clearly
compromised
our ability to care for the most vulnerable in our society”.
He reflected on the limited availability of services like the
Brain Hennessy
, a residential mental health unit in which Stanley was an inpatient at
in 1999 and 2003. He observed that this was the best form
of care for Stanley.
observe that Stanley’s brother’s concerns reflect matters raised in
other coronial inquests in this jurisdiction and
have been the subject of ACT
Audit Office review, Royal Commissions and inquires in Australia. In particular,
the final report of
Royal Commission into Victoria’s Mental Health
(2021) discussed the value and need for more residential services for
mental health consumers, including supported housing services
which can provide
multidisciplinary support to mental health patients on site. The extent to which
this recommendation had been advanced
in the ACT was not the subject of evidence
in this inquest.
my view, in respect of Stanley's mental health care proximate to his death, the
CMH team, particularly Mr Keed, did their best,
within the care structures
available, to attend to Stanley's various mental, physical and social needs. The
adequacy of those structures
in 2020 and now is beyond the scope of this
Formal Findings
I find that:
(a) Mr Stanley McIntyre died between 2 June 2021 and 22 June 2021 at unit 3 of
44 Elimatta Street in Reid in the Australian Capital
(b) The cause of Mr McIntyre’s death was pulmonary emphysema.
(c) No matters of public safety arise in respect of his death.
acknowledge the role played by Stanley’s brother in the inquest process.
His advocacy for Stanley provided me with insights
as to Stanley’s life
and the challenges he faced in dealing with his mental health issues.
also acknowledge the role played by Mr Keed in Stanley’s care.
Stanley’s needs were complex and addressing them was
a difficult task
particularly in circumstances where resources and structures may not have been
sufficient or adequate to address
Stanley’s needs. It is clear to me that
am grateful for the contributions of counsel assisting, Ms Xiao Lin King, to the
inquest process. My findings reflect the outcomes
of her hard work and insights.
I certify that the preceding sixty-nine [69] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Findings of his Honour Coroner Archer.
Associate: Lucy James
Date: 12 August 2025
RTF format (253 KB)
Signed PDF/A format