Land Architecture Australia Pty Ltd and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Anor [2008] ACTAAT 26 (14 October 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: LAND ARCHITECTURE
AUSTRALIA PTY LTD AND ACT PLANNING & LAND AUTHORITY & ANOR
[2008] ACTAAT
(14 OCTOBER 2008)
Catchwords:
Land and planning – review of decision refusing
approval to construct multi unit development in an A10 area – issues
relating to plot ratio and setback – whether proposed development exceeded
gross floor area allowable in Territory Plan –
whether proposed
development would encroach protection zone of significant trees
City Area Leases Ordinance 1936-1967
Land (Planning and Environment)
Act 1991, s 230
Tree Protection Act 2005
Mr B Hatch, Senior Member
Ms S Tongue, Senior Member
Mr R Nichols, Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/46
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
ARCHITECTURE
AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
ACT PLANNING &
LAND AUTHORITY
PHILIP & HELEN
Party Joined
CORRECTION OF ERROR
Mr B Hatch, Senior Member
Ms S Tongue, Senior
Mr R Nichols, Member
Pursuant to section 44A of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1989
paragraph 3 of the reasons for decision dated 14 October 2008
is amended in
accordance with the following:
Third line:
“Block 1 Section 20” and insert “Block 9 Section 23”;
Davison Place” and insert “17 Adair Street”.
..............................
Senior Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/46
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
ARCHITECTURE
AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
ACT PLANNING AND
LAND AUTHORITY
PHILIP & HELEN
Party Joined
Mr B Hatch, Senior Member
Ms S Tongue, Senior
Mr R Nichols, Member
The decision under review is remitted to the respondent for reconsideration
in accordance with the findings in this decision.
...............................
Senior Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/46
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
ARCHITECTURE
AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
ACT PLANNING AND
LAND AUTHORITY
PHILIP & HELEN
Party Joined
REASONS FOR DECISION
14 October 2008 Mr B Hatch, Senior Member
Ms S Tongue, Senior
Mr R Nichols, Member
This application is to review the decision of the respondent of 16 May 2008.
This “decision” is in fact a notice of deemed
refusal pursuant to
section 230 of the Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991 (
). The deemed refusal occurs when a decision is not made within
the prescribed period as set out in the Act. Notwithstanding this,
respondent issued a document headed ‘Notice of Deemed Refusal’ which
then sets out the reasons by which the application
would have been refused had
an actual decision been made. The effect of this is positive in that the
developer was given the reasons
by which the application would have been refused
rather than being left in the situation of appealing from a deemed refusal.
2. The application relates to land on Blocks 3 and 4 Section 22 Scullin
the subject land”
) on the corner of Adair and McIntosh
Streets . The application sought approval for consolidation of the blocks, the
demolition of
two existing dwellings, variation to the lease to permit the
erection of ten units in a two storey building with basement car parking
associated landscaping, paving and other site works.
3. The applicant is Land Architecture Australia Pty Ltd which was
represented at the hearing by Mr Jose Henriquez. Mr Philip and
Pellatt, who are the current lessees of Block 1 Section 20 in the suburb of
Scullin, and reside at 11 Davison Place, were
joined as a party who oppose the
proposed development (
“the parties joined”
). In the hearing
before the Tribunal the applicant and the party joined were self represented and
Dr Jarvis instructed by the ACT
Government Solicitor appeared for the
respondent.
4. The Tribunal had before it documents prepared by the applicant,
respondent and the party joined. The Tribunal visited and inspected
the subject
land and heard oral evidence from: the applicant’s representatives; Mr
Raymond Brown, who is a town planner who
manages assessments within the
respondent and was the manager of the technical assessment for this development
application; Mr Andrew
Curran, who is a traffic expert called by the applicant;
and Mr and Mrs Pellatt, the party joined. During the proceedings the applicant
submitted revised plans and sketches to demonstrate how issues might be
resolved. These plans were not necessarily a complete documentation
amendments and consequently the Tribunal did not have before it a fully
documented revised development application.
5. There are a number of issues raised in relation to the deemed
6. The first issue is in relation to the car parking and traffic
arrangements for the site. This issue had initially been in relation
width of the driveway. That issue has now been satisfactorily resolved by the
driveway now being in accordance with the requirements
of the Territory Plan.
The Territory Plan also requires that 19 car spaces be provided and the plans
provide for 20 car spaces.
The final issue is in relation to the restricted
areas for vehicles to pass each other in the driveway. The Tribunal accepts the
evidence of the expert engineer, Mr Andrew Curran, who gave evidence that a
traffic light arrangement can be installed and that such
an arrangement would be
more than adequate for the purposes of this driveway. Even where there was a
power failure, Mr Curran assumed
that such a traffic light arrangement would
have a back up battery system. Even in the event of total failure of the
traffic light
system, Mr Curran did not envisage great problems considering the
low volume of traffic and relatively slow movement of vehicles
in the driveway.
Further, the traffic light would be of such a height and intensity that it would
not affect neighbouring residences.
7. The more serious matters in dispute related to the gross floor area,
which affects the plot ratio. Pursuant to the Territory
Plan plot ratio is
defined as “ the gross floor area in a building divided by the area of the
site”. For developments
in the A10 area the maximum plot ratio permitted
is 0.5:1(50%) as set out in the Territory Plan at Part B1 Area A10 Control (g).
The proposed development involves consolidating two Crown leases into one. The
combined area of the two leases is 1,689.6m
Accordingly, the maximum GFA allowable would be
8. Much time was spent in the hearing with evidence in relation to GFA.
9. The evidence of the applicant was that the GFA was just marginally below
the 50% limit. The evidence of Mr Brown was that the
plans as submitted and
later plans had the plot ratio at above 50% by a small amount. The applicant
measured the plot ratio by using
a computer program. A computer program can
only be as accurate as the person operating that system and the evidence
provided by
the applicant could not be regarded as independent expert evidence.
The method used by Mr Brown uses the dimensions shown on the
drawings and
sometimes employs scale rules. The Tribunal accepts that both systems can be
accurate. The party joined used a similar
manual system as that employed by Mr
Brown but the Tribunal notes that, unlike Mr Brown, the party joined are not
expertly trained
in these matters and while the Tribunal does not doubt the
effort the party joined put in to achieving an accurate figure, some discount
has to be made of the accuracy of that figure due to the lack of experience.
Having said that, the Tribunal is aware that the figure
arrived at by the party
joined was above 50% for GFA.
10. The Tribunal is also mindful that on a number of occasions the applicant
made errors in the plans. One is worthy of note whereby
the size of the carport
was incorrectly described. This left the Tribunal troubled as to what other
mistakes had been made in relation
to estimating the GFA by the applicant. In
all of the circumstances, the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Mr Brown that the
as drawn achieve a GFA above 50% and therefore not in accordance with the
Territory Plan.
11. At the end of the hearing, the applicant produced sketch plans showing
alteration to two of the units in the development. No
final plans were produced
and therefore no precise measurement of GFA. Simply based on the nature of the
drawing which was also
designed to overcome an issue in relation to the front
setback of the development, the Tribunal concludes that the GFA has been
Whether that reduction would thereby take the plot ratio below 50% is
not clear to the Tribunal. It is open to the Tribunal to
inform itself in
whatever way it considers appropriate. It is not the place of the Tribunal in a
matter such as this to attempt
to finalise draft development plans into final
drawings and thereafter calculate the GFA. Whether that would be appropriate in
other matters would be a matter for that Tribunal.
Performance Measures
12. The other major issue in this matter is in relation to the front
setbacks. Appendix III.2 of the Territory Plan sets out the
scheme in relation
to setbacks. In the Plan the objectives are the formal statement of the
planning aims sought by the land use
policy and the controls are specific policy
provisions identifying the purposes for which land may be used and planning
that apply to development proposals in the relevant land use policy
13. Objective 7.2 of the Plan is “to limit overlooking of private open
space and to enable residents to effectively control
outlooks between rooms in
adjacent dwellings”. The performance criteria include requiring dwellings
to be sited to allow good
sunlight access to their private open space (P3.3), to
minimise overshadowing of northern facades of adjacent dwellings and private
outdoor spaces (P3.4) and to minimise overshadowing of northern facades of
adjacent dwellings and private open spaces (P3.5). Performance
measure D2.1
provides for the minimum setbacks of buildings from the street front boundary of
street frontages and the performance
measure for corner blocks over 650 square
metres which this development is, allows for a setback of the lower floor level
of 4 metres
and the upper floor level of 6 metres.
14. The Tribunal and the respondent are required to take into account the
performance measures. The objectives, performance criteria
and the performance
measures are a hierarchy. Where the performance measures are met then according
to the Territory Plan that would
normally meet the objective and the performance
15. The plans as submitted and the subject of this review had an initial
setback for the lower floor level of 3.486 metres. The
Tribunal notes that this
is in contravention of the 4 metre performance measure. The issue thereafter
becomes whether such a setback
is appropriate in relation to the performance
criteria and the objective. The Tribunal agrees with the decision-maker that
a setback is not appropriate for the streetscape character and the amenity
of the residents of that area.
16. The setback issue is also related to the issue of significant trees
which will also be dealt with this in this decision.
17. At the start of the hearing new plans were prepared which, once again,
showed a setback which was still not 4 metres although
much closer than the
original set of drawings. The Tribunal forms the same conclusion in that a
setback less than the performance
measure would not be appropriate for the
streetscape character which predominantly consists of houses set back well
beyond 4 metres.
The applicant produced the previously mentioned sketch
drawings very late in the hearing. Those sketch drawings make considerable
changes to units 4 and 5 such that the setback for the lower floor level is now
at 4 metres. Being at 4 metres does not necessarily
mean that such a setback
would meet the performance criteria P2.1 but the Tribunal concludes that, in
this instance, such a setback
would meet the performance criteria. The Tribunal
attended the site for a view on the first day of the hearing. The Tribunal
the opinion from an inspection of the site that the setback distance was
an important issue in relation to the streetscape character
and the amenity of
the residents. Taking into account the streetscape character and the setback of
the current housing stock in
that part of Scullin, the Tribunal does not
consider that any setback less than 4 metres on this site would be
appropriate.
18. The next important issue which also encroaches onto the setback issue is
the significant trees. The two relevant trees are the
trees noted as Tree 2 and
Tree 3 which are
casaurina cunninghamiana
. The applicant in this
application for review relied upon a report from EcoTrees of 9 March 2007. As
the applicant admitted in
evidence it is not clear from that report what plans
were given to EcoTrees. Therefore the conclusion by EcoTrees that Trees 2 and
would not be adversely affected by the development is of little, if any, use to
the Tribunal. The Tribunal however is able to
conclude that, where the setback
at the front boundary discussed above is less than 4 metres, then those two
trees would be on the
face of it adversely affected by the development. The
applicant conceded as much by proposing that the development at that point
be built on a concrete slab but elevated on piers. With a setback of less than
4 metres, the Tribunal is not satisfied that
such an alteration would
necessarily properly protect those two trees. The Tribunal however, following
its view of the site and
upon seeing the amended sketch drawings which put the
setback at at least 4 metres, concludes that, while the development would still
encroach upon the tree protection zone, it may well be possible for safeguards
to be put in place to protect those trees. The Tribunal
is mindful of
Tree Protection Act 2005
which is as follows:
11 Protection zone for protected tree
protection zone
for a protected tree is—
(a) the area under the canopy of the tree; and
(b) the 2m wide area surrounding the vertical projection of the canopy;
(c) the 4m wide area surrounding the trunk as measured at 1m above natural
ground level.
(2) However, if another protection zone is defined in a tree management
plan in force for the protected tree, that protection zone
for the tree.
19. That Act also allows for an application to be made for what is referred
to as “tree damaging activity” in section
22 which is as
22 Application for approval of tree damaging etc activity
A person may apply, in writing, to the conservator for approval for an
activity that would or may—
(a) damage a protected tree; or
(b) be prohibited groundwork in—
(i) the protection zone for a protected tree; or
(ii) a declared site.
20. The Tribunal considers that such an application would be essential in
this sort of matter and it may be that when adequate safeguards
are put in place
by the Conservator that the building work is able to continue notwithstanding
that the development proposal encroaches
into the tree protection zone.
21. The final issue is in relation to the Crown lease. This development
proposal includes a proposal that the two blocks, being
Blocks 3 and 4 Section
22 Scullin, be amalgamated into one block. Both current Crown leases were
granted on 2 April 1969 for residential
purposes pursuant to the City Area
Leases Ordinance 1936-1967 as it was then known. The Tribunal does not see any
difficulty with
this proposal. However where approval is to be granted the
respondent would normally impose conditions for administrative arrangements
achieve a consolidated lease. This was not done in this case because of the
deemed refusal.
22. The Tribunal considers that this development application fails to meet a
number of requirements of the Territory Plan. The respondent
was correct to
reject this development application in the form in which it was lodged. It was
inconsistent with the Territory Plan
in relation to the front setback and tree
protection. It was initially inadequate in relation to other matters such as
traffic arrangements
but that issue was easily overcome. Importantly the
application was inconsistent with the gross floor area issue.
23. Different plans were submitted and these illustrated that issues raised
were capable of resolution without substantial amendment
to the development.
24. By the end of the hearing of this matter it was becoming increasingly
clear to the Tribunal that the applicant was able to modify
its proposal in
order to meet the requirements of the A10 area. Unfortunately, by the end of
the hearing, it was not clear to the
Tribunal what the precise changes would
have been. In particular, while the Tribunal could conclude that the setbacks
were adequate,
the Tribunal was not in a position to confirm that the GFA was
within the acceptable limit. The Tribunal could also not be convinced
tree protection issue had been adequately dealt with although, as set out, the
Tribunal held the view that such a matter
could be dealt with in discussions
with the Conservator under the
Tree Protection Act 2005
25. Accordingly the Tribunal affirms the decision under review but remits it
for reconsideration by the respondent in accordance
with the findings in this
decision. In particular the respondent needs to take special note in relation
to GFA and the front setbacks.
The matter needs to be raised specifically with
the Conservator and, where necessary, the applicant needs to make application to
the Conservator under the
Tree Protection Act 2005
PUBLICATION DETAILS
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by Member's
________________________________________________________________________
LAND ARCHITECTURE AUSTRALIA PTY
RESPONDENT:
ACT PLANNING & LAND AUTHORITY
PARTY JOINED:
PHILIP & HELEN PELLATT
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
DR D JARVIS
PARTY JOINED:
SOLICITORS: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
ACT GOVERNMENT
PARTY JOINED:
OTHER: APPLICANT:
MR J HENRIQUEZ
RESPONDENT:
PARTY JOINED:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
MR B HATCH, SENIOR MEMBER
MS S TONGUE,
SENIOR MEMBER
MR R NICHOLS, MEMBER
DATE/S OF HEARING:
20, 21 & 25 AUGUST
DATE OF DECISION:
_______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (78.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format