FARRELLY & ORS v CONSTRUCTION OCCUPATIONS REGISTRAR; KELLY & ORS v CONSTRUCTION OCCUPATIONS REGISTRAR (Administrative Review) [2025] ACAT 46 (23 June 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
FARRELLY & ORS v CONSTRUCTION
OCCUPATIONS REGISTRAR; KELLY & ORS v CONSTRUCTION OCCUPATIONS REGISTRAR
(Administrative Review)
[2025] ACAT 46
AT 141/2024 and AT 99/2024
Catchwords: ADMINSTRATIVE REVIEW
– merits review of part of
registrar’s decision to make a rectification order against the nominee and
former directors
of Lifestyle Homes (ACT) No 1 Pty Ltd (in liquidation) –
requirement for the registrar to give a reasons statement considered
where the registrar’s notice of decision failed to inform the applicants
they could apply for a reasons statement,
contrary to the prescribed
requirements in s 7 of the
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Regulation
– where the notice of decision failed to include the information
that a reasons statement should contain – where the
registrar failed to
serve a reasons statement in accordance r 129 of the
ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Procedures Rules 2024
– where understanding
the registrar’s reasons for making a rectification order (including
findings made in relation to
material questions of fact and the evidence on
which the findings are based) is essential for the ACAT to properly discharge
functions in a merits review of the decision in accordance with the tribunal
principles in s 7 of the
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
including to afford the parties natural justice and procedural fairness –
where water ingress issues allegedly involved systemic
breaches of performance
provisions FP1.2, FP1.4 and FP1.5 of NCC 2016 (Vol 1 Amendment 1) in relation to
class 7 basement carparks
and P2.2.3 of NCC 2016 (Vol 2) in relation to class
10a garages – where onus lay on the applicants to satisfy the registrar
that in the particular case there was no necessity for compliance with the
performance provisions – decision remitted to the
registrar for
reconsideration
Legislation cited:
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
ss 7, 10, 22B, 22C, 22D, 67A, 68(3)
Building Act 2004
Construction Occupations (Licensing) Act 2006
, ss 34, 38, 123A
Legislation Act 2001
Subordinate
Legislation cited:
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedures
, rr 38, 129(1)
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Regulation 2009
Building (General) Regulation 2008
Construction Occupations (Licensing) Regulation 2004
, schedule 4
Senior Member M. Orlov
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) AT 141/2024
JAIME FARRELLY
CONSTRUCTION OCCUPATIONS REGISTRAR
Senior Member M. Orlov
The Tribunal orders:
decision under review be remitted to the respondent for reconsideration in
accordance with the reasons of the Tribunal.
......................................
Senior Member M.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) AT 99/2024
First applicant
Second applicant
JASON HARWOOD
CONSTRUCTION OCCUPATIONS REGISTRAR
Senior Member M. Orlov
The Tribunal orders:
decision under review be remitted to the respondent for reconsideration in
accordance with the reasons of the Tribunal.
......................................
Senior Member M.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
3 September 2024, the registrar made orders against Jaime Farrelly, Gary Kelly
and Jason Harwood requiring them to rectify building
work done by Lifestyle
Lifestyle Homes
) in relation
to the erection of a mixed class 1a townhouse and class 2 unit development on
Lifestyle Homes has gone into liquidation.
Messrs Farrelly and Kelly are the former directors of the company. Mr Harwood
was the nominee.
Farrelly, Kelly and Harwood sought merits review of the registrar’s
decision in application AT 99/2024. For reasons that
are not presently material,
Mr Farrelly became the applicant in AT 141/2024 while Messrs Kelly and Harwood
remained the applicants
in AT 99/2024. The applications involved common issues
and orders were made for them to be heard together with evidence in one to
evidence in the other.
rectification orders are in identical terms and require the applicants to take
stated action to rectify five categories of
Defect 2 is described
compendiously as water ingress and non-compliant hydraulic systems. The
applicants seek merits review of the
decision only in relation to part of the
non-compliant work covered by defect category 2 involving water ingress into
class 10a garages
and class 7 basement carparks.
stated action requires the applicants to “rectify the defects set out in
in a manner that meets or exceeds the requirements of the...(Building
Act) and the...(NCC) and other relevant mandatory codes and
standards in force
at the time the Building Approval Notice was issued on 10 January
3 commences with:
Below is a list of alleged defects at the
Premises, the relevant performance provisions for the area of work, and the
basis on which
I have determined that the alleged defects constitute a breach of
the building code applicable at the time of the Building Approval
Notice being
Volume 1 of the NCC 2016 Amendment 1 and Volume 2 of the NCC 2016 (the
3 says in relation to water ingress and non-compliant hydraulic systems:
2a, Water ingress into Class 1aii townhouses and associated
Class 10a garages
Water ingress is evident in multiple class 1aii units and associated 10a
garages. Areas affected include but are not limited to:
Water ingress
into habitable areas. Affected units include: 1, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16, 21,
24, 25, 26, 28, 73 & 80.
Water ingress
into associated garages. Affected units include: 1, 56, 57, 73 &
Defective and non-compliant building work
contributing to water ingress has been observed. Key defects include:
Non-compliant
installation of valley/valley trays. Affected units include: 6, 13, 14, 16 &
Missing and
defect window and cladding flashings. Affected units include: 14, 73 &
Ineffective
downpipe spreaders concentrating the flow of water. Affected units include: 12
Ponding and
flooding in courtyards, causing water ingress into habitable areas. Affected
units include 24 & 26.
drainage systems in the enclosed courtyard is not provided with emergency
overflow. Affected units include: 24 & 26.
through concrete, causing water ingress into garage area. Affected units
include: 57,73 & 80.
roof flashings. Affected units include: 12, 13 & 14.
Ineffective
damp course, causing moisture ingress and deterioration of building elements.
Affected units include: 24.
This is determined
to be in breach of:
Building Act
section 42(1)(b)
Performance
Provision P2.2.1, P2.2.2 & P2.2.3 of Volume 2 of NCC 2026
Part 3.1.2.0
of Volume 2 of the NCC
AS/NZS 3500.3
It is considered likely that the
defects above are indicative of systemic issues across the Premises. In
complying with this Rectification
Order, you are required to conduct further
investigation into these issues.
2b, Water ingress into Class 2 units and associated Class 7A basement
Water ingress is evident in multiple Class 2 units and the associated 7a
basement car park. Areas affected include but are not limited
Water ingress
into habitable areas. Affected units include: 104, 107, 108, 109, 114, 117, 119
Water ingress
into associated basement garages. Affected units include: 104, 105, 108, 109,
114, 117, 119 & 125.
Defective and
non-compliant building work contributing to water ingress has been observed. Key
defects include:
Non-compliant
and effective installation of box gutters. Affected units include: 104 &
Missing and
defective window and cladding flashings. Affected units include: 104, 107, 108
Ineffective
downpipe spreaders concentrating water flow of water. Affected units include:
roof flashings. Affected units include: 108.
Insufficient
overflows for box gutters and rainwater heads. Affected units include: 104,
roof flashings. Affected units include: 108.
through concrete, causing water ingress into basement car park. Affected units
include: 104, 117 & 125.
Water ingress
into the basement garages has been observed. The Dincel walls used in the
construction of the basement have not been
constructed in accordance with the
approved plans. Affected areas include: Basement walls beneath units 96 –
107 and beneath
units 108 – 125.
determined to be in breach of:
Building Act
section 42(1)(b)
Performance
Provision FP1.2, FP1.3, FP1.4 & FP1.5 of Volume 1 of the NCC 2016 Amendment
& F1.5 of Volume 1 of the NCC 2016 Amendment 1
AS/NZS 3500.3
It is considered likely that the
defects above are indicative of systemic issues throughout Blocks 5 & 6. In
complying with this
Rectification Order, you are required to conduct further
investigation into these issues.
Evidence considered by the Registrar:
Attachment C
– 20240520 – Sellick Consultants – Hydraulic engineer’s
report on water ingress Revision B –
dated 20 May 2024
Attachment D
– 20240130 – B5 S13 Greenway, Defects list issued by Strata –
dated 30 January 2024
applicants seek a review of the decision only insofar as it is premised on a
finding that water ingress into class 10a garages
associated with class 1aii
townhouses and class 7a basement carparks associated with class 2 units is a
defect and that the defects
are systemic. The grounds of review state:
applicants dispute that the following alleged defects are contraventions of the
Building Act 2004
2a, Water ingress into
Class 1aii townhouses and associated Class 10a garages
allegation is understood to be that there is water ingress into units 1, 56, 57,
73 and 80. Units 57, 73 and 80 are said to
have water leaking into the garage
areas and that there are leaks through the concrete,. In response, the
applicants say that:
Registrar has failed to apply the correct code, citing NCC 2016.1 Vol 1. Section
F, as opposed to NCC 2016 Vol 2.
performance requirement clearly excludes class 10 structures of this kind,
except where it contributes to the class 1 structure’s
waterproofing.
applicant says that the basement walls and surrounding elements are not
defective, so the rectification order is
inappropriate.
2b, Water ingress into Class 2 units and
associated Class 7a basement Carpark
. This allegation is understood
to be that there is water ingress into multiple class 2 units and the associated
7a basement car park.
The affected units are said to be 104, 117 and 125 with
alleged leakages through concrete in units 96 – 107 and 108 –
with water ingress into the basement garages. The applicants say:
Registrar has failed to consider the full performance requirement in NCC 2016
Vol. 1 which excludes class 7 structures.
applicants say that the elements surrounding the basement are not defective and
have been constructed in accordance with the
Building Act 2004
(ACT) and the
approved plans.
remaining defects are not in issue.
The decision under review
decision under review may be described as the decision of the registrar to make
an order requiring the applicants to rectify water
ingress into:
(a) multiple class 10a garages associated with certain class 1aii townhouses
that “include” units 1, 56, 57, 73 and
80 on the grounds that water
ingress is, or is the result of, a breach of one or more of
Building Act
, clauses P.2.2.1 to P.2.2.3 and
parts 3.1.2.0
of NCC 2016 (Vol. 2) and
unspecified provisions of AS/NZS 3500.3 – 2015 and AS 1562.1 – 1992
and is indicative of systemic
issues across the premises; and
(b) multiple class 7 basement garages associated with class 2 units that
“include but are not limited to” units 104,
108, 108, 109, 114, 117,
119 and 125 on the grounds that water ingress is, or is the result of, a breach
of one or more of
and (c) of the
Building Act
, clauses FP1.2 to FP1.5
and parts F1.1 and F1.5 of NCC 2016 Amendment 1 (Vol. 1) and unspecified
provisions of AS/NZS 3500.3 –
2015 and AS 1562.1 – 1992 and is
indicative of systemic issues throughout blocks 5 and 6.
The grounds on which the decision under review was made
the registrar must be satisfied there has been a contravention of the COLA or an
operational Act as a pre-condition to making a
rectification order, the decision
under review depends on the registrar having found:
(a) water ingress into class 10a garages is occurring across the premises;
(b) water ingress into class 7 basement carparks is occurring throughout blocks
(c) this is, or is the result of, a systemic breach of one or more of:
section 42(1)(b)
Building Act
section 42(1)(c)
Building Act
(iii) each provision of the NCC 2016 mentioned in the order;
(iv) unspecified provisions of AS/NZS 3500.3 – 2015;
(v) unspecified provisions of AS 1562.1 – 1992.
finding that the water ingress is, or is the result of, a systemic breach of
, depends on the registrar being satisfied the way building materials
were used in the building work did not comply with their acceptable
the building code for a class 10a or class 7 building.
finding that the water ingress is, or is the result of, a systemic breach of
, depends on the registrar being satisfied work was not carried out in a
proper and skilful way having regard to mandatory considerations
prescribed by
Building (General) Regulation 2008
finding that the water ingress is, or is the result of, a systemic breach of
provisions of the NCC 2016 mentioned in the order,
depends on the registrar
being satisfied first, that each provision applies and second, the work does not
comply with the provision
in a material respect, bearing in mind performance
provisions of the NCC often include multiple limbs, not all of which may be
to the particular case.
finding that the water ingress is, or is the result of, a systemic breach of
AS/NZS 3500.3 – 2015 and/or AS 1562.1 –
1992, depends on the
registrar being satisfied first, that the standard applies and second, the work
does not comply with the standard
in a material respect.
The obligation to give reasons
registrar is required to give a statement of reasons for a decision to make a
rectification order. The duty to do so arises under
provisions of the
Construction Occupation (Licensing) Act 2004
and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
Legislation Act 2001
decision to make a rectification order against an entity is a ‘reviewable
decision’ within the meaning of s 123A of
the COLA and pursuant to item
13, column 1 in schedule 4 of the
Construction Occupation (Licensing)
Regulation 2004
Pursuant to s 123B, the registrar must give a
‘reviewable decision notice’ to the person or entity against whom
the rectification
order is made.
dictionary for the
Legislation Act 2001
defines a ‘reviewable
decision notice’ as a notice given under s 67A of the ACAT Act.
67A(1) of the ACAT Act provides for a person who makes a reviewable decision to
take reasonable steps to give written notice
of the decision (defined as a
‘reviewable decision notice’) to any person whose interests are
affected by the decision.
Subsection (3) provides for the time within which a
reviewable decision notice must be given, what the notice must contain, any
or thing that must accompany a notice and anything else in relation to
the notice to be prescribed by regulation. Subsection (4)
provides for the
validity of a decision to be unaffected by a failure to comply with the
to a decision to make a rectification order, s 7 of the
ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Regulation 2009
ACAT Regulation
A reviewable decision notice given to a person in
relation to a decision under and authorising law must –
(a) state the decision; and
(b) ...; and
(c) state that the person may apply for a reasons statement in relation to
the decision under the Act, section 22B; and
(d) state that the person may apply to the ACAT for review of the decision;
(e) state how to make the application; and
(f) state the other options available under ACT laws to have the decision
22B of the ACAT Act states:
(1) This section applies if –
(a) a decision-maker makes a reviewable decision; and
(b) within 28 days after the day the decision is made, a person (the
) who may apply for review of the decision asks the
decision-maker in writing for a statement of reasons for the decision (a
reasons statement
Note The rules may prescribe a longer period for asking for a statement of
reasons (see s 25(1)(e) and (2))
(2) The decision-maker must give the applicant a written reasons statement
for the decision within 28 days after the day the applicant
asks for the
statement unless –
(a) the decision contains the matters that a reasons statement would contain;
(b) a document that contains the matters the reasons statement would contain
has already been given to the applicant; or
(c) section 22E (Certain material not required to be disclosed) applies in
relation to the decision.
Note For what must be included in a statement of reasons, see the
Legislation Act
egislation Act 2001
(1) This section applies if a law requires a tribunal or other entity making
a decision to give written reasons for the decision,
whether the term
‘reasons’, ‘grounds’ or any other term is used.
(2) The document giving the reasons must also set out the findings on
material questions of fact and refer to the evidence or other
material on which
the findings were based.
(3) This section is a determinative provision.
22C(1) of the ACAT Act provides for a person to whom a reasons statement has
been given to apply to the ACAT for a declaration
under subsection (2) that the
reasons statement is insufficient. Subsection (3) states the declaration must
explain why the reasons
statement is not sufficient. The following examples of
why a reasons statement is insufficient are given under subsection (2):
insufficient
particulars of findings on material questions of fact
insufficient
reference to evidence or other material on which findings based
insufficient
particulars of reasons for decision
the ACAT makes a declaration under s 22C, s 22D requires the decision-maker to
give the applicant an additional statement containing
the information, evidence,
material or anything else required to make the reasons statement sufficient
within 28 days.
provisions inform the Tribunal’s procedural rules providing for the time
to be extended for an applicant to file an application
for review of an
administrative decision. Section 10(2) of the ACAT Act requires an application
for review of a decision to be made
within 28 days after the day the decision is
made, subject to exceptions in subsection (3) that may cause the commencement
the 28 day period to be extended. Rule 38(4) of the
ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Procedures Rules 2024
) allows the
ACAT to extend the time for making an application for administrative review of a
decision by up to 56 days, starting
on the day after the time for making the
application ends.
evident purpose of these provisions is to enable a person or entity affected by
an administrative decision to obtain a reasons
statement, giving sufficient
particulars of the decision-maker’s findings on material questions of
fact, sufficient references
to the evidence or other material on which the
findings are based and sufficient particulars of the reasons for the decision
the affected person or entity, to enable them to decide whether to file an
application for review of the decision and, if so, to
specify the reasons for
applying for review and why the ACAT should determine that the correct or
preferable decision is different
to the one made.
an application for review is filed, r 129(1) of the ACAT Rules requires the
respondent, within 14 days of receiving the application,
to serve on the
applicant and the tribunal a statement of reasons for the reviewable decision
which (a) sets out the findings on
material questions of fact; (b) refers to the
evidence or other material on which those findings are based; (c) identifies the
law; and (d) gives reasons for the decision.
is self-evident that the provision of a sufficient statement of reasons, whether
contained in the decision itself or provided pursuant
to a request made under s
22B of the ACAT Act or pursuant to r 129(1) of the ACAT Rules, is fundamental to
the ACAT being able to
exercise its functions in relation to the review of an
administrative decision in accordance with the principles stated in s 7 of
ACAT Act, including to afford natural justice and procedural fairness to the
The failure to give reasons for the decision under review
notice of decision to make a rectification order
issued to each
applicant includes a page titled ‘Important Information’, said to be
provided in accordance with s 7 of
the ACAT Regulation. The NOD does not
include a statement that the person or entity against whom the order is made may
a reasons statement under s 22B of the ACAT Act and therefore does not
comply with the prescribed requirements for a valid reviewable
decision notice.
As already mentioned, this does not invalidate the
of the applicants requested a reasons statement under s 22B.
registrar failed to serve a statement of reasons on the applicants and the
Tribunal as required by r 129(1) of the ACAT Rules.
It is unclear why not. The
omission was not noticed before the applications were listed for final
the absence of a reasons statement it is necessary to look to the NOD, the first
paragraph of which says, “This Notice of
Decision sets out my reasons for
making the RO. This document is to be read in conjunction with the
This is followed by a
brief section headed ‘Facts’ and another headed ‘The
Complaint’.
latter provides basic background information about the sequence of events
leading up to the making of the decision, including
inspections by Access
Canberra building inspectors who observed non-compliant fire separation between
residential units and water
ingress issues, the commissioning of reports from a
fire engineer and hydraulic consultant by unit owners and the commissioning of
further reports in relation to fire separation issues by the registrar. There is
a list of attachments comprising document and reports
to which the registrar
gave “due regard ... being produced by a professional with sufficient
knowledge and experience to form
such conclusions” and which the registrar
“found...relevant in making my
five main areas of alleged defective work are listed under the heading
‘Defects Identified’.
balance of the NOD states:
review of the complaint particulars and the evidence in relation to those
alleged defects provided to the Registrar, I was satisfied
that you provided a
construction service that was in breach of s42 of the Act.
08 July 2024, a Notice of Intention to issue a Rectification Order (
under section 34 of COLA was given to you. A response was provided to the defect
allegations contained in that NOI.
Section 38(1)(a) of COLA the Registrar, or his delegate, may make a
Rectification Order requiring an entity, ‘to take
stated action to rectify
work done as part of a construction service’.
Section 38(2) of COLA a Rectification Order may require an entity, ‘to
give the registrar written information about a
thing required to be done under
the order’.
35 of COLA allows me to make a rectification order if:
(a) the Registrar (or delegate) has given a licensee or former licensee
notice under section 34 of COLA;
(b) the licensee or former licensee provided the construction service, or
part of the construction service, to which the notice relates;
(c) after considering any submissions made within the time mentioned in the
notice, I am satisfied:
(i) the licensee or former licensee is contravening, or has contravened COLA
or an operational Act (as defined in section 16 of COLA);
(ii) it is appropriate to make a rectification order in relation to the
licensee or former licensee; and
(d) if I have accepted a rectification undertaking from the licensee or
former licensee in response to the notice – the licensee
licensee has failed to comply with, or has withdrawn, the undertaking.
deciding whether it was still reasonable and appropriate to issue a
Rectification Order, I kept in mind the loss and damage caused
contravention and how a proposed rectification order may affect people who have
suffered because of the
contravention.
section 35 of COLA, I formed the view that it was appropriate to issue a
Rectification Order against you.
is boilerplate that fails to meet even the minimum requirements of a reasons
statement under s 22B of the ACAT Act – i.e.,
the provision of sufficient
particulars of (a) findings on material questions of fact, (b) references to the
evidence and other material
on which the findings are based and (c) reasons for
parts of the rectification order relevant to the decision under review are
reproduced in [6]. It is self-evident that it does
not state the findings on
material questions of fact the registrar must be taken to have made as outlined
in [9] – [13].
evidence “considered” by the registrar does not take the matter
further. This consists of a report by Sellick Consultants
dated 20 May 2024
Sellick report
) and a list of defects prepared by the strata manager
dated 30 January 2024 (
defects list
) both of which are attachments to the
rectification order.
listing evidence “considered” by the registrar, particular where the
evidence comprises expert reports about a
range of issues, is not a substitute
for the registrar making findings on material questions of fact and giving
sufficient particulars
of the findings supported by references to the evidence
and other materials on which the findings are based.
Sellick report concerns water ingress and non-compliant hydraulic systems issues
affecting the complex as a whole. For present
purposes it is necessary to focus
on what the report says on about water ingress into garages and basement
carparks. In a section
titled ‘Inspection Summary’, the report
states units 57, 73, 80, 104, 105, 107, 108, 117 and 125 were inspected and
leaks were found in the garages for units 57, 73, 104 and 125. An old leak
was noted in unit 80 that “had been siliconed and
has been working for the
past 3 years or so”.
extent of water leakage into garages is not discussed specifically, although
related issues are mentioned – e.g.,
slab penetrations appear as though they have been cored through the
slab rather than casting into the slab during the concrete pour.
There appears
to be no evidence of any water proofing membrane and associated flexible tape
around the penetrations to prevent water
ingress into the basement garages.
Silicone has been used and is only short-term fix that will continue to
Review of the structural documentation has revealed that basement wall
detail is a simple “retaining wall” design which
provides no ground
water seepage protection to prevent water ingress into the
There are no structural details showing how the level 1 slabs should be
integrated into the Dincel (basement) walls. It is understood
inspections that water ingress is occurring at the back of most of the basement
garages where the slab above ties into the
Dincel walls. We suspect that the
water is seeping in between the top of the Dincel wall and underside of the
level 1 slab via capillary
action during heavy rain events, this could have been
prevented had the builder installed Bridgeman tape or
equivalent.
appendix to the report titled ‘Water Ingress Issues’ includes
photographs said to be of water ingress into the garages
of units 57, 73, 104,
108, 117 and 125.
report mentions damp and weatherproofing performance requirements applying to
class 1 and class 10 buildings – P2.2.1 (Surface
water), P2.2.2
(Weatherproofing) and P2.2.3 (Dampness) of NCC 2016 (Vol 2) – and class 2
and class 7 buildings – FP1.1
to FP1.4 of NCC 2016 (Vol 1 Amendment 1)
– and assumes but does not explain why the requirements apply to the class
class 7 garages in the particular case.
conclusions at the end of the report do not address water penetration into
garages or the basement carparks directly, although
the following conclusions
appear to relate:
structural basement wall details in our opinion are not in line with acceptable
industry practice.
Slab penetrations are poorly treated from a water proofing perspective and not
considered acceptable industry practice.
defects list references reports of water ingress into garages affecting units
37, 40, 47, 101, 105, 109, 110 and 114.
the applicants had requested a reasons statement under s 22B of the ACAT Act, it
would not have been open to the registrar to refuse
to do so on the grounds the
NOD contains the matters a reason statement given under the section would
The practical consequence of not knowing the registrar’s
reasons for decision
s 68(3) of the ACAT Act, the tribunal is required to confirm, vary or set aside
the decision under review and, if the decision
is set aside, either make a
substitute decision or remit the matter for reconsideration in accordance with
any direction or recommendation
of the tribunal. The principles governing merits
review are well understood. The tribunal’s task is to decide what is the
or preferable decision in the circumstances based on the evidence and
submissions at the hearing, regardless whether these were available
original decision-maker. It is axiomatic that it is not necessary to establish,
or even enquire into, whether the original
decision was correct. Thus it is
often said the tribunal ‘stands in the shoes’ of the original
decision-maker and, in
deciding what is the correct or preferable decision,
decides the matter afresh.
statements of that kind should not be allowed to obscure the fact that the
tribunal’s statutory function is to review
an administrative decision and,
in doing so, to decide whether the decision should be confirmed, varied or set
aside. The starting
point for the exercise of the tribunal’s jurisdiction
must always be to understand the reasons for the decision under review.
explains the requirement in rule 129(1) of the ACAT Rules that the
decision-maker must serve a statement of reasons on the applicant
and provide
copies to the tribunal within 14 days of receiving an application for review.
The rule applies regardless whether a reasons
statement has been given
previously.
practical effect of the registrar’s failure to provide a statement of
reasons in this case is that the Tribunal is required
to review a decision the
reasons for which can only be guessed at. This is inefficient, costly and
time-consuming and creates significant
challenges for the Tribunal in affording
natural justice and procedural fairness to the parties.
Performance provisions applying to class 10a garages
registrar submitted water penetration into class 10a garages associated with
class 1 townhouses is, is the result of, a breach
of performance provisions
P2.2.2 and P2.2.3 of NCC 1966 (Vol 2).
Performance
provision P2.2.2 Weatherproofing provides:
A roof and external
wall (including openings around windows and doors) must prevent the penetration
of water that could cause –
(a) unhealthy or dangerous conditions, or loss of amenity for occupants;
(b) undue dampness or deterioration of building elements.
Limitation:
P2.2.2(a) does not apply to a Class 10 building except where its
construction contributes to the weatherproofing of the Class 1 building.
Performance provision P2.2.3 Dampness provides:
Moisture from
the ground must be prevented from causing –
(a) unhealthy or dangerous conditions, or loss of amenity for occupants;
(b) undue dampness or deterioration of building elements.
Limitation:
P2.2.3 does not apply to a Class 10 building where in the particular case
there is no necessity for compliance.
applicant submitted the limitations mean neither provision applies.
building work does not comply with P2.2.2 depends on:
(a) whether the construction of the class 10a building contributes to the
weatherproofing of the class 1 building;
(b) if (a) is answered ‘yes’, whether a roof or external wall
prevents water penetration that could cause loss of amenity
for occupants;
(c) regardless how (a) is answered, whether a roof or external wall prevents
water penetration that could cause:
(i) undue dampness; or
(ii) deterioration of building elements.
building work does not comply with P2.2.3 depends on:
(a) whether, in the particular case, there is no necessity for the class 10
building to comply with P2.2.3;
(b) if the exception does not apply, whether moisture from the ground is
prevented from causing:
(i) loss of amenity for occupants;
(ii) undue dampness; or
(iii) deterioration of building elements.
a garage is not a habitable space, the question whether water penetration or
moisture from the ground may cause unhealthy or dangerous
conditions does not
appear to arise.
Performance provisions applying to class 7 basement
registrar submitted water penetration into class 7 basement carparks associated
with class 2 units is, or is the result of, a
breach of performance provisions
FP1.2, FP1.4 and FP1.5 of NCC 2016 (Vol 1 Amendment 1).
Performance
provision FP1.2 provides:
Surface water, resulting from a storm
having an average recurrence interval of 100 years must not enter the
Limitation:
FP1.2 does not apply to –
(a) a Class 7...building where in the particular case there is no necessity
for compliance; or...
Performance
provision FP1.4 provides:
A roof and external wall (including
openings around windows and doors) must prevent the penetration of water that
could cause –
(a) unhealthy or dangerous conditions, or loss of amenity for occupants;
(b) undue dampness or deterioration of building elements.
Limitation:
FP1.4 does not apply to –
(a) a Class 7...building where in the particular case there is no necessity
for compliance; or...
Performance provision FP1.5 provides:
Moisture from the ground
must be prevented from causing –
(a) unhealthy or dangerous conditions, or loss of amenity for occupants;
(b) undue dampness or deterioration of building elements.
Limitation:
FP1.4 does not apply to –
(a) a Class 7...building where in the particular case there is no necessity
for compliance; or...
applicant submitted the limitations mean none of the provision apply.
FP1.2, FP1.3 and FP1.4 apply depends on whether in the particular case there is
no necessity for compliance – in other
words, whether the exceptions
the exceptions do not apply, whether building work is non-compliant
(a) for FP1.2, on whether surface water resulting from a storm having an average
recurrence interval of 100 years (or less) is entering
the building;
(b) for FP1.4, on whether water penetration through a roof or external wall
prevents water penetration that could cause:
(i) loss of amenity for occupants;
(ii) undue dampness; or
(iii) deterioration of building elements.
(c) for FP1.5, on whether moisture from the ground is prevented from causing:
(i) loss of amenity for occupants;
(ii) undue dampness; or
(iii) deterioration of building elements.
with the garages, because basement carparks are not habitable spaces, the
question whether water penetration or moisture from the
ground may cause
unhealthy or dangerous conditions does not appear to arise.
Whether the defects, if established, are systemic
registrar submitted the rectification order should include all the garages and
basement carparks in blocks 1, 4a, 4b, 5 and 6
because the breaches resulting in
water penetration are systemic.
applicant submitted any rectification order should be limited to units mentioned
specifically in the rectification order. If any
defects are established, the
evidence does not support a finding the breaches are systemic.
The hearing
heard the evidence over two days on 14 and 15 April and submissions on 16 April
2025. The respondent relied on further reports by
the author of the original
Sellick report and called him to give supplementary oral evidence. The
cross-examination exposed significant
problems with his evidence. The parties
accepted my indication that the evidence could not support an order to confirm
or vary the
decision under review and that it was preferable to remit the matter
to the registrar for reconsideration. As a consequence, the
applicants did not
call their witnesses to give evidence, although statements were filed and served
in accordance with earlier procedural
directions.
parties confined their submissions to the issue whether the performance
provisions of NCC 2016 referenced in the rectification
order apply.
Consideration
Does P2.2.2 apply to the class 10a garages?
exception, if established, means that clause P2.2.2(a) does not apply. P2.2.2(b)
applies regardless.
applies if the construction of the class 10 building contributes to the
weatherproofing of the class 1 building.
drawings given building approval on 10 January 2019 are in evidence as exhibit
G – G (Unit Type G) on drawing A402 is a section though a typical class 1
townhouse constructed on top of a class 10a
garage. Units 56 and 57 are Type G
units. The detail shows the top of the Dincel wall at the rear of the garage
finishing above ground
level and in line with the finished floor level of the
habitable space on the first floor of the class 1 building. The Dincel wall
provides a physical barrier to water entry and therefore contributes to the
waterproofing of the class 1 building.
am satisfied P2.2.2(a) applies.
applicant accepts the construction of the Dincel walls was not carried out in
accordance with the approved drawings. This is a
s 42(1)(d)(i)
Building Act
. The onus lies on the applicant to satisfy the registrar that the
breach is not causally material – that is, it has played
allowing water ingress into the class 10a garages.
Does P2.2.3 apply to the class 10a garages?
exception depends on whether in the particular case there is no necessity for
compliance.
other words, P2.2.3 applies unless it is established there is no need for
compliance in the particular case. The onus to satisfy
the registrar there is no
need for compliance lies with the applicant.
the applicant submitted there was no need for compliance, the evidence was not
sufficient to enable a finding one way or
Does FP1.2, FP1.4 and FP1.5 apply to class basement
with P2.2.3, these provisions apply unless the applicant satisfies the registrar
there is no need for compliance in the particular
case. The evidence was not
sufficient to enable a finding one way or the other.
The preferable decision
evidence satisfied me there is a water penetration issue affecting some class
10a garages and class 7 basement carparks meriting
further investigation. The
preferable decision in those circumstances is to remit the decision under review
to the registrar for
reconsideration in light of the matters discussed in these
......................................
Senior Member M. Orlov
defect 1a – non-compliant
separating walls between adjoining class 1aii townhouses; defect 1b –
non-compliant bounding
walls between adjoining class 2 units; defect 1c –
non-compliant passive fire treatment in class 7a basement carparks; defect
– water ingress into class 1aii townhouses and associated class 10a
garages; defect 2b – water ingress into class
2 units and associated class
7a basement carparks
T Docs pp 7, 8
T Docs pp 439, 452, 465
ACAT Act, s 67(4)
T Docs p 419
T Docs p 420
T Docs pp 192-3
T Docs p 195
T Docs p 199
T Docs p 202
RTF format (339 KB)
Signed PDF/A format