Inquest into the Death of Ruth McKay [2023] ACTCD 7 (6 April 2023)
CORONERS COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Inquest into the Death of Ruth McKay
[2023] ACTCD 7
Hearing Date(s):
10-14 February 2020, 5 June 2020, 3 July 2020, 11 October 2021, 16-17 March
Coroner Taylor
See [196]-[199]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– cause and manner of death – acute
bronchopneumonia – death in care - no criticism of treating clinicians
matters of public safety in relation to operation of aged care facility
- delay in coronial proceedings – non-publication order
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
sections 3BA
Cases Cited:
R v Doogan; Ex Parte Lucas Smith & Ors
[2005] ACTSC
March v E & MH Stramare Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Texts Cited:
Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety, Final Report, Care,
Dignity and Respect, Volume 1:
www.agedcare.royalcommission.gov.au
Representation:
Counsel Assisting
Ms M Jones SC together with Ms S
Baker-Goldsmith
Solicitor for Goodwin Aged Care Services
Counsel for Goodwin Aged Care Services
Solicitor for the Australian Capital Territory
Counsel for the Australian Capital Territory
File Number(s):
CD 19 of 2015
CORONER TAYLOR:
Introduction
old people are an important part of our community. It is through the elderly we
chart our family history and importantly, our
own place in that history. Through
our old people we identify our connections to kin, place and culture. Old people
are a rich source
of wisdom, possessing knowledge and experience that only old
age can generate. Our families and communities benefit socially, politically
economically from the ongoing participation of old people in our society.
Getting old is a privilege and it should be attended
to by high standards of
support and care. In my culture our old people, our Elders, occupy a special
place of reverence. So too
Mrs Ruth McKay in her family. The circumstances of
her death are sad and distressing – they bear no resemblance to the full
life she led nor the love and high esteem in which she was held. The following
report is the result of an inquiry into her death.
It is by no means a
reflection of the complete impact of her life.
Background summary
Ruth McKay (
) died on 23 January 2015 at The Canberra Hospital
). She was 90 years of age.
17 January 2015, Mrs McKay was found at around 8am lying on her back under an
ornamental antique car in an external courtyard at
the aged care facility where
she lived, Goodwin House Ainslie (
), bleeding from a head injury.
She was dressed in a light night gown. Prior to this incident Mrs McKay had been
observed to wander
at night. When she was discovered, it was not known for how
long she had been under the car or outside in the courtyard. She was
found there
after it was discovered she was not in her bedroom. A staff member called
“000” and an ambulance attended
the scene and transported her to
TCH. She developed an infection and died at TCH on 23 January 2015.
McKay was born Ruth Allison Irwin on 5 August 1924. She lived her early life in
Marrickville, Sydney, where she attended Marrickville
Girls High School, she
then completed a secretarial course and went on to be employed by a newspaper.
Mrs McKay married Douglas Henry
McKay in 1947. They moved to Canberra and had
three children - Robyn born in 1948, Julienne born in 1951 and Wendy born in
Mr McKay was an economist who became a senior public servant. Mrs McKay
was at home with their girls full time. Mrs McKay actively
played golf until
2009 when she was in her mid-80s and was involved in the golf club as treasurer.
Due to Mr McKay’s declining
physical health and Mrs McKay’s
advancing dementia, in 2009 they moved into the independent living section at
Goodwin. Mr McKay
died on 7 July 2012. In July 2013, Mrs McKay moved to the
Memory Support Unit (
) due to her more advanced
MSU is a secure unit designed for residents of Goodwin with dementia and for
other residents at risk when unsupervised or when
the facility is left
unattended. The MSU has an external, secure courtyard area accessible to
residents. Mrs McKay gained access
to the MSU courtyard where at some point, for
reasons unknown, she pulled herself under the stationary, antique car.
is clear from the evidence before me, and from the statement of Mrs
McKay’s daughter, Ms Wendy McKay, at the hearing on 14
February 2020, that
Mrs McKay was deeply loved by her family. She was a wife, a mother and
grandmother who lived a life characterised
by close connection with her family
and an abiding loyalty that has endured after her death. It is clear that Mrs
McKay’s death
was a profound loss for her family. It is also clear that
her life was much more than her death which, while obviously the subject
these proceedings, should not take away from the loving, rich and full life she
led for the 90 long years that she lived.
of the of the
Coroners Act 1997
(“the Act”) requires
inquests to be carried out in a way that recognises that the death of a person
and an inquest into
the person’s death, has a significant impact on the
person’s family and friends. In my view, that obligation has not
satisfactorily discharged in this case.
is plain that the prolonged history of this coronial process has had a
significant impact on Mrs McKay’s family. The delay
that has attached to
this process since Mrs McKay’s death in 2015 is indefensible and I will
not attempt to explain it away.
I will note that since I became responsible for
the coronial proceedings, a substantial delay occurred in 2021 awaiting the
of further material from Goodwin. The final day of hearing was set in
March 2022, after material was provided by Goodwin in October
Sarah Campbell, Mrs McKay’s granddaughter gave a statement on behalf of
the family at the hearing on 16 March 2022 which
addressed, in part, the impact
the delay has had on her family. It is entirely appropriate that an apology be
extended on behalf
of the Coroners Court to the family for that delay which was
at times accompanied by very poor levels of communication and initially,
indication that coronial proceedings would not eventuate. Ms Wendy McKay
travelled to Canberra in July 2019 expecting a hearing
to commence as she had
not been informed that the matter would be adjourned. This reflects very poorly
on the Coroner’s Office
and would have undoubtedly been a source of more
distress and frustration. The Coroners Court must always be mindful that its
has real life impacts for those unfortunately swept up in our remit
and every attempt should be made to reduce the impact of coronial
proceedings on
grieving family members. I am not confident that was always the case in this
matter. I apologise to Mrs McKay’s
family for the delay and the, at times,
poor communication. I acknowledge the ache in their hearts created by the
circumstances of
Mrs McKay’s death, and I acknowledge the ongoing negative
impact these protracted proceedings have had on their experience
Timeline of proceedings
Mrs McKay’s death in January 2015, the police informed the family that
they would be taking no further action.
decision was made pursuant to
of the Act to hold a hearing and in
March 2019, the Coroners Court advised the family that an inquest would be held
into Mrs McKay’s
death in July 2019.
hearing was originally scheduled to begin in July 2019. The hearing was
adjourned and subsequently, late in 2019, carriage of
the proceedings was
transferred to me from the Chief Coroner. The hearing first commenced before me
on 10 February 2020. Leave was
granted to Goodwin and the Territory to appear at
the inquest and both parties were represented by counsel. The Territory’s
appearance was on the basis that Mrs McKay had passed away at TCH and one of the
issues for consideration is to what extent, if any,
Mrs McKay’s treatment
at TCH, contributed to her death.
view of Goodwin Ainslie was conducted on the first day of the hearing. Evidence
was heard on five days from 10 February 2020 to
14 February 2020. On 5 June 2020
an application was made by Counsel Assisting to re-open the inquest to hear
evidence from two further
witnesses, TL and HY. Leave was granted.
grandmother, Resident 1, was a resident at the MSU at the same time as Mrs
McKay. HY’s wife, Resident 2, was a resident
in the MSU from 19 February
further evidence was heard on 16 March 2022. Final submissions were received in
February 2023, I issued a notice pursuant to
of the Act annexed
In response, pursuant to
(1)(b), Goodwin provided a statement annexed
See paragraph 22 for
further reference.
Submissions
received the following submissions in this matter;
(a) Submissions on behalf of Counsel Assisting filed 9 May 2022;
(b) Submissions in reply on behalf of Goodwin dated 31 May 2022;
(c) Submissions on behalf of Canberra Health Services (
) dated 20 May
(d) Supplementary submissions on behalf of CHS dated 17 June 2022;
(e) Letter from Goodwin’s legal representatives dated 23 June 2022
indicating an amendment to paragraph [76] Goodwin’s
submissions;
(f) Amended submissions on behalf of Goodwin to reflect the change to paragraph
[76] received on 27 June 2022;
(g) Further supplementary submissions on behalf of CHS dated 27 June 2022
(responding to the changes flagged in Goodwin’s letter
of 23 June 2022);
(h) Counsel Assisting’s submissions in reply dated 2 July 2022.
McKay died after an accident and her death is directly attributable to the
(1)(g) of the Act relevantly provides:
13 Coroner’s jurisdiction in relation to deaths
(1) A coroner must hold an inquest into the manner and cause of death of a
person who—
(g) dies after an accident where the cause of death appears to be directly
attributable to the accident
of the Act relevantly provides:
52 Coroner’s
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find, if possible -
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the
person has died.
(3) At the conclusion of an inquest or inquiry the coroner must record the
coroner’s findings in writing.
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
(i) state whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in
connection with the inquest or inquiry; and
(ii) if a matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the
(b) may comment on any matter about the administration of justice connected
with the inquest or inquiry.
is no issue in relation to
sections 52
(1)(a) and (b). There is no dispute as to
the medical cause of Mrs McKay’s death. There is no dispute as between
experts Drs
Milne, Brock and Professor Pain that the cause of Mrs McKay’s
death was pneumonic illness caused either by aspiration and/or
five issues that I will consider are:
McKay leaving her room in the MSU at Goodwin and entering the MSU courtyard
undetected;
length of time Mrs McKay was in the courtyard before she was found. This will
include consideration of staffing at Goodwin and
the particular circumstances of
the shift on 16-17 January 2015;
treatment and care at TCH from 17 January 2015 when Mrs McKay was an inpatient
at TCH until her death on 23 January 2015,
including the issue of
aspiration;
action, investigation, reporting processes and previous relevant incidents;
connected to public safety.
notice I issued to Goodwin in February 2023 contained numerous
comments which I considered including in this report. In the notice
I indicated
I was considering making the following comment “
bed and room sensors
were often switched off in the MSU
”. Arising from Goodwin’s
response to that notice, and having reflected on the nature and extent of the
evidence before
me on the issue, I determined to alter the terms of the comment
to now read
“as at January 2015 bed and room sensors were not
consistently operated in the MSU
Relevant Legal Principles
is appropriate to identify the relevant legal principles that attach to these
proceedings. In
R v Doogan; Ex Parte Lucas Smith & Ors
[2005] ACTSC
”) the Full Court of the ACT Supreme Court stated
in relation to the nature of a coroner’s inquiry, at [12] and
The task of a coroner is not to determine whether anyone is entitled to some
legal remedy, is liable to another or is guilty of an
offence. The
Coroner’s task is to inquire into the matters specified in the relevant
section of the
Coroners Act 1997
and make, if possible, the required findings
and any comments that may be appropriate...
The [Coroners] Act is generally concerned with the resolution of relatively
straightforward questions such as “what was the
cause of this
death?” or “what caused this fire?”. It does not provide a
general mechanism for an open-ended inquiry
into the merits of government
policy, the performance of government agencies or private institutions, or the
conduct of individuals,
even if apparently related in some way to the
circumstances in which the death or fire occurred.
Full Court in
further observed that coroners should not conduct
a wide-ranging inquiry akin to that of a Royal Commission
(at [28]) using this example to demonstrate the limits of a coronial enquiry at
... a coroner might well hear evidence suggesting that a cyclist’s death
had been caused not merely by a collision with a motor
vehicle, but also by the
antecedent conduct of the driver of that vehicle in failing to stop at a stop
sign adjacent to an intersection.
However, the limited jurisdiction conferred
... would not authorise the coroner to inquire into any perceived failures in
to general policy relating to the siting of stop signs or the
enforcement of traffic regulations. The particular siting and design
relevant intersection may be a different matter. The application of the
common-sense test of causation will normally exclude
a quest to apportion blame
or a wide-ranging investigation into antecedent policies and practices.
Full Court endorsed, at [29], the common-sense test of causation laid down by
the High Court in
March v E & MH Stramare Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR
A line must be drawn at some point beyond which, even if relevant, factors which
come to light will be considered too remote from
the event to be regarded as
causative ... in the context of a coronial inquiry, [the common sense test of
causation] may be influenced
by the limited scope of the inquiry which, as we
have mentioned, does not extend to the resolution of collateral issues relating
to compensation or the attribution of blame.
may be made provided the requisite standard of satisfaction is met. A Coroner is
to have regard to the principle laid down
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
as stated by Dixon J at 361-2:
The truth is that, when the law requires the proof of any fact, the tribunal
must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or
existence before it can be
found. ...The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given
description, or the gravity of the consequences flowing
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer
question whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Full Court in
, commenting in relation to the coroner’s power
to make comment under
of the Act, said [41]-[42]:
Subsection 52(4)
also provides that a coroner “may comment on any matter
connected with the death, fire or disaster including public health
or safety or
the administration of justice.” Comments may obviously extend beyond the
scope of “findings”. The
latter term refers to judicial
satisfaction that facts have been proven to the requisite standard or that legal
principles have been
established. The former refers to observations about the
relevant issues and may extend to recommendations intended to reduce the
similar fires, deaths or disasters occurring in the future. However, conferral
of the power to make comments does not enlarge
the scope of the coroner’s
different context, in
Harmsworth v The State Coroner at 996:
The power to comment, arises as a consequence of the obligation to make
findings...It is not free-ranging...The powers to...are inextricably
with, but not independent of the power to enquire into a death or fire for the
purposes of making findings. They are not
separate or distinct sources of power
enabling a coroner to enquire for the sole or dominant reason of making comment
or recommendation.
It arises as a consequence of the exercise of a
coroner’s prime function, that is to make “findings”
If a coroner decides to pursue this course, he or she is subject to the
requirement in
of the Act that any party who may be adversely
affected by such a comment be given due warning that it may be made, as well as
opportunity to make a written statement in relation to the comment or make a
submission to the coroner in relation to the proposed
Non-publication Order
make an order pursuant to section 40 (2)(b) of the Act directing that the
publication of the names of any employee of Goodwin (except
senior managers Mr
Jeffrey Shelley and Ms Robyn Boyd) and the names of any of the treating doctors
and nurses of Mrs McKay at TCH
is prohibited. In addition, the names of other
residents of the MSU and their family members who gave evidence in these
proceedings
are also prohibited from publication. In each case I consider that
it is in the public interest to make a non-publication order.
findings that follow are based on the evidence received during this
view of Goodwin was conducted on the first day of hearing, 10 February 2020.
Counsel assisting helpfully provided Attachment A,
a list of all the witnesses
called in the proceedings (annexed
and Attachment B a timeline
of events (annexed hereto).
the hearing, evidence was heard from staff who were working at Goodwin on 16 and
17 January 2015, Goodwin management staff,
medical staff at TCH, the forensic
pathologist who conducted the autopsy, Associate Professor Dr Nathan Milne. Two
expert medical
witnesses, Professor Michael Pain, a consultant thoracic
physician engaged by Goodwin, and Dr Jeffrey Brock, a specialist in exposure
hypothermia also gave evidence at the hearing.
The Autopsy
Mrs McKay’s death at TCH on 23 January 2015, an autopsy was performed by
Associate Professor Dr Nathan Milne on 27 January
2015. He produced a report
dated 16 March 2015. He gave evidence at the hearing. He identified that the
histology of Mrs McKay’s
brain demonstrated signs of Alzheimer disease,
and her dementia was noted to be advanced and deteriorating. The lung histology
acute bronchitis and bronchopneumonia of a significant degree.
autopsy report includes the following findings:
(a) Mrs McKay was very physically fit for her age;
(b) The brain showed signs of Alzheimer’s disease;
(c) There were no internal injuries;
(d) There was pus in the upper airways and both lungs showed features of
bronchopneumonia. There was a suggestion that some areas
of pneumonia were
(e) There were no internal findings to suggest hypothermia, however this is
complicated by the period of survival in hospital noting
changes of hypothermia
can be difficult to identify even without such a survival period;
(f) Histology confirmed acute bronchopneumonia in the lungs and some older areas
of pneumonia; and
(g) The pus from the trachea identified a heavy growth of the bacterium
Staphylococcus aureus.
report concluded that the cause of death was acute bronchopneumonia, a bacterial
infection. Dr Milne identified the infectious
organism as Staphylococcus aureus.
“the most likely condition predisposing her to the
development of bronchopneumonia is Alzheimer’s disease.”
opinion was consistent with the evidence he gave in the hearing before me, that
is, Alzheimer’s disease elevated Mrs McKay’s
risk of any infection,
including bronchopneumonia. His evidence was that the bronchopneumonia likely
developed after Mrs McKay fell,
the fall arising from her Alzheimer’s
goes on in his report to note
“she survived in hospital for 6 days
after being found near the car. The acute bronchopneumonia would have developed
time. However, as areas of bronchopneumonia were older, it is
possible that she already had a degree of bronchopneumonia prior to
admission.”
Milne notes in the report that the circumstances prior to the admission to
hospital were uncertain. He notes the fall and the resulting
soft tissue injury
to Mrs McKay’s head. He opines that if the fall was accompanied by any
reduced level of consciousness this
could have seen Mrs McKay predisposed to
aspirating. Dr Milne notes that no aspirated material was seen in the lungs but
it cannot be excluded that the bronchopneumonia resulted from
aspiration. He identifies that hypothermia may have also contributed
evidence Dr Milne said bronchopneumonia was evident in both lungs and described
“quite significant”
. He identified that while
potentially bronchopneumonia can be attributed to Alzheimer’s alone, it
likely developed after Mrs
McKay fell, her fall being attributable to
Alzheimer’s disease. He reiterated the difficulty in assessing the role of
hyperthermia,
noting Mrs McKay’s death six days after the event, but
nonetheless considered it was a factor to be considered as
“part of the
whole process and the way she ended up getting pneumonia as
prospect and potential timing of aspiration was the subject of evidence during
the hearing. Professor Milne’s evidence was
that the cause of the
bronchopneumonia may have been the aspiration of foreign material – there
being signs that foreign material
had been aspirated in the past being inflamed
cells contained old debris. He opined that it appeared foreign material had been
for many days and possibly a longer period –
. He said that there was no sign of fresh foreign material,
although noted Mrs McKay may have aspirated some fluid from her stomach
Well, there was some sign that she had aspirated or breathed contents down
her lungs in the past, with inflammatory cells that contained
old debris. Now,
that looked like that had been present for many days at least, so it could have
been present for months or longer.
There wasn’t any fresh foreign material
in the airways to confirm that but it doesn’t mean she didn’t’
some fluid be that fluid from the stomach or from the head injury
potentially. So aspiration pneumonia I couldn’t confirm microscopically.
From the circumstances it seems most likely.
said an elderly person suffering from Alzheimer’s was at greater risk of
both aspiration and independent of this, developing
an infection, as compared to
a person of the same age but not suffering from Alzheimer’s disease.
I have already noted, upon discovering Mrs McKay under the car vomit was
observed near her head. The evidence also established
that she vomited while
immobile in a cervical brace at TCH. She also had a coughing fit while drinking
water while in the emergency
department.
is essential to understand the physical layout of the area where Mrs McKay lived
at Goodwin, in particular the MSU.
MSU is a secure area of Goodwin located on the ground floor of the three-story
facility. This secure area is designed for residents
at risk of leaving the
facility such as those like Mrs McKay with dementia. Access to the MSU requires
entry from the main lobby
of Goodwin. The MSU has secure doors operated by swipe
card access or by staff pressing a button to allow entry or exit. The hub
MSU is the common area where the nurse’s station is located as well as
areas for eating and socialising. There are two
wings off the common area where
resident’s bedrooms are located. One wing is referred to as the green
corridor and the other
as the gold corridor. The MSU has its own outdoor
courtyard area that can only be accessed via the MSU. Mrs McKay’s bedroom,
number 15, was located toward the end, closer to the courtyard area, of the gold
corridor. The MSU courtyard can be accessed by residents
from the nurse’s
station/common/dining room area and at the end of each of the corridors.
doors at the end of each corridor do not require a key to lock or unlock them.
In January 2015, they opened from the inside by
turning the snib and pushing the
door forward. From the outside a key was required to gain access to the corridor
if the doors were
locked. These doors could be opened from the inside at any
time of the day or night without a key by turning a snib style lock.
McKay’s room was close to the external door at the end of the gold
the doors at the end of each corridor, the glass doors off the common area were
fitted from the inside with mesh screen doors.
Those doors were able to be
locked from the inside with a key and as part of an evening lockdown procedure
these doors were locked
with a key.
had the benefit of attending upon Goodwin to see the general layout of the MSU
for myself. It was of assistance in terms of orienting
some of the evidence
given in the hearing from various witnesses. Floor plans and video footage were
also of use. At the outset I
note that there is no direct evidence of how or
when Mrs McKay went out into the courtyard. There is no CCTV footage or any kind
of electronic record of the MSU courtyard doors or dining room opening or
closing that might assist. Unfortunately, Mrs McKay herself
was not able to
provide any information that assists any aspect of this inquiry.
ambulance service (
) was called to attend Goodwin at 8.10am. ACTAS
officers Greg Addison and Nicole Price arrived at 8.15am. Mrs McKay was observed
be conscious and alert on her back under the car. Substantial blood was
observed near the car. The incident report records that Mrs
McKay had no
recollection of the event. Mrs McKay’s Glasgow Coma Score was measured at
14. She had a large haematoma to her
left forehead with swelling and congealed
blood. She was extracted from under the car and arrived at TCH at 9.11am.
8.25am, Mrs McKay’s tympanic temperature was recorded as 31 degrees. A
space blanket was used and by 9am en route to hospital
her temperature had risen
to 32.9 degrees and at 9.10am to 33.9 degrees.
McKay arrived at TCH Emergency Department (
) at 9.16am. At 8.20pm
she was admitted to the geriatric ward.
A. How did Mrs McKay get outside to the MSU courtyard
undetected?
Security of the external door at the end of the gold
simple answer to this question is that absent a physical inability to operate
the snib lock that was in the place on the door
at the end of the gold corridor,
there was no physical impediment to Mrs McKay gaining access to the outside
courtyard area at any
time of the day or night. There was no alarm or other kind
of notification to alert staff that the doors to the outside area had
were in operation. Mrs McKay was independently mobile though did use a wheelie
walker. There was no evidence before me upon
which I could conclude that the
task of unlocking and opening the door by pushing it forward was physically
beyond Mrs McKay. Indeed,
as will become clear I am satisfied on the evidence
that she was capable of turning the lock and pushing the door at the end of the
gold corridor forward, thereby gaining access to the courtyard. I am satisfied
that this is precisely what she did to access the
courtyard where she was
ultimately found on 17 January 2015. The video footage and the view I attended
demonstrated that the turning
of the snib and the pushing of the door was not a
particularly onerous physical task. The statement of Ms Boyd dated 23 November
2018 (exhibit 6) confirms this view where she states:
Residents have free egress from the corridor to the courtyard area during the
day. At night the outside door is locked but can be
unlocked from the inside by
was a standard practice in place that the doors to the courtyard were to be
locked every night. There was evidence from JL,
the Team Leader for the night
shift on 16-17 January 2015 about the practice required whereby a lockdown
checklist was completed
to confirm that doors had been locked. The checklist
from 16-17 January 2015 reflected that the doors were locked at 7pm and
sometime before 11.30pm.
my view despite this lockdown practice, having seen them in operation myself,
the snib locks on the doors at the end of each corridor
were capable of being
easily accessed and operated. They did not require a key to lock or unlock. This
meant that while staff would
turn the snib to lock the doors, any resident
capable of turning the snib could come along and unlock the corridor doors after
lockdown checklist had been completed.
McKay’s care plan required her to have a sensor mat due to concerns about
wandering at night. The care plan under the heading
Resting” records this as part of the “observations”;
Ruth has been observed wandering at night and falling asleep in the
.” The care plan records that observation as having been added
on 27 December 2014 by Deputy Care Manager RN, VC.
intervention recorded to address that observation is recorded as
sensor mat in place and staff to monitor Ruth during the
”. Again, in the care plan under the heading
“Cognitive and Mental Health Behaviour” it is observed that
Ruth has been observed wandering
”. Indeed, it is recorded in
this part of the plan that “
Ruth has been moved to the memory support
unit due to her previous behaviours of wandering
was no evidence that an alert or alarm was triggered in Mrs McKay’s room
by either a bed sensor mat or a room sensor when
she left it to access the
courtyard on 16-17 January 2015.
am satisfied on the evidence before me that Mrs McKay exited the MSU to the
courtyard area through the door at the end of the gold
corridor by turning the
snib and pushing the door open.
is plain from the evidence that Mrs McKay moved from her room in the gold
corridor to the outside courtyard area undetected. There
was no electronic
record of her movement (through electronic monitoring of external doors or room
doors) and there was no direct
observation by any staff of her movement (whether
by chance doing rounds, via CCTV, or as a result of the sensor mat or room alarm
triggering enquiry). A number of factors combined allowed Mrs McKay to access
the courtyard undetected such as room sensors being
inoperative, the ease of the
corridor door being unlocked, as well as, less significantly in my view, the
16-17 January shift being
particularly busy.
Bed sensor mat and room alarm
I have already observed, Mrs McKay’s care plan identified that she had
been observed wandering at night. The intervention
to address that behaviour was
a bed sensor mat to provide a way, outside of observing the behaviour directly,
for staff to be alerted
when she had moved from the bed. In addition, the care
plan identifies that Mrs McKay was to be monitored through the night.
evidence from the Goodwin Nurse Call Access logs is that there were no alarms
for room 15, Mrs McKay’s room for the night
of the 16-17 January 2015. The
only available inference from this is that the bed sensor mat was not turned on
or not working at
that time, because it is clear that Mrs McKay moved from her
room at some point.
and TL had family members who were residents at the MSU at the same time that
Mrs McKay was a resident at the MSU. They gave evidence
in the hearing that it
was their experience that bed sensor mats were often not switched on. HY gave
evidence in relation to his
wife and TL gave evidence in relation to her
grandmother. TL said her grandmother was required to have a bed sensor mat on
at various times and on many occasions, she would check, and it would
not be switched on. HY gave similar evidence in relation to
his wife, Resident 2
and the use of bed sensor mats.
accept their evidence in relation to their experience of the use of bed sensor
mats. Firstly, because in addition to being witnesses
who presented as careful
and considered they impressed as particularly invested in the day to day lives
of their family members.
Secondly, the issue with the bed sensors was clearly of
interest to them as a matter directly relevant to the wellbeing of their
ones and I am satisfied they recalled the concern accurately. And finally,
because it is entirely consistent with what must
have been the case on the
evening of 16-17 January 2015 when Mrs McKay successfully made her way out to
the courtyard area without
detection through the bed sensor mat which, according
to her care plan, should have been in use and was not. I infer from the evidence
that the use of such sensor mats may have been quite burdensome for staff to
manage because they sounded an alert for every occasion
where there is movement
off the bed including occasions for instance where there may be no risk to the
resident such as going to
the bathroom or getting off their bed to retrieve
something from inside their room.
addition, there is no evidence of any process or procedure that strengthened the
approach to the use of bed sensors in terms of
identifying responsibility for
ensuring ongoing operation upon a change of shift or after an alarm had sounded
and staff had responded.
Likewise, there was no record or log of when a bed
sensor was turned off or on, who turned it off or on or why it was turned off
on to strengthen ongoing compliance with care plans such as the one that
informed the care provided to Mrs McKay. The evidence
supports the view that
bed sensor could be turned on or off by anyone, at any time.
Jeffrey Shelley, the Residential Manager of Operations at Goodwin, said in
evidence that each room was fitted with room sensors
to monitor resident
movement and as a matter of standard practice the sensors were activated when a
resident was in their room. The
sensor had the capacity to alert staff about
resident movement by sending an alert through to staff phones. Ms Robyn Boyd,
Executive Manager, at Goodwin gave evidence that an internal review after
this incident with Mrs McKay revealed that all the sensors
were working. Ms
Boyd’s evidence was that sensors were not activated as a matter of
standard practice but rather they were
used as required. Ms Boyd’s
evidence was that a room sensor was not necessary for Mrs McKay. This view,
though clearly inconsistent
with Mr Shelley’s description of their use, is
consistent with there being no evidence of any alarm or alert from room sensors
for Mrs McKay’s room for 16-17 January 2015 on the basis that they were
not in use for whatever reason on that evening.
gave evidence that sensor mats are turned off in the morning when staff assist a
resident out of bed. GB, a carer on night shift
on 16-17 January 2015 did not
consider that he had any responsibility in relation to checking or ensuring that
sensors were in operation.
record of a staff meeting on 23 January 2015, produced as part of Ms
Boyd’s evidence, indicates that staff were advised that
room sensors were
to be on all night in all rooms.
evidence paints something of a confused picture about what the approach was to
bed sensor mats as at 16-17 January 2015. The difference
in approach articulated
in the evidence of Mr Shelley and Ms Boyd, reflected in the experience of HY and
TL as well as what happened
in Mrs McKay’s case, provides a strong basis
to infer that staff may well have been confused about the use of sensors as a
risk mitigator and that their use was inconsistent.
Supervision in the MSU
is a residential aged care facility. The evidence suggests this is distinct from
a nursing home. Ms Boyd was clear in her
evidence that while the MSU, by its
very nature, was a place that provided some restraint on the capacity of
residents to determine
their movements, it was not a place where constant
supervision was implemented. Ms Boyd said in evidence:
I think what we’re trying to promote is quality of life and as much
independence as possible, our philosophy is not to restrain
people in any way
and so the idea is that we supervise and support, not restrict and retain
– or restrain.
Living in residential aged care doesn’t mean you have 24 hour one to
one supervision. That’s not what residential aged
care is about.
That’s not what it is. It’s to support people to live as
independently as they possibly can. We couldn’t
possibly provide one to
one support to every single resident, 108 residents, 24 hours a day. That is not
what the care is.
highlighted, consistent with the evidence of Ms Boyd, that their facilities are
required to impose as little restriction on
the dignity and autonomy of an
individual as possible in the circumstances and residential aged care facilities
are required to give
real meaning to those concepts. I note, as emphasised by
Goodwin, that The Charter of Rights of Care Recipients – Residential
provided in 2015 that a resident in residential care was entitled “
live in a safe, secure and homelike environment and to move freely both within
and outside the resident care service without undue
restriction
am not satisfied that staffing numbers can be identified as a factor that
contributed, either directly or indirectly, to the circumstances
of Mrs McKay
going out into the courtyard undetected. The reality of the needs of residents
in a facility like the MSU is that staff
attention may be required to meet those
needs in a way that sees other residents unattended. More staff covering the
16-17 January
2015 shift may not have ensured that Mrs McKay remained in her
room given the demands of the shift. This is why, in my view, it
is important
to ensure in so far as is possible that the safety and security of residents
does not rely entirely on staff.
MSU is the home of the residents who live there. That said, MSU residents are
restricted because of their needs. They cannot roam
freely or independently
around the Goodwin facility as they might wish to because a decision is made
that it is not in their best
interest. Restricting their movements is a
protective measure. It is a reasonable measure in the circumstances. It is not
controversial to acknowledge that the autonomy and liberty of residents
should be promoted.
said, the promotion of autonomy and liberty cannot be at a cost to the safety
and security of those residents. Where policies,
procedures, practices and/or
physical accommodations present obvious risk to residents, those risks should be
mitigated. Mitigation
of risk as a matter of common sense may well intrude upon
autonomy or liberty but that intrusion, in my view, is justified where
and/or security are at risk and the action taken to mitigate risk is carefully
and appropriately measured against the promotion
of independence and liberty in
so far as it is possible.
Findings about how Mrs McKay got outside to the MSU courtyard
January 2015, there was nothing other than the practice of staff checking that
the doors at the end of the gold and green corridors
were locked and observing
the movements of residents, preventing residents from tuning the snib lock and
pushing open the doors to
the MSU external courtyard at any time of the day or
night. As at January 2015
, bed and room sensors were
not consistently operated in the MSU. Mrs McKay was known to be prone to
wandering. Indeed, her Goodwin
care plan required that she have a sensor mat in
place at night to guard against that risk. Had sensor mats in Mrs McKay’s
room been switched on, it is likely staff would have responded to the alert when
Mrs McKay left her bed to access the courtyard.
It is also likely that Mrs McKay
would not have remained undetected outside for an extended
resident inside the facility as at January 2015, using the external doors at the
end of the gold corridor nearest to where Mrs McKay’s
room was located,
could simply turn the snib, push open the door and gain access to the courtyard,
to exit the facility. This allowed
residents to access the courtyard at any time
of the day or night.
approach to ensuring the security of these doors relied entirely on staff
compliance and intervention. Even then,
once locked by staff, the doors at the
end of corridor could be unlocked, without detection, by any resident capable of
turning the
snib. The doors could then be opened, without detection, by any
resident capable of pushing the door forward. The failure by Goodwin
adequately protect the safety and security of residents by ensuring that they
were not able to access the courtyard through those
doors, in particular at
night, was a matter of public safety, and represented a risk to the residents.
It was an obvious and straightforward
risk of which Goodwin should have been
aware. This failure led to Mrs McKay accessing the courtyard undetected and
ultimately, to
was confusion in the evidence given by Goodwin managers as to whether sensor
mats were used routinely, as standard, or used
only as required at the
discretion of staff. This confusion may well have affected staff attitudes to,
and understanding of, the
use of sensors and the role of Goodwin care plans in
guiding the approach to risk mitigation. In any event, Mrs McKay’s care
plan required the use of a sensor mat and, consistent with that, at least one
ought to have been in place and switched on in accordance
with that care
reliance solely on staff to ensure that doors remained locked, and that
residents were not attempting to leave the
facility using the corridor doors,
provided the environment for undetected courtyard access to occur. If there had
been an alert
or alarm system on corridor doors which notified staff that doors
had been opened, and/or if sensor mats had been operational in
Mrs McKay’s
room, it is highly likely that:
McKay’s absence from her room would have been detected earlier than it
McKay would have been located in the courtyard much sooner than she
find that Mrs McKay went outside to the MSU courtyard through the gold corridor
external door. I find that she did so by turning
the snib lock on the door and
pushing the door forward. I find that Mrs McKay was able to do so because the
door did not require
a key to unlock it.
find that on the evening of 16-17 January 2015, neither bed nor room sensors
were in use in Mrs McKay’s bedroom at the MSU.
find that Mrs McKay was able to access the courtyard undetected because of the
absence of sensor mats anywhere in her room, including
on her bed. The absence
of sensor mats in use resulted in her leaving her room without staff being
alerted to her movement. I find
that the absence of electronic monitoring,
including alerts or alarms, of the gold corridor external doors meant Mrs
use of the door to enter the courtyard went undetected for some
circumstances of residents in aged care facilities being able to unlock doors to
areas outside undetected at night is a matter
of public safety as contemplated
by section 52 (4)(a). I will address this at (E).
B. How long was Mrs McKay outside undetected in the MSU
evidence demonstrates that Mrs McKay’s absence from her room was not
discovered until just before 8am. Dr Brock opined that
Mrs McKay was likely to
have been under the car for no more than 2-3 hours, but she may have been
outside, but not under the car
for up to five hours.
are a number of aspects of the evidence to consider that informs the finding I
make in relation to this question.
Boyd’s evidence sets out the staffing structure and regime in place at
Goodwin in January 2015. They operated on a 1 carer
to 11 residents ratio. In
summary, there was a morning, an afternoon and a night shift. Staffing levels
varied over the three shifts.
shift saw a Team Leader and four carers for each floor.
Leaders have Certificate IV qualifications while other carers have Certificate
III qualifications. The day shift also saw an
enrolled or registered nurse on
shift. Evening shifts were led by one Team Leader for all three floors supported
by an unspecified
number of carers.
shifts were staffed by a Team Leader for three floors and one carer per floor.
There was an additional carer who was referred
to as a ‘floater’.
There was no enrolled or registered nurse on shift at the facility for overnight
periods. If the assistance
of a nurse was required overnight, the Team Leader
would contact an ‘agency’ nurse.
The 16-17 January 2015 night shift
was the Team Leader on duty on the night shift for 16-17 January 2015. GB was a
carer on duty. SE was the ‘floater’
for the shift. She did not have
any interaction with Mrs McKay during her shift.
evidence consistent with the statutory declaration that he completed on 18
January 2015 is that he checked on Mrs McKay
at 2.10am and saw her sleeping in
her bed. He called GB at 5.20am and requested a check of all MSU residents be
conducted. GB reported
back that all was well with residents except for a male
resident who was wandering.
said he checked the MSU doors leading out to the courtyard including the door
nearest Mrs McKay’s room by “
turning the lock not with a
described Mrs McKay being known to wander. He said she would wander into other
resident’s rooms, the pan and utility rooms,
the garden, and would try to
open doors within that wing. Staff would attempt to divert her and on occasion
she would be administered
a sleeping tablet.
described an incident in January 2015 where Mrs McKay was concerned about her
car. JL made notes about this in the electronic recording
system at 3am on 4
January 2015.
note is comprehensive stating:
Resident came up to care office and asked me I could start up her car and
looking for her mother and father at around 0240. Resident
was guided back to
her room and assisted to settle back into bed. A couple of minutes later
resident got up and came back to care
office with the same reason as above.
Resident was directed back to her room again and declined to settle in bed.
Resident was trying
to get through the fire exit door as well. Advised staff on
duty to keep an eye on resident.
observe here that the note makes no reference to implementing or ensuring the
use of sensors consistent with Mrs McKay’s care
plan to assist with
monitoring Mrs McKay in these circumstances.
maintained that as part of his checking of all residents on 17 January 2015, at
2.10am he saw Mrs McKay in her room, asleep in
her bed. He described there being
enough light for him to satisfy himself that she was where she should be. He did
not make a note
of this observation but recalled it occurring. JL then
described attending to other duties including the death of another resident
overnight. He asked GB to perform a check. GB reported that apart from a male
resident who was wandering, all was well. This is consistent
with progress notes
relevant to Mrs McKay recording at 5.26am that she had been checked and was
sleeping. JL said it was an unusually
busy shift. He had nothing further to do
with Mrs McKay. The Cardox logs which recorded movements in and out of the MSU
main reception of Goodwin were consistent with the evidence JL gave
on Mrs McKay.
JL agreed that if the doors at the end of the corridor were locked anyone could
open them. He also described that while resident’s
individual rooms were
locked from the outside with a key, they could be opened from the inside without
a key. This is consistent
with the observations of First Constable Callum
Hughes. A room door would lock itself upon closing behind a resident, preventing
is no basis for me to reject the evidence from JL about what he did and observed
during his shift as Team Leader when this incident
also completed a statutory declaration on 18 January 2015. He was a carer on the
night shift of 16-17 January 2015. He declared
that at 11.30pm on 16 January and
again at 5am on 17 January 2015 he checked on residents. In an interview with
police on 25 January
2015, he said checks were supposed to happen hourly but
that he had been busy with other duties. He said during the first check where
the bathroom light was on and he saw Mrs McKay in her bed, he was careful not to
wake Mrs McKay because if she woke up, she would
wander, waking other residents
and this would create difficulty because he was the only carer on the floor that
night to care for
20 residents.
said he checked on Mrs McKay at 5am and saw her lying in bed. He had no role in
relation to checking whether external doors were
locked. He generally described
Mrs McKay as a wanderer saying, “
she is saying all the time looking for
the car on the street
”. He said he did not know of her going outside
said Mrs McKay liked the garden and could operate the external doors to the
garden noting those doors did not require a key.
did not believe Mrs McKay’s room had a sensor mat but he was not entirely
certain. As I have already noted, he did not have
any responsibility in this
regard. He said this evening represented one of the busiest shifts he had worked
and that this was why
he had not been able to get to making notes of his duties
for the earlier check he conducted. His evidence about the demands of the
are reflected in the nurse call logs which recorded 15 alarms in the green
corridor between 4.15am and 4.45am.
giving evidence, GB expressed some hesitation about whether he could in fact
recall going into Mrs McKay’s room. This is
unsurprising given the passage
of time. The version he gave in the statutory declaration and in his interview
with police occurred
within days of the incident. They are consistent with the
progress note entry of there being a check of Mrs McKay at 5.26am. There
basis for me to reject the evidence of GB about what he did and saw during his
night shift when this incident occurred.
there was evidence in relation to staffing ratios, ultimately it is not possible
for me to determine that the number of staff
allocated to a night shift led to
Mrs McKay entering the courtyard undetected. The evidence suggests that night
shift staff assist
and support residents with an array of needs and
requirements, consistent with the vulnerabilities of those residents, in
to attending to their administrative and record keeping duties. It is
entirely possible, noting the particular demands of that shift,
that more staff
would have only impacted capacity to respond to those needs in a timelier
fashion, rather than successfully guarding
against resident movement out into
the courtyard. An increased staffing ratio, given the approach in place to
ensuring the security
of the corridor doors was entirely based on staff
compliance and the opportunity for staff intervention, would not have guaranteed
Mrs McKay remained inside. By this I mean, for example, had there been ten
carers on shift for the MSU that night, it is quite possible
that all ten could
have been attending to other residents inside their rooms and not have noticed
Mrs McKay accessing the courtyard
when she did. Absent any monitoring that did
not rely entirely on staff (door alarms or alerts, room sensors, CCTV monitoring
alerts) this scenario, in my view, was a real possibility.
The Discovery of Mrs McKay
three staff members involved in finding Mrs McKay all noted that her bed was
neatly made, and her room was locked from the outside
when they discovered her
CF and PW gave statements four and a half years after the incident. In those
statements, they detailed conducting a head
count of residents in the gold
corridor after beginning their shift on 17 January 2015.
noted that Mrs McKay’s bed was made. PW observed that the bed appeared not
to have been slept in. PW told RD that Mrs McKay
was not in her room. PW looked
for Mrs McKay in other resident rooms and the dining/TV room before she unlocked
and opened the door
at the end of the gold corridor by turning the lock to open
the door and saw Mrs McKay outside under the car. CF retrieved blankets
her warm until the ambulance arrived.
PW nor CF gave evidence at the hearing. Their statements were tendered.
was the Team Leader at the MSU on the morning shift. He was also an enrolled
nurse. He described Mrs McKay as a wanderer. He gave
evidence that the doors at
the end of the corridors which opened into the courtyard could be locked from
inside by turning a latch
or with a universal key. RD is wrong about the use of
a universal key as there was no keyhole on the inside of the doors at the end
corridors out to the courtyard.
gave evidence that he was administering medicines to residents in the gold
corridor from about 7:40am. He said Mrs McKay’s
room was locked when he
reached it, he unlocked it and entered. Consistent with PW and CF, he said the
bed was made neatly. RD observed
that it was made in a way that Mrs McKay could
not have achieved herself. Consistent with PW, he said the bed appeared not to
been slept in.
gave evidence that he was on his way back to the care office when PW called out
to him pointing in the direction of the gold corridor.
RD said that door was
locked when he tried to open it.
said Mrs McKay told him that she was cold and that she had been outside all
night, he also observed here that she had dementia,
a concession from him in my
view about the reliability of that assertion.
called “000” at 8.10am moments after entering the courtyard and
discovering Mrs McKay. He said he observed vomit on
the concrete by her mouth.
recorded a version of events within a few hours of the incident in a typed
document which was attached to his police statement.
version is inconsistent with PW about who discovered that Mrs McKay was missing.
PW’s statement is corroborated by
CF’s. That said, PW and CF’s
statements were made four and a half years later, a long time after the
incident, in comparison
to RD’s version which was within hours of the
incident occurring. Enrolled nurse, VT, in a statement made four and half years
after the incident, described “
” noticing Mrs McKay was
not in her room. There is, on either version, the possibility that both RD and
PW made the discovery
at different times not realising the other had already
observed her bed empty. In any event, I do not consider the inconsistency
who discovered Mrs McKay missing to be a significant matter that provides a
basis to reject any evidence given by these witnesses.
am of the view that I cannot conclusively determine whether the gold corridor
external door was locked when Mrs McKay was discovered
thus preventing re-entry.
I am satisfied it was unlocked by Mrs McKay when she moved out into the
courtyard, JL having checked and
locked it at 11pm. There is the real
possibility that a staff member who was not a witness in these proceedings
locked it after Mrs
McKay went into the courtyard but prior to RD, PW and CF
moving out into the courtyard to assist Mrs McKay. Again, in my view, this
not a significant matter that materially effects the findings I make.
accept the evidence from all three witnesses that when they entered Mrs
McKay’s room the bed was made. Photographs taken by
police sometime after
they arrived at 10am are consistent with that evidence. In the photos of the
room, the bed does appear to have
been neatly put together. In the corner of the
room, next to the head of the bed, some sheets appear to be piled up as if the
had been recently stripped. There is no real explanation on the evidence
before me about that. It is important to note that there
was no log or record
kept of who entered Mrs McKay’s room after she was discovered under the
car in the courtyard. There is
no record of whether any other staff entered her
room after she had entered the courtyard but before she was determined to be
by PW and/or RD. This raises the possibility that a staff member who was
not asked to give any information about this matter to Goodwin
management or the
police investigating on behalf of the coroner, entered Mrs McKay’s room
prior to her discovery, incorrectly
assumed that she was up and about for the
day, and made the bed. As will become clear, I do not consider that the fact
that the bed
was neatly made is evidence that can be relied upon to determine
that Mrs McKay had not slept in her bed.
expert medical evidence which I will come to in a moment does not support the
finding that Mrs McKay was outside all night. The
evidence from GB and JL, which
I have already indicated I cannot reject, is inconsistent with Mrs McKay having
not slept in her bed.
Expert medical evidence on the length of time Mrs McKay was
outside in the courtyard
Jeffrey Brock is a medical practitioner with specialist expertise and experience
in aviation medicine, aerospace medicine and extreme
weather survival on land.
He was an impressive and helpful witness. Dr Brock said that Mrs McKay’s
temperature recorded by
ambulance officers, recording the tympanic (ear)
temperature, must be treated with caution. He said that a body temperature of 31
degrees on rescue, as was recorded by ambulance officers, alongside Mrs
McKay’s medical conditions and frailty would not be
compatible with life.
Dr Brock noted that when she was found she was still conscious and rewarmed
quickly after rescue. Dr Brock
observed that the first rectal temperature at
9.20am which was recorded as 34.9 degrees was likely more reliable than those
by ambulance officers.
Brock said that Mrs McKay was “
significantly hypothermic at the time of
her discovery and initial assessment
” although her temperature would
have been higher than 31 degrees. Hypothermia, he explained, being when an
individual reaches
a core temperature of 35 degrees or less.
Brock described the role hypothermia played in Mrs McKay’s decline as
the beginning of a journey
” saying this about the role of
hypothermia in her decline:
Hypothermia of itself can set in train a sequence of events that may lead to
complications that seemingly are – you survive
the hypothermia event but
other things – in the case of Mrs McKay other things have become apparent
or occurred that might
not necessarily be directly connected to the event itself
or hypothermia per se. But it’s the beginning of a journey ...Healthy
people do better. Unhealthy people or injured people do not necessarily have the
same outcome.
said that Mrs McKay was more likely to experience hypothermia because of her
age, low BMI, her medication, her dementia and likely
Alzheimer’s disease.
He said that someone who has got dementia and who becomes hypothermic is less
able to protect their airway.
These are – all these factors that I’m discussing increase the
likelihood of hypothermia and its complications. So her
age. She was 90. She had
a low BMI, body mass index. Put in lay speak, essentially she was lightly built
and did not have much fat
tissue to provide insulation to her in the cold
threat. She was on a group of medications, some of which would have increased
risk of hypothermia. Particularly she was taking – she’d had
– she was on Amitriptyline, which is used for several
reasons. It can be
used to assist with sleep, it can be – larger doses of Amitriptyline
– it’s an old antidepressant
but in lover doses it’s used to
improve sleep and to deal with chronic pain. She was taking a blood thinner
called Plavix.
Of itself Plavix is used – she had a – and taking
– why was she taking Plavix? Well she had a predilection I believe
cardiac arrythmia called atrial fibrillation. There’s no evidence that
atrial fibrillation has a role in this matter but
she was put on Metoprolol
– a low dose of Metoprolol which is a beta blocker which is a drug
that’s used to reduce her
likelihood of having runs of atrial
fibrillation. But Plavix and – sorry – having a beta blocker onboard
does reduce
your response to thermal stress, particularly – even in a
healthy person. But in a less healthy person such as she was that
predispose her to a faster cooling rate. She suffered with dementia.
That’s – I don’t think there is any
doubt about that. The
autopsy report from a colleague indicated that, you know there were good
evidence of Alzheimer’s disease
I’ve seen her CT scan of her brain
and I agree that’s very likely. So because she suffered with dementia that
is an independent
risk factor for hypothermia and aspiration. Not all the
mechanisms are clearly understood but essentially someone who has got dementia
and who becomes hypothermic they are less able to protect their airway they are
more – they may be unconscious but they are
less able to, as I said,
protect their airway or to do things for themselves that might actually save
addition, he noted the suggestion in the hospital notes that Mrs McKay was
suffering from a urinary tract infection saying that
it would have increased her
risk of hypothermia. Additionally, Mrs McKay may have had an undiagnosed
long-standing low-grade chest
infection prior to her admission which could lead
to mild hypothermia even before she went outside.
Brock identified that the weather conditions at 5am on the morning of 17 January
2015 being 12 degrees posed a “
significant hypothermic threat”.
He said that where Mrs McKay was positioned acted as a heatsink and her
ongoing blood loss also meant heat loss noting she was wearing
a light nightgown
and she was immobile underneath the vehicle.
it was Dr Brock’s view that Mrs McKay was outside of the building for 2-3
hours at most. This view was influenced
by his expectation that had it been any
longer, she would have been profoundly unconscious or deceased. He could not
rule out the
possibility that Mrs McKay had been outside for longer than 2-3
hours but said that given her Glasgow Coma Score of 14 at 8am, it
much less likely that she was outside for more than a couple of
is no basis for me to reject the opinion of Dr Brock. Indeed, it is consistent
with the timing of the observations which JL
and significantly GB made of Mrs
McKay in her room in bed.
Findings about how long Mrs McKay was outside undetected in the
MSU courtyard
find that Mrs McKay entered the courtyard through the gold corridor external
door sometime after 5am on 17 January 2015. I find
that she was outside in the
MSU courtyard until she was discovered around 8am. I find that she was
undetected outside in the MSU
courtyard for between 2 to 3 hours.
is difficult to determine with any certainty the extent to which Mrs McKay was
suffering hypothermia and if she was, the extent
to which it contributed to her
death. It is clear that she had a number of factors personal to her that
elevated the risk of and
susceptibility to hypothermia. While I am satisfied she
did indeed suffer a degree of hypothermia from the time she spent outside
courtyard, in particular under the stationary vehicle, I cannot make any
definitive finding about the role it played in her
decline and ultimately in her
C. Medical treatment and care at TCH including the question of
Care on arrival – removal of the cervical spine
I have already noted, Mrs McKay arrived at TCH at 9.11am. BH was the Senior
Registrar who cared for Mrs McKay at TCH ED. BH gave
evidence before me. He had
no independent recall of treating Mrs McKay and relied on hospital notes. Given
the significant passage
of time there can be no criticism of him for this.
noted that Mrs McKay was in a cervical spine collar and no airway issues were
noted with oxygen levels at 96%. He ordered a CT
scan of the brain/cervical
spine, chest and the abdomen/pelvis area and an x-ray.
12.50pm the hospital notes record Mrs McKay having a large brown liquid vomit
while lying on her back with the collar on. Suctioning
commenced within seconds
as AR was with Mrs McKay when the vomiting occurred.
a CT report confirmed the left front soft tissue haematoma and no other
traumatic injury, BH notes at 1.20pm that the cervical
spine collar was removed.
BH ordered antibiotics along with a repeat chest x-ray.
view was that the cervical spine collar was to remain in place until the results
of a CT scan. To remove it before the
results of such a scan in the
circumstances I am satisfied created a risk of injury to the spinal column.
There was no challenge
to his evidence that to have removed it earlier would go
against standard practice and treatment. Indeed, it was consistent with
Professor Pain’s evidence. Agreeing with Professor Pain, Dr Brock
articulated the balancing exercise underpinning Mrs McKay’s
treatment in
those first hours of her care noting that the priority was to ensure that a
c-spine injury was not missed which could
have been the difference between life
and death. While Dr Brock noted a CT scan earlier could have seen the removal of
the collar,
he also observed that emergency departments are routinely
prioritising patient care. Dr Brock offered this observation:
It's a trade off between the risk of missing – until you absolutely
should and she doesn’t have a significant neck fracture.
versus the risk of anything else – any other complications going like,
I’m sure you, the obvious one
is whether or not if she vomits and
she’s got a collar on whether you can – she can protect her airway
with by herself
or with help adequately while wearing a cervical collar. But as
Professor Pain and I agree the priority is to get, is to ensure that
don’t miss a c-spine injury which could be, you know, catastrophic if they
took the collar off and something happened, she
had a disc – or she had a
serious spinal injury that was missed. That might be the difference between life
and death at the
time. The only thing I might say, is, well, given all –
it’s great looking backwards, but given all of the circumstances
time they could have done – the only thing I can think of is could they
have done the CT scan earlier and made the,
and cleared the requirement for her
to maintain the c-spine - or maintain the wearing of the neck guard. The sooner
it was removed,
perhaps the more comfortable she would have been.
Brock did not identify any concerns with, or criticisms of the care Mrs McKay
received at TCH. The above extract from his evidence
demonstrates that his view
I am affirmed in that
view because of his specific use of the term
looking backwards
” and this further evidence where he said:
I think realistically – I don’t know how busy it was. It was a
Saturday. ED departments are crazy. It’s prioritisation.
And, you know,
in the whole mix of what was going on in the ED, it might be that getting her
trauma, whatever. The only thing I would
say optimally was to have got maybe a
CT earlier.
Pain made clear, having reviewed the treatment provided to Mrs McKay at the TCH
that he had no concerns about that treatment
responding when asked
none whatsoever
”. He went on to offer “
if the event
hadn’t occurred in the courtyard, none of this will be
my view there can be no criticism of the decision to await the results of a CT
scan before the collar was removed from Mrs McKay.
There is no evidence before
me that the performance of the CT scan was unusually or unnecessarily delayed.
BH did not express any
concern about the time taken for the CT scan to be
performed in the context of his experience as an emergency doctor. The time it
did take for a CT scan to be performed was not, in my view, a failing, nor did
it represent inappropriate, or an unsatisfactory level
of care. BH did not
assess the need for a CT scan as urgent. That assessment was not challenged or
undermined by any of the other
expert medical evidence.
McKay’s cause of death as determined by Dr Milne was acute
bronchopneumonia. There was no contest to the cause of Mrs McKay’s
The issue to resolve here is whether the acute bronchopneumonia was caused by
aspiration of foreign material. If aspiration
did occur there is also a question
of when and how it occurred.
described by the medical experts, aspiration is the inhalation into the airways
of something that should not be inhaled
– typically food, saliva and
stomach contents. A consequence of aspiration can be inflammation and infection.
question of whether or not Mrs McKay vomited while she was laying under the car
was raised during the course of this inquiry.
RD said he saw vomit on the
concrete near Mrs McKay’s mouth when he observed her in situ under the
car. Goodwin identified
that the presence of vomit was not included in the
ambulance officer records. The absence of an observation by the ambulance
that vomit was near Mrs McKay when they attended to her was said by
Goodwin to provide a basis to reject entirely the observation
that RD said he
made. The evidence demonstrates that while the ambulance officers may not have
specifically noted vomit in their
notes, RD was not the only person who recorded
observing vomit near Mrs McKay at the scene when she was under the stationary
to the statement of Jeffrey Shelley (exhibit 19), is a document he produced
Ruth McKay Incident – Ongoing Review Following
” dated 17 January 2015. That report details versions of the
incident from Goodwin staff who were immediately on the scene.
One of those
staff members is VT, an enrolled nurse. VT also provided a statement, and it is
exhibit 25. In both the version she
gave detailed in Mr Shelley’s report
and in exhibit 25, VT specifically notes observing vomit near Mrs McKay when she
the vehicle saying, “
there was vomit around down the
left-hand side of her face and on the concrete
VT did not give sworn evidence, there is nothing on the face of her documented,
consistent versions that would cause me to have
concern about relying on her
version. RD made contemporaneous notes about the incident on the day soon after
it occurred which included
his observations of Mrs McKay while she was under the
vehicle. Those contemporaneous observations include that he saw vomit on the
concrete near her mouth.
absence of vomit being recorded in the observations made by the ambulance
officers does not cause me to reject the observations
of RD and VT. I am
satisfied there was vomit on the concrete near Mrs McKay and down the left-hand
side of her face.
significance of this is that I am satisfied Mrs McKay may have aspirated while
trapped under the vehicle.
I have already noted, at 12.50pm Mrs McKay vomited while lying on her back with
the collar on at TCH. Suctioning commenced within
seconds as a nurse was close
by to Mrs McKay.
2.30pm, BH records there is “
likely aspiration
identifies “
aspiration pneumonia
” as a possible issue. BH,
noting he had no independent recall and there being no notes of his reasoning,
gave evidence that
it was likely he came to that view after seeing signs of
aspiration on the CT scan and the prescribing of antibiotics could have
that possibility.
agreed aspiration could have been possible while Mrs McKay was on her back under
was the medical assessment and planning unit registrar on 17 January 2015 and
admitted Mrs McKay under the Geriatric Team. After
examining Mrs McKay, DB noted
lots of upper airway transmitted noise. Difficult to assess
clearly...subtle crep right base, no wheeze
”. Upon being told that Mrs
McKay had a coughing episode in the ED, DB queried if there was a risk of
aspiration.
4:45am on 18 January 2015 while Mrs McKay was under TC’s care, she noted
that she was “
very chesty and gurgly
” so she placed her in a
semi-sitting position. At 7:40am she noticed that Mrs McKay was “
chesty and gurgly
” and she was worried that she “
become a bit fluid overloaded
”. TC notified the after-hours doctor who
did not arrive before she finished shift.
a radiologist reviewed the CT images and X-Ray images of Mrs McKay and noted
that her lungs were “
grossly clear
”, and no evidence of
aspiration was visible on the x-ray or the CT scan as would normally be the case
if it were present. WH
said this in evidence:
Does an x-ray always pick up evidence of aspiration? As I said, this is also,
once again we are back to square one where we started
in regards to the CT and
aspiration. This all depends on the amount – about the amount of the
aspirate, compilation of the
aspirate, time between aspiration is going to
happen and examination to occur, so there are many factors which influence this.
yes ma’am, if there is content most of the time we should be able to
see if it’s already unless enough time has elapsed
between the event and
the examination, patient has responded and aspirated of such nature, the
chemical composition and the age of
the contents, size of the particle and
material which has been aspirated. So they always get – I mean, not always
we can detect
but most of the time we are able to see aspiration.
opinion is consistent with Dr Milne who also identified how much is aspirated as
a factor influencing whether aspiration would
be revealed in a CT scan or an
x-ray. He went on:
If someone aspirates particulate food matter, that might be really obvious
sitting in the airway. It they’re only aspirating
a bit of fluid and
we’re then relying on a secondary inflammatory process, I can’t
really say how long it’s going
to take on an x-ray, it not being my field,
but it takes hours to see microscopically, so I would think usually it would
take longer
on an x-ray to see those changes.
Milne gave evidence that he could not confirm aspiration pneumonia
microscopically although he did say from the circumstances known
seemed likely.
Pain was of the view that up until Mrs McKay vomited an amount of gastric juice,
her lungs were “
in pretty good condition
”. Aspiration
pneumonitis he said causes irritation of lung tissue that can develop into an
infection. Professor Pain explained
that where the foreign body is fluid and not
a significant amount it takes about 24 hours for clinical and radiological
of aspiration. He said:
The amount you aspirate is proportionate to the severity of the aspirational
event, the pneumonitis. So I guess it’s possible
that she aspirated some
fluid under the car, or at some time before she went to hospital which had not
demonstrated itself radiologically.
That is possible.
Professor Pain explained the difference between aspiration pneumonia and
bronchopneumonia:
Aspiration pneumonia is an acute --- it produces an acute inflammatory
response which goes to a diffuse pneumonitis. It’s an
acute inflammatory
reaction. Of itself it is sometimes self-limiting, but it is in some sense a
medical emergency. It’s a very
serious event carrying a high mortality,
unless it is actively treated. And there is treatment for it. Bacterial
pneumonia is an
infection with organisms often beginning in the upper
respiratory tract, but then descending down into the lower part where it
pneumonia, which is an inflammatory reaction usually localised, in the
sense that it’s patchy and not as diffuse as pneumonitis.
But it can meld
into one another making the separation very difficult.
asked this question:
So something could begin as aspiration? Yes
Pneumonia and become bronchopneumonia?------ Exactly so, Your Honour.
Pain found that Mrs McKay could not have had pneumonia prior to 17 January 2015
as Goodwin did not note any concerns for
her health in the week prior. In his
report he said that it was unlikely that aspiration occurred while she was
outside as he would
have expected Mrs McKay to show increased signs of stress on
admission and abnormalities in chest radiology. He said that the most
scenario is that Mrs McKay developed pneumonia after vomiting in the ED. In
evidence at the hearing, Professor Pain retreated
from this definitive position
adding the following evidence to his view that aspiration had most likely
occurred after admission
to hospital:
I’d like to modify that I think. I think it’s possible that
radiology may not have detected anything so shortly after
the possible event.
But certainly I would expect Mrs McKay to be very distressed if she had
significant aspiration in the courtyard.
Pain was asked to comment on the observations of DB. Professor Pain’s
opinion was that DB’s observations were
more consistent with aspiration
pneumonitis than bronchopneumonia. He gave the following evidence:
Question: So can I take you to the section where it says ‘chest’
and DB gave evidence yesterday afternoon. He says ‘lots
of upper airway
transmitted noise. Difficult to assess clearly. Subtle creps right base. No
wheeze. Not dull to percussion’.
Could you tell her Honour whether or not
that picture of those symptoms is consistent with a diagnosis of pneumonia or
pneumonitis? Or is there any difference?
Answer: I don’t think what he said there allows a clear distinction.
‘Not dull to percussion’ is against pneumonia
in the sense that
significant pneumonia often produces dullness when you percuss the chest. That
was not present, so that’s
one point against this being pneumonia.
‘No wheeze’ is slightly against this being an aspiration pneumonitis
commonly there is a wheeze because the airways get irritated as well as
the lung tissue, so you commonly hear a wheeze in early aspirational
Subtle creps at the right base is a very non-specific finding and is equally
applicable to aspiration pneumonitis and
pneumonia. ‘Difficult to assess
clearly’. Well that doesn’t help much at all. So I think these
findings are more
– to my mind are more consistent with aspiration
pneumonitis but they certainly don’t – they’re a bit against
pneumonia. But you couldn’t put a lot of money on it either way.
He (DB) was obviously concerned about the episode of coughing and sputtering
and he wondered – he has a question mark, ‘Query
aspiration’.
So, I think it’s certainly in his mind as a diagnosis, but he wasn’t
totally convinced.
Significantly,
Professor Pain was not able to exclude the contribution of aspiration of gastric
juices while Mrs McKay was under the
car as contributing to aspiration
pneumonia. Professor Pain identified that it was possible radiology may not have
detected anything
so shortly after a possible event of aspiration. While Mrs
McKay was not in respiratory distress when she arrived at hospital, Professor
Pain could not exclude the possibility of aspiration while she was trapped under
the vehicle. Dr Milne did not see any microscopic
evidence of foreign material
that was fresh and could not confirm aspiration pneumonia microscopically.
the evidence before me, it is not possible to determine to the requisite
standard whether aspiration did in fact occur. It is similarly
not possible to
determine if aspiration did occur, when it occurred and how it occurred. On the
evidence before me I am not able
to determine the cause of the bronchopneumonia
Findings on medical treatment and care at TCH
find that while at TCH, Mrs McKay received appropriate treatment and care.
McKay may have aspirated foreign material either while she was trapped under the
vehicle in the MSU courtyard or at TCH when she
vomited or after drinking water
and coughing. It is not possible to make a positive finding that the acute
bronchopneumonia was caused
by aspiration. Mrs McKay’s pre-existing
medical conditions, including Alzheimer’s, made her more vulnerable to
this infection
with or without aspiration. I am unable to find to the requisite
standard that she did in fact aspirate foreign material, or did
not, and if she
did, where that occurred.
D. Goodwin actions on 17 January 2015, internal investigation,
reporting processes and previous incidents
deal first with the credibility of RD. I formed the view that RD presented as a
responsible, thoughtful, diligent carer who operated
with the wellbeing of
residents in his care at the forefront of his practice. In my view, attempts to
undermine his credibility were
misguided. RD almost immediately identified the
seriousness of the incident involving Mrs McKay and took the time to record his
involvement
contemporaneously. That approach reflects the view I have taken of
him which is also reflected in the time he took to comprehensively
concerns about Resident 3 (see Resident 3 Icare record 26 December 2014). That
RD was mistaken about some matters, like
whether a key was required to operate
the gold corridor door, or that he believed Mrs McKay had not slept in her bed
all night, which
I am satisfied was not the case, does not in my view provide a
basis to reject his evidence or cause me to hesitate about relying
reiterate my view that I do not consider there to be any real basis upon which I
could reject the evidence of HY and TL. It is entirely
unsurprising that they
could not provide specific dates and times given they gave evidence some years
after the events. TL’s
evidence that at times her mother’s sensor
mats were switched off is not undermined by the records establishing that at
times it was turned on. Indeed, the picture painted by the combination of
that evidence is consistent with the confusion as between
Mr Shelley and Ms Boyd
robustness of their use and the
fact that Mrs McKay left her room undetected to
get to the courtyard despite her care plan instructing otherwise.
17 January 2015, Mr Shelley and Ms Boyd arrived on the scene after Mrs McKay had
been taken to hospital via ambulance. There was
a significant amount of evidence
of what happened at Goodwin in the immediate aftermath. There was conflicting
evidence about the
precise detail of what was said and done by Mr Shelley, Ms
Boyd and RD. I accept RD formed the view arising from his engagement with
Goodwin management that he was, at the very least, to be careful about his
engagement with police. RD’s commitment to capturing
his version of events
as quickly as possible is to be commended, in my view.
am not in a position, based on the evidence, to make any definitive findings
I do not consider
what occurred in the immediate aftermath to be relevant to the findings I am
required to make. I take the opportunity
to make clear though, as a matter of
common sense and good practice, all staff in facilities such as Goodwin,
particularly senior
staff, should be well versed in the response and approach to
be taken after a serious incident such as the one Mrs McKay’s
presented. Certainty in approach provides a basis for clear, consistent
leadership so that all staff understand the requirements
and their role in
responding to a serious incident such as the one subject to this inquiry which
could include cooperation with police
investigations.
Boyd gave evidence that the incident involving Mrs McKay did not need to be
reported to the Department of Health or the Aged Care
Quality and Safety
Commissioner, but internal Goodwin procedures required an investigation to be
undertaken. Consequently, Mr Shelley
was instructed to conduct the investigation
he did resulting in the document “
Ruth McKay Incident
Review Following Fall
document noted the following actions to be taken following the incident; a
request that external doors be alarmed, an audit of
bed sensors, staff training
on documentation, staff reminding of checking and staff discussion of behaviour
management.
audit of the bed sensors, crash mats and room sensors revealed, according to Mr
Shelley, the technology was not being used as robustly
as Goodwin had hoped.
This view is entirely consistent with Mrs McKay’s room not having sensors
switched on and the experience
described by TL and HY. Mr Shelley gave evidence
that every room was fitted with sensors which staff were required to turn on
residents were in their rooms. The sensors would detect movement, send an
alarm to DECT phones and if they were not responded to
in a certain time, there
was an escalation process.
the review conducted by Mr Shelley, he was not aware of whether a sensor mat was
in Mrs McKay’s room nor that there
was no alarm set off during the night
of the incident. He accepted that the absence of any nurse calls from Mrs
McKay’s room
on the night in question would tend to indicate that there
was no sensor operative in Mrs McKay’s room and as such, no precise
of Mrs McKay exiting the room could be ascertained.
Boyd gave evidence that the MSU courtyard was designed for dementia patients so
that all paths lead back to the doors inside. She
did not accept that the lack
of any restriction, other than locking the doors, was a deficiency or obvious
risk, instead describing
to Mr Shelley’s view that the use of sensors was standard procedure, Ms
Boyd was of the view that they were only to
be used as required. Confusion
amongst senior management, which is clear on their evidence, provides a basis to
infer that confusion
existed amongst caring staff about their use and a basis to
determine that their use was not consistent.
Australian Aged Care Quality Agency (
) was responsible for managing
the accreditation and ongoing supervision of all Commonwealth funded aged care
facilities. Goodwin
was accredited on 16 August 2012 and 6 August 2015.
2012 accreditation found that Goodwin met all expected outcomes. In relation to
the physical environment, safe systems and living
environment, the audit report
found that the outside courtyard areas provided a secure environment for those
residents inclined to
wander. Additionally, regular audits and environmental
inspections monitor the internal and external environments, risk assessments
conducted, and residents’ rooms are monitored.
2015 audit also found that Goodwin met all expected outcomes and noted that the
system of monitoring and reporting on internal
and external living environments
provided a safe and comfortable environment for care recipients. In relation to
Standard 44 –
physical environment and safe systems, living environment
– the audit notes the following:
The home has a system for monitoring the external and internal living
environment including hazard and incident reporting and conducting
inspections to provide a safe and comfortable environment for care recipients.
The home is on three levels and includes a
memory support unit on the ground
floor with a separate secure garden
is not clear that the AACQA was aware of the incident involving Mrs McKay when
completing the 2015 audit. However, the
Aged Care Act
Aged Care Act
”), as it applied at the time of Mrs
McKay’s death, did not require Goodwin to report the incident to an
external agency.
Aged Care Act
provides for a Serious Incident Response
Scheme which requires a number of serious incidents, including an unexpected
death, to be
reported to the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission.
Icare record in relation to Resident 3 was produced at exhibit 63. On 26
December 2014, three weeks before Mrs McKay was found
under the vehicle in the
courtyard, a note was entered into that record by RD in the following terms:
Hazard report has been completed and sent to management – resident
continues to get outside to courtyard via the gold corridor
doors unsupervised.
Resident is an extreme high risk of falls and injury, resident has been seen
attempting to stand out of wheelchair
unassisted and get into the parked old car
in the courtyard. This has happened 4 times this shift, raising alarms because
needs to be supervised constantly as the doors are unable to be locked
from the inside. Resident is able to unlock the door. Due
to risk, we had had
to block the entrance to the door as resident continues to try and get into the
car by himself. It was reported
that this is happening during the night, and
staff have reported that the resident has been getting out through the gold
door and was found during the night sitting in the driver’s seat
of the car. I have reported this to management and completed
a hazard report so
that more secure locks can be put in place.
was no sworn evidence given about this note either by RD or any other Goodwin
staff member. It is beyond doubt that this entry
exists in Resident 3’s
notes. RD clearly mentions both the making of a hazard report
reporting to management.
highlights that they do not hold any record of the hazard report RD said that he
made. This does not exclude the possibility
that RD told someone in a management
position about his concerns. That prospect was not explored in evidence at the
hearing and RD
does not identify who in management he informed. I do not
consider that the absence of a hazard report in Goodwin records necessarily
means that RD did not complete one. While I accept the possibility exists that
he simply did not complete the hazard report in the
way he said he did that is
not consistent with the general approach he was clearly taking to the risk he
identified. The approach
he described in the note including making the hazard
report, informing management and creating the comprehensive progress note, is
entirely consistent with my strong impression of him in terms of the seriousness
with which he took his role caring for residents.
the evidence before me, the utility of the Icare record in the ongoing
identification by management of resident needs and challenges
remains unclear,
if they are not reviewed or scrutinised after a record or note is added. RD
made the entry as the staff member
identifying the concern. It is unclear
whether there was any process of review or supervisory scrutiny of the content
on those progress
notes, and, if so, when and how, in the context of ongoing
resident care. On the evidence before me I cannot be satisfied that Goodwin
management were, in fact, aware of the specific risk presented by Resident
3’s conduct as at 16 January 2015.
is clear is that the note entered by RD corroborates HY’s evidence about
finding Resident 3 outside in the MSU courtyard
at around midnight. I accept his
evidence about that. I accept TL’s evidence that HY told her about this
incident. I accept
HY’s evidence about the incident where his wife became
locked outside after accidentally finding herself in the fire stairs.
am satisfied that even without management being made specifically aware through
the report of RD of the risk in relation to Resident
3 accessing the courtyard
at night, the risk presented by the security of the locking mechanism on the
gold corridor door in relation
to all residents of the MSU was obvious and
capable of being identified, given the needs and challenges of the residents
is unclear why the entry from RD on 26 December 2014 identifying the risk in the
context of the behaviour of Resident 3 did not
feature in the report produced on
behalf of Goodwin.
was given regarding two incidents at Goodwin prior to Mrs McKay’s death
involving residents being able to exit the
facility at night, and then having
difficulty coming back inside. In the case of one of these residents, this
occurred in the MSU.
It is regrettable that Goodwin’s management were not
able to identify the obvious risk to its vulnerable residents posed by
the courtyard by residents prior to 17 January 2015. It is also unclear how and
whether the hazard report addressing the
accessibility of the courtyard from the
MSU (the existence of which is recorded in the progress notes of Resident 3 on
26 December
2014) was, could or should have been brought to the attention of
Goodwin’s management, putting them on further notice of the
existence of
the already evident risk. It is also unfortunate that it took until September
2020 for more appropriate safeguards to
be put in place, noting that while
alarms on the MSU doors were installed very soon after Ms McKay was found in the
courtyard, it
was not until September 2020 that magnetic door locks were
installed which directly addressed the issue concerning residents being
leave the facility.
Wendy McKay described members of their family feeling unwelcome at Goodwin in
the days after Mrs McKay’s death when they
went to collect her personal
belongings. She also described feeling a lack of communication. This was most
unfortunate and undoubtedly
added to the shock and distress at the circumstances
of Mrs McKay’s death. It was very unfortunate that upon their return to
Goodwin to collect Mrs McKay’s belongings her family were required to walk
through the MSU courtyard, the very place where
Mrs McKay had been found trapped
under the vehicle. There was no evidence that any Goodwin staff member in
particular was responsible
for this being the case or indeed, that there had
been a decision made by anyone at Goodwin that this was to occur. However, I
acknowledge
that it was certainly a factor that contributed to the negative
experience of Mrs McKay’s family.
was evidence about the periods where the MSU was not attended to by staff. TL
and HY both gave evidence of their concern and
frustration in relation to staff
availability. While I am of the view that I cannot reject that evidence,
ultimately, I cannot determine
that staff ratios had any impact on Mrs
McKay’s capacity to move out into the courtyard undetected as she did. It
the particular scope of this inquest to delve in any detail into
staffing ratios or levels. This was an issue within the scope of
Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety
(“the Royal
Commission”) established on 8 October 2018. The Royal Commission made
numerous (though not all unanimous)
recommendations in their final report. I
will come more to the Royal Commission in a moment. It seems to me to be a
matter of common
sense that where staff are routinely attending to vulnerable
residents with varying needs and risk profiles (including wandering,
confusion, emotional dysregulation) that may require the time, care and
attention of staff it heightens the need to ensure
that direct staff supervision
is supported by other methods of supervision, such as electronic monitoring.
E. Matters of Public Safety
January 2015, as I have already found, Mrs McKay was able to let herself out
into the MSU courtyard. The failure to ensure that
residents could not go
outside at night led to Mrs McKay’s death. I am satisfied Goodwin
rectified this situation entirely
by September 2020 with the installation of a
timed automatic door, locks and ultimately CCTV.
matter of public safety arises in relation to aged care facilities more
generally accommodating residents with dementia in circumstances
where they can
get access to outside areas at night or in dangerous weather conditions
undetected.
is true to say that there was no evidence from an independent aged-care expert
as I have found them
to be, in relation to residents accessing the MSU courtyard in January 2015.
That said it is surprising to me,
given the view I have formed about the obvious
nature of the risk presented by the security of the corridor doors, that the
to MSU residents in that regard was not identified in either the 2012 or
the 2015 accreditation process. It is clear that the accreditation
failed to identify the risk of undetected resident access to the MSU courtyard.
While the accreditation process in August
2015 saw the doors alarmed, they were
nonetheless still able to be opened at any time of the day or night.
Aged Care Act
at the time of Mrs McKay’s death did not require the
reporting of an accidental death. Assaults, unlawful sexual contact and
unreasonable use of force were reportable. Despite Mrs McKay dying as a result
of the incident at Goodwin, there was no requirement
or mandatory reporting that
required any external agency to be informed of the circumstances of her death.
Royal Commission operated under wide ranging terms of reference, including the
quality of aged care services delivered in Australia,
the best ways for aged
care services to be delivered and future challenges and opportunities for
delivering accessible, affordable
and high-quality aged care services in
Australia. The final report underscores the stake we all have in ensuring
easily accessible,
high quality aged care not only in the interests of our aging
loved ones but in recognition that old age is hopefully, ahead of us
part of their final report the Royal Commission noted:
Residential aged care is often a person’s final place of residence
before they die. Palliative and end-of-life care, like dementia
care, should be
considered core business for aged care providers. People at the end of their
lives should be treated with care and
respect. Their pain must be minimised,
their dignity maintained, and their wishes respected. Their families should be
supported and
final report of the Royal Commission includes recommendations giving more power
to the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commissioner
to conduct inquiries into
issues relating to the quality and safety of aged care, including complaints and
serious incidents. The
Royal Commission, reflecting on the future of aged care
services in Australia, observed:
The purpose of the aged care system must be to ensure that older people have
an entitlement to high quality aged care and support
and that they must receive
it. Such care and support must be safe and timely and must assist older people
to live an active, self-determined
and meaningful life in a safe and caring
environment that allows for dignified living in old age.
their final report, the Commissioners noted that shortcomings of the regulator,
the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission and
its predecessor observing:
We both consider that the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission and its
predecessors have not demonstrated strong and effective
regulation. The
regulator adopted a light touch approach to regulation when a more rigorous
system of continuous monitoring and investigation
was required for aged care.
Current regulation policies and processes have many deficiencies. The regulatory
framework is overly
concerned with processes, not focused enough on outcomes,
and does not provide enough safeguards to protect older people and provide
reassurance to their families that they will receive safe and high-quality aged
care. The system is insufficiently responsive to
the experiences of older
final report of the Royal Commission contains numerous recommendations. In
particular, recommendation 10 of Commissioner Briggs
specifically addresses
strengthening the role of the regulator across the aged care sector to ensure
the maintenance of an appropriate
regulatory capability, including regulatory
and investigatory skills, clinical skills, assessment skills, and enforcement
is a positive reform then, arising from the Aged Care Royal Commission, that
from 2021 the
Aged Care Act
provides for a Serious Incident Response Scheme.
This scheme requires certain serious incidents to be reported to the Aged Care
and Safety Commission. The Act identifies eight types of reportable
incidents including unexpected death. It is clear that if circumstances
an aged care facility now, such as those that led to the death of Mrs McKay,
there would be an obligation to report the
incident to the scheme. In my view,
that represents significant and positive progress from the position in 2015. It
is a reform that
provides increased scrutiny of individual experience in aged
care services and an increased capacity to identity systemic challenges.
acknowledge the improvements that Goodwin has made since Mrs McKay died. In
particular, I note the high level of confidence expressed
by Goodwin about there
being no prospect now, of any MSU resident moving into the MSU courtyard without
it being known to staff immediately.
Some of those improvements occurred soon
after Mrs McKay died and before this inquest began in 2019. Some have occurred
in more recent
years. These improvements include:
(a) Removal of the stationary vehicle from the MSU courtyard – 18 January
(b) In or around January 2015, Goodwin changed the operation of the alarms to
24-hour operation;
(c) Installation of alarms on the MSU external doors, with doors alarmed at
night only, then later alarmed 24 hours a day –
18 January 2015;
(d) On 18 January 2015, Goodwin installed external lighting in the courtyard of
the MSU which illuminates the area. The lighting
is programmed to turn on
automatically from dusk to dawn and remains on overnight;
(e) Goodwin conducted an audit of the room motion sensors and validated that all
motion sensors were working at the time of Mrs McKay’s
(f) Training of staff and requirement that sensors be switched on;
(g) From mid-2016, a full-time registered nurse is now employed by Goodwin and
is on-site 24 hours a day;
(h) In September 2020, Goodwin installed magnetic doors at end of each corridor
that lock automatically between 7pm and 7am each
night and can be opened by
staff with a swipe card. In addition, a head count of residents is implemented
at 7pm each night. Any
alarm that is activated requires attention or action by
(i) In September 2020, Goodwin installed four closed-circuit television (CCTV)
cameras with monitoring and recording capability operating
CCTV inside the MSU
gold and green corridors and outside across the full range of the MSU courtyard.
CCTV screens can be monitored
from the nurses’ station;
(j) In 2020, an additional carer was rostered on at night – this
additional carer will ensure that all breaks taken by the
carer in the MSU are
(k) Since 2017, the Team Leader position for the MSU is rostered consistently to
ensure familiarity with residents and their needs;
(l) In 2019, a new nurse-call system was installed which ensures alarms are
triggered when a stairwell door is opened;
(m) Goodwin installed additional fencing with magnetic locks in the MSU
courtyard which prevents access to the main switch room;
(n) Goodwin installed cladding on both sides of the internal entry/exit doors of
the MSU with a print so that these doors do not
appear as an exit door which
residents can pass through. The doors appear to be a bookshelf;
(o) Goodwin implemented more focussed regular dementia training for staff in the
MSU. This now includes training through a virtual
reality platform called
“EDIE” (Educational Dementia Immersive Experience) which is a tool
created by Dementia Australia.
This enables participants to see the world
through the eyes of a person living with dementia utilising high quality virtual
technology. It enhances knowledge of dementia whilst exploring a
supportive approach to living more confidently with dementia. This
was initially
trialled in 2018 but rolled out to staff more broadly in 2020. Also in 2020,
Goodwin implemented mandatory Positive
Behaviour Support Training for all staff;
(p) Changes to internal policies relating to the reporting of incidents,
including specifying the responsibilities of carers or staff
members who
witnesses an incident, and management.
was the installation of the magnetic door locks in September 2020 that directly
addressed the specific problem that led to Mrs
McKay’s death. I
acknowledge that the door alarms installed in January 2015 went some way to
mitigating the risk realised by
Mrs McKay’s circumstances. The
improvements in September 2020 came some five years after the incident involving
Mrs McKay on
any view, a long time. The internal review commissioned by Goodwin
in the immediate aftermath of the incident involving Mrs McKay
resulting in the
Ruth McKay Incident: Ongoing Review Following Fall”
was not as effective as it could have been in identifying the urgency of the
risk presented by the locking mechanism and the shortcomings
of a system relying
entirely on staff practice and intervention to ensure the security of the
corridor exits from the MSU. On 16
May 2022, the timing of the automatic lock
doors was changed to unlock at 8am and to lock at 4pm each day throughout
winter. Goodwin
indicated that a review was to be undertaken before the summer
of 2022/23 to determine the appropriate hours of operation. I am satisfied
this approach is appropriate in the circumstances and that, given the
improvements that have now been made by Goodwin, there
are no further
recommendations that I am required to make.
summary, I find that Ruth Allison McKay died in The Canberra Hospital on 23
January 2015
direct cause of her death was acute bronchopneumonia with the infectious
organism being
Staphylococcus
McKay developed acute bronchopneumonia after accessing the external courtyard
undetected at the Memory Support Unit at Good Aged
Care Facility in Ainslie
sometime after 5am on 17 January 2015. Mrs McKay was outside in the courtyard,
undetected, for some hours
before her discovery around 8am on 17 January 2015
where she was trapped under a stationary, antique vehicle in the courtyard. Mrs
McKay also sustained a head injury while outside in the courtyard.
McKay accessed the courtyard undetected by turning the snib lock on the gold
corridor door near her bedroom and pushing it forward.
Mrs McKay’s care
plan identified the use of room sensors to mitigate the risk of her wandering in
the context of her dementia.
Bed and room sensors were not in operation in her
room on the night of 16 and into the early hours of 17 January 2015 and staff
not observe her accessing the courtyard. There was no other mechanism in
place in the MSU to detect Mrs McKay’s movement into
the courtyard. If
there had been an alert or alarm system on corridor doors which notified staff
that doors had been opened, and/or
if sensor mats had been operational in Mrs
McKay’s room, it is highly likely that:
McKay’s absence from her room would have been detected earlier than it
McKay would have been located in the courtyard much sooner than she
death of a loved one is always a source of sorrow. I again acknowledge that the
delay that regrettably attached to these proceedings
has compounded that sorrow
for the family members of Mrs McKay. Mrs McKay was a beloved matriarch and it is
clear that her death
has been deeply felt by her family. To reach 90 years of
age is an extraordinary achievement and the circumstances of her death were
very unfortunate end to a rich life, well lived. I extend my sincere condolences
to Mrs McKay’s family and I thank them for
the generous way in which they
participated in these proceedings in the face of their grief and frustration.
also extend my appreciation to counsel assisting Ms Jones SC, Ms
Baker-Goldsmith, Ms Musgrove and Ms Foy for their helpful submissions
conduct and assistance during the course of the proceedings.
I certify that the preceding two hundred and one [201] numbered paragraphs
are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Her Honour
Coroner Taylor.
Associate: L Corcoran
Date: 6 April 2023
Notice Pursuant to
Coroners Act 1997
to Goodwin Aged Care Services dated 21 February
Statement of Goodwin Aged
Care Services in response to Notice Pursuant to
dated 3 March
Attachment A – List
of Witnesses called.
Attachment B – Timeline of Events.
RTF format (525 KB)
Signed PDF/A format