Hopkins and Construction Occupations Registrar [2008] ACTAAT 28 (29 October 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: HOPKINS AND
CONSTRUCTION OCCUPATIONS REGISTRAR
[2008] ACTAAT 28
(29 OCTOBER 2008)
Catchwords:
Construction practitioner’s registration –
application to review decision to reprimand building surveyor and to place
condition on licence restricting appointment to class 1 and/or class 10
buildings – certification of building works as completed
reasonable grounds to be satisfied that works complied with Building Code of
Australia – failure to give directions
to carry out building works to
achieve compliance with Building Code of Australia – fire protection
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1989, s 37
Building Act 2004
Building Regulation 2004 (repealed), ss 15, 20,
Construction Occupations (Licensing) Act 2004
Construction Occupations (Licensing) Regulation 2004
Emergencies Act 2004
Legislation Act 2001
Mr M H Peedom, President
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/58
GENERAL DIVISION )
KENYON HOPKINS
CONSTRUCTION
OCCUPATIONS
Mr M H Peedom, President
The decision under review is set aside and substituted with a decision
(i) the applicant is reprimanded for the omissions referred to in these
reasons for decision pursuant to
section 61(1)(a)
Construction
Occupations (Licensing) Act 2004
(ii) pursuant to
section 61(1)(c)
Construction Occupations (Licensing)
the following condition is imposed on the applicant’s
Only valid for
appointment as certifier in relation to building works involving class 1 and/or
class 10 buildings.
....................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/58
GENERAL DIVISION )
KENYON HOPKINS
CONSTRUCTION
OCCUPATIONS
REASONS FOR DECISION
29 October 2008 Mr M H Peedom, President
The decision under review
This is an application for review of a decision of the respondent to take
disciplinary action against the applicant by reprimanding
him and imposing a
condition on his licence as a building surveyor. The decision, dated 16 June
2008, was made pursuant to
section 61(1)
Construction Occupations
(Licensing) Act 2004
“the COL Act”
2. Provision is made for the review of a decision to take disciplinary
action under the COL Act by section 124(1) of that Act and
section 45(1)(n) of
the Construction Occupations (Licensing) Regulations 2004.
The hearing
3. At the hearing of the application the applicant was represented by Mr J
Cameron, a legal practitioner. The respondent was represented
by Mr G McCarthy,
of counsel. Evidence was given by the applicant on his own behalf. Evidence
was given on behalf of the respondent
by Mr D Kyburz. A number of documents
were tendered in evidence on behalf of the respondent and the Tribunal had
before it a statement
of the respondent’s reasons for the decision under
review and other material required by section 37 of the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act 1989 (
“the T documents”
) to be lodged with the
Tribunal, copies of which were provided to the applicant.
4. The applicant was first issued with a licence as a building surveyor on
13 January 1999 and it was apparently subsequently renewed.
The licence upon
which the decision under review imposed a condition was issued by the respondent
under the COL Act. The class
of the licence is specified as principal building
surveyor and the period of issue of the licence as 31 October 2007 to 31 October
2008. No conditions were endorsed on the licence.
5. On 28 February 2006 the applicant was appointed under
Building Act 2004
as it was in force at all times relevant to these proceedings
Building Act
) as the certifier of building work
proposed to be constructed on Block 30
Lyneham. The building work
involved the construction of three buildings containing 40 residential units and
40 basement car parking
spaces. The notice of the applicant’s appointment
included a statement that the appointed certifier was responsible to assess
building owner’s building application and plans for compliance with the
Building Act
and the Building Code of Australia (
to issue the building approval; and to inspect and certify that the building
work carried out by the builder complied with the
Building Act
and the BCA.
6. On 5 November 2007 the respondent received the following documents from
the applicant:
(i) staged inspection reports certified by the applicant;
(ii) a Certificate of Structural Sufficiency Design/Inspections from a
certified practising structural engineer;
(iii) an undated letter of certification from Capital Hydraulics and Drains
(iv) a plumbing inspection report dated 22 October 2007;
(v) an ACT Fire Brigade Fire Appliances Approval Certificate dated 30 October
(vi) an ‘alternative solution’ report prepared by Defire (ACT)
dated 2 November 2007;
(vii) an “inspection record” dated 5 November 2007;
(viii) a document entitled ‘Certificate of Completion of Building Work
(from certifier) Application for Certificate of Occupancy
and Use (COU) (by
owner)’ signed by the applicant and dated 5 November 2007 (also signed on
behalf of the owner and dated 30
October 2007);
7. The certificate issued by Capital Hydraulics & Drains (document (iii)
in paragraph 6 above) stated:
Capital Hydraulics & Drains Pty Ltd certifies that the Fire Hydrants
comply with part E1.3 of the BCA and that they have been
installed in accordance
with the AS2419.1
While undated, the certificate appears to have been sent by facsimile dated
11 October 2007.
8. The copy of the plumbing inspection report (document (iv) in paragraph 6
above) that was included in the T documents was partially
illegible but appears
to certify that a final inspection of plumbing works for the building had been
carried out by a plumbing inspector
and found to be satisfactory.
9. The Fire Brigade Approval Certificate dated 30 October 2007 (document (v)
in paragraph 6 above) was issued in accordance with
section 15(1)(g)
Building Regulations 2004
(repealed). It certified the Fire Brigade’s
approval of the active fire safety systems for the scope of the building works
but said that the approval was conditional upon a number of matters including
the following:
AS1221 Fire hose reels
Installed and located to the requirements of BCA Clause E1.4 &
PRIOR TO OCCUPANCY
Basement Hosereel plumbing
(plastic pipe) to be replaced to conform to AS2441
, which refers to
AS2419.1 (section 8.2.1) for acceptable pipe specifications.
(viii) The Building Certifier and/or project manager for the building
works are to ensure the owner/manager of the building(s) is
aware of the
directions and recommendations the ACTFB have set for this Fire Appliances
Approval Certificate.
The Fire Brigade certificate also contained the following statement:
9. In accordance with
Building Act 2004
, final approval of
the building works is the responsibility of the Building Certifier.
10. The alternative solution report (document (vi) in paragraph 6 above)
noted that the building design involved non-compliance by
exits from the
building with the BCA and proposed an alternative design solution that would
meet its requirements.
11. In the inspection record (document (vii) in paragraph 6 above) signed by
the applicant he stated:
Units substantially completed in accordance with approved plan and
Paperwork provided
Verification of compliance of approval to be obtained from Owen Pankhurst
at ACT Planning
12. The inspection record also stated:
Following inspection of the stage described above, I certify that the
work has been generally constructed in accordance with the approved
referenced documentation, the ACT
Building Act
including the BCA and relevant
Australian Standards.
13. The Certificate of Completion (document (viii) in paragraph 6 above)
The building work referred to herein appears to me to have been
completed, and I hereby give to the Registrar advice that:
the building
work has been completed in accordance with the requirements of the
Building Act
and substantially in accordance with the approved plans; and
the building
or part of the building as erected or altered is structurally sufficient, sound
and stable for the purposes for which
it is intended to be occupied or
..............
If the owner of the land applies for a certificate the Registrar would be
justified in issuing a certificate in respect of the work
under the subsection
[ticked box for 69(2)]
I certify that the building work has been completed in accordance with
Building Act 2004
and substantially in accordance with the approved
14. Following receipt of the Certificate of Completion the respondent issued
a Certificate of Occupancy and Use for the development
in accordance with
section 69(2)
Building Act
15. On 29 April 2008, following the receipt of a complaint from an owner of
one of the units in the building, an inspection of the
building was carried out.
It was ascertained that pipes affixed to the ceiling of the basement car park
that supplied water to fire
hose reels were made of plastic.
Fire fighting equipment standards
16. Part E1 of the BCA contains provisions dealing with fire fighting
equipment. Clause E1.4(c)(i) of the BCA states:
(c) The fire hose reel system must─
(i) have fire hose reels installed in accordance with AS2441;
17. Clause 6.5 of the Australian Standard for the installation of fire hose
reels (AS2441 – 2005) states:
6.5 Pipe and pipe fittings
Pipes and fittings used in hose reel systems shall comply
with AS2419.1.
18. Clause 8.2.1(a) of the Australian Standard AS2419.1 – 2005, which
relates to fire hydrant installations states:
8.2 PIPE AND PIPE FITTING SPECIFICATIONS
8.2.1 Above-ground pipes
Pipes and pipe fittings used in above-ground fire hydrant installations
shall comply with the following:
(a) Plastic pipes and pipe fittings shall not be used.
19. Clause 8.2.2 specifies the standards which apply to pipes and pipe
fittings (including plastic pipes and pipe fittings) that
below-ground.
The disciplinary notice
20. On 8 May 2008 the respondent issued a disciplinary notice to the
applicant pursuant to section 55 of the COL Act. The notice
alleged that the
applicant contravened
section 44(2)(a)
and (b) of the
Building Act
by certifying
the building work as complete when he was aware that the plastic pipes used to
supply water to the fire hose reels
in the basement car park areas did not
comply with the requirements of the BCA and relevant standards and by failing to
builder reasonable and appropriate directions to achieve compliance
with the BCA and the standards.
21. The disciplinary notice also alleged that, contrary to
section 48(2)(e)
Building Act
, the applicant gave the respondent a certificate that the
building work had been completed in accordance with the
Building Act
circumstances where it had not been so completed.
The applicant’s response
22. In a written response to the disciplinary notice dated 27 May 2008 the
applicant stated that he had obtained a certificate from
the Fire Brigade which
stated that it had given approval for the scope of the works and that it had
also obtained an undertaking
from the owner and builder that the works would be
upgraded whilst the process of strata approval was underway and that the Fire
Brigade had given assurance that they had this undertaking in accordance with
section 5.4
Emergencies Act 2004
. He said that Capital Hydraulics &
Drains had verified that the fire hose reels were in accordance with clause E1.4
and AS2441;
a plumbing inspector had approved the plumbing works; and the
alternative solution report had also stated that the fire safety measures
complied with the BCA. He said that the BCA had been complied with because the
pipes were not above-ground and clause 8.2.2(b)(iv)
of AS2419.1 expressly
permitted the use of plastic pipes and pipe fittings below-ground. He further
stated that the Fire Brigade
had advised him that the fire hose reels did comply
with the BCA. He said that his intent was to comply with the BCA and at the
same time allow the process to strata units to continue after all the pressures
from the builder, owner and project manager to allow
them to continue. He said,
however, that he would not now choose the same course of action but “stand
firmly on strict compliance
with AS2441 – 2005 clause 6.5 and its referral
to AS2419.1 clause 8.2.2(a)”.
The applicant’s evidence
23. At the hearing of the appeal the applicant submitted in evidence two
written statements made by him. In a written statement
dated 4 September 2008
the applicant said that he was aware of the problem with the fire hydrant pipe
work and believed that it needed
to be rectified prior to occupation of the
premises. He had taken the view, however, that although the building as
completed was
not strictly in accordance with the prescribed requirements for
building work, it was substantially in accordance with those requirements.
issuing the certificate of completion he had accepted the certificate from the
plumbing inspector. He said that he had given
notification to the Fire Brigade
to rectify the hydrant pipe work prior to occupation pursuant to the
Emergencies
and they had provided him with an undertaking that this rectification
would occur. He referred to
section 86(2)(a)
Emergencies Act 2004
authorises the Chief Officer of the Fire Brigade to issue an improvement notice
stating the action that the occupier of premises
must take to reduce the risk
from fire to public safety and the period during which the action must be taken.
He thought it would
be reasonable to expect that no-one would occupy the
premises without complying with an improvement notice. He said that he notified
the Construction Occupations Registrar of the problems with the hydrant pipe
work by forwarding the Fire Brigade report which identified
non-compliance and
advised the Registrar that if the owner of the land applied for a certificate
the Registrar would be justified
in issuing an occupancy certificate under
section 69(2)
Building Act
. He expected that the Registrar would note
his recommendation that the work was not completed strictly in accordance with
the prescribed
requirements but was substantially in accordance with them.
24. In a further statement dated 30 September 2008 the applicant stated that
he wished to qualify the statement made by him in his
statement dated 4
September 2008 in relation to his reliance upon the plumbing inspector’s
certificate. He said that his view
was that the plastic pipes were not
satisfactory and he did not argue with the condition imposed by the Fire
Brigade. He said, however,
that the reference in AS2419.1 – 2005, clause
8.2.1(a) to pipe fittings used “in above-ground” fire hydrant
installations
was ambiguous. It could mean either that they were below ground
level or that they were buried underneath ground. The pipes in
question were
below ground level. Nevertheless, he did not argue with the Fire Brigade
certificate and he said that he required
the builder to replace the plastic
pipes with copper pipes.
25. The applicant said that he went to the building site on 1 November 2007
and told the builder that everything needed to be completed
and when this had
been done to contact him for a re-inspection. Later that day, the builder
called his office and said:
If the building can’t get a certificate of occupancy the process
cannot continue and the units can’t be strata body corporate.
We will not
be able to comply with leasing conditions and this could cost us $2000 per
The builder told him that the strata body corporate process would take about
3 months to complete. He said that these comments by
the builder did not
influence his decision in relation to what work had to be done but he decided to
adopt the same procedure as
the Fire Brigade, that being, to certify the works
conditional upon the replacement of the pipes prior to occupation. He had then
told the builder that he would require compliance with the Fire Brigade report
and all other relevant certifications before he would
consider submitting
paperwork and an application for a certificate of occupation. The builder had
told him that he had agreed to
a request from the Fire Brigade that the pipes
would be changed before the tenants occupied the building. He had later on that
received a telephone call from an officer of the ACT Fire Brigade who told
him that another officer of the Fire Brigade had got agreement
from the builder
and the owner to replace the plastic fire hose reels with copper hose reels. He
said that he accepted that he should
have done more to bring to the attention of
the Registrar the fact that the pipes needed to be replaced prior to occupation
premises and that he should have been more proactive in checking the
builder’s compliance with the request of the Fire Brigade.
26. The applicant stated that he had attended an average of 50 units of
professional development activities each year. This exceeded
the minimum
requirement of 30 units per year. He said that there would be difficulty in
sustaining his business with the restriction
that had been placed by the
Registrar on his licence. Although the great volume of certifications
undertaken by him related to buildings
other than class 1 and class 10
buildings, those classes of buildings were more complex and remunerative. They
accounted for approximately
25% of his business. The restriction would also
have a flow-on effect to the work undertaken by him in respect of other classes
of buildings.
The legislation
27. Section 54(1)(a) of the COL Act provides:
54 Disciplinary grounds
(1) Each of the following is a
disciplinary ground
in relation to a
(a) the licensee, or a nominee or employee of the licensee, contravened,
or is contravening, this Act or an operational Act (including
a direction given
to the licensee under an operational Act);
Building Act
is an “operational Act” for the purpose of
the COL Act (see section 16 COL Act). The liability of the applicant having
accrued at the date of the alleged disciplinary offences, the provisions of the
Building Act
to be applied are those in operation at that time (see
Legislation Act
(2001)). At the date of the alleged disciplinary conduct
Building Act
relevantly provided:
42 Requirements for carrying out building work
(1) Building work must not be carried out except in accordance with the
following requirements:
(a) the materials used in the building work must comply with the standards
under the building code for the materials in buildings
of the kind being built
or altered;
(b) the way the materials are used in the building work must comply with
their acceptable use under the building code for buildings
of the kind being
built or altered;
(c) the building work must be carried out in a proper and skilful
.................
Section 43(3)
Building Act
prevents a building licensee from
proceeding beyond a building stage unless the licensee has given notice to the
certifier that the
stage has been reached and the certifier has inspected the
building work and given written permission for the work to proceed.
Sections 44
Building Act
relevantly provide:
44 Stage inspections
(1) If a certifier receives a notice under
(3) (a) for building
work, the certifier must inspect the building work as soon as
practicable.
(2) On, or as soon as practicable (but in any case within 2 business
days), after inspection, the certifier must—
(a) if satisfied on reasonable grounds that the building work does not
comply with
(Requirements for carrying out building work)—give
the building licensee in charge of the building work written directions
reasonable and appropriate for achieving compliance; or
(b) if satisfied on reasonable grounds that building work complies with
—certify that the work complies and give the certificate to the
building licensee in charge of the building work.
(3) A certifier commits an offence if the certifier contravenes subsection
(1) or (2).
Maximum penalty: 10 penalty units.
................
48 Completion of building work
(1) This section applies if building work appears to have been completed
and the certifier is satisfied on reasonable grounds that—
(a) the work has been completed in accordance with this Act and
substantially in accordance with the approved plans; and
(b) the building as erected or altered is structurally sufficient, sound
and stable for the purposes for which it is to be occupied
(2) Within 7 days after the day the certifier is satisfied, the certifier
must give to the construction occupations registrar the
...........
(d if the regulations require that, on completion of the building work,
the consent or approval of anyone is to be obtained—
written evidence of the obtaining of the consent or approval;
(e) a certificate by the certifier that the building work has been
completed in accordance with this Act and substantially in accordance
approved plans;
31. The approval of the chief officer (fire brigade) is a prescribed
approval on completion of building work for the purpose of section
48(2)(d) (see
Building Regulation 2004 (repealed) section 22(b)).
Building Act
relevantly to these proceedings
69 Certificates of occupancy
(1) If building work involving the erection or alteration of a building
has been completed in accordance with the prescribed requirements
building work, the construction occupations registrar must, on application by
the owner of the parcel of land where the building
work was carried out, issue a
certificate that the building work has been completed in accordance with the
requirements and that
the building as erected or as altered is fit for
occupation and use as a building of the class stated in the approved plans for
building work.
(2) If building work involving the erection or alteration of a building as
completed is not strictly in accordance with the prescribed
requirements for the
building work but is substantially in accordance with the requirements, the
construction occupations registrar
may, on application made by the owner of the
parcel of land where the building work has been carried out, issue a certificate
the building as erected or as altered is fit for occupation and use as a
building of the class stated in the approved plans for that
33. Section 60 of the COL Act authorises the Registrar to take disciplinary
action in relation to a licensee if satisfied on reasonable
grounds that a
disciplinary ground is established in relation to the licensee.
34. Section 61(1) of the COL Act provides for the following disciplinary
a) reprimand;
requirement for the licensee to complete a stated course of training to the
Registrar’s satisfaction;
imposition of a condition on the licence;
financial penalty not exceeding $1000;
of licence;
cancellation
of licence;
cancellation
and disqualification from application for a licence for a period or stated
action happens;
disqualification
from application for licence until completion of course.
35. Section 62 specifies the considerations required to be taken
account of in deciding what disciplinary action to take as follows:
62 Considerations for deciding what disciplinary action to
(1) In deciding what disciplinary action to take in relation to the entity
under section 61, the registrar must consider the following:
(a) the degree of responsibility of the entity for the act or omission
that made up the disciplinary ground;
(b) any injury, loss or damage caused, or that could have been caused, by
the act or omission that made up the disciplinary ground;
(c) the number of people detrimentally affected by the doing of something,
or not doing something, that made up the disciplinary ground;
(d) how any proposed disciplinary action will affect people detrimentally
affected by something that made up the disciplinary ground;
(e) the extent to which it is necessary to discourage the entity and
others from doing something, or not doing something, that made
disciplinary ground;
(f) whether, and the extent to which, it is necessary to protect the
public from the entity;
(g) the desirability of making the entity responsible for the consequences
of the entity’s actions or omissions;
(h) the desirability of maintaining public confidence in the regulatory
system set up by this Act;
(i) the entity’s regard, or disregard, for public safety and
protection of the environment when doing something, or not doing
something, that
made up the disciplinary ground.
(2) The registrar may consider anything else that is relevant.
Reasons for decision
36. Completion of the building work that was approved in a building approval
is a prescribed stage of building work for the purpose
Building Act
Building Regulation 2004 (repealed)). The
obligation imposed on a certifier by
section 44(2)
Building Act
soon as practicable after inspection of the completion stage of building work,
is to satisfy him or her self on reasonable
grounds that the building work does
or does not comply with the requirements of
Building Act
so satisfied the certifier is required to certify compliance. If not so
satisfied, the certifier is required to give the building
licensee written
directions that are reasonable and appropriate for achieving compliance.
Failure to discharge that obligation is
made an offence by
section 44(3).
37. In circumstances where building work has apparently been completed,
Building Act
also imposed an obligation in this case on the
certifier to satisfy him or her self on reasonable grounds that the work has
completed in accordance with the
Building Act
and substantially in
accordance with the approved plans and also that the building is structurally
sufficient, sound and stable for
the purposes for which it is to be occupied or
used. If so satisfied, the certifier is required to give a certificate to the
certifying that the building work has been completed in accordance
Building Act
and substantially in accordance with the approved
38. It is, in that event, a requirement of both
that the certifier be satisfied, on reasonable grounds, that the building work
complies with the requirements of the
Building Act
39. On no interpretation of the Certificate of Completion issued to the
respondent by the applicant is there conveyed advice that
the building works
failed to comply with the requirements outlined in paragraphs 16 to 19 above.
Nor, having regard to the failure
of the works to comply with a basic fire
safety requirement designed for the protection of the occupiers of the
buildings, was there
any basis for suggestion that there was substantial
compliance with the BCA.
40. The applicant asserted that he relied upon the certificate issued by
Capital Hydraulics & Drains, the plumbing inspection
report and the
alternative solution report as affording reasonable grounds for satisfaction of
compliance with the BCA. He also
said, at least initially in his response to
the Registrar, that he relied upon advice which he said he was given by the Fire
that the works did comply with the BCA.
41. No person was identified as having given advice on behalf of the Fire
Brigade that the building works complied with the BCA,
nor was evidence given of
the terms of any such advice. Such advice would have conflicted with the terms
of the conditional approval
given in writing by the Fire Brigade. I do not
accept that such advice was given to the applicant.
42. The alternative solution report is expressed to be limited to
alternative solutions to the requirements of the BCA in relation
to exits from
the buildings. It is also expressed to be made upon the assumption that the
building design complied with the BCA
except for the provisions relating to
exits. It provides no basis for satisfaction that other provisions of the BCA
43. Whatever reliance the applicant was entitled to place upon the Capital
Hydraulics & Drains certificate and the plumbing inspection
displaced by the later provision to him of approval given by the Fire Brigade
which was made conditional upon replacement
of the plastic pipes so as to
conform to clause 8.2.1 of AS2419.1. The applicant’s assertion that, in
issuing a certificate
of completion, he was adopting a similar approach to that
taken by the Fire Brigade in issuing a qualified approval is untenable.
ignores the statutory obligations to which he was made subject by
sections 44
Building Act
and which have no application to the Fire Brigade.
It also ignored the advice given to him in the Fire Brigade approval that final
approval of the building works was the responsibility of the building
44. Clause 8.2.1 applies to pipes that are “above-ground”.
Exposed pipes suspended from a basement ceiling are plainly
not below-ground
irrespective as to whether the basement is constructed below ground level. No
submission was made to the contrary
on behalf of the applicant. It was
asserted, however, that there was some possible ambiguity in the meaning of the
expression “above-ground”.
I do not accept that such ambiguity
exists. There is a clear difference between “above-ground” and
“above-ground
level”. The risk of damage to plastic pipes which are
unprotected by ground coverage from fire or impact and the potential
fighting equipment to be rendered ineffective as a consequence is obvious.
Furthermore, the applicant’s acknowledgement
that he was aware of the
problem with the fire hydrant work and believed that it needed to be rectified
prior to occupation of the
premises is inconsistent with any understanding that
the applicable standards did not require that plastic pipes not be used.
45. The reliance which the applicant stated that he placed upon the building
works being substantially in accordance with prescribed
requirements for
building works is misplaced.
Section 48(1)(a)
Building Act
possible sufficiency of substantial compliance with the approved plans. It does
not qualify the requirement for building
work to be completed in accordance with
Building Act
. The certification by the applicant that the building works
had “been completed in accordance with the requirements of the
” was plainly incorrect and provided a misleading basis for the further
advice given by him to the Registrar that the Registrar
would be justified in
issuing a certificate under
section 69(2)
Building Act
46. When questioned as to the nature of the undertaking which he said he had
been given by the Fire Brigade that the plastic pipes
would be replaced, he said
that he had had a telephone conversation with a Fire Brigade officer and pointed
out to him that the exits
and the plastic pipes did not comply with the BCA.
The officer replied by informing him that another Fire Brigade officer had an
agreement for the pipes to be changed and that it was a matter for the applicant
to determine what action should be taken in relation
to the exits. The
telephone conversation does not afford a reasonable ground for the applicant to
have been satisfied that the work
was completed in accordance with the
Sections 44
Building Act
require certification of what has
been done. It does not admit the possibility that that work necessary to meet
the requirements
Building Act
will be carried out after the
issue of a certificate of completion.
47. I therefore find that the applicant did not have reasonable grounds to
be satisfied that the building work complied with
Building Act
and that he contravened
section 44(2)
section 48(1)(h)(i)
by certifying the building works as completed in the absence of such grounds
in circumstances where he was obliged to give the builder
in charge of the work
written directions that were reasonable and appropriate for achieving
compliance. Disciplinary grounds are,
in that event, to be found by the
Tribunal to exist.
48. In relation to the matters which section 62 of the COL Act requires to
be taken account of, I make the following observations:
The applicant
asserted reliance upon others for his failure to discharge the statutory
obligations imposed on him. The deficiency
in the building work which he
certified as complete was pointed out to him by the Fire Brigade and was
obvious. His contravention
of the BCA is a matter for which he, as the building
certifier, was solely responsible.
There is no
evidence of loss or damage caused by the applicant’s omission. The
potential for loss or damage of a serious nature
existed because of the
inadequate protection to the water supply of fire fighting equipment.
There is no
evidence of any person being detrimentally affected by the applicant’s
It is a matter
of high importance that those persons who accept the responsibilities imposed on
them as construction practitioner
licensees be discouraged from the kind of
omission found in this case to exist.
It is a matter
of considerable importance that the public be protected by ensuring that
standards designed to protect them and their
property from damage are
It is desirable
that the applicant be made responsible for his omission.
It is desirable
that the confidence of the public in the requirements of the COL Act be
maintained by taking action that responds
appropriately and proportionally to
any conduct that is a disciplinary ground.
The applicant
showed a high level of disregard for the need to take action for a most
fundamental aspect of his responsibility as
a building certifier.
49. In a submission on behalf of the applicant, Mr Cameron said
that the applicant had made the correct decision that the plastic
pipes should
be replaced but that he had followed the wrong procedure in the certification of
the completion of the building work
provided by him to the Registrar.
50. It does not seem to me that this submission assists in finding that the
applicant’s omissions were, in some way, ameliorated.
The acknowledgement
of understanding that remedial action to the building works was required gives
greater emphasis to the need
to ensure that required action was to be taken by
him in accordance with the requirements of the
Building Act
applicant’s further acknowledgement in his statement dated 30 September
2008 that he was influenced in the course he
decided to take by pressure applied
to him by the builder raises a serious question as to the applicant’s
preparedness to discharge
the duties of a building certifier.
51. I have taken account of the applicant’s evidence that although the
condition imposed by the decision under review would
exclude him from a small
number of certification projects, the particular category of work from which he
would be excluded is the
most remunerative and would likely have an adverse
impact on his capacity to maintain the same volume of certification work in
categories that he would be permitted to continue. The evidence presented
to the Tribunal was inadequate to quantify the likely
financial impact of the
decision under review on the applicant, however, I accept that it would have a
significant impact on him.
Nevertheless, that impact has to be weighed against
the other considerations that are required by
section 62(1)
Building Act
to be addressed.
52. I also have regard to the fact that the applicant has previously been
the subject of disciplinary action. In November 2005 he
was found to have
failed to notify the respondent of a known contravention of the
Building Act
As a result, he was formally reprimanded and directed to complete a course of
training conducted by the University of Technology
in relation to building
regulations.
53. It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that the appropriate
decision for the Tribunal to make would be to impose a condition
on his licence
that would require him to attend a further course of training. The applicant
was, however, unable to identify a course
that was available and designed to
address the kind of shortcoming demonstrated by his conduct in this case. The
fact that he has
contravened the
Building Act
on more than one occasion suggests
that the training courses which he has attended have been ineffective in
ensuring the proper discharge
of his responsibilities.
54. The condition imposed by the decision under review would restrict the
applicant to the certification of less complex projects
that do not require
extensive fire safety systems. In all the circumstances, I consider that such a
condition is appropriate.
55. I note that the applicant’s licence is renewable (see
COL Act) and that the condition would remain extant indefinitely on any renewal
of his licence, although it would be open to him
to make a fresh application for
an unconditional licence at some later time. Any such application, if made,
would doubtless require
consideration of the steps which the applicant had taken
to ensure that he properly understood his responsibilities as a building
certifier and that he was prepared to discharge them.
56. It appeared from the material before the Tribunal that in giving effect
to the decision under review the respondent issued a
licence to the applicant
that had endorsed upon it the condition imposed by the decision under review.
That amended licence was
expressed to be issued for the period 31 October 2007
to 31 October 2008. That period partly precedes both the conduct that
constituted
disciplinary grounds as well as the date of the decision under
review. The issue of the licence for the period expressed was clearly
misconceived and has the potential to create doubt about the status of any
certification made by the applicant in relation to buildings
other than class 1
or class 10 buildings prior to the decision under review. The decision under
review should not, in that event,
be permitted to stand.
57. I consider that the correct and preferable decision for the Tribunal to
make is to set aside the decision under review and substitute
(i) the applicant is reprimanded for the omissions referred to in these
reasons for decision pursuant to
section 61(1)(a)
Construction
Occupations (Licensing) Act 2004
(ii) pursuant to
section 61(1)(c)
Construction Occupations (Licensing)
the following condition is imposed on the applicant’s
Only valid for
appointment as certifier in relation to building works involving class 1 and/or
class 10 buildings.
PUBLICATION DETAILS
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by Member's
________________________________________________________________________
KENYON HOPKINS
RESPONDENT:
CONSTRUCTION
OCCUPATIONS REGISTRAR
PARTY JOINED:
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANT:
MR J CAMERON
RESPONDENT:
MR G MCCARTHY
PARTY JOINED:
SOLICITORS: APPLICANT:
JOHNINFO LAWYERS
RESPONDENT:
ACT GOVERNMENT
PARTY JOINED:
OTHER: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
PARTY JOINED:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
MR M H PEEDOM, PRESIDENT
DATE/S OF HEARING:
9-10 OCTOBER 2008
DATE OF DECISION:
_______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (138 KB)
Signed PDF/A format