Police v Matthew Jones (a pseudonym) [2025] ACTMC 10 (8 May 2025)
MAGISTRATES
COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Police v Matthew Jones (a pseudonym)
[2025] ACTMC 10
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Chief Magistrate Walker
Subpoenas WIT25/382, WIT25/383, WIT25/384 and WIT25/386 are set
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– APPLICATION IN PROCEEDING – SUBPOENA TO
CHILD WITNESSES – application to set aside subpoenas to give evidence
– balance between prosecutorial discretion and Court’s implied power
to control its own proceedings – likelihood
of psychological harm to
vulnerable children a basis to set aside a subpoena
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Court Procedure Rules 2006
(ACT), r 6604
Children and Young People Act 2008
Human Rights Act 2004
Legislation Act 2001
Evidence Act 2011
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Cases Cited:
Castrucci v ACT Electricity Authority
[1990] ACTR 1
Secretary of the Department of Planning,
Industry and Environment v Blacktown City Council
[2021] NSWCA 145
Canham v ACT Magistrates Court and Jabs
[2014] ACTSC 14
Crimmins v Pearson
[2016] ACTSC 195
Williams v Spautz
[1992] HCA 34
Levinge v Director of Custodial Services
(1987) 9 NSWLR 546
Marshall v R
[2023] ACTCA 11
R v Vilayur (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 2
CSR Ltd v Cigna Insurance Australia Ltd
[1997] HCA 33
Pesec v Consolidated Builders Ltd
[2022] ACTSC 241
[2004] ACTSC 115
R v Malone (No. 3)
[2022] ACTSC 74
Director-General of the Community Services Directorate (Applicant)
Ross McLennan (Informant)
Matthew Jones (a pseudonym) (Defendant)
Representation:
Stafford Whitfield (Applicant)
Indigo Collins (Applicant)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Paul Edmonds (Defendant)
File Number:
CC 9344 of 2024
CC 9345 of 2024
CC 9346 of 2024
MAGISTRATE WALKER:
Introduction
were issued at the request of the Director of Public Prosecution (
for four children (whose names have been anonymised to protect their
identities), Charlotte aged 11, Cynthia aged 10, Marcus aged
9 and Aaron aged 4
the children
), which require them to attend to give evidence in a
prosecution against their father, the Defendant. The Defendant is charged,
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT), with three counts of
common assault, aggravated by being in the family violence context, against his
son Marcus.
four children are currently subject to interim care and protection orders
pursuant to which the Director-General of the Community
Services Directorate
) has parental responsibility. There are two other members of this
sibship who are not directly involved in these proceedings.
Application in Proceeding filed on 14 April 2025, the DG applies to have the
subpoenas set aside pursuant to rule 6604 of the
Court Procedure Rules
), which provides, relevantly:
application
someone else having a sufficient interest,
may set aside a subpoena completely or partly, or grant other
relief in relation to it.
parties concede, and I find, that the DG has a sufficient interest in respect to
the subpoenas, having regard to the parental
authority she currently holds in
respect to the children.
grounds relied upon by the DG in her application are that it is not in the
interests of justice, it is not within community expectations,
contrary to the best interests of the children to require them to give evidence
against their father, as to do so would
cause them harm. In submissions, this
was condensed to the concept that the subpoenas were oppressive.
Defendant in the criminal prosecution supports the application.
prosecution opposes the application.
The Children’s Role
in the Prosecution
children were interviewed by police in light of a disclosure made by Marcus. I
was invited to have regard to both the statement
of alleged facts and the
records of interview. The prosecution case relies on Marcus’ complaint in
interview to the effect
that the Defendant assaulted him by kicking him to the
ribs and slapping him in the face, arms and legs repeatedly on a Friday in
September 2024. Aaron’s evidence in interview corroborates the alleged
kicking. Charlotte and Cynthia’s evidence provides
no direct support for
the allegation. The children’s evidence taken wholistically is potentially
both inculpatory and exculpatory.
was advised by Mr Howe that the Director had considered the public interest in
opposing the DG’s application.
The Evidence
evidence relied upon by the DG to establish that the children would suffer harm
if required to attend consists of the following:
(a) Affidavits of Children, Youth and Families (
) case workers Emma
Hope (17/9/24), Lewis Kuskie (20/2/25 and 28/3/25) and Andrew Stead (14/4/25)
(b) Expert reports of Professor Louise Newman, psychiatrist (10/10/21) (annexed
to Emma Hope’s affidavit) and Ms Katie Martens,
forensic psychologist
case worker affidavits address a concerning level of physical violence in the
family home, alleged to emanate from both parents,
on a background of their own
traumatic experiences. This is why the children were removed from their
parents’ care.
Newman conducted a family assessment for CYF in which she interviewed the
parents separately, spoke with the children and
then observed each parent with
their children. She identified that the Defendant suffers post-traumatic stress
disorder, mood disorder
and depression. She recorded that he abused alcohol and
engaged in both physical violence and coercive control. She opined:
[the Defendant] remains a man at high risk of both harm to others and
harm to himself, given the periods where he experiences extreme
distress. Of
concern, he has been unable to regulate his behaviour, which is well documented,
for some time.... He has ongoing difficulties
in emotional regulation and
management of behavioural impulses. This significantly limits his capacity to be
a safe and predictable
attachment figure and parent for the children
Newman also noted that Mr Jones has experienced suicidal ideation.
to the children, Professor Newman observed: “[
i]n summary, I am of the
view that the multiple traumatic experiences of these children, combined with
their neglect and long duration
of exposure to disruptive and violent behaviour
from their father, as well as physical abuse in some cases from their mother,
contributed in a major way to emotional difficulties, particularly anxiety
and some behavioural disturbance, largely in distractibility
and avoidance of
the parents
Martens conducted a psychological assessment of the children in November 2024.
She observed that the children, particularly Marcus
and Cynthia, had shown a
deterioration in behaviours since being in care. She noted that all of the
children have experienced developmental
Kuskie, who holds a Bachelor of Psychology (Honours) and has four years of
experience in child protection work, is the current
case worker for these
children. Mr Kuskie, in his affidavit of 28 March 2025, expressed concern for
the children’s emotional
regulation and any future relationship with their
parents if required to engage in the criminal proceedings. He fears this may be
aggravated for Marcus, especially in light of his self-blaming. On being
informed that his father had been charged in February of
this year with an
assault on him, Marcus had an immediate emotional outburst.
affidavit of Andrew Stead, Operations Manager at CYF, summarises some of the
challenges the children have faced whilst in care,
noting in particular that the
three older children reacted negatively to the return to their mother’s
care of the two younger
children. This return was staged over 3 months. At the
first stage, the children became violent and Cynthia, suicidal. The second
saw a further eruption of violence from Marcus, whilst Charlotte “
”. At the third stage of the restoration of the two younger
children, Charlotte and Cynthia, and the children’s mother,
blamed Marcus
for the family being separated. He attacked Charlotte in response to being
blamed by her. The police were called. Marcus
nonetheless blames himself for the
removal of the children from their parents’ care.
Stead summarises the DG’s concerns that the children will blame themselves
or each other for the result of the hearing, will
experience “
stress, negative emotions and/or dysregulation
” as a result of giving
evidence, may experience suicidal ideation, will physically hurt themselves or
each other in response
to negative feelings triggered by giving evidence, and
will be afraid of retaliation by the Defendant. He is also concerned that
restoration plan will be slowed as a result of behavioural regression caused by
the children being required to give evidence
and that they will be fearful of
upsetting, angering or disappointing their mother by giving evidence. Further,
giving evidence against
their father will remove any prospect of repairing the
children’s relationships with him in the future.
Stead notes that the mother has expressed support for the DG’s
application.
Director-General’s
Submissions
Whitfield, representing the DG, submitted that the Court could infer from the
evidence that the children were vulnerable and would
suffer further harm if
required to attend to give evidence.
community expectation was that the Court would act in the best interests of the
children, which could be determined having regard
Children and Young
People Act 2008
(objects) and
(best interests of the
subpoenas are oppressive in the ordinary meaning of that word as detailed in the
Oxford English Dictionary, including cruel and
unfair treatment of people. Not
setting aside the subpoenas is cruel because it would cause further trauma to
already vulnerable
if the children did not attend to give evidence, the prosecution could continue
relying on facilitative provisions of the
Evidence Act 2011
respect to hearsay evidence where the maker of a statement (here in interview)
was “unavailable”.
The Defendant
Edmonds for the Defendant joined with the DG’s submissions, although noted
that application of the
Evidence Act 2011
(ACT) provisions referred to by
the DG would be opposed. He conceded that without the children available to give
evidence in person,
the prosecution was likely to fail.
Edmonds submitted that the power to set aside a subpoena extends to a subpoena
to attend to give evidence as well as a subpoena
to produce documents.
respect to the issue of harm to the children, he submitted that the Court could
infer that the children were at an important juncture
and that their mental
health was fragile; further, that the Court could infer an “
higher than
” risk of harm without specific expert evidence as to the effect
of being required to attend Court.
Edmonds submitted that in exercising the discretion pursuant to rule 6604 of the
CPR’s, the Court should be guided by a consideration
Section 11(2)
Human Rights Act 2004
(ACT), which provides,
“[e]very child has the right to the protection needed by the child
because of being a child, without distinction or discrimination
Human Rights Act 2004
(ACT), which requires
legislation to be interpreted consistently with human rights;
Section 139
Legislation Act 2001
(ACT), which requires the
interpretation of legislation which best achieves the purpose of an Act to be
preferred, and;
(4) “Best interests” considerations pursuant to the
Children and
Young People Act 2008
acknowledging the breadth of prosecutorial discretion, and that it must be rare
to intervene, Mr Edmonds submitted that whilst
this Court has no inherent parens
patriae jurisdiction, the welfare of the children is a consideration as part of
the public interest.
He submitted that failure to set aside the subpoenas would
be oppressive to the children.
further submitted that the prosecution case was inherently weak, pointing to the
contradiction between the two younger against
the older children as to whether
anything happened at all and observing that the available medical evidence did
not support the mechanism
of assault alleged, that is of a full grown adult male
kicking and repeatedly slapping a child yet leaving no mark or injury.
even though there may be difficulty for the prosecution proceeding
with the matter if the subpoenas were set aside, he submitted
there was a low
public interest in the matter proceeding.
Prosecution Submissions
prosecution submits that acceding to the application would be a substantial
departure from fundamental criminal justice principles
relating to prosecutorial
discretion. In circumstances where the witnesses are patently relevant, the
Court has no basis to intervene
in exercise of this discretion.
prosecution further submit that the absence of an analogous case reflects the
position that the remedy is not available in relation
to the exercise by the DPP
of her discretion to call witnesses. The Court’s discretion is more
appropriately directed to existing
categories such as those in which there is no
legitimate forensic purpose to the subpoena, or matters in which the effect of
subpoena is oppressive.
said, Mr Howe
conceded in an exchange during submissions, that were the
recipient of a subpoena to attend to give evidence suffering a terminal
such that they may soon die, the requirement to attend under compulsion may be
oppressive and a basis to set the subpoena
is clear that the Court is empowered to set aside a subpoena to attend to give
evidence in appropriate circumstances (see
Castrucci v ACT Electricity
[1990] ACTR 1
Abuse of Process
issue of a subpoena for a non-legitimate purpose may be an abuse of process.
Although dealing with the question of a subpoena
to produce documents, Bell P in
Secretary of the Department of Planning, Industry and Environment v Blacktown
City Council
[2021] NSWCA 145
, observed:
danger in using the language of “tests” for the setting aside of
subpoenas. Such terminology should, in my
opinion, be eschewed. It is sufficient
to observe that subpoenas will and should be set aside when they can be seen to
amount to an abuse of process as part of the Court’s general
power to regulate and protect its own processes. Such a power
is not to be
restricted to defined and closed categories.
Magistrates Court has implied power to regulate its own processes so as to
prevent an abuse of process (see
Canham v ACT Magistrates Court and Jabs
[2014] ACTSC 14
Crimmins v Pearson
[2016] ACTSC 195
policy underpinnings in respect to abuse of process considerations are detailed
in the majority decision in
Williams v Spautz
[1992] HCA 34
As Lord Scarman said in
Reg. v Sang
[1979] UKHL 3
(1980) AC 402
455, every Court is “in duty bound to protect itself" against an abuse of
its process. In this respect there are two fundamental
policy considerations
which must be taken into account in dealing with abuse of process in the context
of criminal proceedings. Richardson
J referred to them in
Moevao v Department
(1980) 1 NZLR 464
, at 481 in a passage which Mason CJ quoted in
(1989) 168 CLR, at 30. The first is that the public interest in the
administration of justice requires that the Court protect its
function as a court of law by ensuring that its processes are used fairly by
State and citizen alike. The second is that,
unless the Court protects its
ability so to function in that way, its failure will lead to an erosion of
public confidence by reason
of concern that the Court's processes may lend
themselves to oppression and injustice.
Levinge v Director of Custodial Services
(1987) 9 NSWLR 546
McHugh JA stated:
Conduct which might be regarded as
constituting an abuse of process in respect of a comparatively minor charge may
not have the same
character in respect of a serious matter.
finding that conduct may result in an abuse of process does not necessitate a
finding that the conduct is motivated by mala fides;
it is the result with which
the Court is concerned.
Prosecutorial Discretion
Ordinarily,
as restated in
Marshall v R
[2023] ACTCA 11
prosecutor alone bears responsibility for deciding whether a person will be
called as a witness...
R v Vilayur (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 2
The principle operates as a broader proposition, in that the court generally
does not scrutinise how the prosecuting authorities
investigate or conduct the
case, such as by ordering further inquiries to be conducted about a particular
topic or that further witnesses
be called: see
R v Apostolides
[1984] HCA 38
at 576. The court will intervene only in limited circumstances, such as
to ensure that a person is not tried unfairly and that its
processes are not
The Court’s Discretion
6604 vests a broad discretion in the Court to set aside a subpoena either partly
or entirely or to grant other relief in respect
to it. The discretion, I am
satisfied, is intentionally broad because the range of circumstances in which it
may be appropriate to
set aside a subpoena are widely variable. In that sense,
whilst the Court may be guided by existing categories of cases in which
subpoenas have been set aside, such categories are necessarily not exclusive
CSR Ltd v Cigna Insurance Australia Ltd
[1997] HCA 33;
of Planning, Industry and Environment v Blacktown City Council
[2021] NSWCA
a review of case law confirms that the vast majority of matters in which CPR
6604, or similar provisions, have been successfully
invoked fall within those
categories identified in Meagher, Flint and Refshauge J’s commentary to
the Rule, namely legitimate
forensic purpose, relevance, privilege or
oppression, there are exceptions.
‘oppressive’?
concept of ‘oppression’ is not narrowly defined.
determining whether compliance with a subpoena would be oppressive, the Court
may have regard to the concept of proportionality,
that is the burden the
subpoena places on the recipient.
this is more commonly considered in the context of subpoenas to produce
documents (see
Pesec v Consolidated Builders Ltd
[2022] ACTSC 241)
approach has been extended to subpoenas to attend to give evidence (see
have been unable to identify a reported matter in which a subpoena to attend for
a relevant witness has been set aside in a criminal
proceeding. However, as the
prosecutor fairly conceded, such a circumstance may be
have been unable to identify any decision which addresses directly a situation
in which a subpoena to attend to give evidence had
been set aside on the grounds
that there is no utility in it because it cannot, or will not, ultimately be
enforced or enforceable
due to being oppressive.
in a somewhat analogous situation in
[2004] ACTSC 115
, Crispin J
dealt with an application to compel a 7-year-old child to give evidence in
criminal proceedings against his step-mother.
The child was a compellable
witness. The Court found that there was a significant risk of harm to the child
if he was required to
give evidence. His Honour concluded that the Court
retained a discretion in relation to its exercise of coercive powers and
the Crown that he would not make any order that would require the child
to be brought to Court against his will, even against a background
compellability. Whilst concluding that he was bound to apply the compellability
provisions, His Honour nonetheless noted at [21]:
However, due
recognition of the importance of these considerations need not be accompanied by
a complete disregard for the risk that
curial processes intended to protect
spouses or children may themselves inflict further and perhaps quite unwarranted
Honour further observed at [30]-[33]:
... a conclusion that the
child was a competent and compellable witness did not require a further
conclusion that the Court had no
discretion as to whether to apply some or all
of the coercive measures available to compel witnesses to give evidence...Whilst
will normally be appropriate for the Court to take such measures as may be
necessary to ensure the attendance of a compellable but
reluctant witness, such
remedies are discretionary and the Court may decline to do so when satisfied
that the interests of justice
require such a course.... I see no reason to doubt
that the Court has power to refuse to take coercive measures against a child in
order to protect him from the risk of psychological harm to which he is
vulnerable by reason of his age and position as a child in
a family... Whilst I
accepted that the child fell within the class of witnesses amenable to
compulsion, it would, in my opinion,
have been inappropriate to have applied any
of these coercive measures to him. A seven year old boy could not be sensibly
with contempt proceedings and, save perhaps in the most compelling
circumstances, such a child should clearly not be arrested, forced
into court or
intimidated in order to require him to give evidence when he might suffer
significant psychological harm as a consequence
of doing so. Children of that
age should be protected by the law; not harmed by it.
What constitutes harm?
R v Malone (No. 3)
[2022] ACTSC 74
, the accused person had sought
documents held by the Victims of Crime Commissioner which were potentially
relevant to the complainant’s
credibility. The Commissioner claimed that
the documents contained a protected confidence as defined in
Evidence Act 2011
Evidence Act
and made an application
to set aside a subpoena as envisaged by
s 131A(2)(a)
Evidence Act
J found the person confiding the information would suffer harm if her ability to
frankly express her emotions and concerns as a victim to the
” was constrained for fear of having the record thereof
disclosed under subpoena.
follows from His Honour’s decision that likelihood of psychological harm
may be a basis to set aside a subpoena.
Consideration
way of general observation, I note that because of the familial relationship
between the children subject to the subpoenas and
the Defendant, at hearing the
Court would ordinarily have a discretion, if objection were taken, as to whether
the children should
be compelled to give evidence pursuant to
Evidence Act
. However, the allegations are such that
Evidence Act
is enlivened, rendering the children compellable.
Submissions
were made by the DG and Defendant to the effect that the children’s
evidence already captured in police interviews,
may be admissible under the
Evidence Act
even if the children are not required to answer subpoenas to
attend to give further evidence, such as under
unavailable
”, and 66A “
contemporaneous statements
The outcome of any such application is speculative.
assessments by the parties as to the strength of the prosecution case, in
circumstances where it cannot be said to be “impossibly
not a factor I have taken into account.
allegations against the Defendant are of three common assaults on one occasion
in a course of conduct but as alleged, are serious
examples of such assaults
against a young child, particularly the allegation of kicks to the ribs. It is
relevant that they arise
in the context of a history of exposure to violence
based on evidence from the DG. It may be inferred that the child would suffer
psychological harm from such assaults and, in any case, is in need of
protection. I observe also that if convicted, issues of general
and specific
deterrence would loom large in any sentencing exercise, matters which are very
much in the public interest. In short,
there is a compelling public interest in
prosecuting matters of familial violence against vulnerable children and, as
alleged, this
is such a matter.
DG brought this application on relatively short notice and relies on expert
evidence which has not addressed directly whether,
and in what way, the
children, either individually or collectively, are likely to be harmed if
required to attend Court under subpoena.
Nonetheless, there is expert evidence
of the children’s mental state and vulnerabilities before me.
DG supports its application with opinions expressed by Mr Kuskie, the current
case worker and Mr Stead, the Operations Manager
at CYF. These are not presented
as “expert opinion” but there was no challenge to the opinions they
expressed, which
I am satisfied reflect their professional opinions based upon
knowledge of the children through their specialised employment. I accept
opinions are well-founded.
am able to draw a number of inferences from the available evidence:
(1) Each of the subpoenaed children are extremely vulnerable as a result of the
developmental trauma they have experienced, in particular
early and regular
exposure to family violence;
(2) Division of the family is a source of significant distress to each of the
(3) Each child blames either themselves or a sibling for that family
(4) The children are emotionally vulnerable and labile; they respond with anger,
aggression and/or sadness to difficult situations;
(5) Significant efforts are being made to stabilise the children’s
situation and support their mental and emotional stability;
(6) There is a likelihood that the trauma of giving evidence per se in these
proceedings will add to the psychological harm already
experienced by these
(7) In responding to this stressor, there is the potential of physical harm to
the children from (i) themselves; (ii) each other;
(8) There is a significant risk that one or both parents may take retributive
action as a result of the children giving evidence
in these proceedings, either
as an intended form of discipline or in response to their own emotional
instability;
(9) The children’s future relationships with their parents are important
in assisting them to address their trauma;
(10) The children’s relationships with each other are particularly
important given the disconnection with their parents; and
(11) Giving evidence in these proceedings has the potential to further damage
the children’s relationships with each other
as well as with their
one involved in the criminal justice system could be blind to the fact that
giving evidence in Court is inherently stressful; more
so when it is under
compulsion and when the witness is vulnerable.
conclude that there is a real likelihood of harm to these children, beyond that
of child witnesses generally, if required to attend
to give evidence against
their father in response to the subpoenas.
the subpoenas are not set aside, it is likely that coercive measures would be
required to effect their attendance. The Court may
take into account whether
such measures are likely to have any utility.
Court could order that the DG arrange the children’s attendance at Court,
however, when the DG has determined that it is
not in the children’s best
interests to do so, requiring the DG to act contrary to her legislative mandate
may well, reasonably,
be resisted by legal means.
Alternatively,
the Court could issue a warrant for the children’s arrest by a police
officer pursuant to
Magistrates Court Act
However, having regard to
, which requires a consideration of
the impact of using a warrant for the arrest of the person
and noting the additional trauma that such action is likely to occasion on these
already traumatised children, such a course
is highly unlikely.
also echo the sentiments of Crispin J in
[2004] ACTSC 115
namely, that “
[c]hildren of that age should be protected by the law;
not harmed by it
a close consideration of the competing considerations in this application, I
conclude that this is one of the very rare occasions
upon which it is incumbent
on the Court to make a decision which does impinge upon prosecutorial
discretion.
WIT25/382, WIT25/383, WIT25/384 and WIT25/386 are set
I certify that the preceding sixty-six [66] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Decision of her Honour Chief Magistrate
Associate to Chief Magistrate Walker
Date: 8 May 2025
RTF format (248 KB)
Signed PDF/A format