Inquest into the death of Sharyn Kaine [2024] ACTCD 6 (16 September 2024)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Matter Title:
Inquest into the death of Sharyn Kaine
[2024] ACTCD 6
Decision Date:
Coroner Archer
See [42], [43]–[48], [52]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– manner and cause of death – multi organ
failure due to adhesions related bowel perforation – liver failure induced
by intravenously administered paracetamol – errors in medication
transcription – weight-adjusted dosage not applied –
testing delay
– matters of public safety – Digital Health Records (DHR)
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
Cases Cited:
Inquest into the Death of Patricia (Jill) Croxon
[2023] ACTCD
File Number:
CD 311 of 2021
CORONER ARCHER:
BACKGROUND ISSUES
Introduction
Kaine died at the Canberra Hospital (“TCH”) on 9 October 2021. I
shall, with respect, refer to her as Sharyn in
these reasons. Sharyn was the
mother to two children and a loving grandmother to her grandchildren. She was 73
years old at the time
of her death.
had been admitted to then Calvary Hospital (“Calvary”) on 2 October
2021 for treatment of lower abdominal pain.
After an assessment at Calvary,
Sharyn was transferred to TCH for surgical treatment of what was suspected to be
bowel perforation.
After what was thought to be a successful surgery on 3
October 2021, Sharyn’s condition stabilised.
7 October 2021, her condition suddenly deteriorated. When assessed in the
Intensive Care Unit (ICU), she was found to be seriously
unwell with signs of
organ failure. Prior to her collapse, she had been given paracetamol
intravenously (IV). It was suspected that
she had been administered a
paracetamol overdose. Attempts to treat that issue were unsuccessful.
Sharyn’s life support was
withdrawn. Her son and a priest were present at
the time of her death.
daughter Danielle has advocated tirelessly for Sharyn throughout the coronial
death was reported to the Coroner on the day of her passing. Jurisdiction was
assumed pursuant to
Coroners Act 1997
(ACT) (“the
Act”), as it appeared that Sharyn’s death was “completely or
partly attributable to an operation
or procedure”. As no Medical
Certificate of Cause of Death was issued by treating clinicians, the
Court’s jurisdiction
was also enlivened by
Required Findings
assumed jurisdiction, the relevant coroner, then Coroner Louise Taylor, was
required to hold an inquest
the manner and cause of Sharyn’s death and make the findings required by
of the Act. That section of the Act relevantly provides:
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find,
if possible—
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the person has
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
(i) state whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection
with the inquest or inquiry; and
(ii) if a matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the matter.
assumed carriage of the case when I was appointed as what has been styled as the
Territory’s “dedicated coroner”
in March 2022. Sharyn’s
case was one of a large number of investigations that were then outstanding.
Obligations I Have under
Section 3BA
of the Act obliges me, in conducting an inquest, to carry out the objects
of the Act in a way that recognises that the family and
friends of a deceased
person have an interest in having all reasonable questions about the
circumstances of the person’s death
answered. During my investigation,
apart from matters concerning the paracetamol overdose, Sharyn’s family
asked a series of
questions about other aspects of Sharyn’s care,
(a) the circumstances surrounding the timing of Sharyn’s surgery;
(b) the timing of her surgery;
(c) why it was necessary to transfer Sharyn to TCH for treatment;
(d) the timing of the turning off of life support; and
(e) the circumstances surrounding the involvements of the coroner’s
Independent
of these reasons, those questions were answered by the Court during the
investigation.
Dispensing with a Hearing
arriving at the findings a Coroner is required to make, I have a discretion as
to whether to hold a hearing
of the Act). I can dispense with a hearing in
the circumstances and according to the processes set out in
34A Decision not to conduct hearing
(1) A coroner may decide not to conduct a
hearing into a death if, after consideration of information given to a coroner
to the death of a person, the coroner is satisfied that—
(a) the manner and cause of death are sufficiently disclosed; and
(b) a hearing is unnecessary.
(2) A coroner must not dispense with a hearing into a death of a person, if
the coroner has reasonable grounds for believing the death
in care or death
in custody.
(3) A coroner who decides not to conduct
a hearing into a death must give the Chief Coroner and a member of the
deceased's immediate
family written notice of the decision, including the
grounds for the decision.
a decision is made by a Coroner not to conduct a hearing, application can be
made to the Chief Coroner for a review of that decision:
of the Act.
formed the view that a hearing in this matter was not necessary:
(a) given the extent of the evidence before me, there is sufficient evidence
available to me that allows me to make the findings
required by
(b) most of that evidence that is relevant is not subject to contest; and
(c) the only real issues in this case were:
(i) whether an overdose of paracetamol was indeed administered to Sharyn; and
(ii) whether that overdose caused or hastened her death.
matters could be addressed without the need to call witnesses in-person.
far as public safety issues that arose from the inquest were concerned, they too
were capable of being addressed by the information
received in documentary form
during my investigation.
communicated my view to the family and to the legal representatives of TCH (the
ACT Government Solicitor) (“ACTGS”)
when the provisional findings
were sent to them [17].
findings that follow are made based on the following material
(a) Police coronial report, dated 10 October 2021;
(b) Autopsy Report of Professor Johan Duflou, dated 15 November 2021;
(c) Medical records received from TCH and Calvary;
(d) Statements from clinicians provided by the Territory:
(i) Dr BC, General Surgeon;
(ii) Dr HE, General Surgeon;
(iii) Dr TN; and
(iv) Dr BI;
(e) Information provided by TCH Pharmacy, per Ms EC;
(f) Information provided by the ACTGS about the operation of the Digital Health
(g) Canberra Health Services (“CHS”) Procedure Documentation;
(h) NSW Health, South Eastern Sydney, Local Health District, Paracetamol Use
Protocol (publicly available); and
(i) Representations and information received from Danielle Kaine on behalf of
the family of Sharyn.
COURSE OF THE INQUEST
process of evidence gathering concluded on 10 May 2024, when Dr BI’s
statement was received. Provisional findings were sent
to the family and the
Territory through the ACTGS on 26 July 2024. As those provisional findings
contained comments that were adverse
to the Territory or its employees, pursuant
to s 55 of the Act, notices accompanying the provisional findings were issued to
Territory, inviting the Territory to make a submission to me in relation to
the proposed comment or to give me a statement in relation
AN OUTLINE OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING SHARYN’S
Prior Health History
was generally healthy until she was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in 2011.
Sharyn underwent a pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple
procedure). That was an
operation to remove the head of the pancreas. The operation also involved
removing the first part of the
small intestine, called the duodenum, the
gallbladder, and the bile duct. In Sharyn’s case, some lymph nodes were
also removed,
and she underwent chemotherapy for a period of
Admission – 2 October 2021 – Surgery and its
2 October 2021, Sharyn was brought to Calvary Hospital by ambulance, arriving at
0813 hours. Her symptoms were lower abdominal
pain, a distended and painful
abdomen, and an inability to urinate properly. A CT scan was undertaken at 1025
hours, which showed
a significant problem with Sharyn’s bowel – the
large bowel was dilated, and the colon and rectum were seen to be collapsed.
radiologist concluded that there were indicia of a perforation, and obstruction
of both the large and possibly also small bowel.
1225 hours, it had been determined that surgery was required to repair the
perforation. At 1430 hours, Sharyn was reviewed by the
general surgical
registrar, who took a detailed history and observations, and discussed the
matter with Dr BC, a general surgeon.
It was agreed at that point that Sharyn
would require transfer to the Canberra Hospital, and it was noted that she would
likely require
a stoma and intensive care post-surgery. The record indicates
that the surgeon “may not be able to resect obstructing mass”.
in the evening of 2 October 2021, at 2325 hours, Sharyn was admitted to TCH.
Surgery commenced just after 0830 hours on 3 October
2021, and was completed
just after 1230 hours. That surgery was conducted by Dr BC, assisted by his
registrar Dr HE. Dr TN was the
anaesthetist for the operation. A hole in the
intestine was found and repaired. One of the joins to the stomach created in the
procedure had eroded and was repaired.
operation appeared to have gone well, although Sharyn was in some pain the
following day, and her urine was in an unusual colour.
Over the course of the
next couple of days, those issues were investigated and apparently settled.
Sharyn was mobilising and undergoing
physiotherapy reviews.
Relief – Prescription of Paracetamol
2 October 2021, the day prior to surgery, Sharyn was prescribed a dose of
by Dr HE, to
be delivered intravenously. Sharyn weighed 39 kgs. This dosage was written on
the handwritten medication chart .
TN saw this prescription on the handwritten medication chart when he
“attended for surgery”, and he cancelled it. In
his statement given
to the Coroner, he indicated that although 1 g of paracetamol QID is a standard
adult dose, given Sharyn’s
size, he considered that to be a
“large” dose.
cancelled the 1 g dose and substituted in handwriting a dosage of 600 mg QID,
which, in his view, was a more appropriately weight-adjusted
dose. The dosage
was charted as oral or intravenous, depending on her oral intake.
one dose of paracetamol at 600 mg was given to Sharyn. It is recorded as having
been administered at 1600 hours on the handwritten
medication chart (although
noted against the 1200 hours column) and recorded by RN QT in a progress note at
1624 hours.
some point in the late afternoon or early evening of 3 October 2024, Sharyn was
transferred from the Post Anaesthetic Care Unit
to the ward. According to Dr TN,
at that time, charted medications were transferred from the handwritten
medication sheet into a
digital medication record, called the “EMM”.
email from ACTGS dated 13 December 2022 the Court was advised that Dr BI, a
junior medical officer with ACT Health, was responsible
for the transcribing of
medications onto the EMM system on 3 October 2021. By statement dated 1 May
2024, Dr BI confirmed that was
so. The time at which she completed this task is
not clear from her statement. Dr BI noted that she had not seen Dr TN’s
handwritten
change and indicated that she does not “know whether the
updated prescription for paracetamol was recorded before or after
I transcribed
Ms Kaine’s medications into EMM”. Dr BI also noted that 1 g of
paracetamol QID is a standard dose, and
there was nothing in the records to
indicate that there was any abnormality in her liver function results to
indicate that a prescription
at that level was causing adverse outcomes. It was
her understanding that once the medications were charted, the “General
charted medications”. Her reading of the medical records
suggested that
that was done on “at least” 4 and 5 October 2021. Further, she noted
that Sharyn’s care team had
responsibility for reviewing her medications,
and it appeared that that was done, given evidence of her other medication being
may be inferred that as Dr BI was working “the afterhours shift” at
TCH, and as Dr TN entered the medication onto the
chart at the time of surgery,
that the change in prescription had in fact been charted before Dr BI was
entering the data. However,
I do not believe it is necessary to make such a
finding, or to resolve what the tension between the accounts given by Dr BI and
TN may be as to the timing of his alteration of the charted dose. The
apparent uncertainty highlights the shortcomings of the medication
process generally.
a result of:
(a) the transcription error; or
(b) the failure to incorporate Dr TN’s changes into the medication chart
(if his correction had been made after Dr BI’s
transcription); and
(c) the failure to review Sharyn’s paracetamol dosing levels;
1 g paracetamol QID was then administered on 13 occasions over five days. As
Sharyn never returned to consuming oral fluids or food,
the paracetamol was
administered intravenously for the entirety of her treatment.
the afternoon of 7 October 2021, Sharyn suffered a collapse, warranting a
Medical Emergency Team (MET) call and an ICU admission.
admission to the ICU, liver failure due to potential paracetamol toxicity was
identified. Medications were provided to improve
liver function, including an
intravenous N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) infusion. Her blood pressure had dropped
dramatically. Septic shock
was identified as the most likely cause.
the evening of 7 October 2021, Sharyn began dialysis. However, her condition
continued to deteriorate, and, in the early hours
of 8 October 2021, the
treating team concluded that her organ failure was not survivable. The family
met with the treating clinicians
in the afternoon of 8 October 2021. They were
told that Sharyn would die within 24 hours. They left the hospital.
condition deteriorated quickly, which, unfortunately, restricted
the opportunity for all of the family members to be present when
Sharyn passed
away. She was declared deceased at 0027 hours on 9 October
The Dosage of Paracetamol
What dose should have been administered?
noted, the view of Dr TN was that 1 g paracetamol QID was not an appropriate
dose for a woman of Sharyn’s weight. Subsequently,
Ms EC from the
Medication Safety and Quality Team at the TCH pharmacy expressed the same view
in correspondence sent to the Court.
In her opinion, having regards to various
drug consumption guides employed at TCH (MIMS, AHM, and UpToDate), given Sharyn
only weighed
39 kgs, the dose of paracetamol should have been:
(a) according to MIMS and AHM, no more than 585 mg every four hours, with a
maximum dose not exceeding 2340 mg; and
(b) according to UpToDate, no more than 487.5 mg every four hours, or 585mg
every six hours.
According to Ms EC, Sharyn’s dose of 1 g four times a day
“exceeded both the maximum amount per dose and the maximum per
Why was the high dose given?
HE says in his statement that he references guidance tools such as MIMS, AHM,
and UpToDate when prescribing medications, but cannot
now recall whether he did
so in Sharyn’s case. He does not reflect upon whether the dosage was
appropriate in hindsight, but
he does note that Dr TN altered the prescription
on 3 October 2021.
BI, similarly, did not consider the appropriateness of the dosage in relation to
Sharyn’s weight when transcribing the cancelled
1 g QID prescription into
the EMM system. It is unclear what Dr BI could see when she was entering
information into EMM, but the
EMM record, as is produced in hard copy, shows the
patient’s details at the top of the page, including their weight. One
that EMM did not have the capacity to identify the inappropriateness of
the dosage and alert the prescriber/data entry officer that
consideration might be required.
does not appear that any medical review of the paracetamol being administered
took place between 3 and 7 October 2021.
The method of
administration
Administering
a medication via an intravenous route introduces that medication directly and
immediately into the bloodstream, and
it can take effect more quickly than other
methods of administration. It is known that patients on intravenous medications
be closely monitored, so that complications can quickly be
identified.
In the case of
paracetamol, good practice would dictate a review of that method of
administration every 24 hours,
a transfer to oral analgesics as soon as practicable. Sharyn was administered
medications via intravenous delivery for the period
3 to 7 October 2021. That
was, understandably, because she was nil-by-mouth following significant bowel
surgery. However, that did
not appear to have prompted a medical review of the
medications being provided over that period of time.
appeared that the first liver function testing post-surgery was carried out on 6
October, and further testing, as well as an international
normalised ratio (INR)
was done on 7 October
(post-MET call and admission to the ICU) – by that stage, the liver had
shown significant dysfunction.
THE AUTOPSY
light of the circumstances of Sharyn’s death, Coroner Taylor directed that
an internal examination be conducted, with a view
to determining the cause of
Sharyn’s death. Professor Duflou’s findings were somewhat equivocal
as to the cause of death:
At autopsy, the deceased showed evidence
of extensive surgical and medical treatment. The deceased’s body appeared
swollen and
there was evidence of coagulopathy with multiple areas of excessive
bleeding and bruising associated with therapeutic procedures
such as insertion
of drips and sampling of blood.
On internal examination of the body, surgical repair of the perforated bowel
appeared to have been successful, with no indication
of continued leakage. No
residual or recurrent cancer of the pancreas was identified. The
deceased’s liver appeared markedly
soft and was generally of small size.
No specific cause for the liver failure was identified on naked eye examination,
but on microscopy
the features were those of hepatic necrosis without
significant inflammation – a cause for this histologic pattern is
paracetamol
Other changes in the body were largely considered the result of sepsis,
multiple organ failure and markedly deranged metabolic processes.
Whether these
were the result of the initial bowel perforation, or a consequence of
paracetamol toxicity, or both processes, is not
able to be determined.
Duflou formally framed the cause of death as “adhesions-related bowel
perforation (surgically treated) and possible
paracetamol-induced liver
MANNER AND CAUSE OF DEATH
Professor Duflou’s opinion, it is not open for me to find that the
paracetamol overdose was the only operative cause of
death. For the purposes of
s 52(1) of the Act, I find that:
Sharyn Kaine died on 9 October 2021
at about 0227 hours at the Canberra Hospital, Garran in the ACT. She died of
multi organ failure
due to adhesions related bowel perforation (surgically
treated) and paracetamol-induced liver failure.
PUBLIC SAFETY
the purposes of s 52(4) of the Act, I find that a matter of public safety does
arise in connection with the inquest conducted
into Sharyn’s death.
the time of Sharyn’s death, TCH did not have any specific organisational
procedures or guidelines in respect of paracetamol
administration. The resources
referred to above – MIMS, AHM, and UpToDate – were available to all
clinicians involved
in the administration of medications, including paracetamol.
Their use should have indicated the limits referred to above. In his
Dr HE said that he usually uses those online resources, but cannot say that he
did so in Sharyn’s case. Dr BI did
not independently review the
suitability of the dose she charted. Clinical teams subsequently responsible for
Sharyn’s care
did not detect the error in the dosage. Processes, including
warning functionality within EMM, were not sufficiently robust so as
to compel a
review of the doses being administered.
the time of Sharyn’s death, NSW Health had adopted systems that
supplemented the dosing guidance provided by standard resources
over and above
the standard guides, such as MIMS. NSW have included paracetamol on its list of
high-risk medications, due to the
demonstrated and on-going risks of paracetamol
overdose, particularly in the setting of IV administration. Guidance is given as
dosing levels, with reminders given to adjust dosage where patients are
underweight. In respect of IV paracetamol, guidance is given
paracetamol is administered by IV means, review of the appropriateness of dosage
should occur every 24 hours, and it should
be replaced by oral dosage “at
the earliest opportunity”. If the dosing occurs for longer than 48 hours,
liver function
tests should be carried
question of whether such guidance should be adopted in the ACT was put to CHS by
the Court. Whilst no dispute was raised with
the content of the guidance
available in NSW, the view taken in the response provided by
was that the introduction of
the Digital Health Record (DHR)
rendered that form of written guidance redundant:
Adding paracetamol
to CHS High-Risk Medicine register will have limited effectiveness at reducing
the reoccurrence of such incidences.
Since this incident MedChart and the
National Inpatient Medication Chart have been replaced by DHR. The DHR
electronic prescribing
system EPIC has dose range checking that includes single
dose, daily dose, weight-based dose, and cumulative dose checking. If the
dose Sharyn was prescribed on EMM was prescribed on EPIC a user would be
advised, they have breached a dose range based on her weight
and provided with
an easy pathway to correcting their error. There is a graded assertiveness in
the presentation of the alerts depending
on the severity of the dose.
Nurses will similarly be advised if the dose they intend to administer breaches
the normal dose range.
As an additional safety check errors are visible to
pharmacists and overridden dose warnings are presented to pharmacists as part
the verification process. Therefore, EPIC drastically reduces the likelihood of
this type of error and presents multiple opportunities
for the error to be
detected and corrected to avoid harm to the patient.
comparative analysis was undertaken by CHS of the NSW guidance and the
functionality of the DHR, which highlighted, amongst other
things, the capacity
of the DHR to identify potential overdoses before they occurred. For example,
weight-based dosing is an in-built
feature of DHR for adults and paediatric
patients. For an adult patient of 39 kgs to be prescribed a dose that deviates
programmed rules, an alert with the correct dosing would be displayed.
Similarly, if the dosing exceeds a maximum single or daily
dose, the prescriber
will be alerted. The DHR also provides guidance to those administering
paracetamol by IV means.
potential of the DHR to address the incidence of overdosing in a hospital
setting is acknowledged. However, its practical efficacy
in addressing
(specifically) the incidence of paracetamol overdoses in Canberra hospitals was
not the subject of evidence. One assumes
that the potential for human error
remains. For example, if an incorrect patient weight is input into the DHR, then
the potential
for paracetamol overdosing may remain. Sharyn’s case also
involved an input error, but in a (largely) pre-digital prescription
monitoring environment.
SECTION 55 NOTICE
noted in [17], as my findings contain a comment adverse to a person, namely, the
Territory and the various clinicians responsible
for the paracetamol overdose
that occurred in this case, I provided the Territory with a copy of the proposed
comment and my provisional
findings, with advice consistent with s 55 of the Act
as to how they might respond. A response was received through the ACTGS by
letter dated 19 August 2024, which relevantly stated:
CHS would like
to take this opportunity to clarify that the previous response provided to the
Coroner via the ACT Government Solicitor
on 15 April 2024 demonstrated how the
Digital Health Record (OHR) would have made a difference in relation to the
intravenous (IV)
paracetamol administered to Ms Kaine only and does not apply to
the oral administration of paracetamol.
CHS acknowledges that there remains a risk that adult patients that weigh
less than 50kg may be administered an inappropriate dose
of oral paracetamol, as
OHR does not currently have the functionality that provides alerts and
associated weight adjusted dosage
recommendations for oral paracetamol. CHS is
currently working with Digital Solutions Division within ACT Health Directorate
this functionality for oral paracetamol. The design will look the
same as that used for intravenous paracetamol. The timing for the
functionality to be implemented is currently under review. It is a high
priority, and the timing will reflect this.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Inquest into the Death of Patricia (Jill) Croxon
[2023] ACTCD 3
investigation with a hearing was undertaken by me into another drug overdose
death at TCH. The death of Mrs Croxon also pre-dated
the introduction of the
DHR. In that inquest, evidence that pointed to the potential for the DHR to
reduce the incidences of adverse
(including non-fatal) medication outcomes was
also given. Evidence was also given of the capacity of the TCH pharmacy to
trends in that regard.
the reliance placed on the DHR to improve patient outcomes in this important
area, and the remaining shortfall in its functionality
outlined by the Territory
in its response of 19 August 2024, it would inform public consideration of the
efficacy of the DHR process
for CHS to produce its data on trends to determine
the efficacy of the DHR in this
recommend that CHS publishes statistical material that identifies trends in
adverse medication outcomes (including non-fatal outcomes)
at TCH since the
introduction of the DHR, including adverse outcomes involving paracetamol.
acknowledge that Sharyn’s passing has caused great distress to her
extended family. I offer my sincere condolences. I am grateful
for the role that
Danielle has played in my investigation.
I certify that the preceding fifty-three [53] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the reasons for findings of his Honour Coroner
Associate: Markus Ching
Date: 16 September 2024
Under the Act, an
“inquest” is synonymous with an investigation.
QID means four times per
Jean Kim and Orlando de
Medication Routes of Administration
(Stat Pearls Publishing,
Webpage, August 2023) <
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK568677/
See [45] below regarding NSW
Health guidance, and also the Queensland Department of Health Guideline on Safe
Paracetamol Use, effective
Probably as a marker for
An example of this
guidance was found in the NSW Health Protocol: “
Prescribing Protocol
SESLHDPR/717. Protocol for the safe use of
letter dated 15 April 2024.
DHR commenced in November 2022. “The Digital Health Record is a record of
all interactions between a person and the public
health system in the ACT. As
such, it is much more detailed. It will contain records of observations,
medications, data fed from
devices such as infusion pumps and patient monitors,
information on who is in which care facility bed, or which operating theatre
much more. It is a complete view of health care activities in the ACT public
health system”: Online sources ACT Government
Digital Strategy.
RTF format (337 KB)
Signed PDF/A format