DPP v Niatin [2025] ACTSC 473 (22 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
DPP v Niatin
[2025] ACTSC 473
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
(1) For the offence of sexual intercourse without consent (CC2024/11897),
the offender is convicted and sentenced to 1 year and 9
imprisonment, commencing on 28 November 2024 and expiring on 27 August
(2) For the offence of attempted sexual intercourse without consent
(CC2025/4970), the offender is convicted and sentenced to 1 year,
1 month and 15
days’ imprisonment, commencing on 13 October 2025 and expiring on 27
November 2026.
(3) The overall sentence will be a term of imprisonment of 2 years,
commencing on 28 November 2024 and expiring on 27 November 2026.
(4) A non-parole period of 15 months will be imposed, commencing on 28
November 2024 and expiring on 27 February 2026.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – sexual intercourse without
consent – attempt sexual intercourse without consent – where victim
was a sex worker – where sex workers are particularly
vulnerable to
offences of this kind – where offender faced hardship in custody due to
language difficulties – where offender
faced deportation upon release from
custody – sentenced to 2 years’ imprisonment – non-parole
period of 15 months
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Criminal Code 2002
Cases Cited:
DPP v Dalgliesh (a pseudonym)
[2017] HCA 41
262 CLR 428
v Aghahosseini
[2024] ACTSC 237
DPP v Ayoub (No 5)
[2023] ACTSC
DPP v Earle
[2023] ACTSC 93
DPP v Hudson
[2023] ACTSC
DPP v Hudson
[2023] ACTSC 333
DPP v Ivanovski
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
R v Al-Harazi (No
[2017] ACTSC 350
R v El-Debel; R v Kahlon (No 7)
[2022] ACTSC
R v Emberton
[2022] ACTSC 286
[2017] ACTSC
[2015] HCA 39
256 CLR 550
Shrestha v R
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48
The Queen v Miller
[2019] ACTCA 25
The Queen v Miller
[2019] ACTCA 25
[2002] NSWCCA 380
Director of Public Prosecutions
Rony Niatin (Offender)
Representation:
N Deakes (DPP)
E Chen (Offender)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
ACT Legal Aid (Offender)
File Number:
SCC 127 of 2025
Introduction
Niatin (the offender) has entered pleas of guilty to one count of sexual
intercourse without consent (CC2024/11897), contrary
(ACT) (the first offence), and one count of attempted sexual
intercourse without consent (CC2025/4970) also contrary to
, by virtue of section 44 of the
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT) (the second offence). Both offences were committed against the same victim
and arose from within the same course of conduct.
The maximum penalty for each
offence is 12 years’ imprisonment.
offending occurred in a licensed sex work establishment, a regulated but
entirely lawful industry and occupation in the Australian
Capital Territory. The
offending began as initial consensual activity but strayed to nonconsensual acts
for the sexual gratification
of the offender.
The offending
the evening of Friday, 22 November 2024, the victim commenced a shift at Harlots
Canberra in Fyshwick in the Australian Capital
Territory. Harlots Canberra is a
brothel and the victim worked there as an escort.
before 11:59pm, the offender and his friend entered Harlots Canberra. At around
12:10am on Saturday, 23 November 2024, the
victim entered the introduction room
inside Harlots Canberra where she met the offender and his friend. The victim
introduced herself
to both. A short time later the offender informed Harlots
staff that he would like to make a booking with the victim. The offender’s
friend made a booking with another escort.
passing a health test and showering, the offender entered a room with the victim
and paid the victim some cash.
victim noticed the offender was overtly touching his penis, and asked him to put
on a condom before engaging in any further acts.
The offender wished to perform
cunnilingus on the victim. She reached for a dental dam beside the bed. (A
dental dam is a form of
protection worn over the vagina and anus to protect the
wearer from sexually transmitted diseases). The victim tried to give the
offender a dental dam. The offender said to the victim “no, we don’t
need that – we don’t need that”.
offender proceeded to use his mouth and tongue to perform cunnilingus on the
victim’s vagina unprotected for about five
seconds, before placing his
fingers into the victim’s vagina. The victim told the offender
“okay, darling, if you put
a condom on, we can get straight into
offender put a condom on and the victim performed fellatio on the offender. The
victim noticed that the condom appeared to be
tight. She told the offender he
should take it off, and put another one in its place. The offender replaced the
condom on his penis.
The offender and the victim then engaged in consensual
penile-vaginal sexual intercourse, with the offender behind the victim while
was in a kneeling position on the bed facing away from him.
in this position, the victim felt the offender stop briefly before continuing.
She noted it felt like skin-to-skin contact,
rather than the feeling of latex.
The victim told the offender “no”, and to put a condom on. She then
watched the offender
pick up and place the same condom back onto his penis
before continuing intercourse in the same position.
short time later, the victim felt the condom was no longer on the
offender’s penis whilst he was inside her. She could no
longer feel the
latex. She began to say “no” and “stop” again
repeatedly.
offender used his hands to push the victim’s upper body into the bed and
her head was pushed into the blankets. The offender
continued to have
unprotected penile-vaginal sexual intercourse with the victim.
victim told the offender repeatedly throughout the interaction that he needed to
wear a condom. The victim formed the view that
the offender either did not
understand what she was saying, or that he was refusing to listen.
the offender was engaging in penile-vaginal intercourse with victim, the victim
felt the tip of the offender’s penis near
her anus. She felt immediate
pain in her anus and told the offender to stop. The victim was unsure if the
offender’s penis
penetrated her anus. The victim did not consent to anal
intercourse.
victim immediately stopped the appointment by pretending the duration of the
services had lapsed. They put their clothes on and
returned to the reception
area of the establishment. The offender’s friend was in the reception
waiting for the offender.
the offender was in the reception area, the victim informed other staff that she
had been sexually assaulted. The offender and
his friend left. Police were
subsequently notified. Later that morning, police arrived at the brothel and
gathered evidence before
taking the victim to the Canberra Hospital to undergo a
medical examination.
around 11:00am on 28 November 2024, police located the offender at his work at a
construction site in Campbell. The offender was
arrested and cautioned. He was
then conveyed to the ACT Watch House. He has remained in custody since that
The Victim Impact Statement
victim provided a Victim Impact Statement in which she described the effects of
the offending upon her. She said that since the
offending, she has felt
“very isolated”. She said that she did not feel comfortable telling
her family or her friends
leave her home. She said that she no longer felt safe in the world.
the victim did return to work, she found she was dissociating, which affected
her ability to be present in a booking. The offending
also affected her
relationships with her colleagues. She has reduced her work hours to limit the
negative impact upon her colleagues
and clients. As a result, she has sustained
a lot of financial loss.
offending has also had a negative impact upon the victim’s intimate
relationships and her ability to trust other people,
particularly in intimate
victim concluded:
In order to continue living my life I have had to push down my feelings about
this incident, and I am carrying all my emotions about
this around with me. I
bottle up all my emotions, and sometimes I just can’t anymore, and it all
comes out, and it makes life
really difficult.
I want this man to know how he treated me was not ok!
The offender’s subjective
offender is a citizen of Vanuatu. He arrived in Australia approximately three
years ago. He overstayed his visa in order to work.
Australian Border Force have
confirmed that the offender is an unlawful non-citizen. He will be deported upon
the expiry of any custodial
sentence imposed.
his interview with the author of the Pre-Sentence Report (which was conducted in
English), the offender described a supportive
upbringing in Vanuatu with his
parents, two older brothers and two sisters. The offender’s father and
eldest brother are both
now deceased. The offender was 14 years old when his
father passed away. He assumed financial responsibility for his mother and
after this time. As an adult, he has continued to provide financial
support to his mother and younger sister, whilst also supporting
his wife and
three children.
offender denied any past or current issues with drugs or alcohol. He told the
presentence report author that he was under the
influence of alcohol at the time
of the commission of the offences. He described this as a “rare night
out”. The offender
identified alcohol as a contributing factor in the
commission of the offences. He has not consumed alcohol since that time.
offender has no criminal history. He was of good character prior to the
commission of the present offences. Whilst in custody,
he has been employed as a
sweeper, reflecting his commitment to work and prosocial activities.
offender gave evidence via a Bislama interpreter in the sentencing proceedings.
He said that his life in prison has been “very
hard”. He explained
that he has “no friends, I cannot communicate, I can’t speak English
very well, I am isolated
and alone in the prison.” Since his
incarceration, the offender has been unable to provide financial support to his
in Vanuatu, and “can no longer pay for the electricity, the water
bills, the school fees or hospital bills..” The offender
also expressed
remorse, saying “if I was able to apologise to [the victim], I would
apologise and ... ask her forgiveness”.
Determination
following features of the offending are relevant to the assessment of the nature
and circumstances of both offences:
(i) The victim, as a sex worker, was in a position of vulnerability;
(ii) The offending was opportunistic and not planned;
(iii) The duration of the service was 20 to 30 minutes. The offending was of a
considerably shorter duration. It is not possible
to state the length of either
offence, other than to say that neither were momentary, nor prolonged, and that
the first offence was
of a longer duration than the second;
(iv) The removal of the condom exposed the victim to the risk of sexually
transmitted disease and, in respect of the first offence,
(v) The first offence was a rolled-up count consisting of more than one act of
penetration, although occurring in very short succession.
offender’s counsel submitted, it is properly characterised as a course of
(vi) There was some force used, in particular pushing and forcing the
victim’s head into the blankets in relation to the first
(vii) Whilst the victim did not suffer severe injuries, she sustained soreness
in and around her anus (relevant to the count of the
second offence) and some
tenderness to the back of her head;
(viii) The second offence (attempted anal intercourse) came close to completion.
It was only the victim’s resistance that hindered
the penetration.
Agreed Facts records that the victim “formed the view that the offender
either didn’t understand what she was saying
or was refusing to
listen” (emphasis added). It is difficult to understand why the victim
considered that there was a possibility
that the offender did not understand
what she was saying. She had repeatedly said “no” and
“stop” to the
offender. It is clear from the Agreed Facts that the
offender’s level of understanding of English was sufficient for him to
communicate with the victim earlier in the encounter. The Pre-Sentence Report
author was able to conduct an interview with the offender
in English. In his
evidence in the sentence proceedings, the offender acknowledged that the words
“yes” and “no”
are the same in Bislama as in English.
Nonetheless,
the victim was the subject of the offending, and it is clear from the Agreed
Facts that she had a doubt about whether
or not the offender understood what she
was saying. In these circumstances, I am not satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the offender
knew that the victim was not consenting to sexual
intercourse without a condom.
is not, however, a matter which greatly reduces the objective seriousness of the
offences. In circumstances where the victim
repeatedly said “no” and
“stop”, the offender’s recklessness is of a high order. As the
offender acknowledged
that he understands the meaning of “yes” and
“no”, any lack of understanding of the victim’s lack of
consent is likely to have been attributable to the offender’s consumption
of alcohol at the time of the offending. As the offender’s
properly acknowledged, this is not a matter that operates in mitigation of the
sentence to be imposed.
into account all of the above considerations, the need for denunciation and for
deterrence, both general and specific, is high.
As Berman AJ observed in
[2023] ACTSC 333
[S]ex workers are particularly vulnerable to offences of this kind. The very
nature of their employment requires that they have sex
with strangers when they
are alone. ... Such people should know that if they go beyond what has been
agreed and commit offences of
sexual violence upon a sex worker who has made it
clear that he or she does not consent, then the criminal law will mark the
wrongfulness
of such conduct with significant sentences.
Offenders are sentenced in order to protect the community of which sex workers
are a part. They deserve the protection of the criminal
law just as much as
accountants, factory workers, doctors and bus drivers.
The Queen v Mitchell
[2002] NSWCCA 380
The Queen v Miller
[2019] ACTCA 25
victim powerfully explained the harm which the offending had caused in her
victim impact statement, to which I have already referred.
The sentence to be
imposed must also adequately recognise this harm.
accept the offender’s evidence that he is remorseful for the harm that he
has caused to the victim. He has good prospects
of rehabilitation.
offender has spent 329 days
in custody, since 28 November 2024, following
his arrest. By reason of the language barrier, the offender is “isolated
The prosecution accepted that the
offender’s custody has been more onerous as a result of his language
difficulties: see
R v Al-Harazi (No 7)
[2017] ACTSC 350
the offender’s time in custody, he has not been able to financially
provide for his family in Vanuatu, as he was prior
to this incarceration. The
prosecution accepted that this constitutes family hardship which should be taken
into account on sentence:
R v El-Debel; R v Kahlon (No 7)
offender pleaded guilty in the Magistrates Court. I will reduce the sentences by
25% to take account of his early guilty pleas.
prosecution provided a table of comparative cases. This table includes
interstate sentences imposed for offending relating to
sex workers. As the
offender’s counsel submitted, these interstate decisions are of little
guidance, as they concern offences
which carry different maximum penalties, and
were determined in different statutory sentencing regimes: see
DPP v Earle
[2023] ACTSC 93
sentences imposed for similar offending in this jurisdiction included
[2025] ACTSC 237
DPP v Aghahosseini
[2024] ACTSC 237
DPP v Hudson
[2023] ACTSC 333
DPP v Ayoub (No 5)
[2023] ACTSC
R v Emberton
[2022] ACTSC 286
The Queen v Miller
[2019] ACTSC 37
[2017] ACTSC
The prosecution’s table of those sentences is annexed to this
course, I have carefully considered the sentences imposed in these decisions, as
required by
s 33(1)(za)
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT), whilst
bearing in mind the limitations of such comparative cases:
[2015] HCA 39
256 CLR 550
DPP v Dalgliesh (a pseudonym)
[2017] HCA 41
262 CLR 428
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
is no dispute that the only appropriate sentence to be imposed is one of
full-time imprisonment. Taking into account all of
the matters I have described
above, I will sentence the offender for the offence of sexual intercourse
without consent to imprisonment
for 1 year and 9 months (discounted from 2
years and 4 months). For the offence of attempted sexual intercourse without
I will sentence the offender to imprisonment for 1 year, 1 month and 15
days (discounted from 18 months).
prosecution acknowledged that, as the two offences occurred within short
succession, there should be a measure of concurrency
in the sentences imposed.
The sentence for the offence of attempted sexual intercourse without consent
will be accumulated by three
months upon the sentence for sexual intercourse
without consent.
offender will be deported upon his release from custody. The offender’s
counsel conceded that this matter does not operate,
of itself, to mitigate the
sentence to be imposed. This concession was properly made. The offender’s
liability to deportation
arises from his failure to abide by the conditions of
his visa, rather than as a result of the offending.
the offender’s counsel submitted that the offender’s deportation is
of potential relevance to the structuring
of the sentence to be imposed.
Specifically, the offender’s counsel submitted that as the offender will
be deported upon his
release, I should impose a partially suspended sentence,
rather than setting a non-parole period. The offender’s counsel submitted
that this would avoid the offender having to apply for parole, which may be
difficult in light of his language difficulties.
offender’s counsel acknowledged that this course would not be appropriate
if I formed the view that the offender should
receive a minimum term of 12
months imprisonment or more: see
Crimes (Sentencing)
am not satisfied that it is appropriate for the offender to receive a minimum
term of less than 12 months’ imprisonment. Taking
into account all of the
matters that I have set out above, I consider that the appropriate minimum term
is 15 months’ imprisonment.
It remains appropriate for the Court to set a
non-parole period, notwithstanding that the offender will be deported upon his
Shrestha v R
[1991] HCA 26
(1991) 173 CLR 48
at 71 - 73. It will be incumbent on Corrective Services to ensure that he has
assistance in preparing his application for parole.
orders of the Court are:
(1) For the offence of sexual intercourse without consent (CC2024/11897), the
offender is convicted and sentenced to 1 year and 9
months’ imprisonment,
commencing on 28 November 2024 and expiring on 27 August 2026.
(2) For the offence of attempted sexual intercourse without consent
(CC2025/4970), the offender is convicted and sentenced to 1 year,
1 month and 15
days’ imprisonment, commencing on 13 October 2025 and expiring on 27
November 2026.
(3) The overall sentence will be a term of imprisonment of 2 years, commencing
on 28 November 2024 and expiring on 27 November 2026.
(4) A non-parole period of 15 months will be imposed, commencing on 28 November
2024 and expiring on 27 February 2026.
I certify that the preceding forty-five [45] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Sentence of her Honour Justice
ANNEXURE A – Table of Comparative Cases
Objective Features
Subjective Features
DPP v Ivanovski
[2025] ACTSC 237
1x sexual intercourse without consent
The offender made a booking with the victim, who was a sex worker. The
offender told the victim he wanted to have unprotected sex.
The victim made it
clear she did not offer “natural services”.
The offender initially wore a condom. However, during the booking, the
offender removed the condom.
The offending was opportunistic and not prolonged, there was no threat of
violence, the victim was put at risk of disease and pregnancy,
the offender was
clearly aware of the victim’s non-consent and there was a profound
negative impact on the victim.
Assessed as suitable for an ICO.
No criminal history.
Offender used cocaine and methylamphetamine.
Good work history.
Breakdown of marriage prior to offence, but in a new relationship at the
time of sentencing.
Denial of offending.
2 years and 6 months’ imprisonment.
Suspended after 12 months upon entering a GBO for 1 year and 6
DPP v Aghahosseini
[2024] ACTSC 237
McCallum CJ
4x rolled up counts of sexual intercourse without consent
2x act of indecency without consent taken into account
3 other criminal incidents (burglary, escape from custody) were also
sentenced for.
The offender, who was 37, contacted the 19-year-old victim on Grindr. The
offender offered payment for the victim to meet him and
undress while the
offender masturbated. The victim agreed but stated he would not engage in sex.
The offender engaged in several acts of sexual intercourse without consent,
including penetrating the victim’s anus with his
finger and his penis, and
inserting his penis into the victim’s mouth. The victim was protesting and
in pain during the offending.
The offender knew the victim did not consent to any of the acts, the victim
suffered pain and discomfort, force was used during the
offending, and the
offending involved several skin-on-skin acts.
Born in Iran and immigrated to Australia in 2013.
Illicit substance user.
Positive relationship with mother.
Psychiatric diagnosis most consistent with schizophrenia, however
culpability not reduced for sexual offending.
Previous employment.
Likely to be deported.
2 years and 6 months’ imprisonment for each count of sexual
intercourse without consent, fully cumulative.
Total sentence: 6 years and 1 month’s imprisonment.
NPP of 4 years.
DPP v Hudson
[2023] ACTSC 333
3x sexual intercourse without consent
1x attempt sexual intercourse without consent
1x sexual assault in the third degree
3x act of indecency without consent
The offender’s friend paid for the services of the victim, who was a
sex worker. The offender committed several acts of indecency
without consent on
the victim. The offender then used force on the victim by straddling her chest,
telling the victim he wanted to
“face fuck” her, and putting his
penis in her mouth. The victim found a condom and put it in her mouth to protect
The offender attempted to then penetrate the victim’s vagina with his
penis but could not as his penis was not erect. The offender
roughly penetrated
the victim’s vagina with his fingers while holding her down, causing
injuries to her genitalia. The offender
then attempted to punch the victim but
swung and missed.
This was a degrading series of assaults which occurred despite the
victim’s protests, force was used which caused injury, the
use of a condom
was only due to the victim’s actions to protect herself, and the offender
acted with entitlement.
32 years at time of sentencing.
No prior sexual offending but above average risk for sexual
reoffending.
Family hardship.
Exposed to domestic violence and alcoholism as a child –
considerations enlivened.
Found guilty after trial. Continued to deny guilt, and lacked
Sexual intercourse without consent:
18 months’ imprisonment
for each count
Attempted sexual intercourse without consent:
imprisonment
Sexual assault in the third degree:
imprisonment
Total sentence: 4 years and 9 months’ imprisonment.
NPP of 2 years and 6 months.
DPP v Ayoub (No 5)
1x inflict actual bodily harm with intent to engage in sexual
intercourse
1x sexual intercourse without consent
1x common assault
The offender attended a brothel while under the influence of
methamphetamine and paid for a standard service. While in the room with
victim, the offender put his hand around her neck and choked her without her
consent. The offender aggressively and repetitively
penetrated the
victim’s vagina with his fingers, and held open the victim’s mouth
to spit in it.
The choking was serious enough to cause bruising to the victim’s
neck. The victim was in a vulnerable position as a sex worker,
and struggled to
get away from the offender. The offending was assessed as in the mid-range of
objective seriousness.
Regular criminal history over a long period, but no prior sex
History of drug use from childhood.
Mental health condition complicated by drug use.
Inflict actual bodily harm
– 20 months’
imprisonment
Sexual intercourse without consent
– 14 months’
imprisonment
Total sentence: 30 months’ imprisonment.
Suspended after 18 months and 22 days.
R v Emberton
[2022] ACTSC 286
1x aggravated robbery
1x destroying or concealing evidence
1x sexual intercourse without consent
The offender contacted the victim, an independent sex worker, requesting
her services. When the offender arrived at the victim’s
apartment, he
pulled a knife from his pocket and demanded money. After the victim gave him
some money, the offender directed the
victim to take off her clothes and have
sex with him. After ejaculating, the offender took the victim’s phone and
deleted her
call log and message history.
It would have been clear to the offender that sexual acts were only agreed
to on a commercial basis, and that he was proceeding without
consent. The
offending was assessed as towards the upper end of the mid-range of objective
seriousness.
Primary motivation was financial strain
Strong prospects of rehabilitation
No criminal history
25% discount for guilty plea
Sexual intercourse without consent:
imprisonment.
Total sentence: 4 years and 5 months’ imprisonment.
NPP of 2 years and 4 months.
The Queen v Miller
[2019] ACTCA 25
Burns, Loukas‑Karlsson and Bromwich JJ
1x sexual intercourse without consent
The victim was a sex worker who informed the offender that sexual activity
involving her anus was not to occur. The offender agreed
and paid for a two-hour
period involving extra services. While performing oral sex upon the victim, the
offender inserted his finger
into her anus.
The offending was not premeditated, was impulsive and occurred over a very
short period of time. The vulnerability of sex workers
was recognised.
Close relationships with family
Full time employment
Offending fuelled by alcoholism
Antiquated but significant criminal history
High risk of general reoffending.
2 years’ imprisonment, fully suspended upon entry into a GBO.
On appeal, the sentence was found to be manifestly inadequate, however the
Court exercised its residual discretion to dismiss the
[2019] ACTSC 37
Loukas-Karlsson J
4x act of indecency without consent
3x sexual intercourse without consent
The offender and the victim worked together as cleaners for a hotel. Over
the course of two separate days the offender groped the
victim, masturbated in
front of the victim and undressed the victim. On one of the days, the offender
engaged in penile-vaginal intercourse
with the victim on three occasions without
the victim’s consent.
Offending was opportunistic, but formed part of a continuing course of
conduct. The victim was entitled to a safe workplace.
Low risk of reoffending
No criminal history
Hardship to family
Deportation and extra-curial punishment
Refusal or cancellation of visa on character grounds
17 months, 18 months and 18 months’ imprisonment for each count of
sexual intercourse without consent.
Total sentence: 4 years’ imprisonment.
NPP of 2 years.
[2017] ACTSC 357
1x sexual intercourse without consent
The offender had consumed a large amount of alcohol and was very
intoxicated. The offender attended an escort agency and paid the
victim for oral
sex only. During the service, the offender instructed the victim to have sex
with him. She declined as it was not
a part of the service. The offender then
struck the victim with an open hand to the face, pulled her hair and rolled on
top of her.
The offender penetrated the victim’s vagina with his penis
despite her pleas to stop. The victim managed to escape, and alerted
The offending was relatively brief in duration, but occurred when the
victim was alone and vulnerable. Violence was involved, but
only transient
injury was caused. The offending was not premeditated, the offender’s goal
was self-gratification, and the offender
ignored repeated protests. The
offending was assessed as in the mid-range of objective seriousness.
18 years old at the time of offending.
No prior criminal history.
Remorse demonstrated.
Conviction would significantly hinder employment prospects.
20% discount for guilty plea.
24 months’ imprisonment, suspended after 5 months.
RTF format (258 KB)
Signed PDF/A format