Julian Moufarrige and Shane McNamee v Peter Vickers and Susan Vickers [2008] ACTRTT 15 (26 September 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: Julian Moufarrige and Shane McNamee v Peter Vickers and Susan
Vickers [2008] ACTRTT (15)
of 319 of 2008
Catchwords: Compensation for breach of quiet enjoyment and failure to
repair by landlord.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES
TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT
319 of 2008
Julian Moufarrige and Shane McNamee
(Applicant/Tenant)
Peter Vickers and Susan Vickers
(Respondent/Landlord)
Tribunal :A. Anforth
Date :4 July 2008
The Respondent is to pay the Applicant the sum of $4700.00 being compensation
for failure to repair defects arising during the tenancy;
failure to deliver
premises in a reasonable state of repair at the commencement of the tenancy; and
breach of quiet enjoyment.
The above amount is to be paid on or before 3
of August 2008.
..................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
) NO: RT 319
Julian Moufarrige and Shane McNamee
(Applicant/Tenant)
Peter Vickers and Susan Vickers
(Respondent/Landlord)
REASONS FOR DECISION
present dispute concerns a tenancy at unit 50 Waterfront, 9 Eastlake Parade
Kingston Act. The premises are new luxury premises
and the Applicant was the
first occupant of those premises.
tenancy commenced on 7 December 2007 at a rent of $1250 per week and a bond of
$5000.00 was paid.
way of brief overview, the premises suffered a range of significant defects from
the start of the tenancy which required repairs.
The landlords authorised those
repairs to be carried out over the period from the commencement of the tenancy
and some of these repairs
were ongoing when the tenants filed their application
in the Tribunal on 15 April 2008. The defects themselves caused the tenants
substantial loss of amenity and loss of quiet enjoyment over this period. This
loss was exacerbated by the fact that tradesmen were
at the premises carrying
out the various repairs for 51 days in this period. The tenants lodged a claim
with the Tribunal on 15 April
2008 in which they sought an order to terminate
the fixed term lease on the basis of this loss of amenity and quiet enjoyment
to be relevantly compensated.
to the application was an attachment which set out the relevant chronology of
events. The attachment read:
We the tenants of 50/9 Eastlake Pde believe the Landlord to be in
breach of the lease. Below is a list of activities and maintenance
significantly impeded our use and enjoyment of this property.
The main issues being
*Oven reported as faulty in first week of tenancy. (Oven non operational).
Oven not replaced for another 13 weeks. Owner waited on
replacement under
*Floorboards in Dining, lounge, and corridor significantly bowed. Issue
reported on ingoing inventory. They were removed by the builder
in the latter
part of December and not re-laid until the end of February.
*Whole row of tiles ripped up on the balcony in the first week of March. This
was done to test for leaks into apartments below. Tiles
still not replaced.
*Fly screens missing for sliding doors in the West facing living area,
reported on ingoing inspection. Not replaced until the last
week of January.
There are serious heat issues with the living area. Sheer curtains have little
impact on screening the sun, as a
result of not being able to open our sliding
doors to circulate air we had to run our air-conditioning 24 hours during a very
*Water poured out of the air-conditioning unit in the ceiling flooding the
kitchen. This required a piece of gyprock 1 metre by 1.5
metres adjacent to the
kitchen be removed. Builder has said that everything will be fixed by Wednesday
next week. Approx 6 weeks
for work to be completed. We denied access this week
to work men for personal reasons.
I believe all of the five above mentioned maintenance issues to be in breach
of the standard residential tenancy terms, clause 57,
under the heading Lessor
to make repairs.
All of these repairs have or are taking well over 4 weeks without any
agreement with us the tenant to extend the period of maintenance.
Further issues that have had a cumulative negative effect on the tenancy
*2nd week in March, Feature insert on wall collapses and breaks ornamental
vase. Repaired within 1 week
*Second week of tenancy, laundry floods as a result of a concrete slab
blocking the air-conditioner overflow, repaired straight away.
*February, Builder conducts acoustic tests on our air-conditioning system due
to noise complaints from other residents
*Concierge organizes acoustic tests for our unit. Asks us to put felt on the
bottom of our dining room chairs and on our chairs on
the balcony to dampen
noise transference to apartments below.
*March, We become fully aware of noise transference issues within the
development when the vacant unit next to us is occupied. They
can clearly hear
my television and stereo when played at a normal level and we can clearly hear
their piano as if we were in the
same room. I can also clearly hear them walking
up and down the stairs and walking in their bedroom. This is highly disruptive
the noise from next door is heard at its loudest from my bedroom.
March, Both my car and my flat mate's car are broken into, with windows being
smashed. Not the fault of the Landlord but a poor reflection
on security. There
have been three occasions and many cars broken into since our tenancy
March after being told the Landlord
wishes to place the apartment on the market I sent Gabrielle Hume of PRO an
email. I requested
that we be let out of the lease or be compensated.. Our
tenancy to that point had been a revolving door for trades people. 1 was
frustrated and informed her that we would not pay any further rent until we had
a reply. We actually have continued to pay rent.
The request to sell was seen as
provocative given the floorboards had just been replaced, after approximately 13
weeks of being in
ill repair.
March 7 Gabrielle replies to my letter and informs me she is waiting on a
report from the concierge (concierge organizes maintenance
development)
Sat March 29 Frustrated at not receiving a response from PRD in relation to
the maintenance report from the concierge I meet with
the Landlord at our mutual
agreement in the apartment.
The landlord offers us a generous rent reduction from $l,250p/w to $950 p/w
for three months. The only catch is we are to provide
unrestricted access to the
selling agent.
We respond by asking for the offered rent reduction for four months, the
equivalent of how long we had been in the apartment and that
we provide access
every Saturday for several hours. I state that it is our preference however, to
be released from the lease.
I don't receive a response from the owner, so I email him letting him know
that I would appreciate a response in the next two days,
as our rent is due.
An email from the landlord is received on Monday April 7th saying that he
will be unable to have an answer that quickly as he is busy
with work and I will
hear from either the selling agent or the managing agent.
Time keeps ticking and, we have paid a further $10,864.00 since our initial
request to be released or compensated . We now want to
be compensated for the
disgraceful condition the apartment has been in and the continued interruptions
throughout our tenancy, as
well as being released from the lease. We had an
option of renting far cheaper properties but our expectation was that for the
rental of $1,250.00 per week this apartment would be an amazing place to
live.... It has been a horror story and more significant
maintenance will be
required to rectify the acoustic issues.
Finally I would like to conclude by saying I think the managing agent
primarily has been fine during our tenancy. The main issue I
have with them is
that they have not responded to us since March 7 in Relation to a maintenance
tenancy agreement and the emails of 6, 11, 31 March 2008 and 2, 7 April 2008
referred to above were annexed to the application.
landlord’s agent response on 7 March 2008 referred to above read in
I refer to your email to me of Thursday 6 March 2008 with the
subject 50/9 Eastlake Parade and our previous conversations in relation
Unfortunately new developments can bring some initial teething problems and
as you commented these have been out of the lessors control.
Whilst I understand that you have had a number of tradespeople attend to your
property, it is my understanding that these repairs
have been undertaken within
Clause 82 of The Schedule: Standard Residential Tenancy Terms. The lessor and
this office have worked
endlessly to have all repairs undertaken within a timely
manner, unfortunately some do take time when we are locked into warranty
bookings etc. It is my understanding that there are no maintenance items
outstanding with the exception of the light fitting that
you have just reported.
This has been logged with the concierge for repair.
I have spoken with Adam Johnston from the concierge's office who claims that
at no time have they entered your apartment without your
approval. He will
supply a log from the alarm company to verify this. I have also asked him for a
detailed list of all works carried
out on your unit for the Lessors reference.
As I told you in our last conversation the lessor and this office have not been
aware of the tradespeople entering your unit for testing etc. I will ask
the concierge to contact me in the first instance should
it be necessary in the
future so that I can monitor this more closely.
The approval for a spa bath is the Body Corporates'. We forwarded on your
request, but as yet have not has a response. This office
has followed this
request up with the Body Corporate on a number of occasions, I have been told
that the executive committee are
still in discussions on this matter we will
advise you as soon as the Body Corporate makes a decision on the request.
Your statement "We will pay no further rent until we have received a
response" contravenes the Schedule: Standard Residential Tenancy
Terms, as I am
sure you understand as the Director of a Real Estate Agency. Your next rent in
the amount of $5,432.00 is due on 10
March 2008.
Should your rent not be receipted in this office by the date you will be in
breach of Clause 26 and as such may receive
a Notice to Remedy, we will then
seek Lessors instructions should you not remedy the breach.
Clause 66 of The Schedule: Standard Residential Tenancy Terms states that you
are to Observe rules of the body corporate. The House
Rules for The Waterfront
clearly states the "Residents must not create any noise in an apartment in on
Common Property likely to
interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of other
residents, especially between 9pm and 8am". The Rule goes on to state that
sources of noise are music, loud voices, washing machines, dryers,
slamming doors, dragging or moving furniture especially on hard
surfaces such as
on the winter garden etc. " If your neighbours feel that you have not adhered to
this rule, than they are entitled
to make a complaint, no matter what complex.
In relation to the request for Bill Lyristakis from Berkley's Real Estate to
take a buyer through your unit. Apart from the fact that
I discussed this with
you and you agreed, the lessor is entitled to sell the property at any time.
Whilst timing is unfortunate given
the issues you have had I have been
instructed by the lessor to organise access for him. The contract is being
prepared at present
then I will confirm a suitable time with you.
As you are aware an energy rating is required for the contract. ACTNOW
inspect have requested access to prepare the EER. Can you please
authorise the
release of your mobile number for this to occur.
I will be in contact shortly once I have all information confirmed from the
concierge. I will be out of the office this week, should
you have any queries
please contact Jane Barrett of this office.
12 May 2008 the landlords filed a statement setting out their defence to the
claim made by the tenants. That statement read:
The maintenance list as
supplied by the tenants is a true
& correct reflection of the issues that they have faced
These issues
have been as a result of a new building project and totally out of the control
of Mr & Mrs Vickers.
Following a meeting with Mr Geny McCabe of Stocklands, as at 8th May 2008 all
maintenance issues have been deal with and there are
no outstanding matters.
Mr Vickers met with Mr McNamee discussing all his issues and immediately
offered compensation in the order of $ 300.00 per week. Taking
the rent from $
1250 pw to $950 per week for the next 3 months. At that time Mr Vickers was in a
difficult financial situation and
needed to place the property on the market.
This adjustment of rent was to further compensate them for the ongoing
inconvenience.
Since that meeting Mr Vickers has sourced other options and the apartment
will not be placed on the market for sale.
With all maintenance complete and the apartment not for sale we request the
Tribunal not issue a Termination Order. The owners support
compensation being
awarded to the tenants as already offered March
Mr & Mrs Vickers regret the disruption that both tenants have endured and
thank them for their co operation with PBS Builders.
Through out this period
both the owners and this office have liaised with the Concierge, Stocklands
& PBS Builders to monitor
the works and encourage all parties to have utter
respect for the tenants. We trust that now they will be able to enjoy Penthouse
matter was listed before the Tribunal on 16 May 2008 before a differently
constituted Tribunal. On that day Mr McNamee appeared
on behalf of both tenants
and Ms Hume, real estate agent appeared on behalf of the landlords. The matter
was adjourned to 19 may
2008 for hearing.
19 May 2008 Mr McNamee appeared for both tenants and Ms Hume appeared for the
landlords. Following a hearing of the parties the
Tribunal found that the
landlords had breached the terms of the residential tenancy agreement by reason
premises not being in a reasonable state of repairs at the commencement of the
tenant (prescribed term 54(1)(b) of the Act)
premises not being maintained in a reasonable state of repair during the tenancy
(prescribed term 55 of the Act)
disturbance to the tenants’ quiet enjoyment caused by the various
tradesmen carrying out repairs (prescribed term 52
of the Act).
Tribunal was satisfied that the landlords’ breaches caused a substantial
loss of use of the premises and loss of quiet enjoyment
by the tenant that
justified the termination of the tenancy and ordered pursuant to section 43 and
prescribed term 90(a) of the Act
that the tenancy be terminated as of 10am on
the 30 June 2008.
coming to the above conclusion the Tribunal was particular, but not exclusively,
influence by the fact that the landlords’
tradesmen been present at the
premises for 51 days since the commencement of the lease on 7 December 2007 to
the filing of the application
on 15 April 2008, and the fact that the tradesmen
had left the premises with very substantial holes in the floor at two points in
the premises in prominent traffic zones, each of which was easily big enough for
the tenants to fall into and potentially suffer
serious harm. These holes were
not covered or guarded in any way. The Tribunal expressed its surprise that any
responsible landlords
or tradesmen could or would allow such a dangerous
situation to exist from mid December 2007 to the end of February 2008.
issue of the quantum of the tenants compensation was adjourned to a later date
with orders for the tenants to file and serve statements
setting out the extent
of the inconvenience and distress they claim to have suffered.
tenants later filed their statements pertaining to the distress and
inconvenience suffered. The statement read:
Further to the ruling made in our favour relating to the Landlord
being in breach of the tenancy agreement. We wish to seek compensation
significant disturbance relating to our capacity for quiet enjoyment of the
The ruling primarily related to maintenance not being completed in a timely
manner. The items of maintenance were;
1) Stove faulty at the beginning of tenancy, 13 weeks to replace (Became
aware of this in the first week of tenancy during a dinner
party that was duly
cancelled). My flatmate uses an oven in normal circumstances regularly so this
was a source of great frustration.
2) Floor boards in dining, lounge and corridor Ripped up in mid December and
not replaced until the end of February. Approx 11 weeks
to be replaced after
being ripped up. This matter had a major impact on our day-to-day activities in
the apartment. Both my flat
mate and I chose to restrict visits from our younger
nephews and nieces. We were concerned for there safety.
3) Fly screens missing on main living area sliding doors at the start of
tenancy and not replaced until last week of January. The
apartment is North/West
facing, only has sheer curtains and there are no other windows in the room that
open to release hot air.
Even during a mild summer we were forced to use the
air-conditioning continuously otherwise the conditions were stifling.
4) 1 by 1.5 metre hole in ceiling caused by air conditioning leak. Reported
second week in March work substantially completed by the
second week in May.
Approx 9 weeks to be substantially completed. This made the apartment look like
a construction site for an unnecessary
long period of time. The location of the
work adjacent to the kitchen is prominent.
5) Row of tiles ripped up on balcony in Early March not replaced until the
middle of April. This work added to the feeling that we
were residing in a
construction site. This maintenance issue mainly impacted on us restricting
visits by younger relatives.
There have been a host of other maintenance issues that have negatively
affected our private enjoyment that were also noted on our
initial application
When considering our claim for compensation we request you consider firstly
the weekly rent we are paying of $1,250 per week.. When
we selected this
property we planned to be able to entertain friends, family and business
colleagues in one of Canberra's most sought
after locations, a prestigious
penthouse apartment overlooking the lake. Items 1,2 and 4 have made it
completely out of the question
to entertain, impossible to enjoy for personal
use and certainly more than stripped away any prestige associated with
any where near the paid rent.
We also request you consider that items 1,2,and 3 were not in working
condition, over the Christmas period. Both my flat mate and
I were anxious to
entertain our respective families who were very excited to have Xmas at a
'beautiful' new venue. We were unable
to provide the penthouse for either
family's Xmas.
Our private enjoyment has also been significantly disrupted not only by the
disgraceful state of repair of the property but also by
the magnitude and
intensity of the days when maintenance has been required.
There have been a total of 51 days of maintenance at the date of the first
hearing, more by the time this compensation request is
My flat mate and I are both involved in the running of our own businesses.
This allows us in normal circumstances to spend time working
from home as well
as the freedom to come home during the day to relax during the week, (we both
work weekends).
We have found the monotonous regularity of the maintenance overwhelming,
highly stressful and have both had to significantly compromise
our routines to
fit in with trades so we would finally have a habitable residence. This has been
the case for the entirety of our
We wish you to consider the cumulative impact of the ongoing maintenance, the
poor state of repair of the apartment and the inconvenience
and cost of
departing early from the lease when making your ruling for compensation.
response to the tenants statement immediately above, the landlords’ agent
filed the following statement:
Response to the Compensation claim for50/9 Eastlake Parade
The lessor is extremely disappointed that the Tribunal issued a Termination
Order and that he has be cited as in breach of the tenancy
agreement due to the
fact that all issues were out of his control and attended to by the resident
builders. In no way did he not
respond immediately to all noted issues.
In light of the Termination Order the Lessor requests the release of the
tenancy agreement is ample compensation and no further be
issued. It should be
1-The events as listed by
the tenants were over a
period and did not occur at the same time. This therefore did not render the
property in a 'disgraceful state of repair" as
indicated by the tenants.
Floorboards in the living room — the Tenant at the hearing
said "there were 5 to 6 floorboards lifted. The internal area of
the 2 storey
Penthouse apartment is 190m2 which therefore is quite insignificant. They were
not in a dangerous state as noted by
the tenant.
3-Flyscreens were at the property - the railing to the base was missing. This
was repaired. To release the hot air one simply needed
to open the glass door
— Ducted air conditioning is included in the apartment and to be the most
effective in all areas you
would keep the door dosed.
4-Air conditioning leak - repaired promptly allowing for the plaster to dry
etc — once again out of the owners control.
5-A row of tiles lifted on the terrace against a wall to check draining - the
terrace is 205m2 — quite insignificant given the
area, It should be noted
the Lessor provided a $50,000 Stainless Steel BBQ unit with sink storage etc for
the tenants enjoyment on
the 205m2 terrace.
The Lessor was disappointed that his brand new luxury apartment experienced
initial teething issues;. With the exception of the flyscreen
installation all
occurring after the tenancy commenced. An owner surely could only be considered
in breach if a maintenance issue
was reported and not acted on. Each & every
item brought to the Lessors attention was acted upon promptly, as confirmed by
tenant at the hearing. It was unfortunate that some took time to remedy with
suppliers being shutdown over the Xmas break.
It should be noted that the not installed flyscreen was pointed out to Mr
McNamee at the time of his initial inspection of the property
prior to signing a
tenancy agreement and he was not worried about it, nothing was due t0 the
installed. He agreed to occupy before
it was repaired...
matter was next listed before the Tribunal on 4 July 2008 to determine the issue
of compensation. On that occasion Mr McNamee
appeared for both tenants and Ms
Hume appeared for the landlords.
hearing the parties the Tribunal awarded the tenants the sum of $4,700.00 in
compensation calculated on a comparative verdicts
(a) For 13 weeks of the faulty
stove $300.00
(b) For 10 weeks of the dangerous holes in the floor $2000.00
(c) For 6 weeks of non flyscreen $200.00
(d) For 9 weeks delay in repairing the leading roof $100.00
(e) For 8 weeks of investigations and repairs to terrace $100.00
(f) For the repeated visits from the tradesman and their
disturbance $2000.00
9 July 2008 the landlords’ agent sought reasons for decision restricted to
a “breakdown of the compensation ...awarded”.
the course of both hearings the Tribunal explained to the parties the relevant
statutory provisions and principles of law it
relied upon. The relevant
statutory provisions are:
52. The lessor shall not cause or permit any interference with the
reasonable peace, comfort or privacy of the tenant in the use by
the tenant of
the premises.
54(1) At the start of the tenancy, the lessor must ensure that the premises,
including furniture, fittings and appliances (unless
excluded from the tenancy
agreement), are—
(a) fit for habitation; and
(b) reasonably clean; and
(c) in a reasonable state of repair; and
(d) reasonably secure.
55.(1) The lessor shall maintain the premises in a reasonable state of repair
having regard to their condition at the commencement
of the Tenancy Agreement.
The tenant shall notify the lessor of any need for repairs.
57. Subject to clause 55, the lessor shall make repairs, other than urgent
repairs, within 4 weeks of being notified of the need for
the repairs (unless
otherwise agreed).
landlords’ duty at the commencement of the tenancy is to hand over the
premises in a “reasonable” state of repair
(prescribed term
54(1)(c)). The adjective “reasonable” qualifies the “state of
repair of the premises” and
does not qualify the nature of the actions or
endeavours of the landlord to carry out the repairs (
Moore v Tidy
unreported SASC 13/8/92 Rhodes J;
Dupont v Lawrence
(1997) NSWRT
Prescribed term 54(1)(c) imports an objective test concerning the actual
state of the premises irrespective of the landlords motivation
or efforts.
landlords’ duty at the commencement of the tenancy is to ensure that all
defects that are detectable by reasonable inspection
defects”) are remedied prior to the premises being handed over. Prior to
the commencement of the tenancy the
landlords are not required to have the
premises inspected by relevant tradesmen in a search for defects, but the
landlords are required
to remedy any defects which are apparent on a reasonable
inspection by them or their agent (
Jones v Bartlett
[2000] HCA 56
Northern Sandblasting v Harris
(1997) 188 CLR 313
NSW v Watton
[1998] NSWSC 589
Gration v C Gillian Investments P/L
[2005] QCA 184
Francis v Lewis
[2003] NSWCA 152
the present case three of the five defects of which the tenants complained (see
paragraph 16 above) were apparent on a reasonable
inspection by the landlords or
their agent at the commencement of the tenancy. The flyscreen was not present at
all, the floor boards
were visibly warped and the stove was non functional. In
relation to the stove the defects would have been apparent upon the
non-technical
act of testing the oven to see if it worked prior to handing over
the premises.
landlords’ duty to repair defects arising during the tenancy
(“latent defects”) commences upon the landlords’
notice of the development of the defect (
Jones v Bartlett
[2000] HCA 56
Northern Sandblasting v Harris
(1997) 188 CLR 313
Ahluwalia v
[2003] NSWCA 175
Sakauo v Williams
[2005] NSWCA 405
Weeks v Bond
[1997] QCA 349).
In the present case the defects relating to
the airconditioning in the ceiling and the tiles on the balcony fall into this
the landlords are put on notice of the defects arising during the tenancy,
prescribed term 57 allows the landlords 4 weeks to
carry out the repairs. In the
present case neither the repairs to the ceiling arising from the leaking air
conditioner nor the tiles
on the balcony were repaired within 4 weeks.
the landlords are given the benefit of the doubt to the effect that the defects
to the stove, floor boards and flyscreen were not
known to the landlord at the
commencement of the tenancy and were not apparent to reasonable inspection at
that time, then those
defects must then be treated as latent defects arising
during the tenancy, from the time the tenants put the landlords on notice
existence of the defects. The landlords then have 4 weeks to carry out the
repairs. In the case of each of these defects the
landlords took much longer
than 4 weeks from the date of notice to carry out the repairs. To this extent
not much turns on whether
these defects are categorised as “patent”
or “latent” because the landlords are still in breach of their
contractual obligations.
landlords’ case is essentially that defects are to be expected in new
premises and once the defects were brought to the
landlords’ attention
they moved as expeditiously as circumstances permitted to carry out the repairs.
The landlords pointed
to delays in obtaining approval from warranty insurers for
the stove, delays attributable to the tradesmen, delays attributable to
Christmas and defective work on the part of the tradesmen. The Tribunal
explained to the landlords’ representatives that these
considerations went
only to the reasonableness of the landlords’ efforts to carry out the
repairs which was not a relevant
consideration. The contractual duty to repair
is one of strict liability not requiring any element of fault or negligence on
landlords’ part (
Robinson v Fretin
[2006] NSWSC 598
(supra)) modified only by such qualifications as are found in the
Act and residential tenancy agreement. As indicated above the qualification
“reasonableness” in prescribed term 54(1)(c) does not qualify the
landlords conduct or efforts to effect the repairs.
relation to the breach of quiet enjoyment caused by the presence of the
tradesmen, the landlords contended that because the tradesmen
were attending to
repairs that any disturbance caused to the tenants by the tradesmen could not be
a breach of prescribed term 52.
Unfortunately for the landlords the Full Federal
Worrall v Commissioner for Housing of Act
[2002] FCAFC 127
determined otherwise on the principle that each of the prescribed terms of the
tenancy agreement are independent and if the landlords’
repairs detracts
from the tenants’ quiet enjoyment then the tenants have been deprived of
the most important right that the
tenancy agreement conferred upon them.
September 2008
RTF format (153 KB)
Signed PDF/A format