Cummins v Lifestyle Homes (ACT) No. 1 Pty Ltd [2018] ACTIC 4 (20 November 2018)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Cummins v Lifestyle Homes (ACT) No. 1 Pty Ltd (ACN 168 332
[2018] ACTIC 4
Hearing Date:
Magistrate Theakston
See paragraph 23
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL LAW
– Sentence – non-compliance with
Health and Safety Regulations 2011
(ACT) – unlicensed employees
– failure to comply with Australian Standards – incorrect signage
– incomplete
scaffolding – accumulation of waste material
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Legislation Act 2001
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Regulations Cited:
Work Health and Safety Regulations 2011
(ACT) regs 40, 78, 85 (1),
163 (1), 308, 314 (h)
Cases Cited:
Comcare v Commonwealth of Australia
[2007] FCA 662
Bradley Cummins (Informant)
Lifestyle Homes (ACT) No. 1 Pty Ltd (ACN 168 332 429) (Defendant)
Representation:
Ms S Beaumont (Informant)
Mr D Robens (Defendant)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Informant)
Clyde & Co (Defendant)
File Numbers:
CC 40745 of 2018
CC 40746 of 2018
CC 40749 of 2018
CC 41080 of 2018
CC 41081 of 2018
CC 41082 of 2018
MAGISTRATE THEAKSTON:
1. The defendant is before the Court for sentence having
pleaded guilty to the following charges in contravention of the Work Health
Safety Regulations 2011 (ACT):
(a) CC18/40745 – allowing a worker to
carry out high risk work while unlicensed (10 October 2017) contrary to reg 85
(b) CC18/40746 – failing to comply with Australian Standard AS/NSW
3012:2010 (Electrical installations – Construction
and demolition sites)
(10 October 2017) contrary to reg 163 (1);
(c) CC18/40749 – failing to
install a sign with the principal contractor’s contact details (10 October
2017) contrary
to reg 308;
(d) CC18/41080 – failing to maintain a
workplace so as to allow for entry, exit and movement about without risk to
safety (10 October 2017) contrary to reg 40;
(e) CC18/41081
– failing to put in place arrangements ensuring compliance with Division
3.2.10 (Falling objects) (10 October
2017) contrary to reg 314 (h);
(f) CC18/41082 – failing to safely manage risk of falls (10 October
2017) contrary to reg 78.
2. As the offender is a body corporate, the
offences carry a maximum penalty of $30,000, save for charges CC18/40745 and
which carry a maximum penalty of $18,000. Those maximums are
available to this Court, as the offences are summary in nature, (see
Legislation Act 2001
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
), and therefore the limitations applicable to
indictable offences dealt with summarily do not apply, for example the maximum
specified at ss 374(7) and 375(15) of the
Crimes Act 1900
defendant entered pleas of guilty to the charges either at the first or third
appearance. I accept the pleas were entered
at an early opportunity and I take
into account the utility such action provides to the Court and others, and that
those pleas compliment
the remorse and acceptance of responsibility demonstrated
elsewhere by the defendant. I will discount the penalties I would have
otherwise imposed by 25%.
The Circumstances of the Offences
4. The facts are described within an agreed Statement of Facts
and are supplemented by evidence given by the WorkSafe ACT Inspector,
Christopher Flanagan. In early October 2017 a random inspection was conducted
at a building site, known as Opus, where the defendant
was building 63
residential units in four separate blocks. During that inspection, Mr Flanagan
made the following observations:
worker was observed to be incorrectly performing dogging work for a small mobile
crane known as a telescopic handler. That
role required a high-risk licence and
the worker did not hold, and never had held, that licence. There had been
discussions between
that worker and the managers of the defendant about the need
for him to obtain that licence. Mr Flanagan directed him to stop work.
(b) The temporary electrical distribution boards erected on the site did not
comply with the relevant standard, and there were a
number of extension leads on
site which were being used incorrectly. In particular, the boards’ earth
leakage devices were
not locked, leads from the boards extended through the
partially opened cover – rather than through purpose built holes in
box, and the extension leads were on the ground – rather than suspended,
and in places were wrapped around the scaffolding
– rather than suspended
on insulated hooks. Additionally, some of the distribution boards were not
adequately secured, and
some were not sufficiently accessible.
(c) The large sign at the front of the building site incorrectly identified a
related company, rather than the defendant, as the
(d) The site was littered with various building materials and waste. These were
located in areas of access and egress, including
on the scaffolding platforms.
They impeded the workers from being able to enter, exit and move about the site
without risk to health
and safety, both under normal conditions and in the event
of an emergency.
(e) Extensive scaffolding was erected around the buildings on the site, and was
observed to be incomplete and non-compliant with
the relevant standard. The
components missing included diagonal bracing, external raker bracing to the top
level, hand rail mesh
guards, intermediate hop up decks, and platform boards.
Additionally, some boards were not sufficiently fixed, and some showed signs
decay. The top level of scaffolding was also observed to have excessive
movement. Further, there were no barriers protecting
the scaffolding from
vehicles moving within the site, and building materials were stored on the cross
members at the base of the
scaffolding. There was a consequential risk of items
falling from the scaffolding.
(f) Associated with the way the scaffolding was assembled, there were numerous
elevated edges throughout the site without barriers
to prevent falls. Some of
those locations involved drops greater than 4 metres and presented a clear risk
of falls from height.
The Defendant’s Subjective Circumstances
5. The defendant is a company that undertakes residential
construction in Canberra. It has been operating since 2014. At the time
offences it had 25 employees, but has subsequently reduced its staff to 13. The
defendant has no criminal history.
6. At the time of the offences the
defendant had a range of written work health and safety policies and associated
paperwork in place.
This included:
Health and Safety Policy,
(b) Site Work, Health and Safety Management Plan,
(c) Safe Work Method Statements,
(d) Copies of High-Risk Licences,
(e) Plant Operator Competency and Skills Assessments,
(f) Documented toolbox talks every four weeks, and
(g) Documented safety inspections.
7. About a month before the WorkSafe inspection, the defendant
engaged a Work, Health and Safety manager. That manager conducted
inspection shortly after his appointment and identified a number of safety and
compliance issues. Those issues included no
pre-start check list for the mobile
plant, missing safety certificates for the electrical distribution boards,
extension leads being
used while on the ground and the scaffolding inspections
were not up-to-date.
8. Clearly, the processes envisaged by the
defendant’s documentation and procedures, and the appointment of a safety
did not translate into practices that avoided the above breaches on the
day of the inspection.
9. Mr Gary Kelly, a director of the defendant, gave
evidence on behalf of the defendant. He described the consequences of the
inspection, including the steps subsequently taken by the defendant to
comply with the relevant requirements. They included:
Kelly accepting full responsibility on behalf of the defendant during a record
of interview with WorkSafe officials.
(b) A prohibition notice being issued during the inspection and lifted 13 days
(c) The defendant replaced underperforming staff, in particular the site
(d) The defendant replaced the scaffolding contractor, and the deficiencies with
the scaffolding were rectified.
(e) The balance of the non-compliance issues were rectified following
discussions with contractors and staff at toolbox meetings.
(f) Since the inspection, the defendant has taken on fewer projects, in order to
ensure the same issues do not arise again.
(g) The defendant has implemented a more sophisticated contractor management
10. Mr Kelly initially suggested that he had attended the site
a week or two before the WorkSafe inspection and had not noticed that
scaffolding had been incorrectly assembled. However, he ultimately agreed that
when he attended the site, he was not there to
check the scaffolding, had not
inspected the scaffolding and was aware from the earlier report that the
scaffolding may not have
been compliant.
Consideration of Sentence
11. In this matter the following features are striking. The
defendant conducts an ongoing local business in residential construction
prior to the inspection had on paper a range of appropriate work, health and
safety processes. The WorkSafe inspection uncovered
six separate breaches of
the regulations, some of which had some potential to cause injury, and others
that had a high potential
to cause injury. In particular, the breaches in
relation to the scaffolding, namely the risks of workers and objects falling,
particularly high in the circumstances. Those breaches exposed workers to
immediate and proximate risk of very serious injury or
death, and were risks
that would have been obvious to an observer and had been brought to the notice
of the defendant. They were
also numerous in number. They were known risks,
with the likelihood of manifestation and the seriousness of the consequences
being high.
12. Fortunately no one was injured as a result of any of the
breaches. The defendant took decisive action to correct the breaches,
changing staff, contractors and processes.
13. My attention was drawn to the
decision of Comcare v Commonwealth of Australia
[2007] FCA 662
where Madgwick J,
at (120), summarised the considerations relevant to sentencing in NSW
occupational health and safety prosecutions:
under the cognate New South Wales Act refer to the following considerations
among others:
(i) the penalty must be such as to compel attention
to occupational health and safety generally, to ensure that workers whilst at
work will not be exposed to risks to their health and safety;
(ii) it is a significant aggravating factor that the risk of injury was
foreseeable even if the precise cause or circumstances of
exposure to the risk
were not foreseeable;
(iii) the offence may be further aggravated if the risk of injury is not only
foreseeable but actually foreseen and an adequate response
to that risk is not
taken by the employer;
(iv) the gravity of the consequences of an accident does not of itself
dictate the seriousness of the offence or the amount of penalty.
However the
occurrence of death or serious injury may manifest the degree of the seriousness
of the relevant detriment to safety;
(v) a systemic failure by an employer to appropriately address a known or
foreseeable risk is likely to be viewed more seriously than
a risk to which an
employee was exposed because of a combination of inadvertence on the part of an
employee and a momentary lapse
of supervision;
(vi) general deterrence and specific deterrence are particularly relevant
factors in light of the objects and terms of the Act;
(vii) employers are required to take all practicable precautions to ensure
safety in the workplace. This implies constant vigilance.
Employers must adopt
an approach to safety which is proactive and not merely reactive. In view of the
scope of those obligations,
in most cases it will be necessary to have regard to
the need to encourage a sufficient level of diligence by the employer in the
future. This is particularly so where the employer conducts a large enterprise
which involves inherent risks to safety;
(viii) regard should be had to the levels of maximum penalty set by the
legislature as indicative of the seriousness of the breach
consideration;
(xi) the neglect of simple, well-known precautions to deal with an evident
and great risk of injury, take a matter towards the worst
case category;
(x) the objective seriousness of the offence, without more may call for the
imposition of a very substantial penalty to vindicate
the social and industrial
policies of the legislation and its regime of
14. The offences before the court are strict liability in
nature and do not involve fault elements, for example intention or recklessness.
Accordingly and consistent with Madgwick J’s observations above, any
appreciation of the risk by the defendant must be an aggravating
feature of an
15. I was invited to exercise my discretion to not record
convictions.
Subsection 17(3)
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
three mandatory considerations in relation to that discretion, namely:
offender's character, antecedents, age, health and mental condition;
(b) the seriousness of the offence;
(c) any extenuating circumstances in which the offence was
16. In the present case, there was no evidence of extenuating
circumstances and therefore the third consideration provides little
assistance.
17. The first consideration favours the exercise of that
discretion. The defendant has no criminal history, there is no suggestion
similar issues in the past, the defendant had appropriate workplace safety
documentation in place and is an ongoing local business.
18. For the second
consideration, the same can be said for three of the six charges. In relation
to failing to comply with standards
for electrical installations, failing to
provide a safe general workplace and failing to install a sign with the
principal contractor’s
details, are each of a relatively low objective
seriousness. I say that because there was no immediate risk to the health or
of those on site. Those charges involved the breach of discrete layers
within a multi-layered system designed to protect the health
and safety of
persons who attended and worked on the site. This is the case even for the
charge of failing to comply with standards
for electrical installations. That
is because, while injury was possible, the risk due to these breaches was
relatively low due
to the other layers of safety that remained in place. Those
other layers included the use of earth leakage devices and the insulated
extension leads. For those charges, the low seriousness of the offences favour
the exercise of the discretion.
19. In contrast, the charges involving
falling from heights, falling objects and allowing high risk-work to be carried
out without
a licence are, to my mind, much more serious. Even in the absence
of additional failures, those breaches of themselves posed an
immediate and
significant risk to the health and safety of workers and others who attended the
site. The state of the scaffolding,
including its instability and missing
components and the presence of numerous unguarded elevated edges meant that a
moment of inattention
by a worker could have resulted in a person or object
falling from a significant height. The consequences of that would obviously
significant. Similarly, allowing the worker, who did not hold a high-risk
licence, to perform dogging work created an immediate
risk to that worker, as
well as to others who may be nearby. The failure of the worker to appropriately
perform that task was immediately
apparent to Mr Flanagan when he attended the
20. As indicated above, it is also concerning that the defendant was
put on notice about those more serious breaches, and that in
any event the
potentially serious consequences of those breaches were
foreseeable.
21. Unfortunately, there was no evidence before the Court that
quantified the costs of complying with the various obligations, compared
any costs saved by ignoring the breaches, for example contractual penalties or
interest payable as a result of a delay in the
completion of the project.
Without that evidence, it is difficult for the Court to set, with any precision,
a fine that would adequately,
but not disproportionately, deter offending of
22. In relation to the more serious offences, there is a clear
need to denounce the conduct of the defendant and to send a message
to employers
generally, and to the building industry specifically, that there will be legal
consequences of significance for breaching
Work Health and Safety
Regulations
, where health and safety is put at risk, even if such risks have not
materialised into actual injuries. Accordingly, for those matters
I will impose
significant fines. Those fines are reduced to take into account that the
breaches arose out of a common or associated
set of circumstances that occurred
on the one building site. They have also been reduced to take into account the
defendant’s
subjective circumstances, the comprehensive steps taken by the
defendant since the inspection to prevent further breaches and the
defendant assisted the investigation and entered pleas of guilty to the charges.
For the other charges I will exercise my
discretion and not record
convictions.
23. I make the following orders:
(a) In relation to charge
CC18/40745, allowing worker to carry out high risk work while unlicensed, I
record a conviction and impose
a fine of $5,000 and allow 3 months to
(b) In relation to charge CC18/40746, failing to comply with Australian
Standard AS/NSW 3012:2010 (Electrical installations –
Construction and
demolition sites), I find the offence proved, do not record a conviction and
dismiss the charge;
(c) In relation to charge CC18/40749, failing to install
a sign with the principal contractor’s contact details, I find the
proved, do not record a conviction and dismiss the charge;
(d) In relation to
charge CC18/41080, failing to maintain a workplace so as to allow for entry,
exit and movement about without risk
to health and safety, I find the offence
proved, do not record a conviction and dismiss the charge;
(e) In relation to
charge CC18/41081, failing to put in place arrangements ensuring compliance with
Division 3.2.10 (Falling objects),
I record a conviction and impose a fine of
$7,500 and allow three months to pay; and
(f) In relation to charge
CC18/41082, failing to safely manage risk of falls, I record a conviction and
impose a fine of $12,500 and
allow three months to pay.
certify that the preceding twenty-three [23] numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Judgment of his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Sam Lynch
Date: 20 November 2018
RTF format (187 KB)
Signed PDF/A format