Osuchowski & Scouller v Radojevic [2008] ACTRTT 13 (26 September 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: OSUCHOWSKI & SCOULLER V RADOJEVIC [2008] ACTRTT
Catchwords:
Lessor’s obligation to repair.
Notice to vacate clause 96(b)
Compensation
Meaning of ‘genuine intention’
Failure to repair
Legislation:
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
Sections 104;
Prescribed terms: 54(b) & (c); 55; 57; 96(b)
Tribunal: J Lennard
Date: 26 September 2008
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT
618 of 2007
RE: Monica OSUCHOWSKI & Rebecca SCOULLER
(Applicants/Tenants)
AND: Budimir RADOJEVIC & Slavka RADOJEVIC
(Respondents/Lessor)
Tribunal :J. Lennard,
Date :9 January 2008 –
IN-CHAMBERS ORDER
Residential Tenancies Tribunal finds that the lessor has:
Breached the
Residential Tenancy Agreement between the parties by failing to comply with the
obligation to repair;
Issued a notice
to vacate under clause 96(b) of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
circumstances where there was no established genuine intention that an immediate
relative would reside in the premises and where
the lessor engaged in deceptive
and deliberately misleading conduct; and
Has unlawfully
demanded, and withheld, monies relating to lessors’ costs from the
lessor shall pay an amount of
to the tenants within 14 days of
the date of this Order. This amount consists of
compensation
for failure to repair;
compensation for the invalid
termination of the tenancy and
refund of water abstraction
..................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT
618 of 2007
RE: Monica OSUCHOWSKI & Rebecca SCOULLER
(Applicants/Tenants)
AND: Budimir RADOJEVIC & Slavka RADOJEVIC
(Respondents/Lessors)
REASONS FOR DECISION
J Lennard, Member
Re: Premises at 105 Matina Street NARRABUNDAH ACT 2604
Applicant tenants and the Respondent lessor entered into a Residential Tenancy
Agreement in relation to premises at 105 Matina
Street Narrabundah for a fixed
term of twelve months commencing 9 September 2005. The weekly rent was $320 and
OZ Property Services
Pty Ltd acted as the lessors’ agent.
29 December 2006 a severe hailstorm hit the Canberra region. This hailstorm
caused extensive flooding in the premises. The flooding
caused water damage to
the ceilings, walls and carpets throughout the premises as well as damage to the
personal property of the
tenants. These facts were acknowledged by both parties,
and were not in dispute before the tribunal.
31 December 2006 the tenants reported the damage to the lessors’ agent.
The lessor and the agent inspected the damage to
the premises on 4 January 2007.
The lessor made a claim for the cost of the repairs on his insurance policy,
which was held by the
16 March 2007 the rent was increased in accordance with the residential tenancy
agreement from $320 to $350 per week.
repairs to the premises commenced on 28 March 2007 and were completed on 10 June
7 September 2007, the lessors’ agent served the tenants with a termination
notice. The notice stated that the grounds on
which the notice was issued
As per clause 96. (b) The owners [sic] immediate relative intends to
reside in the above property at 105 Matina Street Narrabundah
and will require
vacant possession.
In the letter attached to the termination notice the
lessors’ agent states
Regretfully, we have been instructed by the
Landlords that their son wishes to move into the above property and therefore
4 (four) weeks notice for you to vacate the property under clause
96(b) of your signed tenancy agreement.
tenants vacated the premises on 7 October 2007.
11 October 2007 the premises were advertised for rent on allhomes internet
26 October 2007 the tenants made an application to the Residential Tenancies
Tribunal for compensation for loss of quiet enjoyment
and use of the premises
caused by the lessors’ breach of the tenancy agreement. This breach was
said to be constituted by the
extraordinary delay by the lessor in repairing the
storm damage. The tenants also claimed compensation for the cost of vacating the
premises and finding other accommodation as a result of an unlawful termination
of the tenancy by the lessor. This was said to be
constituted by the serving of
a termination notice upon grounds that were false.
Residential Tenancies Tribunal heard the matter on 20 November 2007. The
applicants appeared before the Tribunal, the respondents
did not personally
appear but were represented by Mr Andreas Hass of OZ Property.
tenants gave evidence in relation to the causes of the delay in affecting the
repairs. The tenants’ oral evidence was supported
by copies of
correspondence between the parties and between the lessors’ agent and
evidence before the Residential Tenancies Tribunal indicated that the delay was
caused by a combination of factors:
storms which damaged these premise had caused extensive damage throughout the
Canberra region and there was necessarily delay
caused by a shortage of
lessor chose not to be directly involved in the repairs and regarded their duty
to repair as fulfilled once they had made the
claim with the
tenants were left by the lessors and their agent to do the majority of work
chasing up tradesman, making arrangements for access
by the tradesmen and
cleaning up after the tradesmen;
NRMA insisted that MasterHomes, as their ‘preferred’ repairer
undertake the work;
MasterHomes
did not attend to the work in a professional or diligent manner;
NRMA did not pursue complaints from the lessors or the tenants and failed to
ensure that the repairs were undertaken in a timely
or professional manner.
Neither the NRMA nor MasterHomes appears to have approached the repairs to the
premises in a sensible, professional
or organised manner.
lessors’ agent indicated to the Residential Tenancies Tribunal that he had
endeavoured to assist the tenants in their dealings
with the NRMA but was not
able to speed things up. The Residential Tenancies Tribunal found Mr Haas to be
a reliable witness, and
appreciated his candour and honesty.
Residential Tenancy Agreements between the parties provides:
Lessor to make repairs
55. (1) The lessor must maintain the premises in a reasonable state of
repair having regard to their condition at the commencement
of the tenancy
(2) The tenant must notify the lessor of the need for repairs.
to clause 55, the lessor must make repairs, other than urgent repairs, within 4
weeks of being notified of the need for repairs
(unless otherwise agreed).
Urgent repairs
tenant must notify the lessor ( or the lessor’s nominee) of the need for
urgent repairs as soon as practicable, and the
lessor must, subject to clause
82, carry out those repairs, as soon as necessary, having regard to the nature
of the problem.
following are urgent repairs in relation to the premises, or services or
fixtures supplied by the lessor:
(f) flooding or serious flood damage
(g) serious storm or fire damage
The extent of the need for repairs or damage.
The tenants gave detailed evidence of the damage caused by the storm, this
evidence was accepted by the lessor’s agent as giving
a true picture of
the events and the damage. The tenants written submissions stated:
The 29 December 2006 storm caused water damage to four rooms – two
bedrooms, the living room and kitchen area. A hole, approximately
diameter resulting from the storm was indicative of the volume of water entering
one bedroom.
Further evidence before the Residential Tenancies Tribunal was that
the curtains and carpets were wet, the water had leaked over the
light cabling,
furniture and personal property of the tenants was set and damaged. The damage
was promptly reported to the lessor
and inspected by the lessor and his agent on
4 January 2007. Despite the extensive damage to the premises, and the smell
from the wet the carpet, the lessor’s only response was to refer
the matter to his insurer, the NRMA. The lessor refused to
undertaken interim
measures such as having the carpet professionally cleaned and dried. The lessor
denied any further responsibility
for ensuring repairs were undertaken in a
timely manner; he took the view that referring the claim to the NRMA was
sufficient. A
lessor cannot discharge his duty to repair in this manner.
Northern Sandblasting v Harris
(1997) 188 CLR 313
contradicted evidence was the repairs to the premises were not commenced until
28 March 2007 and not completed until 10 June
The Residential Tenancies Tribunal finds that the lessor has breached the
residential tenancy agreement by failing to cause necessary
repairs to be
completed in accordance with clauses 55, 57 and 60. Section 104(d) provides that
the Tribunal may make an order requiring
the payment of compensation for loss of
rent or any other loss caused by the breach of a residential tenancy agreement.
The Residential
Tenancies Tribunal finds that this failure to repair caused
significant reduction in the tenants’ use and enjoyment of the
In reaching this finding the tribunal takes the following factors into
attempt was made to undertake interim repairs;
the 65 day repair period the tenants were not able to use all rooms in the
tenant was obliged to move out for a period of four weeks, due to the lack of
useable space in the premises;
a result the tenants were not able to invite guests to the premises;
was an unpleasant odour coming from the wet carpet for several months;
tenants spent a considerable amount of time liaising with tradesmen and
NRMA refused to assist the tenants;
Masterhomes
workmen threatened to delay the repairs if the tenants continued to
visiting the premises caused further damage to the personal property of the
tenants and failed to cleanup after repairs had
been completed.
In calculating the amount of compensation payable by the lessor
to the tenants the Residential Tenancies Tribunal notes and takes
into account
the following factors:
damage caused by the storms in the Canberra are in late 2006 and early 2007 was
extensive. As a result it was difficult to engage
tradesmen and the
lessor’s insurance company would have experienced some delays.
Nevertheless the lessor made no attempt to
expedite the repairs and chose to
leave the entire matter in the control of the NRMA. No effort was made to make
temporary repairs
or to alleviate the discomfort of the tenants.
NRMA chose to use a “preferred repairer” and this contributed to the
delay in completing the repairs.
tenants have a duty to mitigate and given the extensive nature of the damage and
the extraordinary delay in repair, could have
chosen to terminate the tenancy
for breach by the lessor. The tenants explained, and the tribunal accepts, that
they rejected this
avenue on the basis that they were promised repairs would be
completed in one week in March of 2007. They were hampered by lack of
information and a refusal by the NRMA to provide them with information or
A party who suffers damage as a result of a breach of contract by
another party is entitled to an amount of damages which will, as
possible, put the injured party in the same position they would have been in had
the breach not occurred. That is that damages
for breach of contract are
compensation loss.
Robinson v Harman
[1848] EngR 135
(1848) 1 Exch 850.
The innocent
party must establish that the loss complained of was caused by the breach of
contract and that the loss was not too
remote from the breach. The rule in
Hadley v Baxendale
(1854) 9 Exch 341
is applied to determine which loss
is recoverable. An innocent party may recover damages caused by a breach of
contract if they are
the types of loss that occurs in the usual course of
events, or arise naturally from the breach, or where the loss complained of
be reasonably supposed to have been in the contemplation of the parties at the
time they made the contract to be likely to result
from the breach.
While damages for personal distress or pain and suffering are not usually
awarded for a breach of contract, recent decisions indicate
that such an award
is appropriate and proper where the contract itself promised peace, comfort,
enjoyment or relaxation. Damages
have been awarded for breach of contracts
relating to holidays and weddings.
Jarvis v Swan Tours
[1973] 1All ER 71
Baltic Shipping v Dillon
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 111 ALR 289.
The tenants ask for compensation relating to the following loss:
reduction in use and enjoyment of the premises from the date f the storm until
the commencement of repairs;
100% reduction in use and enjoyment of the premises from the date of
commencement of repairs until completion of repairs;
reduction in use and enjoyment of the premises from the date of completion of
repairs for a 10 day period for cleaning and restore
the premises to normal
Compensation
for the loss of property destroyed or damaged by the flooding and by the
workmen; and
Compensation
for loss of work time, stress and distress caused by the delay in repairs and
the difficulties of dealing with aggressive
workmen and an uncooperative lessor
and insurance company.
Each of the items of loss claimed by the tenants fall within the
first limb of the rule in
Hadley v Baxendale.
A residential tenancy
agreement by its express terms of the, when read with s104 (d) of the Act
indicate that where the peace, comfort
and privacy of a tenant in interfered
with, the breaching party is liable for compensation. The Residential Tenancies
Tribunal calculated
the compensation by reference to the rental rate and other
decisions of this and similar state tribunals. The lessor is liable to
compensate the tenants in the amount of $7828.20.
The claim for unlawful eviction
On 7 September 2007, the lessors’ agent served the tenants with a
termination notice. The notice stated that the grounds on
which the notice was
issued were
As per clause 96. (b) The owners [sic] immediate relative intends
to reside in the above property at 105 Matina Street Narrabundah
require vacant possession.
In the letter attached to the termination notice
the lessors’ agent states
Regretfully, we have been instructed by the
Landlords that their son wishes to move into the above property and therefore
4 (four) weeks notice for you to vacate the property under clause
96(b) of your signed tenancy agreement.
In compliance with the notice to
vacate the tenants vacated the premises on 7 October 2007. A final inspection
was conducted by the
lessor’s agent on 8 October 2007.
The Residential Tenancies Tribunal received the following
premises were advertised for rent on allhomes.com.au on 11 October 2007 at a
rent of $450 per week, an amount which was $100 per
week more than the tenants
had been paying.
from several persons who had contacted the agent in response to the
alhomes.com.au advertisement, and some emails from the
agent to the prospective
tenants. In each of these a different explanation of how the premises came to be
vacant was given.
lessor refused to accept the tenants back into the property, despite contact
between them and the lessor’s agent as early
as 12 October, and the
premises remained vacant until 21 November 2007.
The Lessor did not appear at the hearing nor did he put forward any
explanation as to why his son had not taken up occupation of the
premises. The
lessor’s agent made written submissions to the tribunal, but some of the
statements within it were not consistent
with other evidence before the
tribunal. The tenants argued that given the improvement to the premises by the
repairs and the rising
rental market, the lessor had decided to give a notice
to vacate on false grounds in order to obtain ‘market rent’ for
premises. In all the circumstances the Residential Tenancies Tribunal finds that
it is more likely than not that the lessor had
always intended to rent the
property at the higher amount. Thus the notice to
vacate was not based
upon a genuine belief by the lessor that his son was to reside in the premises.
Residential Tenancies Act
provides that the tribunal
may make an order for compensation for wrongful eviction. The serving of a
notice to vacate in the circumstances
constitutes a breach of contract. A
failure to act in good faith is a breach of a term implied in fact to most
contracts in Australia
Hughes Aircraft.
The tribunal orders the lessor to pay an amount of $3841.49 being:
$420 removal
$122.66 for
hire of Ute
$139.83 paid
by tenant to internet provider upon termination of agreement
$95 cleaning
miscellaneous costs
costs of packing and
$2000 general
damages, which takes into account loss of leave and that the tenants had to move
to separate premises, so that their
household arrangements were unable to
JANN LENNARD
Residential Tenancies
September 2008
RTF format (95.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format