Nicita v Ernst & Young [2025] ACTSC 478 (24 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Nicita v Ernst & Young
[2025] ACTSC 478
Hearing Dates:
15 – 16 October 2025
Decision Date:
(1) The proceedings are dismissed.
(2) The plaintiff is to pay the defendant’s costs.
(3) Liberty is granted to either party to seek an alternative order in
relation to costs by filing and serving written submissions
limited to not more
than three pages and any evidence in relation to costs within
seven days of the date of this judgment.
Catchwords:
PARTNERSHIP
– BREACH OF
PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT – Termination for just cause – where plaintiff
charged with common assault arising
from his conduct towards a bar manager
(caught on CCTV) – where plaintiff had already been given “first and
final warning”
due to comments made at Miami Vice‑themed Christmas
party – where question of “just cause” to be determined
partnership agreement by the sole opinion of managing partner – where, if
managing partner finds just cause, termination
is at managing partner’s
absolute discretion – whether termination decision reasonably open to
managing partner and made
in good faith – whether termination power
enlivened by plaintiff’s private conduct – where decision separately
affirmed by internal appeal – termination within power given by
partnership agreement – proceedings dismissed
Legislation
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
Partnership Act 1963
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Cases Cited:
Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation
[1947] EWCA Civ 1
[1948] 1 KB 223
Bartlett v Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
92 NSWLR 639
Birtchnell v Equity Trustees Executors and Agency Co Ltd
[1929] HCA 24
Cameron v Murdoch
(1986) 60 ALJR 280
Hospital Products Ltd v United States Surgical Corporation
[1984] HCA 64
Johnson v Snaddon
[2001] VSCA 91
Lewis v Estate of Juan Martinez
[2025] NSWCA 2
Luna Park (NSW) Ltd v Tramways Advertising Pty Ltd
[1938] HCA 66
(1938) 61 CLR
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
256 CLR 104
Pooley v Driver
[1876] UKLawRpCh 350
(1876) 5 Ch D 458
Watson v George
[1953] HCA 41
(1953) 89 CLR 409
Leonard Joseph Nicita (Plaintiff)
Ernst & Young (Defendant)
Representation:
D Mahendra (Plaintiff)
R Yezerski SC with P Bindon (Defendant)
People + Culture Strategies (Plaintiff)
Kingston Reid (Defendant)
File Number:
SC 264 of 2024
Introduction
plaintiff, Leonard Nicita, was a partner in a firm known as Ernst &
Young (EY). His interest in the partnership was terminated
as a result of a
decision made by the Country Managing Partner of EY, David Larocca, on
6 November 2023. Mr Larocca’s decision
was subsequently
confirmed on 11 December 2023 by an appeals committee provided for by
the relevant partnership agreement (the Appeals
Committee).
plaintiff has brought proceedings claiming that the decision of Mr Larocca
involved breaches of the partnership agreement and
has sought damages for those
plaintiff argued that the power in the partnership agreement to terminate a
partnership interest for “Just Cause”
was not enlivened because the
incident giving rise to the termination did not involve conduct as a partner of
the firm but instead
occurred in his private life and because, at the time of
the termination, he had given notice of his retirement from the partnership.
plaintiff also argued that the decision to terminate his interest in the
partnership was not made reasonably or in good faith
because an alternative
course available to Mr Larocca was to put the plaintiff on “garden
leave”, something which was
provided for by the partnership agreement and
would have resulted in him being paid during a period of notice.
the reasons that follow, neither of these arguments demonstrates any breach of
the partnership agreement and, as a consequence,
the plaintiff’s claim
fails. The claim is therefore dismissed.
The plaintiff and
plaintiff’s partnership with EY relevantly began in November 2021,
when he joined the firm as a senior partner in the Transaction
Tax team (with a
formal commencement date of 1 December 2021)
That Transaction Tax team was within the International Tax and Transaction
Services Group.
the time of joining the firm, the plaintiff signed a “Joining Deed”
whereby he acceded to, ratified, and agreed to
be bound by an earlier form of
the partnership agreement, which included the first schedule to that agreement
(the Regulations).
The Regulations included clause 18.2 in its current form
the plaintiff joined the partnership of EY in November 2021, it was the
second time he had been a partner of the firm. The plaintiff
had earlier been a
partner between July 2013 and December 2015.
a partner, the plaintiff was subject to a firm policy entitled “FP 100
Standards of Professional Behaviour” effective
8 December 2021 and a firm policy entitled “FP 107 Workplace
Behaviour” effective from 16 February 2022.
May 2022, there was a Christmas party for the EY tax practice. This had
been deferred from 2021 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Christmas
party had a “Miami Vice” dress-up theme. At that party, the
plaintiff had an interaction with another partner
of the firm (Person A)
which gave rise to a complaint to management. That complaint was subsequently
described by Mr Larocca in the
following terms:
The specific complaint made was that at a Sydney Tax function on Friday
20 May you made comments to the complainant to the effect
that you thought
she was beautiful, you wanted to sleep with her and, when the complainant said
she was married, you noted that most
of your affairs are with married women.
his evidence to the court, the plaintiff denied that he had said that he wanted
to sleep with Person A, but did say that he had
complimented her on her
fancy dress, suggested they should go out to dinner and, when she had said that
she was married, asked her
whether she was happily married. When she told him
that she was, he said “ah yeah, but you will be surprised since being
that I have probably been with more married women than other single
The consequences of the May
2022 incident
two weeks later, the plaintiff was contacted by the Head of Human Resources
at EY and notified of the complaint. He said that
he “was totally shocked
and relayed [to her] my recollection of what occurred, believing it to be
innocuous”. The Head
of Human Resources told him that there was no need
for any further investigation.
3 June 2022, he received a call from Mr Larocca. There was a
dispute about the tone and content of that telephone call. It is unnecessary
make findings about the precise tone or specific words used. However,
Mr Larocca made a contemporaneous note which recorded that
he had told the
plaintiff that he was “very disappointed with his behaviour” and
that it was “completely unacceptable
from anybody, let alon[e] a partner,
let alone a senior partner, let alone a senior partner [who] has just re-joined
He identified the various sanctions that would be imposed. The
plaintiff indicated that he completely understood and assured Mr Larocca
that it would not happen again. Mr Larocca said that, if it did, the
plaintiff “won’t be here”. The plaintiff said
that he was keen
to apologise to Person A.
same day, the plaintiff was sent an internal memorandum which recorded in
summary form the circumstances giving rise to the complaint
in the manner
referred to above at [
memorandum indicated that the complainant was reasonably offended and
embarrassed by the plaintiff’s comments and said
that the behaviour
constituted a breach of the “Workplace Behaviour Policy, EY Values, and EY
Code of Conduct” and was
inconsistent with the plaintiff’s
leadership position within the firm. It indicated that the following
consequences would follow:
apologise to the complainant in a manner acceptable to her.
- A financial
sanction of 4% of income ($52,000) will be applied to your FY22 income.
memorandum serves as a first and final warning against further instances of
inappropriate behaviour which may result in more
significant sanctions,
including termination.
- You confirm to
me that you have attended (or are scheduled to attend) our Partner Bystander
Intervention Training.
the plaintiff did not agree in his evidence that he had said some of the words
attributed to him in the summary reproduced
], he never communicated that
disagreement to Mr Larocca and, as a consequence, it was reasonable for
Mr Larocca to proceed subsequently
on the basis that the plaintiff had
admitted that conduct.
Ongoing work at the
June 2023, a number of partners resigned from EY to go to another business.
This led to the plaintiff’s workload increasing
because of the need to
assist with the work that would otherwise have been undertaken by those
partners. He perceived that he was
not receiving appropriate assistance from
other partners who were trying to “grab” clients rather than helping
on work. He spoke to Scott Grimley, Tax and Law Leader of EY
Oceania, and said that he was considering resigning and would take the
to think about it. That led to Mr Grimley seeking to persuade him to stay.
At the end of June 2023, three more partners from
the Transaction Tax team
resigned to go to another business. That meant that seven of the 17 mergers and
acquisition tax partners
had departed the firm within three weeks. In
July 2023, steps were taken within EY to address the consequences of the
of those partners.
6 July 2023, the plaintiff had a meeting with Mr Larocca at which
his remuneration for the 2023 financial year was set at $1.35
million, with a
bonus of $50,000. There was discussion of a remuneration trajectory to $2
million by 2026.
August 2023 incident
the evening of 4 August 2023, the plaintiff had attended a fundraising
function for the Sydney University Rugby Club. The plaintiff
had purchased a
table for 10. He invited some clients and EY staff members. While the event
started at midday, the plaintiff only
arrived between 2:30pm and 3pm. At about
5pm, four EY staff members who had attended the event left to continue drinking
else. At about 7pm, the plaintiff and his girlfriend (and a friend of
hers) went to meet up with the EY staff members at Dean &
Nancy bar. They
stayed there with the staff members until 9pm, when the four staff members
indicated that they were going to go to
one of their houses to have further
drinks. His girlfriend’s friend also left. Between 10pm and 10:30pm, the
plaintiff paid
the bill. That bill was $2,380.79 and the plaintiff added a tip
of $250. The amount of $2,380.79 eventually ended up being claimed
as an expense
paid the bill, the plaintiff discovered that his jacket was missing. The jacket
contained his keys, which he needed to get
into his apartment. There was,
however, a jacket left behind which had a name tag on it that indicated that it
belonged to one of
the EY staff members, Person B. The plaintiff called
Person B and another EY staff member to ask if they had accidentally taken
wrong jacket. When the plaintiff spoke to Person B, Person B was
adamant that he had not taken the plaintiff’s jacket, but
intoxicated. The plaintiff asked the bar staff whether a jacket had been handed
in. They checked and advised there had
not. He then asked whether he could check
the CCTV footage to see whether someone had stolen his jacket. The bar staff
checked with
the bar manager and returned saying that the bar manager was
refusing to check the cameras. The plaintiff then asked to speak to
manager. There was a discussion between the plaintiff and the bar manager. This
was captured on CCTV. The CCTV footage was
without sound, but the
plaintiff’s evidence, which was uncontradicted, was that the bar manager
had said “you guys in
your expensive suits and sluts in short skirts think
you own the place, but you don’t”. The CCTV footage shows the
pushing the bar manager with his hand and then moving forward and
bumping him with his chest. The bar manager made a comment to him
incident having been caught on CCTV and pointed to the location of the CCTV
camera. The bar manager called police, who
attended. The plaintiff was charged
with common assault. The police were shown the CCTV footage, including the CCTV
footage which
showed that, in fact, Person B had taken the
plaintiff’s jacket.
plaintiff for denying that
he took the jacket and for not trying to locate it. He said that he was drunk
but thought he might have
left the jacket in a cab. He said that he would pay
for the jacket if the taxi company could not locate it. The plaintiff pursued
Person B in text messages when the jacket did not turn up. Eventually,
Person B paid some $4,000 to the plaintiff for the jacket,
some sunglasses,
the cost of a locksmith and a lost key fob. A few weeks later, in rather unclear
circumstances, an executive assistant
from EY who was present at Dean &
Nancy bar found the jacket and it was returned to the plaintiff after
dry-cleaning. The plaintiff
did not enquire further into the circumstances as he
was happy that the jacket had been returned and, when cash flow permitted,
the $4,000 to Person B.
The plaintiff does not
accept the remuneration letter
31 August 2023, the plaintiff received a letter concerning his
remuneration. That reflected the figures that had been discussed
earlier. The
plaintiff responded by email saying that he was happy with the letter and would
sign it once he was back in the office.
However, after the plaintiff learnt that
a particular person whom he had suggested for recruitment would not be
recruited, the plaintiff
sent an email indicating that he was not going to sign
the 31 August 2023 letter. He felt that the particular performance
which he was required to achieve under the terms set out in that letter
was not achievable without the support of that recruit.
The response to the
August 2023 incident
plaintiff did not inform Mr Larocca about the incident on
4 August 2023 or the criminal charge, but Mr Larocca learned of
around September 2023. Senior EY personnel, Scott Grimley (Tax
and Law Leader) and McGregor Dixon (Director, Executive Office and
Matters), inquired into the incident, including in a Teams meeting with the
plaintiff on 18 October 2023.
../../../../../../../../Supreme
Court/SC Judiciary/01. Judiciary/01. Resident Judges/03. Mossop J/Civil
Trials/2025/Nicita v Ernst
&amp; Young/Useful folder/Word versions of
submisssions/Defendant written opening submissions.docx - _bookmark16
plaintiff explained the circumstances of the incident. It was suggested to him
that he might need to disclose the matter to the
NSW Law Society because he held
a practising certificate.
2 November 2023, Mr Larocca and Mr Grimley held a meeting
via Teams with the plaintiff to ascertain his full version of events
relating to
the bar incident. During that meeting, Mr Larocca used a script (described
as a “talk track”) that had been
prepared in advance by in-house
lawyers for the purposes of the meeting. That script, which Mr Larocca said
that he “largely
followed”, included the following in relation to
the context for the meeting:
I understand that you intend to have the proceedings dismissed and have (or will
be) taking steps in this respect. I am obviously
very concerned about the impact
of this charge on you both personally and professionally.
However, given that EY Partners and Staff are aware of the charge, we are
concerned that the charge will soon receive media attention
and EY will be
Amongst other things, the Senate is sitting at the end of next week, so if the
charge receives media attention, I may also be asked
questions by the Senate in
relation to the charge and your role as a partner of the Firm. So that’s
the public brand context.
that meeting, the plaintiff described the incident on a number of occasions as
being “innocuous”. He was keen to
provide Mr Larocca with a
link to the CCTV footage, which Mr Larocca then viewed during the course of
the meeting
The plaintiff was attempting “to demonstrate that it was merely a push in
mitigating circumstances”. However, Mr Larocca
was initially confused
because, although the plaintiff had said he did nothing wrong, what Mr Larocca
saw in the CCTV footage indicated
to Mr Larocca that the behaviour was
unacceptable. The plaintiff had not made a disclosure to the NSW Law Society by
the time of
that meeting.
The plaintiff following the
the meeting, the plaintiff thought that Mr Larocca and Mr Grimley were
“searching for excuses to berate and bully
[him]”. In his affidavit,
I became upset from this treatment. After working past midnight almost every day
for four months without a break and with no support
from leadership, who had not
only now dismissed the whole strategy I had initially outlined, but had taken
active steps to actually
thwart it, my feelings were compounded. I was confused
as to why David suddenly appeared to hate me so much after all I had sacrificed
for the Firm. Without a strategy to hire new Partners and with the majority of
staff already having left the Firm, I could not see
any light at the end of the
tunnel for at least 12 months. I recall helping my daughter that evening with
her Maths study for her
Year 10 exams and felt happiness for the first time in
weeks and realised that my physical and mental health would not survive if
continued working at the Firm under these conditions and with the toxic culture
created by David’s leadership. I [called]
both Reid and Daryn to relay
what had happened and that I felt I needed to resign.
following the meeting
the evening of 2 November 2023, Mr Larocca spoke to
Mr Grimley about the matter and reflected on what action should be taken.
reached the view that the appropriate outcome was to terminate the
plaintiff’s membership interest in the partnership for “Just
Cause”. At 9:25pm that evening, he sent an email to Mr Grimley,
Mr Dixon, Daryn Moore and staff of EY’s General Counsel
setting out his thinking on the issue. That was in the following terms:
Scott and I spoke earlier this evening.
I am landing on Len being terminated for just cause, for the following reasons:
Context: Len is
on a first and final warning (June 2022) where he gave me a [very] strong
assurance that I will never hear from him
again on behavioural matters. This was
a behavioural matter, in a bar involving senior EY staff. Len admitted it
occurred in full.
The nature of
the incident at the bar. Having viewed the footage (Len provided it to Scott and
I on the call), I have concluded that:
not what is expected of a partner (let alone a senior partner or one on a first
& final warning).
to this is that Len was very keen to provide it to me so that (I assume) I could
conclude that this wasn’t an issue I
needed to be concerned about. It did
the opposite. This tells me Len doesn’t understand what is expected of a
Partner at EY,
let alone the fact he is on a first and final warning and his
assurances (above) to me
to him, there were clients present and (I think at the time) staff also present.
Staff look to partners for role modelling
behaviour. Clients look to our
partners to portray the EY brand. A clear situation of brand damage to EY,
particularly post our Culture
Review where expectations are very clear.
Importantly,
I am not making a judgment on whether this is ‘assault’ or not. That
is a matter for the police.
The fact he has
not at any stage reported the police charge to me. He has an obligation under
the Partners Agreement to disclose to
me any circumstance that may affect his
position as a partner of the firm. Over and above this, I expect a partner
– particularly
one on a first and final warning – to know he must
report this, and to action it.
The fact he has
yet to notify the Law Society, knowing he must do this within 7 days (which he
also knows has expired). Further, he
didn’t demonstrate any particular
concern with this issue.
Other matters
– that I acknowledge I probably can’t go back to Len specifically
on, but am comfortable I can go back ‘generally’
sufficient evidence that has come forward:
matter relating to the jacket, including the dollars/[redacted] situation. Len
had ample opportunity to tell me about this and
he failed to [do] this.
law partners coming forward below.
fact the police charge is in the market and highly likely to emerge publicly.
Given Len’s failure to notify me, notify the
Law Society and his
characterisation of what happened this elevates the potential brand damage to
Unless anyone has a different view and/or Jodie/Genevieve advise I do not have a
legal basis based on the above, I propose we move
down this path and do so
quickly. I have asked Mac to flag with Claire Cardno as EOG Chair my directional
recommendation.
next day, 3 November 2023, at 10:38am, Mr Larocca sent a further
email to that group confirming his decision and setting out what
he considered
the next steps to be. The email concluded: “Difficult, very disappointing
but right decision in my view.”
The plaintiff gives notice
of retirement
3 November 2023 at 11:41am, the plaintiff sent an email to
Mr Larocca giving notice of his retirement pursuant to clause 18.7.2
of the Regulations.
The plaintiff’s
membership interest is terminated for “Just
3 November 2023 at 1:18pm, Mr Larocca replied to the
plaintiff’s email seeking a time to discuss it later that day and
that the email was not to be taken as EY’s acceptance of the
plaintiff’s retirement. At the plaintiff’s request,
the meeting did
not ultimately occur that day and was scheduled for 6 November 2023.
6 November 2023 at 11am, Mr Larocca met with the plaintiff and
conveyed his decision to terminate the plaintiff’s membership
interest for
“Just Cause” with immediate effect
Once again, Mr Larocca followed a script prepared by in-house lawyers.
Following the meeting, Mr Larocca emailed the plaintiff a
termination
letter confirming his decision in writing
That letter referred to the conversation on 18 October 2023, the
conversation on 2 November 2023 and the conversation earlier on
6 November 2023. The letter continued:
As discussed, I have considered the information that you provided in the October
Meeting and the November Meeting and ... make the
following comments:
failing to disclose the criminal charge to me on or around the time that the
charge was laid, you failed to comply with your obligations
Regulation 8.4.7 of the Partnership Agreement.
have not disclosed the charge to the Council of the Law Society which you are
required to do as a holder of a practising certificate
in accordance with
section 51 of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(NSW). This
disclosure failure is also inconsistent with your obligations under
section 4 of FP 100 Standards of Professional Behaviour
the November Meeting, you provided me with a copy of the CCTV footage showing
the Alleged Conduct. From my review of the CCTV footage,
I have concluded that
the CCTV footage showed behaviour that is inappropriate for a partner of the
Firm and inconsistent with EY’s
Global Code of Conduct.
acting inconsistently with EY’s Global Code of Conduct, you have breached
Regulation 8.4.4 of the Partnership Agreement.
have become aware that you have also shared the CCTV footage showing the Alleged
Conduct with a number of EY partners and staff.
Additionally, as you would be aware, this all follows a first and final warning
that was communicated to you on 3 June 2022, in respect
of a complaint
alleging inappropriate behaviour made by another partner of the firm, which you
admitted to in full.
letter identified that the plaintiff had an obligation to comply with
clauses 8.2, 8.3, 8.4 and 8.4.7 of the Regulations. It continued:
I consider that the comments set out above, taken as a whole, amount to a breach
of EY’s policies and your obligations under
the Partnership Agreement.
Whilst you tendered your resignation to me on 3 November 2023, that
resignation was not accepted. I am
terminating your membership interest in the
Firm by reason of “Just Cause”, effective immediately, in accordance
Regulation 18.2 of the Regulations to the Partnership Agreement.
The Appeals
17 November 2023, the plaintiff exercised his appeal rights under
clause 18.4.2 of the Regulations. The letter from the plaintiff’s
solicitor invoking the powers of the Appeals Committee raised a number of
submissions, including that:
(a) there was no power to terminate once notice had been given of a
partner’s voluntary retirement and no power to reject a
voluntary retirement;
(b) the plaintiff was protected because he was a protected whistleblower under
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(c) the power to terminate had not been exercised by the Country Managing
Partner in good faith; and
(d) the construction of clause 18.2 was incorrect and the types of
misconduct relied on by Mr Larocca were not sufficient to give
absolute discretion to terminate where the firm had suffered no damage and it
was not clear that the firm would suffer
any damage in the future.
11 December 2023, the Appeals Committee notified the plaintiff of its
determination. The letter, which was sent to the plaintiff’s
After careful consideration of all relevant matters, including the matters
raised by you and Mr Nicita during the Appeal Meeting,
the Committee has
determined to confirm the termination decision. It has not determined to make
any additional determination in respect
of any financial or other arrangements
in relation to the termination.
applicable to interpreting the partnership agreement
general and uncontroversial principles applicable to the interpretation of the
partnership agreement were usefully summarised
in the defendant’s written
submissions. They include the following.
partnership agreement is a contract:
Pooley v Driver
[1876] UKLawRpCh 350
(1876) 5 Ch D 458
472. The principles governing the interpretation of contracts generally are
therefore applicable to the construction of partnership
agreements:
Estate of Juan Martinez
[2025] NSWCA 2
principles require that the rights and liabilities of parties under a
contractual provision are determined objectively by asking
what a reasonable
businessperson would have understood those terms to mean, having regard to the
language used by the parties in
the contract, the circumstances addressed by the
contract and the commercial purpose or objects to be secured by the contract:
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 37
256 CLR 104
plaintiff, as the party asserting breach of contract and claiming damages for
loss, bears the onus of proving the existence of
the contractual terms, the
breach of those terms, and that the asserted breach caused the loss:
Watson v George
[1953] HCA 41
(1953) 89 CLR 409
Luna Park (NSW) Ltd v Tramways Advertising Pty Ltd
[1938] HCA 66
(1938) 61 CLR 286
Partnership Act 1963
contains various rules governing the
existence of a partnership, relations of partners to those who deal with them,
relations of partners
to one another, and the dissolution of partnerships.
recognises the continued application of the rules of equity
and the common law in relation to partnerships, except insofar as they
inconsistent with the express provisions of the statute. In the present case, no
party contended that the
Partnership Act
modifies the operation of the
common law or rules of equity in any manner relevant to the issues in dispute.
The rules of common law
and equity are both relevant as the relationship between
partners is recognised as being both contractual and fiduciary.
relationship is fiduciary because the law presumes that ordinary partnerships
are based on the mutual trust of the partners and
on the confidence of each
partner in the integrity of every other partner. The utmost good faith is said
to be fundamental to this
relationship:
Birtchnell v Equity Trustees
Executors and Agency Co Ltd
[1929] HCA 24
(1929) 42 CLR 384
(1986) 60 ALJR 280
the fiduciary relationship must accommodate itself to the terms of the contract
so that it is consistent with, and conforms
to, them. The fiduciary relationship
cannot be superimposed upon the contract in such a way as to alter the operation
which the contract
was intended to have according to its true construction:
Hospital Products Ltd v United States Surgical Corporation
[1984] HCA 64
(1984) 156 CLR
The partnership agreement
EY Firm Partners’ Agreement Australia, effective from 1 July 2020, is a
relatively short document which picks up and makes
binding upon partners its
terms as well as longer documents described as the “Regulations”,
the “Supplementary
Agreement”, the “Joining Deed” and
potentially other documents. Clause 3.12 indicates that the partnership
is subject to and governed by the laws of the Australian Capital
present purposes, it is only necessary to have regard to the terms of the
Regulations. The relevant clauses of those regulations
are as follows.
Clause 1.1,
the definition section, provides a definition of “Just Cause” which
is significant because it is picked up
in clause 18.2, the power to
terminate the membership interest of a partner in the firm. It also includes a
definition of “Requirements
of Law” which informs the content of one
of the obligations placed upon partners by clause 8.4. Relevantly,
clause 1.1 provides:
(i) any breach of these Regulations; or
(ii) any act of, or omission by, or occurrence in relation to, or a series of
such acts of, omissions by or occurrences in relation
to the relevant Partner,
which is, in the sole opinion of the Country Managing Partner, of such a
nature that the relevant Partner’s continuance as a
Partner is likely to
harm significantly the interests of the Firm or any Associated Entity;
Requirements of Law
” means, in relation to any Person,
any law or regulation (including any professional regulation whether or not
having the force
of law), or any order or determination of any arbitrator or a
court or other Governmental Authority, in each case, which is binding
Person or any of its property or to which such Person, or any of its property,
is subject in accordance with established
principles of international law;
is notable about the definition of “Just Cause” is that it contains
two components. The first component is a factual
one, namely whether things
within (i) or (ii) have occurred. It was accepted by the defendant that the
factual question was not simply
determined by the opinion of the Country
Managing Partner: see, in an employment context,
Bartlett v Australia &
[2016] NSWCA 30
92 NSWLR 639
second component is one of characterisation. That characterisation exercise is
given to the “sole opinion” of the
Country Managing Partner. While
the existence of the factual matters in (i) or (ii) is a question of fact and
not the opinion of
the Country Managing Partner, once that factual matter is
established, the characterisation exercise is one for the “sole
of that person. The plaintiff submitted that the “sole
opinion” must be formed on a basis which is not manifestly unreasonable
(by analogy to
unreasonableness: see
Associated Provincial
Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation
[1947] EWCA Civ 1
[1948] 1 KB 223).
The defendant
described the “sole opinion” as reposing “absolute
authority” in the Country Managing Partner,
although accepted that the
opinion had to be reached in good faith as required by clause 28.
far as the relationship between the two components is concerned, there is the
potential that an opinion in the second component
is based on a factual
foundation for the purposes of the first component which is not ultimately
established. To the extent that
the facts relied upon for the purposes of the
second component are not established to exist, there is an issue as to whether
the purported “Just Cause” considered by the Country Managing
Partner to exist will be outside the scope of the Regulations.
The range of
factual errors may extend from the trivial to the dramatic. In the present case,
the plaintiff did not submit that any
factual error affected the second
component in a manner that took the Country Managing Partner’s
consideration outside the
scope of the definition. Had he done so, it would have
been necessary to consider further the effect of clause 18.4.4 which is set
out and described below.
contains one of the general obligations upon partners:
of honesty and good faith
Without prejudice to the Partner’s or Former Partner’s fiduciary
duties as an agent of the Firm, each Partner and Former
Partner shall act
honestly and reasonably and show the utmost good faith in all dealings with the
Firm, the Associated Entities,
other Partners and Former Partners.
clause 8.4 relates to the general obligations of
High standards and objectives
Each Partner shall:
8.4.1 act in accordance with all Requirements of Law;
8.4.7 make full disclosure to the Country Managing Partner of any
circumstance that may affect the Partner’s position as a Partner
Firm or a director, officer or employee of any of the Associated Entities;
relates to termination of a partner’s membership interest in the firm. It
provides for a variety of ways in which
the membership of a partner of the firm
may be ended. It includes clause 18.2, which is the power that
Mr Larocca purported to exercise
in the present case, as well as a regime
for appeals from that decision:
The Country Managing Partner may, in the Country Managing Partner’s
absolute discretion, terminate a Partner’s membership
interest in the
18.1.1 upon written notice for any reason set out in Regulation 18.2 or
which termination shall be effective immediately or with effect from a specified
future date with no entitlement to a Notice Payment
or Long Service Payment;
18.1.2 upon written notice for any reason in the Country Managing
Partner’s absolute discretion including but not limited to:
(i) the requirements of the Firm in respect of succession planning or strategy;
(ii) the performance of a Partner,
such termination shall be effective from the date that is 6 months from the
date of the notice, or immediately but subject to any
payment provisions of
Regulation 21.1.1(vii).
Dismissal for actual or alleged misconduct
If a Partner is guilty of conduct which equates to a Just Cause, then the
Country Managing Partner may, in the Country Managing Partner’s
discretion, Terminate the relevant Partner’s membership interest in the
Firm either immediately or with effect from
a specified future date (such
dismissed Partner being “
Removed for Just Cause
Country Managing Partner may take such legal advice as the Country Managing
Partner considers appropriate in relation
to such Termination.
18.4.1 Scope
This Regulation 18.4 shall apply to those Partners whose membership interest
in the Firm has been Terminated pursuant to Regulation
18.1.2 or 18.2.
18.4.2 Appeal
The relevant Partner may, within 10 Business Days of receipt of the relevant
Termination Notice, by written notice to the Country
Managing Partner require
that the Termination be considered by the Appeals Committee.
18.4.3 Appeals Committee
If such a notice is given, the required meeting of the Appeals Committee
shall be held within 10 Business Days of receipt of such
notice or such longer
period as the Presiding Partner, having regard to the circumstances, may in the
Presiding Partner’s sole
and absolute discretion decide. The relevant
Partner shall be entitled to attend and speak at this meeting, and to be
accompanied
by one other Partner who may speak on the Partner’s
18.4.4 Appeals Committee powers
The Appeals Committee shall have the power to confirm or invalidate the
decision to Terminate the relevant Partner’s membership
interest in the
Firm and to make such financial and other arrangements in connection with the
Termination as it considers appropriate.
The decision of the Appeals Committee,
including its decision on questions of fact and questions of law, shall be final
and binding
on the parties.
18.4.5 Notification
The Appeals Committee’s decision shall be made and communicated to the
relevant Partner within 10 Business Days of the relevant
18.4.6 Representation
Such legal or other professional advisers to the Appeals Committee as the
Appeals Committee thinks fit may attend the required Appeals
Decisions final
Save as set out in Regulations 18.4 and 18.9, the Termination of a
Partner’s membership interest in the Firm shall be final
and binding on
the parties. No Former Partner shall in any circumstances be entitled to
re-instatement as a Partner, provided that
this Regulation 18.6 shall not
preclude the Firm from re-hiring a Departing Partner if it chooses to do so.
Voluntary termination of Partners
18.7.1 Any Partner and the Country Managing Partner may agree that a Partner
shall Terminate at such time and on such terms as they
shall both approve.
18. 7.2 A Partner will give at least 6 months’ notice to the Country
Managing Partner to retire. The Country Managing Partner
may, at the Country
Managing Partner’s discretion (with or without conditions), either agree
to the waiver of this requirement
for 6 months’ notice or determine that a
shorter notice period may apply.
Clause 18.2
provides that the power of termination operates where a “Just Cause”
exists. It then provides to the Country
Managing Partner an “absolute
discretion” as to whether or not to dismiss the partner. The mere
existence of a “Just
Cause” does not determine that the
partner’s membership interest will be terminated. It is possible that,
notwithstanding
the existence of a “Just Cause”, the Country
Managing Partner will decide in that person’s “absolute
discretion”
not to terminate the partner’s membership interest. On
the other hand, where a “Just Cause” exists, the discretion
whether to exercise the power in clause 18.2 to terminate is an absolute
Appeals Committee procedure may be invoked in cases of compulsory retirement
under clause 18.1 or dismissal under clause 18.2.
As discussed later
in these reasons, that procedure is, in substance, what in a court context would
be described as an appeal
and is stated to be “final and
binding on the parties”. Even where the Appeals Committee procedure is not
decision to terminate a partner’s membership interest in the
firm is described in clause 18.6 as “final and binding on
provides for what is referred to as “garden leave”. It provides a
discretionary power to the Country Managing
Partner to put a partner on
“garden leave” in a period after the service of a termination notice
under various provisions
of clause 18, including clause 18.2. The
effect is to maintain the partner with all the rights and duties of a partner
but, in summary,
prevent the partner from attending the office or engaging in
the business of the firm without the consent of the Country Managing
That the power is a discretionary one is made clear by the terms of
clause 19.1:
Pending Termination/Garden Leave
The Country Managing Partner may, at any time after the service of a
Termination Notice, place the Partner in question on garden leave
Termination of the Partner takes effect.
and 28 provide:
of the Country Managing Partner
responsibilities
26.1.1 All powers and responsibilities relating to the Firm shall be
exercised by the Country Managing Partner who may, subject only
restrictions or rights expressly set out in the Firm’s Organisational
Documents and any requirements of law, exercise
all powers of the Firm.
26.1.2 The Country Managing Partner shall promote the Global Objectives, the
Effectiveness Principles and the Global Strategies and
Plans within the
Performance
of duties and exercise of powers by the Country Managing
In the performance of the Country Managing
Partner’s duties and the exercise of the Country Managing Partner’s
under the Firm’s Organisational Documents, the Country Managing
Partner shall act in good faith in what the Country Managing
Partner considers
the best interests of the Firm, including the interests of all Partners.
final observations can be made about the provisions of the Regulations. First,
as illustrated by the definition of “Just
clauses 18.2, 18.7.2, 19.1 and 28, significant discretion is reposed in the
Country Managing Partner. This reflects
an overall policy that reposing
discretion in the Country Managing Partner is an effective means by which the
management of the organism
created by the partnership agreement may be carried
out. Second, in addition to those provisions which make powers turn upon the
opinion of the Country Managing Partner, the terms of clauses 18.4 and
18.6, which make the outcomes of the processes provided for
by clause 18
“final and binding”, indicate an intention that potential areas of
dispute be resolved in a manner which
limits the scope for the continuation of
disputes outside the framework provided for in the Regulations.
Plaintiff’s arguments
plaintiff did not advance all of the contentions that were outlined in the
Amended Statement of Claim. In particular, the contention
identified in the
Amended Statement of Claim that amendments to the Regulations made in 2013
(which changed the termination provisions,
including the definition of
“Just Cause”) were not validly made was not pressed.
identified in the plaintiff’s opening, the two arguments that were pressed
were as follows:
Firstly, this clause is clearly directed at Mr Nicita’s conduct as a
partner. Not what he does in his social life. Not what
he does in his private
life. Secondly, even if this clause could potentially apply to conduct that
Mr Nicita engaged in at the bar
Dean & Nancy’s in Sydney, in
circumstances where he had already resigned or given notice of his retirement
from the partnership,
the country managing partner could not, on any reasonable
view of the world, have formed an opinion, a reasonable opinion, that
Nicita’s continuance as a partner is likely to harm significantly
the interests of the firm or any associated entity.
And the second plank to that is, of course, what I took your Honour to
insofar as the good faith, express good faith obligation.
And the fact that the
partnership agreement itself contains a provision that would have permitted the
country managing partner to
put Mr [Nicita] on garden leave if for whatever
reason he thought Mr Nicita shouldn’t remain at work or performing
work pursuant
to the partnership agreement.
Plaintiff’s first
argument appears to have two components:
(a) that paragraphs (i) and (ii) of the definition of “Just Cause”
could not apply to conduct in the plaintiff’s
private life; and
(b) that it was not reasonably open to Mr Larocca to conclude that the
plaintiff’s conduct was “likely to harm significantly
the interests
of the Firm”.
of these arguments can be accepted.
far as the submission as to the definition of “Just Cause” and hence
the operation of clause 18.2 is concerned, whether
or not the provision
extends to what could be described as private conduct depends upon the terms of
the Regulations interpreted
in their context as part of the partnership
is nothing in the words of the definition of “Just Cause” that
limits its operation to conduct in the partner’s
work or conduct that
might affect the ability of the partner to perform that work. So far as the
factual component of the definition
is concerned, there is no such limit in (i)
(“any breach of these Regulations”) and there is no such limit in
act of, or omission by ... the relevant Partner”). Nor is
there any limit in clause 8.4.1 (which requires each partner to act
accordance with “Requirements of Law”) that limits this obligation
to the partner’s conduct at or directly related
to work. Rather, the
connection to the business is provided by the characterisation component of the
definition.
when one examines the overall context in which the definition is situated, there
is no proper basis for reading the terms
of the definition in a confined way.
The purpose of the Regulations is to regulate the operation of a partnership.
The partnership
agreement and the Regulations reflect the conditions upon which
numerous people agree to join together with a view to making a profit.
the overall purpose of the agreement is to create and advance the interests of a
partnership, there is less reason to read
its general terms in a restrictive
manner. It is certainly not appropriate to read into such express terms of the
Regulations the
sort of restrictions that might be found in the common law
relating to employment contracts which do not contain express provisions
extending to conduct outside of employment.
the definition covers private conduct, that is, conduct outside the
person’s functions as a partner, is illustrated by
an obvious example: a
partner who murders her husband. It could not reasonably be contended that the
obligation in clause 8.4.1 does
not extend to such conduct because it was a
murder committed at home and not in her capacity as a partner of EY. It would
satisfy the factual prerequisite of paragraph (i) in the definition of
“Just Cause”. That would leave it open to the
Country Managing
Partner to decide whether or not the characterisation of that conduct led to the
definition being met. The fact
that, on this understanding of the scope of a
partner’s obligations, private conduct might also extend to minor
offences, such
as speeding or illegal parking, does not indicate that the
interpretation of the definition so as to cover private conduct is not
businesslike and hence an inappropriate one. That is because of the
characterisation component of the definition which requires the
formation of an
opinion in good faith about the significance of that conduct. That
characterisation component of the definition is
protective of the position of a
partner because it is an additional requirement that must be satisfied before
“Just Cause”
is established and provides the connection with the
interests of the firm, that is, the other members of the partnership.
Not reasonably
far as the second component of the argument is concerned, it was clearly
reasonably open to Mr Larocca to conclude that the conduct
of the plaintiff
meant that the plaintiff’s continuance as a partner was “likely to
harm significantly the interests
of the Firm”. In that context,
“likely” means “a real and not remote chance or
possibility”, not “more
probable than not”. Any formation of
an opinion as to the potential for harm by the Country Managing Partner must be
in good faith. That obligation probably would preclude a decision which
was manifestly unreasonable but, if such a constraint did
not arise from the
good faith requirement, it would arise from giving the expression “sole
opinion” a businesslike operation.
In the present case, it was submitted
that, on any reasonable view of the world, Mr Larocca could not, as a
result of the 4 August
2023 incident, have formed a reasonable opinion
that the plaintiff’s continuance as a partner was likely to harm
significantly
the interests of the firm. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted
that this was the case for a variety of reasons, including that:
(a) the connection with work was tenuous;
(b) the incident was “somewhat innocuous”;
(c) the plaintiff was provoked by the bar manager;
(d) the plaintiff had already resigned at the time of the termination;
(e) neither Mr Larocca nor Mr Grimley, and Mr Larocca in particular,
spoke to EY staff or clients who were aware of the incident
reaction to it was;
(f) there was no evidence that anyone present at Dean & Nancy bar knew that
the plaintiff was a partner of EY at the time of
the incident;
(g) there was no evidence that, as a consequence of the conduct, clients decided
they were going to withdraw the work they provided
to EY or had threatened to do
(h) there were “plenty of other partners in the firm who have had section
10s [being a reference to dealing with a matter without
conviction under
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act 1999
(NSW)] and it has
been of no consequence”.
of these matters could be matters taken into account in the formation of the
opinion of the Country Managing Partner. However,
considered individually or
collectively, they do not demonstrate that the opinion actually formed by
Mr Larocca was not formed in
good faith or was so unreasonable as to be
beyond the scope of the definition of “Just Cause”.
the contrary, in the circumstances, it was reasonably open within the scope of
the definition of “Just Cause” to reach
the opinion that the
plaintiff’s “continuance as a Partner [was] likely to harm
significantly the interests of the Firm”.
That opinion was a not
unreasonable one because of the realistic prospect of damage to the EY brand,
and hence the “interests
of the Firm”, if a person with the track
record that the plaintiff had was to continue as a partner. That track record
the May 2022 misconduct, the incident on 4 August 2023
which led to the plaintiff being charged by police, and failures to disclose
latter incident to the NSW Law Society and to the Country Managing Partner in
circumstances which, it was reasonably open to
conclude, indicated that the
plaintiff did not fully appreciate his obligations under the Regulations. The
opinion was also not an
unreasonable one because it would be reasonably open to
the Country Managing Partner to conclude that EY’s interests would
advanced by only having persons as partners who demonstrated higher standards of
conduct in their personal as well as professional
lives than demonstrated by the
plaintiff. It could not be said to be unreasonable for a person in the position
of Mr Larocca to conclude
that, for a large firm performing professional
services for large corporations and governments, the firm’s interests
be significantly harmed if it had a reputation for overlooking conduct
such as that demonstrated by the 4 August 2023 incident on
the part of
a person who had previously been disciplined for workplace misconduct in the
form of the May 2022 incident.
conclusions are reinforced when regard is had to the particular circumstances
existing at the time. Those included that:
(a) the firm had commissioned an independent review into workplace culture which
reported sometime after May 2022;
(b) in July 2023, there was a Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations
and Financial Services investigating allegations of and
responses to misconduct
by the major accounting firms;
(c) there was also a Senate enquiry at about the same time;
(d) EY partners and staff were aware of the charge and there was a realistic
prospect that the firm would be contacted by the media
or that clients would
become aware of the incident; and
(e) the Country Managing Partner was due to appear before the Senate and, if the
charge received media attention, it was likely that
he would be questioned about
that issue.
were therefore circumstances in which, even more than usual, the potential for
scrutiny of the firm and brand damage arising
from the conduct of a partner was
significant.
I have said earlier, each of the matters identified by the plaintiff as reducing
the significance of the 4 August 2023 incident
might have been matters
favouring an opinion that the firm’s interests would not be significantly
harmed by the continuation
of the plaintiff as a partner. However, the
assessment as to that issue is given by the Regulations to the sole opinion of
the Country
Managing Partner who, plainly enough, was a person in a very good
position to determine the issue. Because the matter is determined
by the opinion
of the Country Managing Partner, the opinion ultimately reached about the
likelihood of significant harm to the interests
of the firm would be influenced
by the opinion of that person about where the firm’s interests lay. That
involves a range of
issues relating to the nature of the business, the client
base, and the competitive and regulatory environment. A different Country
Managing Partner may have taken a different approach to personal misconduct.
Opinions of persons in that position about the consequences
of personal
misconduct for institutions such as EY may have changed over the decades as
social and business values have also changed.
However, the fact that with a
different person in the position of Country Managing Partner, or at a different
time, a different assessment
of the likelihood of there being significant harm
to the interests of the firm might have been made does not demonstrate that the
opinion formed by Mr Larocca was outside the scope of the
definition.
Plaintiff’s second
argument challenges the decision to terminate the partnership of the plaintiff.
It asserts that the decision was not made in
good faith and hence was outside
the scope of clause 18.2 because it was contrary to clause 8.2 insofar
as that clause required a
partner to act “reasonably” and in
“good faith”.
argument was that, in circumstances where the plaintiff had given notice of his
retirement, allowing the plaintiff to serve out
his retirement period or putting
him on garden leave during that period would not have significantly harmed the
interests of the
firm and would have benefited the firm’s revenue and that
the summary termination was disproportionate to any potential harm
to the firm.
argument cannot be accepted for at least four reasons.
so far as the framework in which the Country Managing Partner was required to
make his decision, the general obligation upon
all partners in clause 8.2
of the Regulations must be read in the context of the specific obligation in
clause 28. The specific obligation
in clause 28 applies when that
person is performing the Country Managing Partner’s duties or exercising
the Country Managing
Partner’s powers under the partnership agreement. The
obligation is to act “in what the Country Managing Partner considers
best interests of the Firm, including the interests of all Partners”. If
there is any inconsistency between clause 8.2
and clause 28, the
specific obligation upon the Country Managing Partner prevails so that the
duties and powers are to be exercised
in what that person considers to be the
best interests of the firm, including the best interests of all partners, as
distinct from
an individual partner.
even if clause 8.2 was the governing provision, there was no lack of
reasonableness or good faith in making a determination
under clause 18.2,
which gives to the Country Managing Partner an “absolute discretion”
as to whether to terminate the
relevant partner’s membership interest. The
fact that the power being exercised was a power to terminate the membership
of a partner does not, of itself, indicate any breach of the obligation
of reasonableness and good faith. It is an express power
of termination provided
for by the agreement between the partners. It is granted in the context of the
partnership being a commercial
undertaking. As was explained in
[2001] VSCA 91
A partnership is a commercial undertaking, the principal object of
which is to make profits, and the partners are entitled to pursue
that objective
robustly provided that they act honestly with each other and do not act in their
own interests where to do so conflicts
with the interests of
the partnership.
addition to the grant in clause 18.2 of the power to terminate, there is
nothing in the evidence to suggest that the decision was
made for some
collateral purpose which would impugn the good faith exercise of the power. To
the extent that a qualification of reasonableness
(or perhaps more
appropriately, the absence of unreasonableness) might be read within the scope
of good faith or otherwise qualify
the absolute discretion in clause 18.2,
on no view could the exercise of power in the present case meet the high
threshold that would
be involved in such a qualification on the power. The fact
that a different person or a person at a different time might have taken
account the various matters referred to by the plaintiff and reached a different
conclusion as to whether or not to terminate
the plaintiff’s membership
interest in the firm says nothing of relevance about the exercise of power by
Mr Larocca. There
is no doubt that Mr Larocca’s exercise of
power was within the scope of his “absolute discretion” having
to his obligation in clause 28. Even in the absence of
clause 28, in the circumstances nothing in clause 8.2 would have
Mr Larocca from reaching a decision to terminate the membership
interest of the plaintiff pursuant to the express power to do so
“absolute discretion”. That is because the simple existence of a
general clause such as clause 8.2 does not preclude
the exercise of
specific powers given by the Regulations which may be contrary to the individual
interests of one of many partners.
Mr Larocca was plainly aware at the time of termination that the plaintiff
had given notice of his retirement. That fact did
not significantly alter the
landscape. Clause 18.7.1 makes any retirement subject to agreement with the
Country Managing Partner.
The requirement for six months’ notice in
clause 18.7.2 is a requirement for the benefit of the firm rather than for
the retiring
partner. The potential for a partner to be put on garden leave was
not, in any practical sense, a useful alternative in circumstances
Mr Larocca had determined that the plaintiff’s continuance as a
partner was likely to harm significantly the interests
of the firm. Thus, the
failure to agree to the plaintiff continuing as a partner for a period or to
place him on garden leave is
not in any way indicative of the breach of an
obligation of good faith or reasonableness.
in any event, the plaintiff had and exercised a right of appeal to the Appeals
Committee in accordance with clause 18.4. That
right was exercised on
17 November 2023. On 30 November 2023, the Appeals Committee
conducted a hearing, which the plaintiff attended
along with his lawyer. On
11 December 2023, the Appeals Committee confirmed the decision to
terminate the plaintiff’s partnership
interest. The powers of the Appeals
Committee are to “confirm or invalidate the decision to Terminate the
relevant Partner’s
membership interest in the Firm and to make such
financial and other arrangements in connection with the Termination as it
appropriate”. As noted above, the appeal is the equivalent of
what in a court context would be considered to be an appeal
was therefore open to the plaintiff to raise any and all factual, legal or
discretionary issues that he wished to put before
the Appeals Committee. Those
which he did in fact raise are summarised earlier. Significantly,
clause 18.4.4 provides: “The
decision of the Appeals Committee,
including its decision on questions of fact and questions of law, shall be final
and binding on
the parties.” Having invoked the powers of the Appeals
Committee and that Committee having confirmed the termination of the
plaintiff’s partnership interest, the final and binding decision was that
of the Appeals Committee itself. Even if there was
some defect in the decision
taken at an earlier stage by Mr Larocca, the operative decision was that of
the Appeals Committee, and
no challenge has been made to the final and binding
nature of that decision.
of the arguments that were advanced by the plaintiff at the hearing have been
rejected. The plaintiff’s claim must therefore
fail. It is appropriate
that costs follow the event.
orders of the Court are:
(1) The proceedings are dismissed.
(2) The plaintiff is to pay the defendant’s costs.
(3) Liberty is granted to either party to seek an alternative order in relation
to costs by filing and serving written submissions
limited to not more than
three pages and any evidence in relation to costs within seven days of
the date of this judgment.
I certify that the preceding seventy-six [76] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of his Honour Justice
RTF format (420 KB)
Signed PDF/A format