Police v Harrington (a pseudonym) [2025] ACTMC 9 (14 March 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Police v Harrington (a pseudonym)
[2025] ACTMC 9
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Magistrate Temby
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW –
SENTENCING –
Sentencing procedure
– distribution of intimate images – withdrawal of consent –
family violence – abusive
relationship – impact of mental health
condition – expert evidence
Legislation Cited:
Family Violence Act 2016
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
Cases Cited:
DPP v Matas
[2024] ACTSC 234
Morrison v Maher
[2021] ACTSC 312
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571
R v Teel (a pseudonym)
[2021] ACTSC 183
R v Verdins & Ors
[2007] VSCA 102
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La Rosa
[2010] NSWCCA
[2012] NSWCCA 51
Scott Richard Smith (Informant)
Melissa Harrington (Defendant) (a pseudonym)
Representation:
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
ACT Legal Aid (Defendant)
File Numbers:
CC 4243 of 2023
MAGISTRATE TEMBY:
Introduction
Defendant is to be sentenced for one count of aggravated non-consensual
distribution of intimate images between 19 October 2022
and 3 January 2023.
offence carries a maximum penalty of 400 penalty units and/or 4 years’
imprisonment. The Defendant consented to the matter
being dealt with
Nature and circumstances of offence
Defendant and the complainant commenced a relationship between February and
March 2022. During their relationship they filmed
videos together and took a number of intimate photos. They agreed that the
Defendant would sell the videos
on her ‘OnlyFans’ page.
complainant ended the relationship in June 2022. He demanded that the Defendant
remove the photos and videos of him from her OnlyFans
page, and anywhere else
she stored them. He withdrew his consent for her to use his image.
Defendant said: “I ain’t getting rid of shit. Hope you realise you
fkd with the wrong bitch”. The Defendant
continued to sell the videos on
her OnlyFans page.
18 October 2022, the complainant’s solicitor wrote to the Defendant. The
letter noted:
(a) the complainant’s withdrawal of his consent for the videos to be
(b) that the complainant had not been financially compensated for profit the
Defendant had earned from continuing to use his image,
and that the complainant
might seek compensation if the Defendant did not remove all content featuring
the complainant by 21 October
(c) that the Defendant had posted intimate images of the complainant on her
Instagram page, something the complainant had never consented
(d) that distributing intimate images is a criminal offence and that, if the
Defendant continued to share intimate images of the
complainant on her Instagram
page, or otherwise shared the images, the matter would be referred to the
Australian Federal Police
and the Director of Public Prosecutions for criminal
prosecution of the Defendant.
Defendant did not respond positively to this letter. On 19 October 2022 she
posted the letter to her Instagram account, saying:
“HERE WE FKN GOOOO,
lost your power so you gotta pull this move hahahaha weakkkkk”.
Defendant also continued to share intimate videos of the complainant, at least
to a person known as ‘Brett James’
(around 23 October 2022) and to
the complainant’s then partner (on 2 January 2023), who had requested
videos from the Defendant
using an account named ‘Mamacita’. The
Defendant suspected that the request had come from the complainant or his
but nevertheless sent three videos.
Defendant’s persistent posting of the complainant’s intimate images
on her social media platforms has made the complainant
feel harassed and
Objective seriousness
cases which have considered this offence have identified a range of factors as
being relevant to assessing the objective
seriousness of the offence of
distributing intimate images. Those factors, which are relevant in this matter,
(a) the number of intimate images;
(b) the nature of the content;
(c) the mechanism by which they were distributed;
(d) the extent of distribution;
(e) the harm suffered by the complainant;
(f) the knowledge of the defendant as to the impact of the distribution on the
complainant;
(g) the motivation of the defendant; and
(h) whether the offending occurred in a family violence context.
agree with the Prosecution’s submission that the Defendant’s
offending is serious. The Defendant shared multiple videos
of the complainant to
at least two people through her OnlyFans account (and a third person told the
complainant that they were aware
that the Defendant was still selling intimate
videos of the Defendant) and the Defendant shared intimate images of the
complainant
on her Instagram page. The images (both video and still) were of a
high level of intimacy and the Defendant was recognisable.
conduct continued for some time, from October 2022 to January 2023. This was
despite the Defendant being directed by the complainant
and his lawyer to remove
images of the complainant from her social media.
complainant felt harassed and menaced as a result of the offending.
Defendant initially submitted that the complainant’s loss was only
financial, given the indication his lawyers made that
he might press the
complainant to account for the profit she had earned from the sale of the
videos. However, it is an agreed fact
that the complainant felt harassed and
menaced, not that he was concerned that he had suffered financially. It seems to
me that the
complainant objected to the Defendant financially benefiting from
the use of the images rather than being concerned that he had suffered
Defendant also submitted that it is not possible to distinguish between any
reputational or psychological harm the complainant
suffered as a result of the
images being publicly distributed with his consent, as compared with any such
harm he suffered after
he withdrew his consent. In further submissions, the
Defendant submitted that any reputational harm must be ‘lower’,
given his previous consent to the distribution of the images. The Prosecution
submits that the fact that the complainant previously
consented to the
distribution of the images does not mitigate the offending.
agree that it is not possible, on the agreed facts, to draw the distinction
identified by the Defendant. However, that does not
mean that the complainant
could not feel harassed and menaced by the continued distribution of his image
once he withdrew consent.
also accept that the complainant’s earlier provision of consent does not
mitigate the offending conduct. However, the fact
that he was content for the
images to be publicly shared does inform the nature of the harm he is likely to
have suffered once he
withdrew consent. His is a different experience to someone
who, for example, made an intimate video only for private use but had
partner share the video publicly (including, perhaps, in a way that would
significantly impact the person in a social or professional
what way a person in the complainant’s position is impacted by the ongoing
distribution, or availability, of their intimate
images will vary from person to
person. It is certainly not the case that, just because a person has previously
consented to their
intimate images being distributed in the past, they cannot
suffer harm once they withdraw their consent for the distribution of the
As I have noted, it is an agreed fact that the complainant felt harassed and
menaced, which I accept was the harm he suffered
as a result of the
Defendant’s conduct.
the Defendant knew that continuing to distribute the images would have a
particular impact on the complainant is unclear.
She was certainly aware that he
did not want her to continue to have or share the images, but it is not clear
that she was aware
that it would make him feel harassed and menaced if she
continued to share the images.
motivated the Defendant to continue to share the images is not entirely clear.
Sharing the images through her OnlyFans page enabled
her to earn money, but
there is no evidence as to the extent to which she derived an income from these
images. At face value, the
Defendant’s responses to the complainant and to
the letter she received from his lawyers requesting that she remove the images
from her social media indicate that the Defendant was at least partly motivated
by animosity towards the complainant and a desire
for retribution.
is clear that she did not want to do anything that he told her to do.
opinion of Ms Tabitha Frew, clinical psychologist, is that the Defendant’s
defiance can be explained, at least in part,
by the Defendant’s
Autism-related deficits in social and emotional understanding, in the context of
the risk to her safety
posed by the complainant’s history of family
violence towards her, and the associated exacerbation of her symptoms of Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder (
) from the family violence. Ms Frew
considers that the Defendant’s actions were more driven by a desire to
protect herself than
to effect retribution. Ms Frew’s evidence is
discussed in greater detail later in these reasons.
present purposes, I find that the Defendant’s actions were partly driven
by a desire for retribution and partly because,
as a result of her Autism
Spectrum Disorder (
), coupled with an exacerbation of her PTSD, she
thought that resistance was less vulnerable than compliance and she wanted to
her autonomy. Having regard to the impact of her mental health
condition, her moral culpability is reduced to a moderate degree.
offending also occurred in a family violence context. That is the statutory
factor of aggravation. The family violence engaged
in by the Defendant was, in
terms of the kinds of family violence identified in
Violence Act 2016
, ‘emotional or psychological abuse’ which, as
I have noted, made the complainant feel harassed and
Comparable cases
33(1)(za) of the
Sentencing Act
provides that the Court must have regard
to current sentencing practice and patterns when considering how an offender
must be sentenced.
Consistency does not mean numerical equivalence, but the
consistent application of relevant legal principles. Considering past sentences
is also relevant to the achievement of reasonable consistency in sentencing.
the Defendant notes, there are no reported cases which are similar to the facts
of this matter. Nevertheless, I have summarised
below three cases from recent
years which provide some assistance in understanding how the courts have
approached other matters involving
the sentencing of an offender for
distributing intimate images.
DPP v Matas
[2024] ACTSC
Matas, the victim became aware that the offender had distributed a video of the
offender and the victim engaging in consensual
sexual intercourse, to two of the
victim’s friends. The victim confronted the offender about it over text
message and said,
“ALAN WTF” and “WHO DID YOU SEND THIS
TO”. The offender replied, “Should I keep sending”, “How
do you like it”, and “Its to your friends”. The victim
replied, “You sent a video of you fucking [me] to
a bunch of people I
don’t even know just for a laugh”.
Court concluded that the objective seriousness of the offending was serious,
noting that, although the distribution was limited
to two people, it was a
serious matter and a violation of the dignity of the victim. The Court stated
that the offence approached
the mid-range.
Ultimately,
the Court sentenced the offender to a term of imprisonment of 18 months, reduced
to 1 year, 3 months and 8 days for the
offender’s guilty
Morrison v Maher
[2021] ACTSC 312
, the offender sent sexually explicit images and comments about the
victim to her co-workers’ email accounts at the Australian
Defence Force
and to other family friends. The victim was devastated. To make matters worse,
she was subject to a workplace investigation
by the military police although no
action was taken against her.
Court concluded that the offending was in the high range of objective
seriousness. The Court noted that the offending involved
the sustained use of
violence against a female domestic partner of the offender as a component of the
manipulation and control exercised
over her and that it involved serious
examples of domestic violence.
Court took into account the fact that the offender suffered from bipolar
disorder, although the Court did not accept that there
was a causal link between
that condition and his offending which would reduce his moral culpability. The
Court also had regard to
the fact that the offender had endured a traumatic
childhood, although the Court did not apply the principles developed in
v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571.
Court sentenced the offender to a term of imprisonment of 18 months, reduced to
15 months’ imprisonment for the offender’s
R v Teel (a pseudonym)
[2021] ACTSC 183
, the offender uploaded intimate images of his wife to a particular
website, ‘Zoig’. The images were of his wife, naked,
bedroom, ensuite and shower. The offender uploaded photos on five occasions,
using two to four photos each time. He also
sent photos by email to
victim felt humiliated and degraded. She was mortified.
was given to the Court of the Defendant’s mental health condition. At
[106] the Court said:
106. You did not give any evidence suggesting
that you had any difficulty in being able to restrain your urge to engage in
this sexual
offending. Dr Lennings gave evidence, which I accept, that your
psychological conditions together with your use of pornography lead
developing a paraphilia which was the immediate cause of your offending
behaviour. He believed that your impulse control was
detrimentally affected, as
was your “moral compass”. On balance, I accept that evidence. That
evidence, however, is not
to the effect that you could not control your
behaviour. Indeed, in your evidence you accepted that while alcohol abuse
contributed
to your offending, you still made the decisions. While your moral
compass may have been skewed, you were well aware that what you
were doing was
wrong. For these reasons, I am satisfied that only a slight reduction in your
moral culpability for this offending
is warranted based on your psychological
conditions and your alcohol abuse.
Court sentenced the offender to 8 months’ imprisonment for each offence
(each occasion he uploaded the photos), with substantial
concurrency between the
offences. That took into account the principle of totality and the fact that the
offender had already been
dealt with in the Magistrates Court for an offence
against his wife that formed part of the series of offences before the Court.
The aggregate sentence for the seven offences was 20
Observations in relation to previous cases
level of intimacy of the images distributed by the Defendant are higher than in
the above cases. The extent of distribution (number
of images and breadth of
audience) is difficult to compare, but certainly greater than in
comparison of the harm suffered by the victims of the offences is also
difficult. However, the harm suffered in
Morrison v Maher
must have been more significant.
Circumstances
Defendant relies on three considerations in support of her subjective case,
namely that:
(a) the Defendant suffered childhood disadvantage, engaging the principles set
[2012] 302 ALR 192 (
(b) the Defendant’s offending conduct needs to be understood in the
context of her being a long-term victim of serious family
violence at the hands
of the complainant; and
(c) the Defendant suffers from a range of mental health conditions which enliven
the principles set out in
R v Verdins & Ors
[2007] VSCA 102
some extent, these considerations, and the evidence upon which the Defendant
relies in support of them, overlap.
reasons which I will explain, I do not accept that the
are applicable in this case.
as the Defendant relies on her having been the victim of long-term serious
family violence at the hands of the complainant,
I accept that the Defendant was
the victim of family violence from the complainant , however the evidence as to
the nature and extent
of that violence is limited. In my view, the history of
family violence is relevant both to the Defendant’s motivation for
retribution, and to the impact of her mental health condition, with respect to
the conduct that she engaged in.
agree that the
principles are engaged.
Ms Tabitha Frew
Frew prepared a report for the Court at the request of the Defendant, in
anticipation of an application for dismissal pursuant
. That application did not proceed, however Ms Frew’s report
was relied on at the sentencing hearing. Ms Frew also gave evidence
sentencing hearing.
Frew is a clinical psychologist and there was no dispute that she is an expert
in the field of psychology. There was considerable
disagreement between the
parties, however, as to the findings which I should make, having regard to Ms
Frew’s evidence.
History informing Ms Frew’s
Defendant told Ms Frew that her mother told her that she was sexually abused by
her father when she was very young. She had no
recollection of this occurring
but believes that it did.
Defendant remembered that her father came home late every day after work and he
and the Defendant’s mother would fight for
hours, causing the Defendant to
cry. She started to pull her hair out when she was about ten years old when the
fighting between
her parents became more intense. The hair pulling became worse
when her parents separated, which was when she was 12 years old. For
shut down emotionally.
Defendant said that she always felt safe and comfortable with her mother when
she was growing up, however she started being bullied
at school after the
children at school noticed that she was pulling her hair out. The bullying
continued at college in years 11 and
12, leading to the Defendant finishing year
12 at CIT. The Defendant also said that everyone at her school spread rumours
and she did not know why.
the challenges she had faced during her childhood, she started work at a
supermarket when she was 18 and had maintained that
employment for eight
to her relationship with the complainant, the Defendant was in an
on-again-off-again relationship with another man. They had
a child together, but
that man did not want to be involved in the baby’s life and he has moved
interstate. He was abusive to
the Defendant during the relationship including,
on one occasion, punching her and breaking her nose.
Defendant’s relationship with the complainant was also abusive. Ms Frew
referred to the Defendant’s statement that
the complainant gave her
gonorrhoea but lied about having it himself. Most concerningly, she recounts
that the Defendant told her
that the complainant has sexually assaulted her a
Frew also notes that the Defendant told her that, after her relationship with
the complainant ended, the complainant and his new
partner came to the
Defendant’s store and were aggressive to staff.
Medical records
Frew also had regard to the Defendant’s Canberra Health Services medical
records, both before and after her relationship
with the complainant ended. The
records provide a limited snapshot of the Defendant’s mental health status
after particular
life-events (in mid-2020, early and mid-2022 and mid-2023) and
Ms Frew does not appear to place much reliance on them in reaching
records are nevertheless relied on by the Defendant. In terms of the records
which concern the complainant, which post-date the
end of their relationship,
they record that:
(a) the Defendant was referred by her GP on 28 July 2022 for acute mental health
support after the Defendant presented as agitated,
fearful, hypervigilant, with
sleep disturbance and worsening low mood. The notes record that the Defendant
decompensated after her
car was set alight by an ex-partner, which the Defendant
had told Ms Frew was the complainant. This is consistent with a claim that
made in an application the Defendant lodged for a family violence order in
October 2024, in which she stated that the complainant
arranged for a friend to
light her car on fire shortly after their relationship ended;
(b) Access Mental Health wrote to her GP on 30 July
2022, stating that they had advised ACT Policing of the Defendant’s safety
concerns but that the Defendant had declined a referral to Domestic Violence
Specialist Services and the Women’s Legal Centre.
The precise nature of
her safety concerns is not explained and this correspondence is not referred to
in Ms Frew’s report;
(c) the Defendant’s GP referred the Defendant to Access Mental Health on
26 June 2023 for urgent mental health support after
the Defendant presented with
tearfulness, low mood, anxiety and fear of being stalked. He identified that the
Defendant had suffered
significant domestic violence in the recent past and that
she was getting very agitated because she thought she was being stalked
worried that someone was going to attack her. She wasn’t coping;
(d) Ms Frew wrote in her report that the Defendant feared being stalked by the
complainant but the referral from the Defendant’s
GP does not identify the
person whom the Defendant feared. The Access Mental Health notes from 28 June
2023 state that the person
the Defendant thought was stalking her was her
ex-partner’s girlfriend, not the complainant (although the Defendant may
have feared both the complainant and his partner as a result). The notes
record that the Defendant had sought assistance from the
police in relation to
the incidents of stalking but the police did not take any action; and
(e) the Access Mental Health notes also record that
the Defendant had advised that she was a victim of domestic violence, that she
was getting support from the Domestic Violence Crisis Service, and that her
ex-partner was in custody. This suggests that the family
violence that is
discussed elsewhere in the notes refers to family violence that the Defendant
had alleged that the complainant engaged
in towards her, although it is not
clear what form the family violence took. It seems that the reference to
‘significant family
violence’ in the Access Mental Health notes has
been taken from the use of that phrase in the referral that was written by
Defendant’s GP.
Psychosocial testing
Frew conducted a number of psychosocial tests of the Defendant.
regard to the Paulhus Deception Scale, Ms Frew stated that the Defendant’s
pattern of responding indicated that she was
not likely to have difficulties
with pathological lying, or a trait disposition toward grandiosity, or
chronically deliberate deceptive
acts. Similarly, on the Miller Forensic
Assessment of Symptoms Test, Ms Frew stated that the Defendant’s results
a very low likelihood of feigning a psychiatric illness such as
psychosis or PTSD.
positively, Ms Frew opined that:
(a) although the Defendant is typically able to function adequately, there are
likely to be periods of marked emotional, cognitive
or unpredictable moods and
the feeling of being cheated, misunderstood and unappreciated. Ms Frew said that
the Defendant may often
feel like an overburdened and mistreated victim and that
an intense conflict between dependency and self-assertion may contribute
self-pitying and rash emotionality;
(b) a desire for retribution for past mistreatment is likely to underlie the
Defendant’s characteristic hostility, envy and
suspiciousness. Also
noteworthy are the Defendant’s gratification in undermining the pleasures
and expectations of others,
and her overt displays of oppositional behaviour. Ms
Frew stated that, although nearly everyone behaves resentfully at times, what
distinguishes the Defendant is the ease with which she can be provoked into
acting in a resentful manner and the regularity with
which she manifests
obstinate behaviour (amongst other things).
Ms Frew’s diagnoses of the Defendant
Frew diagnosed the Defendant as suffering ASD, level two (moderate level of
severity). In this context, Ms Frew noted that the
Defendant had been
prolifically bullied from late primary school and that the effects of bullying
cause deeper harm and last longer
for children with Autism in comparison to
neurotypical peers.
Frew said that people with ASD, especially women, are more likely to experience
PTSD than the general population. Ms Frew considers
that the Defendant developed
PTSD symptoms after exposure to family violence in her relationship with the
father of her children,
on the background of a history of prolific bulling and
social exclusion at school.
of these diagnoses are in issue.
Frew stated that the Canberra Health Services records indicated that the
Defendant experienced a deterioration in her mental state
following exposure to
family violence in her relationship with the complainant and the subsequent
threats and harassment from the
complainant’s partner, which caused a
relapse of symptoms of PTSD.
Frew noted that the Canberra Health Services records indicate that the Defendant
also had pre-existing diagnoses for other conditions.
Ms Frew noted a diagnosis
of cannabis use disorder and agreed that the Defendant suffered from
trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder).
disagreed that the Defendant suffers from Borderline Personality Disorder,
stating that her provisional opinion was that the Defendant’s
presentation
is better explained by the impact of her ASD, PTSD, trichotillomania and chronic
cannabis use on her functioning. Similarly,
Ms Frew considers that the
Defendant’s self-report of auditory hallucinations is related to an
Autism-specific experience of
abnormal perception, rather than schizophrenia (a
possible diagnosis that the Defendant had raised with Canberra Health Services
at one stage).
Ms Frew’s opinions with respect to the
Defendant’s offending conduct
Frew concluded that the Defendant’s perception of others, and how she
interprets another person’s intent, is affected
by Autism, and this had a
causal contribution to the commission of the present offence to a moderate
degree. She opined that the
Defendant’s decision to distribute the
complainant’s images despite the complainant’s requests to remove
her social media, was an attempt to safeguard her autonomy and to feel
some control over the complainant’s future actions.
Frew said that, while it would make more sense to avoid actions which could
provoke violence from an ex-partner, some people with
ASD experience a fight,
flight or freeze reaction when confronted with demands that challenge their
independence, leading to heightened
emotional responses. She said that this type
of heightened emotional response is distinctly characterised by an intense
inclination
to avoid demands, even when the person actually wants to comply with
the request.
Challenge to Ms
Frew’s opinion that the Defendant’s actions were caused by her
mental health condition – the flight
or fright response
cross-examination, the Prosecution challenged the notion that the
Defendant’s conduct involved a flight or fright response,
given that the
offending occurred over several months, with repeated requests for the Defendant
to remove the complainant’s
images from social media. Ms Frew maintained
her view. She said that, because of the nature of the Defendant’s
relationship
with the complainant (involving family violence), which exacerbated
her symptoms of PTSD, the impact of her ASD meant that the Defendant
exercise appropriate judgment each time a request to remove the material was
Frew opined that, while the Defendant’s online persona maintained a
façade of independence, it was indicative of an
Autism-specific form of
resistance to threat. She said that this resistance was based in fear and
extreme anxiety rather than antisocial
motivations.
Frew considered that, in reality, the Defendant’s behaviour was
characterised by fear, a deterioration in her mental state,
reports to police,
presentation to health services and seeking a family violence order to protect
her and her daughter. Ms Frew’s
assessment of the Defendant’s
presentation was that she was ‘terrified of the [the complainant] and his
enduring capacity
for malice toward her’.
Frew opined that the Defendant’s Autism-related deficits in social and
emotional understanding, in the context of the risk
to her safety posed by the
complainant’s history of family violence towards her, and the associated
exacerbation of her symptoms
of PTSD from the family violence, impaired her
ability to exercise appropriate judgment. Ms Frew considered that the Defendant
erroneously
perceived that non-compliance with the complainant’s requests
to remove the images from her social media would reduce the likelihood
further harm towards her and was the most reasonable way to maintain control
over her safety.
Challenge to Ms Frew’s opinion that
the Defendant’s actions were caused by her mental health condition –
on history of family violence committed by the complainant as a
contributing factor to Defendant’s mental health condition
key element of Ms Frew’s reasoning, in support of her view that the
Defendant’s mental condition had been a causative
factor in offending, was
thus an acceptance that the Defendant had been subject to family violence at the
hands of the complainant,
that he posed an ongoing risk to her safety and that
this led to fear, a deterioration in the Defendant’s mental state and
exacerbation of her PTSD symptoms.
Prosecution cross-examined Ms Frew in relation to the extent to which her
opinion was premised on the complainant having engaged
in family violence
towards the Defendant during their relationship. The Prosecution submits that
there is little evidence of family
violence prior to the Defendant engaging in
the present offending.
Frew said that the Defendant’s judgment would have been less impaired in
the absence of a history of family violence from
the complainant but that it was
difficult to know how she would have reacted without that history. She said
that, while the relationship
exacerbated the Defendant’s PTSD, it is
difficult to say how much it contributed.
find it difficult to understand that view.
I note that, in re-examination Ms Frew, she said that it was not possible to
distinguish between the impact of the Defendant’s
PTSD and her ASD, given
that the offending involved an interpersonal relationship. This suggests that it
is Ms Frew’s view
that the Defendant’s PTSD (which she considered
had been exacerbated by the complainant engaged in family violence towards
Defendant) was a significant contributing factor driving her offending.
a central premise of Ms Frew’s opinion as to the cause of the
Defendant’s conduct is that the Defendant perceived
that non-compliance
would reduce the likelihood of further harm towards her. That is, it was an
attempt to safeguard her autonomy
and to feel some control over the
complainant’s future actions.
there had not been any family violence in the relationship, she might still have
wished to safeguard her autonomy but there would
have been no threat to her
safety to guard against. Indeed, later in her evidence, Ms Frew noted that the
Defendant’s fear
of violence led to the offending conduct.
is thus clear that Ms Frew’s acceptance that there had been family
violence engaged in by the complainant towards the Defendant
was an important
element of her reasoning as to why the Defendant acted in the way that she did.
noted earlier in these reasons, I accept, as the Prosecution submits, that there
is limited evidence as to the family violence
that the complainant engaged in
towards her.
records which describe the Defendant’s experience of family violence at
the hands of the complainant are quite general in
nature. For example, the
Access Mental Health notes record that the Defendant advised that she was a
victim of domestic violence
but do not identify what form that violence took.
Similarly, they record that ACT Policing had been advised of the
Defendant’s
safety concerns, but do not identify what those concerns
her application for a family violence order in 2024, the Defendant states that
her relationship with the complainant was characterised
by sexual, physical,
emotional and verbal violence. However, the Defendant did not provide any
examples of such violence.
Defendant points to the fact that she was granted a family violence order in
September 2022, which was extended for 12 months
in September 2023. However, I
understand from the Prosecution’s submissions that the September 2022
order was made on a ‘without
admissions’ basis.
Defendant submits that that is irrelevant because, regardless, the order stands
as a contemporaneous allegation of family violence
that was serious enough to
warrant a court order. I disagree. By its very nature, an order that is made on
a without admissions basis
involves no assessment or finding that there has been
family violence. Thus, the basis upon which the order was sought remain
allegations
the Defendant notes that the family violence order she applied for in 2024 was
granted, however I understand that it was
granted as an interim order.
Accordingly, it would almost certainly have been granted on an ex-parte basis,
leaving the allegations
in it untested.
the foregoing, there is evidence that the Defendant has been the victim of
family violence at the hands of the complainant.
The Defendant has made, and
maintained, her claims of family violence over time and she has described a
number of specific incidents.
Defendant told Ms Frew that the complainant had sexually assaulted her on more
than one occasion during the relationship and,
shortly after the relationship
ended, her car was set alight by a friend of the complainant. She also said that
the complainant and
his new partner came to the shop where the Defendant worked
and were aggressive to staff, raising issues for her employment at the
of these incidents occurred prior to the conduct for which the Defendant is
charged in these proceedings.
is also evidence of the Defendant’s mental health deteriorating at the end
of her relationship with the complainant. She
was referred to Access Mental
Health by her GP in July 2022 for acute mental health support after the
Defendant decompensated following
her car being set alight. That referral is
also a contemporaneous record of the Defendant’s claim with respect to the
alight of her car, adding weight to its credibility. I note that this
incident is also referred to in the Defendant’s 2024
application for a
family violence order.
Defendant also points to incidents which have occurred after the offending
conduct which is the subject of these proceedings.
her 2024 application for a family violence order, the complainant describes
several incidents which occurred after the end of her
relationship with the
complainant. She says that, while the 2022 family violence order was in place,
the complainant located her
father’s house and threw paint stripper on the
Defendant’s step-mother’s car. The complainant drove past the
recording her walking into the police station to make a statement.
Defendant submits that, in January 2023, the complainant smashed the
Defendant’s car with a crowbar and breached the family
violence order that
was then in place. It is possible that the breach of the family violence order
relates to the incident in which
the complainant is said to have driven past the
Defendant when she attended the police station.
note that, subsequent to the sentencing hearing, the complainant was found
guilty of contravening the family violence order that
was in place to protect
the Defendant but he was found not guilty of damaging her property. In
circumstances where the complainant
has been found to have contravened the
family violence order that was put in place for her protection, I accept the
Defendant’s
assertion that the complainant located her father’s
house and threw paint stripper on her step-mother’s car and located
and filmed her going into the police station to make a statement.
Defendant submits that the complainant’s conduct of January 2023 is
indicative of the violence that the Defendant endured
during their relationship.
The basis of that submission is that the court would understand that individuals
who engage in violence
after a relationship has ended are likely to have also
engaged in violence during the relationship.
accept that this may sometimes be true, but I do not accept that it describes a
‘likely’ scenario. Sometimes, a partner
to a relationship who feels
wronged will engage in acts of, for example, property damage, by way of
retribution, without having engaged
in violence during the relationship.
the complainant was clearly upset by the Defendant’s conduct of making his
image available for sale, and posting his image
on her social media page, over a
protracted period. That he would take steps in retribution for her conduct is at
least equally likely
to the possibility that his conduct reflects the fact that
he was violent towards the Defendant during their relationship.
Nevertheless, I do accept that the complainant’s conduct is consistent
with the Defendants’ assertions that the complainant
committed acts of
family violence during the relationship, and that he has continued to do so
subsequent to the end of that relationship.
Ultimately,
I accept for the purposes of this sentencing exercise the Defendant did suffer
family violence at the hands of the complainant
prior to her engaging in the
offending which is the subject of these proceedings. Most obviously, this
includes having her car set
alight but I am satisfied that there were instances
of family violence that the complainant committed during the course of the
relationship,
as the Defendant says occurred, inclusive of physical and verbal
abuse. I cannot make any findings, though, as to specific incidents
on the basis
of the evidence before me.
Accordingly,
I also accept that there was a basis for Ms Frew’s opinion that the
Defendant’s relationship with the complainant
involved family violence,
which exacerbated her symptoms of PTSD and caused her to fear the
complainant.
Challenge to Ms Frew’s opinion that the
Defendant’s actions were caused by her mental health condition –
of the Defendant’s desire for retribution on offending
key aspect of the Prosecution’s challenge to Ms Frew’s conclusions
was the proposition that Ms Frew had not adequately
accounted for the
Defendant’s desire for retribution in giving her opinion as to the drivers
for the Defendant’s conduct.
Defendant submits that, to the extent that a desire for retribution is a feature
of the Defendant’s personality, that cannot
be divorced from her ASD
because her personality is indivisible from her ASD. I disagree.
Frew’s report does not suggest that every person with ASD has the same
personality traits, nor that a desire for retribution
is a common personality
trait for someone diagnosed with ASD. Further, the observations that Ms Frew
made, that the Defendant’s
‘desires for retribution for past
mistreatment are likely to underlie her characteristic hostility’ and that
what distinguishes
the Defendant’s capacity for resentment ‘is the
ease with which she can be provoked into acting in a resentful manner
regularity which she manifests ... obstinate behaviour’, were made in the
context of Ms Frew’s discussion of
the Defendant’s general
personality structure, not in the context of the Defendant’s ASD
this respect, I note that Ms Frew was asked a number of questions in
cross-examination about the impact of the Defendant’s
retribution and her answers seemed to indicate that the Defendant’s desire
for retribution and her ASD were factors
that independently impacted the
Defendant’s actions. For example, Ms Frew gave evidence that:
(a) people with ASD are less likely to commit offences of the kind that the
Defendant did, but the Defendant’s betrayal trauma
led to a desire for
retribution – the offending gave her an outlet to direct the hurt she felt
at being betrayed;
(b) the Defendant’s conduct could have been driven by both a desire for
retribution and her ASD; and
(c) the Defendant’s actions were more about having control and protecting
herself than retribution.
Ms Frew also said that the personality testing should be interpreted as part of
the ASD, and that it wasn’t possible to
take Autism out of person, she
then said that, if a person did not have some trauma, her personality may not
have developed to seek
retribution. There is no suggestion in Ms Frew’s
report, or her evidence, that the trauma suffered by the Defendant played
role in the development of her ASD.
Ms Frew’s evidence as a whole, including her report, I understand the
Defendant’s desire for retribution, and the
ease with which she can be
provoked into acting in a resentful manner, are aspects of her personality that
are separate from her
ASD. That aspect of her personality may have been moulded
by trauma the Defendant has experienced in her life but Ms Frew gave no
as to the likelihood that that was the case. As previously discussed, Ms
Frew’s opinion is that at least some aspects
of the Defendant’s
trauma led her to develop PTSD.
my view, a material contributing factor to the Defendant’s conduct,
separate from her mental health condition, was a desire
for retribution against
the complainant, for the family violence he had committed against her and for
the betrayal that Ms Frew identified
that the Defendant felt that the
complainant had exhibited.
Frew opined that a period of imprisonment would have an adverse effect on the
Defendant in terms of worsening her PTSD, cannabis
use disorder and
trichotillomania. She said that the Defendant would likely leave custody unable
to appropriately parent her daughter
or maintain regular
employment.
Bugmy principles
do not accept that the
principles are engaged in this matter.
Defendant submits that she was exposed to family aggression at an early age. The
only evidence of that fact is the statement that
the Defendant made to Ms Frew
that she was witness to her parents arguing when her father came home from work
each day, which upset
her to the point that she cried and ultimately led to her
developing trichotillomania when the fighting became more intense and shutting
down emotionally when her parents separated.
lived with her mother after her parents separated. She visited her father but
did not like going to his house. She said that she
felt safe and comfortable
with her mother when she was growing up.
this recollection at face value, I do not accept that is establishes that the
Defendant suffered childhood disadvantage
in the sense contemplated in
. Nor do I accept that there is a sufficient link between her
childhood experience and the offence such that her experience can, to
extent, explain her offending.
Defendant also refers to having been bullied at school, which she attributed to
children noticing that she was pulling out her
hair. Ms Frew records that the
bullying became so bad that the Defendant ended up leaving Canberra College and
finishing her Year
12 certificate at CIT.
Frew also notes that the Defendant said that she did not know how to approach
other children and make friends, and that it was
a mystery to her that other
children made friends so easily. Again, while Ms Frew included this statement
after describing the Defendant’s
recollection that she was bullied for
pulling her hair out, it suggests that the Defendant’s social struggles
went beyond her
hair pulling condition. From Ms Frew’s description of the
impact of the Defendant’s ASD on her ability to relate to others,
suspect that that condition had a role to play in her experience of school, both
in terms of how she perceives she was treated
and in terms of how other children
interacted with her.
Nevertheless,
I do not accept that the Defendant’s experiences at school reflect
childhood disadvantage of the kind contemplated
. Nor do I accept
that it explains, to any extent, her offending conduct. In saying this, I note
that Ms Frew’s opinion that
the Defendant suffers from PTSD was in part
based on the bullying and social exclusion that she had experienced at school
her PTSD explains, to some extent, her offending conduct. Her
experiences at school are therefore relevant, not on the basis that
they engage
principles but in the application of the
principles.
Defendant submits that her early experiences of relationship dysfunction would
have led her to believe that such dysfunction was
an ordinary part of
relationships, making her more likely to become a victim of family violence in
the future. I accept that the
Defendant is a vulnerable person. This is most
obviously because of her mental health conditions, including the contribution
childhood bullying made to her suffering PTSD. It is also possible that her
childhood experience at home also contributed to her
vulnerability, including
the possibility that she was sexually abused as a child as her mother told her
had occurred.
it is not clear to me, even if that vulnerability did make it more likely that
she would become a victim of family violence,
as the Defendant submits, how her
experience explains, to any extent, her offending conduct. The fact that she was
more likely to
be a victim of family violence does not explain why she would be
a perpetrator of family violence, at least not in any way that is
distinct from
the impact of her PTSD on the commission of her offence.
health condition
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) v De La Rosa
[2010] NSWCCA 194
McClellan CJ at CL (with whom Simpson J and Barr AJ agreed) said, at
Where an offender is suffering from a mental illness,
intellectual handicap or other mental problems the courts have developed
to be applied when sentencing ... They can be summarised in the
following manner:
Where the state of a person’s mental health
contributes to the commission of the offence in a material way, the
moral culpability may be reduced. Consequently the need to
denounce the crime may be reduced with a reduction in the sentence ...
It may also have the consequence that the offender is an inappropriate
vehicle for general deterrence resulting in a reduction in
the sentence which
would otherwise have been imposed ...
It may mean that a custodial sentence may weigh more heavily on the person.
Because the sentence will be more onerous for that person
the length of the
prison term or the conditions under which it is served may be reduced ...
It may reduce or eliminate the significance of specific deterrence ...
Conversely, it may be that because of a person’s mental illness, they
present more of a danger to the community. In those circumstances,
considerations of specific deterrence may result in an increased sentence
Where a person has been diagnosed with an Antisocial Personality Disorder
there may be a particular need to give consideration to
the protection of the
accept Ms Frew’s opinion that the Defendant’s mental health
condition contributed to the commission of the present offence
in a material
way. The Defendant’s Autism-related deficits in social and emotional
understanding, in the context of the risk
to her safety posed by the
complainant’s history of family violence towards her, and the associated
exacerbation of her symptoms
of PTSD from the family violence, contributed to
her offending to a moderate degree. As I noted earlier in these reasons, I found
that the Defendant’s moral culpability is also reduced to a moderate
degree. The need to denounce the offending conduct is
similarly reduced.
as I have also found, a material contributing factor to the Defendant’s
conduct, separate from her mental health condition,
was a desire for retribution
against the complainant, for the family violence he had committed against her
and for the betrayal that
Ms Frew identified that the Defendant felt that the
complainant had exhibited. This limits the extent to which the weight to be
to specific and general deterrence would otherwise be reduced by the
impact of the Defendant’s mental health condition. Nevertheless,
Ms Frew’s opinion that the Defendant’s actions were more driven by a
desire to protect herself than to effect
retribution.
accept that a custodial sentence is likely to weigh more heavily on the
Remorse and Contrition
is no evidence that the Defendant is remorseful for her
Criminal History
Defendant’s criminal history is not long, but it does include offences
which are relevant to the present offending.
Defendant’s most recent offence was aggravated common assault. It was
committed at the beginning of the period covered by
the present offending and
was also in a family violence context. The Defendant submits that this offence
was committed against her
mother and was not serious, resulting in a
non-conviction order.
Defendant also has four convictions for contravening a protection order and one
conviction for property damage. These offences
were committed between March 2016
and March 2017 and, like the present matter, I understand from the
Prosecution’s submissions
that they were also committed in a family
violence context.
Defendant also has one conviction for common assault, in 2017, as well as for a
number of driving offences which are not relevant.
Defendant’s history does not entitle her to leniency. Rather, it indicates
that specific deterrence is a relevant purpose
of sentencing. The weight to be
given to that consideration is impacted, however, by the relevance of the
Defendant’s mental
health condition to the commission of the present
offence and by the fact that most of the Defendant’s offending history is
somewhat dated now.
Frew notes that the Defendant’s history of offending appeared to have
reduced in severity and frequency after the birth of
her daughter in January
2021. Ms Frew noted that, coinciding with the birth of her daughter, the
Defendant had reached an age where
her neurocognitive development is likely to
have reached maturity, such that she was likely to have improved in her capacity
to self-regulate
and make prosocial choices.
Defendant entered a plea of guilty on the day of the hearing. She had apparently
advised the Prosecution four days prior to the
hearing that she would be
pleading guilty and, accordingly, no witnesses were required to attend the
that time she entered her plea of guilty, the Defendant sought to have the
charge against her dismissed pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
The pursuit of that application was delayed until January 2025, whilst the
Defendant obtained medical evidence in support of it.
Ultimately,
the Prosecution did not consent to the matter being dealt with under
Crimes Act 1900
and it was listed for hearing on 4 March 2025, when
the matter came before me for sentence.
agree with the Prosecution that a discount of 10% on the Defendant’s
sentence is appropriate in the circumstances.
submissions as to appropriate disposition
Defendant seeks a non-conviction order under
Crimes (Sentencing)
Sentencing Act
). She submits that:
(a) the objective seriousness of, and the Defendant’s moral culpability
for, the offending is low;
(b) her childhood trauma sheds light on her offending, in that it made it more
likely that she would enter relationships with abusive
individuals such as the
complainant;
(c) her history of abuse at the hands of the complainant and her mental health
condition had a causal effect on her offending;
(d) the application of the
principles reduce the weight to be
given to specific deterrence, general deterrence and punishment as sentencing
considerations; and
(e) the need for community protection is low.
Defendant submits that these factors amount to ‘compelling reasons’
justifying a departure from the ordinary outcome
of a finding of guilt. The
Defendant submits that a non-conviction order, coupled with a Good Behaviour
Order, would be an appropriate
disposition of the matter.
Prosecution submits that nothing other than a term of imprisonment is
appropriate. The Prosecution submits that:
(a) the offending was objectively serious;
(b) the Defendant continued to distribute the videos in the face of the
complainant’s clear expression of non-consent, such
that her moral
culpability is high;
(c) the Defendant has a history of family violence offending;
(d) the Defendant’s subjective case does not mitigate her offending to any
significant degree because her childhood background
and mental impairment do not
have the mitigatory effect argued for by the Defendant; and
(e) the sentencing principles of general deterrence, specific deterrence and
protection of the community remain paramount.
Decision in relation to section 17 application
note that a conviction is the ordinary consequence of a finding of guilt and
that the absence of a conviction is, therefore, an
exceptional outcome. Further,
as the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal said in
[2012] NSWCCA 51
in discussing a similar provision that operates in NSW:
offence that is committed is an objectively serious one and where general
deterrence and denunciation are important factors
in sentencing for that
offence, the scope of the operation of the section decreases.
course, the application of s 17 of the Sentencing Act is not limited to minor
offences. I also accept that an order under s 17
can be made in conjunction with
a good behaviour order, which itself is a form of punishment.
Ultimately,
the question is whether, having regard to the considerations set out in section
17, there are sufficiently cogent or compelling
circumstances to warrant a
departure from the usual course.
have set out my views in relation to the factors that the parties raised in
support of their positions in the course of these reasons.
the reduction in the Defendant’s moral culpability for the impact of her
mental health condition, I do not consider
that it is appropriate to exercise my
discretion under s 17 not to record a conviction. In my view, the purposes of
sentencing would
not be adequately met by a s 17 disposition, having regard, in
particular, to the seriousness of the offending (both in terms of
seriousness of the offence and the objective seriousness of the offending
conduct), and the need for specific deterrence and
protection of the
Purposes of sentencing
the reasons I have already articulated, the need to denounce the
Defendant’s conduct is reduced to a moderate degree by
reason of the
impact of her mental health condition. The appropriateness of the
Defendant’s case as a vehicle for general deterrence
and the need for
specific deterrence is similarly reduced but by no means eliminated given that
the Defendant was also motivated
by retribution.
Defendant’s desire for retribution for past mistreatment, and the ease
with which she can be provoked into acting in a resentful
manner, as elements of
her personality which played a part in the present offence, mean that protection
of the community is a relevant
purpose of sentencing, despite the somewhat dated
nature of the Defendant’s relevant criminal history. Nevertheless, the
Defendant’s
history suggests that she does not pose a particularly high
risk of reoffending.
take into account the harm caused to the complainant. Of course, I also need to
take into account the considerations in s 34B of
the Sentencing Act
the matters mentioned in the preamble to the
Family Violence Act 2016
that respect, I note that freedom from family violence is a human right. I also
acknowledge that the Defendant’s actions
were, in part, caused by a
deterioration of her mental health as a result of the complainant engaging in
acts of family violence
towards her.
Ultimately,
I must ensure that the Defendant is adequately punished in a way that is just
and appropriate.
have had regard to the maximum penalty for the offence. In this respect, I note
that, even though the limit of the Court’s
lower than the maximum penalty, I am required to conduct an initial assessment
of the appropriate
sentence without reference to that jurisdictional limit.
to s 10(2) of the Sentencing Act, the court may only sentence the Defendant to
imprisonment if the court is satisfied, having
considered possible alternatives,
that no other penalty is appropriate. Having considered all the sentencing
options, the objective
seriousness of the offending conduct and the purposes of
sentencing, it is my view that there is no appropriate alternative to
imprisonment
in this matter. I take that view despite the reduction in the
Defendant’s moral culpability that arises because of the impact
mental health condition and in the acknowledgment that the Defendant’s
offending was, in part, a reaction to acts of
family violence that had been
committed against her by the complainant.
have determined that the appropriate sentence is 6 months’ imprisonment,
reduced by 10% to 5 months and 12 days on account
of the Defendant’s
guilty plea.
having regard to the circumstances of the offending, the contribution that her
mental health condition had to the commission
of the offending, and the burden
that full time custody would place on the Defendant (including both the impact
of her mental health
condition and her parenting responsibilities), I will
suspend the term of imprisonment on the Defendant entering into a 12 month
Behaviour Order.
Defendant will be subject to the core conditions of a Good Behaviour Order only.
Accordingly,
I make the following orders:
(a) I record a conviction in relation to charge 4243/2023.
(b) The Defendant is sentenced to 5 months and 12 days’ imprisonment,
commencing on 14 March 2025.
(c) The sentence is to be wholly suspended upon the Defendant entering into an
undertaking to comply with her good behaviour obligations
(Sentence Administration) Act 2005
for a period of 12 months.
I certify that the preceding one-hundred and forty-eight [148] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of
his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Niamh Dwyer
Date: 14/04/2025
RTF format (330 KB)
Signed PDF/A format