Agius v Sana Benchtop Installation Pty Ltd; Agius v Martin Mailei [2025] ACTMC 18 (30 October 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Agius v Sana Benchtop Installation Pty Ltd; Agius v Martin
[2025] ACTMC 18
Hearing Dates:
Decision Date:
Magistrate Temby
See [65] to [67]
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL LAW
– Work Health and Safety – Category 3
offence – crystalline silica exposure – guilty findings
Legislation Cited:
Work Health and Safety Act 2011(ACT), ss 12A, 17, 18, 19, 28, 33,
Work Health and Safety Regulation 2011
Cases Cited:
Kirk v Industrial Court of New South Wales
[2010] HCA 1
Orr v Hunter Quarries Pty Limited
[2019] NSWDC 634
SafeWork NSW v Scharfe
[2021] NSWDC 260
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Thomas) v Cruden
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (inspector Gordon) v Gregory
Ronald Wallis
Text Cited:
Managing Silica Dust at Construction Sites, WorkSafe ACT guidance note,
January 2022
Jacqueline Agius (Informant)
Sana Benchtop Pty Ltd (Defendant)
Martin Mailei (Defendant)
Representation:
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
File Numbers:
CC 40080 of 2025
CC 40069 of 2025
CC 40144 of 2025
MAGISTRATE TEMBY:
Defendants, Sana Benchtop Installation Pty Ltd (
Sana Benchtop
director Martin Mailei, are charged with Category 3 Work Health and Safety
offences contrary to
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
). The offences are strict liability offences (s 12A, WHS Act).
charges arise from work undertaken by Mr Mailei (for Sana Benchtop) in 2023 when
he cut engineered stone benchtops at the ‘Del
Ray’ apartment complex
in Coombs (
the Work Site
). It is alleged that, on 19 January 2023, Mr
Mailei dry cut the engineered stone that he had installed in the laundries of
of the units at the Work Site, which posed a risk to the health and safety
of persons at the Work Site as a result of exposure to
silica dust.
Benchtop is also charged with contravening the
Work Health and Safety
Regulation 2011
WHS Regulation
), which required that particular
control measures be adopted when cutting engineered stone. However, this charge
was a back-up charge
to the primary charge of contravening the WHS Act.
is the case in all criminal prosecutions, the Prosecution bears the onus of
proving the guilt of the Defendants. While the Defendants
did not contest the
charges, they did not have to prove that they did not commit the offences with
which they were charged. Similarly,
while neither Defendant gave evidence during
the hearing, no inference, adverse to them, can be drawn from that fact. I have
regard to the statement that Mr Mailei gave during the WorkSafe ACT
investigation.
standard of proof the Prosecution must meet is proof beyond reasonable doubt.
The Defendants cannot be found guilty unless the
evidence which I accept
satisfies me beyond reasonable doubt of their guilt. If I am satisfied that
there may be an explanation consistent
with the innocence of the Defendants, or
I am unsure of where the truth lies, then I must find that the charges have not
been proved
to the standard of proof required by law.
also note that, while I have referred to the Defendants collectively, I must
consider the case against each Defendant separately
when considering my
verdicts. I will return a separate verdict in respect of each individual
Construction (ACT) Pty Ltd (
Chase Construction
) was responsible for the
construction of the Del Ray apartment complex in Coombs. In August 2021, it
engaged Jason Marble & Granite
Jason Marble
) to supply and
install stone benchtops in the individual units. Jason Marble supplied
engineered quantum quartz stone benchtops for
the laundries in the relevant
units, which it had cut to size at its factory.
with quantum quartz engineered stone is potentially hazardous. The crystalline
silica content of the stone used for the relevant
benchtops exceeds 88% and dust
created when the product is cut, grinded or machined may contain respirable
crystalline silica (
). Known risks to health from exposure to silica
dust include silicosis, bronchitis, emphysema, lung cancer, kidney damage and
scleroderma.
brief exposure to RCS is likely to pose a lower risk of adverse health
conditions than longer-term exposure, even short-term
exposure to high levels of
silica dust can lead to serious conditions. Health risks from brief exposure
depends on several factors,
including the concentration of airborne silica dust,
the duration of the exposure and the affected individual’s
susceptibility.
these risks, the manufacture, supply and installation of engineered quartz stone
benchtops (and other surfaces) was banned from
1 July 2024. While its use was
still permitted at the time it was installed at the Del Ray apartment complex,
preventative steps
needed to be taken to eliminate or minimise the risk of
exposing people at the Work Site to the inhalation of silica dust.
January 2022, WorkSafe ACT issued a guidance note, ‘Managing Silica Dust
at Construction Sites’, which outlined the
risks associated with silica
dust and the ways in which those risk could be managed through a hierarchy of
controls. Level 1 (eliminating
the risk of exposure by using materials that do
not contain crystalline silica) provided the highest level of protection and
6 (using respiratory protective equipment) provided the last line of
protection, being employed to reduce the remaining risk once
the available steps
in Levels 2 to 5 had been taken.
Level 4 control was aimed at reducing the risk of exposure by using engineering
controls. Examples of those controls were:
(a) no dry cutting (use wet methods);
(b) use on-tool water suppression technology or dust extraction;
(c) use well-positioned local exhaust ventilation; and
(d) use H or M-class vacuums.
risk of a person at the Work Site inhaling silica dust needed to be managed by
persons conducting a business or undertaking (
) and workers at the
Work Site in accordance with the general Work Health and Safety obligations
imposed by the WHS Act. In addition,
the WHS Regulation imposed specific
obligations on PCBUs with respect to the cutting of engineered stone. They
reflected the engineering
control measures which had been identified in the
‘Managing Silica Dust at Construction Sites’ guidance note.
418B of the WHS Regulation, which commenced in November 2022 (and remained in
the WHS Regulation at the relevant time), prohibited
a PCBU from directing or
allowing a worker to cut engineered stone with a power tool unless:
(a) a water delivery system supplying a continuous feed of water over the
cutting area was used to suppress airborne crystalline
silica produced by the
cutting; and
(b) at least one other crystalline silica control measure was used.
s 418A, the other prescribed crystalline silica control measures were,
relevantly:
(a) a wet dust suppression method;
(b) the attachment of a Class H vacuum to the tool used for cutting;
(c) the use of a local exhaust ventilation system; and
(d) the isolation of the place where the cutting occurs from other workers.
Consistently
with the above requirements of the WHS Regulation, Jason Marble required that a
number of control measures be taken with
respect to the installation of stone
benchtops at the Work Site. They were set out in two site safety documents.
‘Job Safety Analysis’ document provided that no dry cutting was to
be done at the Work Site and a ‘Work Instruction’
document provided
(a) where elimination of RCS work processes was not practicable, it was
necessary to use a tool extraction fitted directly onto the
tool and water
attachment to supress dust;
(b) wet cleaning methods needed to be used, at the right levels for the whole
time that the work was being carried out;
(c) it was necessary to separate the RCS work process from other work areas and
to restrict access (create an exclusion zone, use
barricades and signage);
(d) it was necessary to clean up dust with an M or H-class industrial vacuum
cleaner; and
(e) in combination with higher level controls, it was necessary to use a
respirator with at least P1 filtration in accordance with
the relevant
Australian standard.
August 2022, Jason Marble engaged Sana Benchtop to install benchtops at the Work
Site. Mr Mailei signed the Job Safety Analysis
document and the Work Instruction
document, acknowledging the stipulated control measures.
19 January 2023, Mr Mailei installed the engineered stone benchtops into the
laundry cupboards of eight units at the Work Site.
Subsequently, one of the
plumbers engaged at the site, Mr Lenffer, realised that the benchtop in one of
the units had been cut incorrectly
because the sink he was trying to install did
not fit. He identified that more stone needed to be cut from each of the stone
in the eight units.
site foreman for Chase Construction raised the issue with Mr Mailei and they
agreed to meet at the Work Site to discuss a solution.
The foreman advised Mr
Mailei that action would need to be taken that day before the silicone used to
adhere the benchtops had cured.
He wanted the benchtops to be removed and cut
Mailei returned to the Work Site that day, but he did not meet with the site
foreman. Instead, he went to each of the units and
carried out dry cuts of the
stone benchtops in each of the units using an angle grinder (a power tool).
There is inconsistency in
the evidence as to whether Mr Mailei’s angle
grinder had an attached vacuum but I have proceeded on the basis of his
that it did and that he isolated each unit by locking the door of the
unit while he was working in it. However, he did not utilise
any ventilation
and, critically, he did not use any wet methods or water suppression techniques.
The only protection Mr Mailei used
was a respirator mask.
is clear that Sana Benchtop (through Mr Mailei) failed to comply with its
obligations under s 418B of the WHS Regulation and, similarly,
failed to adhere
to the control measures identified in Jason Marble’s safety documents.
There is no doubt that Sana Benchtop
was, at the relevant time, a PCBU.
Mr Mailei’s exit from one of the units he was seen by two plumbers on site
(including Mr Lenffer) (
the Affected Persons
) to be covered in white
dust. Mr Mailei walked passed the Affected Persons on exiting the unit. There
were also tilers at the Work
Site at the time, however there is no evidence that
they were near the relevant units.
Affected Persons were at the Work Site to undertake fit-off tasks. They entered
the unit and observed a haze of dust, in response
to which they covered their
noses with their shirts. Mr Lenffer, the more senior of the plumbers, remained
in the unit for a short
time to take photos for an incident report, while the
more junior plumber, Mr Craig, left the unit immediately.
Lenffer could immediately smell and taste the silica dust when he entered the
unit. It felt like it was burning his nostrils. He
started coughing once he was
outside the unit.
haze of dust seen by the Affected Persons, and the film of dust they saw on the
benchtops and tap fittings, indicated a high concentration
of airborne dust. Dr
Warren Harrex, a consultant occupational and environmental physician engaged by
WorkSafe ACT as part of its
investigation, said that Mr Mailei’s use of a
respirator mask provided some level of protection but is unlikely to have been
sufficient given the high levels of dust generated and the lack of ventilation.
Dr Harrex considered that the plumbers’ use
of their shirts to cover their
noses would have been ineffective in reducing exposure to harmful
Harrex opined that the exposure of Mr Mailei to RCS was moderate to high. Dr
Harrex said that the silica exposure of Mr Lenffer
is likely to have been low to
moderate given the high concentration of airborne dust but the short period of
time he was in the unit.
Dr Harrex said that the exposure of Mr Craig was
minimal given the brief period of time he was in the unit. Dr Harrex said that
is most unlikely that there was any risk to his health from such short-term
accept the opinions of Dr Harrex.
Elements of a Category 3
s 33 of the WHS Act, a person commits a Category 3 offence if the person fails
to comply with a health and safety duty. A health
and safety duty includes the
duty imposed on PCBUs by s 19 of the WHS and the duty imposed on workers by s 28
of the WHS Act.
Sana Benchtop
a PCBU, Sana Benchtop owed a ‘primary duty of care’ under s 19 of
the WHS Act to workers and others. One aspect of
that duty was the need to
ensure, so far as was reasonably practicable, that the health and safety of
other persons was not put at
risk from work carried out as part of the conduct
of the business or undertaking (s 19(2), WHS Act).
s 17 of the WHS Act, the duty imposed on Sana Benchtop to ensure the health and
safety of others required it to eliminate risks
to health and safety, so far as
was reasonably practicable and, if that was not reasonably practicable, to
minimise the risks so
far as was reasonably practicable. In determining what was
reasonably practicable, s 18 of the WHS Act required that regard be had
the circumstances, including:
(a) the likelihood of the hazard or the risk concerned occurring;
(b) the degree of harm that might result from the hazard or risk;
(c) what the person concerned knows, or ought reasonably to know about the
hazard or risk and ways of eliminating or minimising the
(d) the availability and suitability of ways to eliminate or minimise the risk;
(e) the cost associated with available ways of eliminating or minimising the
risk, including whether the cost is grossly disproportionate
to the risk.
s 33 of the WHS Act, a person commits a Category 3 offence if the person fails
to comply with a health and safety duty (including
the duties in ss 19 and 28 of
the WHS Act).
Accordingly,
the Prosecution must prove that:
(a) it was reasonably practicable for Sana Benchtop to ensure the health and
safety of the persons alleged to be at risk; and
(b) Sana Benchtop failed to take reasonably practicable steps to ensure the
health and safety of those persons.
s 244A of the WHS Act, the conduct engaged in by Mr Mailei (including both his
acts and omissions) is taken to have been engaged
in by Sana Benchtop with
respect to the physical elements of the offence with which Sana Benchtop was
note that it is not necessary for the Prosecution to establish that a person has
suffered harm, or that a person has been exposed
to a risk of harm, for a PCBU
to have breached the duty identified in s 19 of the WHS Act (
Industrial Court of New South Wales
[2010] HCA 1
). It is the
existence of the risk, and the failure to take reasonably practicable steps to
eliminate (or, if that is not reasonably
practicable, minimise) the risk that
constitutes a breach of s 19 of the WHS Act.
while an incident causing harm may be evidence of the presence of a risk, it is
not necessary that there has been an incident
in order to establish a breach of
s 19 of the WHS Act. A distinction must be drawn between the specific risk that
manifested in the
incident and the general class of risk on which the analysis
must focus. Risk in this context means the possibility of danger and
necessarily actual danger (
Orr v Hunter Quarries Pty Limited
[2019] NSWDC
– [16]) although the likelihood of the danger arising is a
relevant consideration under s 18 of the WHS in determining what
measures were reasonably practicable in the circumstances.
Mailei was, in addition to being the director of Sana Benchtop, a worker. Under
s 28 of the WHS Act, Mr Mailei was required to
take reasonable care to ensure
that his acts or omissions did not adversely affect the health and safety of
other persons.
duty is complimentary to the duty owed by a PCBU under s 19 of the WHS Act. It
imposes obligations on a worker ‘
to assist a PCBU to ensure safety, so
far as that is reasonably practicable, by co-operating in the elimination or
minimisation of
SafeWork NSW v Scharfe
[2021] NSWDC 260
) at [97]). However, a worker does not have to exercise
reasonable care to eliminate or minimise all risks to another person at the
workplace. A worker is only obliged to exercise reasonable care not to expose a
person to a risk to their health and safety as a
result of the immediate conduct
of the worker (
determining what reasonable care required in the circumstances, the question to
be asked is what should, in all the circumstances,
reasonably be expected of a
person holding themselves out to be able to undertake the relevant work
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (Inspector Thomas) v Cruden
at 475). Relevant circumstances include the worker’s state of
knowledge, qualifications, experience and role on-site, and the
extent to which
it could be foreseen that the worker’s act or omission would affect the
health and safety of another person
Authority of New South Wales (inspector Gordon) v Gregory Ronald Wallis
(unreported, Full Bench of the Industrial Relations Commission, 1996)). The test
is an objective one and the act or omission need not be
It was reasonably
practicable for Sana Benchtop to ensure the health and safety of persons at the
order to establish that it was reasonably practicable for Sana Benchtop to
ensure the health and safety of persons at the Work
Site, the Prosecution must
identify the relevant risk with sufficient precision to determine if it was
reasonably practicable to
eliminate the risk or, if not, if it was reasonably
practicable to minimise it (
Orr v Hunter Quarries Pty Limited
this case, the Prosecution has identified the relevant risk as being the risk to
the health and safety of persons at the Work Site
from the inhalation of RCS as
a result of the dry cutting of the stone benchtops.
of the risk occurring
accept the Prosecution’s submission that the risk of other persons at the
Work Site, particularly the Affected Persons, inhaling
RCS was a real one given
the high concentration of RCS in the relevant units and the range of people at
the Work Site who might have
had reason to access the units.
was a construction site and, as such, occupied from time to time by a range of
tradespeople and people responsible for the management
of the construction work
at the Work Site. In particular, as Mr Mailei knew, the issue he had been asked
to address was the inadequacy
in the cut in the laundry benchtops because the
plumbers who had been engaged to install sinks in the benchtops had been unable
do so because the sinks did not fit.
was therefore likely that there would at least be plumbers at the Work Site who
would seek to access the units to complete that
work once Mr Mailei cut the
benchtops to the correct measurements. I note that Mr Mailei in fact walked past
the Affected Persons
on exiting the relevant unit. There were also tilers at the
Mailei was also aware that the site foreman was at the Work Site and wished to
talk to him about the benchtop cut issue. It is
therefore possible that the site
foreman may have decided to enter the units to consider the issue or find Mr
Mailei at some point.
Degree of harm that might result from
I have explained earlier in these reasons, exposure to RCS gives rise to serious
health and safety risks, including the development
of silicosis, bronchitis,
emphysema, lung cancer, kidney damage and scleroderma. While brief exposure to
RCS is likely to pose a
lower risk of adverse health conditions, even short-term
exposure to high levels of silica dust can lead to serious conditions.
Accordingly,
the degree of harm which could result from the inhaling RCS was
significant.
Mr Mailei’s knowledge about the risk and
ways of eliminating or minimising it
Mr Mailei said that he had not undertaken industry silica awareness training,
and therefore could not be expected to have complete
knowledge with respect to
the risks and controls required to cut engineered stone in a safe manner or in
accordance with the WHS
Regulation, he was a professional stonemason. He ought
reasonably to have known of the health and safety risk posed by exposure to
and of the risk of exposure to RCS that Mr Mailei would create by dry cutting
the stone benchtops.
risk posed by exposure to RCS was an issue faced by the construction industry in
general given the prevalence of engineered stone
as a product used for benchtops
in construction and renovation projects. It was a significant issue impacting
many people. Nor was
it a new issue, with WorkSafe ACT’s ‘Managing
Silica Dust at Construction Sites’ guidance note being issued in
2022, before s 418B of the WHS Regulation commenced in November 2022.
Significantly,
Mr Mailei signed two safety documents prepared by Jason Marble which had
identified both the risk and the control measures.
Those documents identified
the problematic activity (generation of hazardous dust when sweeping, cutting,
grinding etc), the practical
risk (exposure to RCS) and the health risk
(silicosis and other respirable diseases) and, as I have noted earlier, the
range of control
measures that reflected the requirements of the WHS Regulation.
Critically, dry cutting of stone was not permitted at the Work Site.
Mr Mailei, Sana Benchtop (both through the knowledge of Mr Mailei as its
director and as a specialist contractor which had been
engaged to instal the
stone benchtops at the Work Site), ought reasonably to have known of the health
and safety risk posed by exposure
to RCS and had knowledge of the information
contained in the Jason Marble safety documents that Mr Mailei
Availability and suitability of ways to eliminate or
minimise the risk
Benchtop was (through Mr Mailei) required to comply with its obligations under s
418B of the WHS Regulation and to adhere to
the control measures identified in
Jason Marble’s safety documents. There were a control measures that Sana
Benchtop could,
and should, have adopted.
Mr Mailei could have removed the stone benchtops from the units and cut them
off-site. This control measure would have eliminated
the risk to people at the
the benchtops to have them cut off-site is what the site foreman wanted Mr
Mailei to do and was the reason he asked Mr Mailei
to return to the Work Site on
the relevant day, before the silicon used to adhere the benchtops had cured.
Further, no special equipment
was necessary to remove the benchtops. The silicon
could have been cut and the benchtops removed. In this respect, I note that the
benchtops were installed in the laundry cupboards and were not particularly big.
They could have been carried by Mr Mailei.
Mr Mailei should have used a water delivery system supplying a continuous feed
of water over the cutting area to suppress
airborne crystalline silica produced
by the cutting. This was a legal requirement under the WHS Regulation and was
also required
by Jason Marble’s safety documents. This control measure
would have at least minimised the risk to people at the Work Site.
is not clear if water had been connected to the units in which Mr Mailei was
working but, even if it had not, there were other
options available to Mr Mailei
such as pouring water from a water bottle or using a backpack water supply with
either a battery-operated
pump or water sprayer. The cost of these options would
have been around $500.
Mr Mailei could have informed the Affected Persons that he had carried out dry
cutting of the benchtops and warned them not
to enter any of the units he had
been working in. He could have done so verbally or, had he thought more
proactively about the issue,
he could have erected barricades or put up warning
signs. Barricades and warning signs would have protected everyone at the site
and not just the Affected Persons.
this control measure would still have required that other steps be taken to
remove the silica dust (as Mr Mailei had to take
in any event), it would have
avoided the Affected Persons being exposed to the silica dust. The erection of
barricades and warning
signs would have provided time for the silica dust to
settle and be removed before anyone else entered the
Cost associated with the ways of eliminating or
minimising the risk
of the control measures identified above were costly and it is clear that, when
regard is had to the likelihood of the risk eventuating
and the degree of harm
that might result from the occurrence of the risk, the cost was not
disproportionate to the risk.
regard to the above reasons, I am satisfied that it was reasonably practicable
for Sana Benchtop to ensure the health and safety
of persons at the Work Site.
As I have identified, there were a range of available reasonably practicable
control measures which
would have eliminated, or at least minimised, the risk to
the health and safety of people at the Work Site from Mr Mailei’s
of the stone benchtops, one of which was both legally mandated and required by
Jason Marble’s safety documents.
Sana Benchtop failed to take reasonably practicable steps to ensure the
health and safety of persons at the Work Site
dry cutting the stone benchtops without water suppression, in a room without
ventilation, Mr Mailei caused the unit the Affected
Persons walked into (and, no
doubt, the other units he had worked in) to have a high concentration of
airborne silica dust. It is
thus clear that Mr Mailei’s conduct created a
risk to the health and safety of other persons as a result of inhaling RCS
at the Work Site. Despite the availability of reasonably practicable
steps that Mr Mailei could (and was obliged to) have taken,
both to avoid
creating that risk and to minimise the risk, he failed to take any of the steps
I have identified above, including
one measure which he was legally obliged to
Accordingly,
I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Sana Benchtop failed to comply with
its duty under s 19 of the WHS to ensure,
so far as was reasonably practicable,
that the health and safety of other persons at the Work Site was not put at risk
from the work
carried out by Mr Mailei as part of the conduct of Sana
Benchtop’s business.
Mr Mailei failed to take reasonable
care to ensure that his acts and omissions did not adversely affect the health
and safety of other
regard to the above matters I am also satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that
Mr Mailei failed to comply with his duty under
s 28 of the WHS to take
reasonable care to ensure that his acts and omissions did not adversely affect
the health and safety of other
I have found, it was Mr Mailei’s conduct which created the risk, it was
reasonably foreseeable that the risk might eventuate
and that, if it did, the
health and safety of other persons at the Work Site (including the Affected
Persons) might be adversely
affected (possibly significantly so), and there were
a range of reasonably practicable steps that he could (and was obliged to) have
taken to avoid exposing other people to the risk of inhaling RCS at the Work
Site (as I have identified in relation to Sana Benchtop’s
comply with the duty that it owed under the WHS Act).
was reasonable to expect Mr Mailei to take each of those steps given his
position as a director of a specialist stone installation
company, the knowledge
within the industry of the health risks posed by exposure to RCS, the
legislative ban on dry cutting of engineered
stone and the fact that Mr Mailei
had signed the Jason Marble safety documents which prohibited dry cutting of
engineered stone at
the Work Site.
relation to proceedings CC 40080 of 2025, I find Sana Benchtop Installation Pty
Ltd guilty of committing a Category 3 offence,
contrary to
Health and Safety Act 2011
relation to proceedings CC 40069 of 2025, I find Martin Mailei guilty of
committing a Category 3 offence, contrary to
Work Health and
Safety Act 2011
relation to proceedings CC 40144 of 2025, as a result of my finding that Sana
Benchtop is guilty of the Category 3 offence with
which it was charged, the
back-up charge of uncontrolled dry cutting of engineered stone contrary to
Work Health and Safety Regulation 2011
I certify that the preceding sixty-seven [67] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Decision of his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Noelle-Alexis Bowles
Date: 30 October 2025
RTF format (268 KB)
Signed PDF/A format