Police v Jarod Bender (a pseudonym) [2025] ACTCC 1 (31 July 2025)
CHILDRENS COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Police v Jarod Bender (a pseudonym)
[2025] ACTCC 1
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Magistrate Stewart
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – Drive Motor Vehicle Without
Consent – Cause Public Alarm – Aggravated Robbery – Assault
– application of Bugmy and Verdins principles
– Lack of Sentencing
Options for Adult Young Offenders – imposition of Suspended Sentence
Legislation Cited:
Children and Young People Act 2008
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
Criminal Code
Cases Cited:
[2025] ACTSC 169
Hall v R; Barker v R
Police v Axl Joseph
[2023] ACTCC 1
[2004] NSWCCA 258
R v Massey (No 3)
[2021] ACTSC 156
Director of Public Prosecutions (Prosecution)
Jarod Bender (a pseudonym) (Young Person)
Representation:
T. Kelliher (Prosecution)
S. Jackson (Young Person)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Prosecution)
InPrivate Law (Young Person)
File Number:
CH 1007 and 1089 of 2024
CH 392,393,394,395,396 and 397 of 2025
MAGISTRATE STEWART:
Introduction
Court is to sentence this young offender who has been given the pseudonym Jarod
Bender. Jarod turned 18 in May 2025 but because
these offences were committed
when he was under the age of 18 (a young person) he is to be sentenced in
accordance with the youth
justice principles.
issues for this decision are the correct assessment of the length of sentences
of imprisonment, the extent of concurrency or accumulation
of different
sentences and how the overall sentence is to be served. One further issue is
highlighted – that Jarod is within
a small cohort of adult aged young
offenders who do not qualify for the majority of sentencing outcomes that adult
offenders qualify
The charges:
Jarod has entered pleas of guilty to the following charges:
(a) CH 1007/2024 – Ride/Drive Motor Vehicle without consent in
contravention of s 318(2) of the Criminal Code 2002 (ACT) (CODE)
penalty 500 penalty units or five years imprisonment or both); and
(b) CH1089/2024 - Act to Cause Public Alarm in contravention of
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) (CA) (maximum penalty 200 penalty units or 10 years
imprisonment or both).
Series two:
(c) CH 392/2025 Joint Commission Aggravated Robbery in contravention of
CA (maximum penalty 2500 penalty units or 25 years imprisonment or both);
(d) CH 393/2025 Act With Intent To Cause Public Alarm in contravention of s
140(a) CA (maximum penalty 200 penalty units or 10 years
imprisonment or
(e) CH 394/2025 Possess Offensive Weapon With Intent in contravention of s
381(1) CA (maximum penalty fine of $2000 or one year imprisonment
(f) CH 395/2025 Common Assault in contravention of s 26(1) CA (maximum penalty
imprisonment for two years);
(g) CH 396/2025 Minor Theft in contravention of s 321 of the Code (maximum
penalty 50 penalty units or six months imprisonment or
(h) CH 397/2025 Ride/Drive Motor Vehicle Without Consent in contravention of s
318(2) of the Code (maximum penalty 500 penalty units
or five years imprisonment
It is noted that the maximum penalty that this Court can impose is two years
per charge.
of Facts relating to each set of charges were tendered, and the facts therein
were agreed to by both parties. The written
facts were supplemented by video
footage which was played and tendered during the sentencing submissions. They
are summarised as
one relates to offences occurring on 9 August 2025. Jarod was, at that time,
serving a suspended sentence for an offence of
Ride/Drive Motor Vehicle Without
Consent (CH 1640/2023). Between 10.30pm 8 August 2025 and 9am on 9 August 2025,
a white BMW Hatchback
(the BMW) and a grey SUV were reported stolen from a
residence in Yarralumla. At about 1pm on 9 August 2025, the BMW was seen by
police driving at excessive speeds in Symonston. Jarod, as well as two
companions, were in the BMW wearing hooded jumpers and face
the duration of these and proceeding events, Jarod was in the front passenger
seat of the BMW. He later admitted that he was
aware that the vehicle was
stolen. CH 1007/24 relates to riding in the car as front seat passenger for the
whole of the driving
and CH 1089/2024 is a rolled up count encompassing each of
the four events at Mugga Lane, Jefferies Street, Castleton Road and Calwell
the BMW was initially seen by police, the driver pointed his middle finger at
them. Police activated lights and sirens and attempted
to pull the car over. The
vehicle accelerated and drove off at excessive speed. There is footage of the
interior of the car at about
this time in Mugga Lane. A motorcycle mounted
police officer is pursuing the BMW from a safe distance. The camera pans back
Jarod who is holding and wielding an object with the obvious appearance of a
black automatic pistol (the pistol). The pistol is
a feature of the footage
which also bears the words “fuck toric” super-imposed at the top of
the screen. This would seem
to be a reference to ACT Policing’s
“Operation TORIC” - a task force (a fact that the Court can take
judicial notice
of) being tasked to stop exactly what the young people were
doing – committing crimes in stolen motor vehicles.
afterwards, at 1.13pm, the BMW was spotted driving on the wrong side of the road
near Gowrie Primary School. The BMW was driven
past a parked vehicle on
Jefferies Street Gowrie and the driver (not Jarod) pointed the pistol at Ms
Greene who was sitting in the
parked car.
BMW drove past the witness out of sight onto Castleton Crescent. As the vehicle
turned towards Bugden Avenue intersection, it
drove past a pedestrian on the
road named Ms Kemp. Jarod extended his arm from the passenger side window and
pointed the pistol
at Ms Kemp.
BMW then approached Calwell High School. At 1.23pm it was reported at the school
doing burnouts on the sports oval in the close
vicinity of other students. The
driver was aiming a pistol at the students
BMW then sped towards three young girls sitting on the oval. They observed the
front passenger (Jarod) with his arm outside the
car window pointing a pistol
at them. Jarod shouted at them, “Get on the ground mother fucker”.
Other victims saw the
driver (not Jarod) pointing the pistol out of the
driver’s side window.
High School was placed into a lock down for a period of 2-hours.
BMW left the scene and was later spotted by police on Lawrence Wacket Crescent
in Theodore. An unmarked police SUV attempted to
deploy tyre deflation devices.
That police vehicle contained visible uniformed AFP officers. The BMW drove
directly towards the police
SUV and rammed into the front door resulting in
(unstated) injuries to one of the officers. Jarod later admitted he was aware
this was a police vehicle. The BMW then left the scene and was found
abandoned. The three male occupants proceeded to flee on foot.
arrested 260 metres away.
second set of offences comprises events occurring on 27 February 2025, 1 March
2025, and 5 March 2025.
27 February 2025, Jarod was on bail for the first series but no longer serving
the suspended sentence on CH 1640/2023. On that
day he was with a slightly
older adult female. They attended Hype DC Outlet Store at the Canberra Outlet
took a pair of Nike shoes out of their box and placed them in his
companion’s bag. They both proceeded to exit the store
without paying for
were approached by a staff member who requested the return of the shoes several
times. The staff member followed them outside
the store urging the item’s
return. The pair were approached by a second staff member who requested the
pushed the second staff member in the chest and pulled out a large kukri-styled
machete from a sheath concealed in his clothing
(CH 394/2025 Possess Offensive
Weapon with Intent). Jarod advanced towards the same staff member, swinging the
machete (CH 2025/395
Common Assault). The second staff member began to retreat.
then advanced towards the first staff member and aggressively swung the machete
towards her (CH 2025/392 Joint Commission Aggravated
Canberra Outlet Centre initiated lockdown procedures whilst the two offenders
fled the scene.
1 March 2025, Jarod shop-lifted a Hugo boss polo shirt worth $299 from David
Jones in Canberra Centre. (CH 2025/396 Minor Theft)
5 March 2025, a stolen motor vehicle was located by police. Jarod and his co
accused were both inside the stolen vehicle. They
were arrested and he has been
in youth custody since that day. (CH 2025/397 Ride Motor Vehicle Without
Subjective Circumstances
holds Italian heritage and has seven half siblings. Emergency action was taken
when he was aged four. Authorities removed
him from his parents care due to
neglect, illicit drug use and repetitive involvement with the criminal
He had been in four
different foster placements until April 2018 and then lived in residential care
until self-placing with his
mother in July 2020. The pre-sentence reports
(PSRs) indicate that Jarod has moved between his parent’s care,
residential
care and being in custody since that
and protection notifications commenced for Jarod prior to his birth. The PSRs
speak to parental substance abuse continuing from
the neo-natal stage, family
violence, adverse living environments, lack of parental supervision, parental
mental health issues,
emotional abuse including verbal threats to him as a child
and actual physical abuse to him as a
The history paints a picture
of social deprivation such that the
sentencing principles
are enlivened.
schooling has been sporadic and spread over multiple schools in his life. He
appears to have responded positively to
schooling whilst in custody and has
shown an aptitude and interest in training to become a
has the physical appearance of a fit and strong young adult. The PSR cites a
2018 psychological report prepared by Dr Davies.
That report confirmed early
trauma and developmental disadvantage including exposure to extreme family
violence, exposure to drug
use, physical and emotional neglect, sexual abuse,
early language difficulty, social and emotional development difficulties,
self-regulation
difficulties, attachment difficulties, externalising behaviour
by way of aggression, self-harm, obsessions and an inability to discern
(or lack of safety) in adults.
diagnosis was PTSD (complex trauma), reactive attachment disorder and ADHD. A
letter dated 23 April 2025 from Mental
Health, Justice Health Alcohol and Drug
Services was prepared for CYF. The Court was not provided with the whole letter,
but an excerpt
appears in one of the reports prepared for the
“Master [Bender] does not have a history or evidence
of a major mental illness; he has a diagnosis of ADHD. Master [Bender]
offered and declined needing (sic) mental health support, aware of self-referral
pathway and closed to Custodial Mental health
Service at point of induction on 6
March 2025. Master [Bender] currently and has previously declined (sic)
medications for ADHD.”
PSR details concern about the level of accuracy of Jarod’s disclosures on
his own substance abuse.
disclosed a ‘need’ for alcohol and consumption of MDMA, cannabis,
methamphetamine and cocaine when in the community.
is reported to have the following level of criminogenic needs:
(a) Substance use – high;
(b) Peer associations – high;
(c) Leisure and recreation – high;
(d) Personality and behaviour – moderate;
(e) Attitudes and orientation – moderate; and
(f) Risk of general recidivism – high.
Significant
effort was put into reports by CYF. Jarod chose not to participate in the first
PSR dated 13 January 2025. He is not
to be punished for
That report was prepared for
the first series only. A second report was prepared for 15 April 2025 that
included participation
by Jarod. That PSR included the second series. On 15
April 2025 a third (update) PSR was ordered for 24 June 2025.
therapeutic correction assessment was also ordered for 24 June 2025. That report
found Jarod unsuitable for such an order. It
“[Jarod] has identified that he would not be willing
to comply with a Therapeutic Corrections Order, he is aware of his issues
compliance and does not believe he would successfully engage with such an
Pre-Sentence Custody
has spent a significant amount in custody prior to sentence. He was arrested
for the first series of offences on 9 August
2024 and released on bail on 10
August 2024. He was then arrested for the second series on 6 March 2025 and has
remained in custody
since that date. The PSRs indicate respectful engagement
with staff but for one assault on a staff member in
Criminal History
is not able to be sentenced with the lenience that the Court might afford a
first offender. He has a significant criminal history
that includes relevant
prior sentences of imprisonment for Ride/Drive Motor vehicle Without Consent
(twice in 2024 and once in 2023),
Common Assault in 2023, Affray in 2023,
Possess Offensive Weapon With Intent in 2023 and Aggravated Robbery twice in
Insight, Remorse And Reductions For Guilty Pleas
of guilty were entered to the first series on 30 September 2024 - less than two
months after the offending and arrest and pleas
of guilty were entered to the
second series on 17 March 2025 - only two weeks after arrest. These pleas are
accepted by the Court
as Jarod’s complete acceptance of responsibility for
the offending.
second PSR contains Jarod’s expressions of remorse for his offending. He
conceded that he was sober for the first series
of offences and that is accepted
by the Court as Jarod again taking full responsibility for his offending without
trying to limit
or explain his
culpability.
He acknowledged
that the schools and owner of the car would have been impacted by his offending
I don’t know, frightened because of the firearm and
reflecting on his behaviour he intended to refrain from stealing cars, getting
into stolen cars and changing who he “
same PSR deals with Jarod’s remorse for the second series. He again
accepted sober responsibility for his offending. He
did note that he had been
taking un-prescribed Seroquel to sleep each night and experienced negative
effects when coming down from
that drug. This was not considered by the Court to
be offered as an attempt to erode criminal responsibility.
appeared to be at a loss to explain this offending. He stated that he had bought
the machete that day and had the capacity to
pay for what he stole. Jarod
accepted the impact that his offending had on the shop workers and shoppers. He
did note that there
were not many shoppers at the time, but this was accepted
by the Court as a statement of fact rather than an attempt to minimise
offending. He accepted that he would have inspired fear in workers and
shoppers about them returning to the shops.
was nothing in the PSR that suggested offender’s pride in the second
series. Jarod acknowledged that the footage from
the outlet centre had been
reported worldwide. He expressed concern about his unblurred image being so
widely associated with his
offending and the likely impact it would have on his
future life.
Court concluded that Jarod’s level of remorse was genuine and consistent
with his guilty pleas. Further, his level of insight
is significant given his
educational limits and own significant trauma experience.
the strength of the prosecution cases, I formed the view that the maximum
discount of 25 per cent should be applied in the
circumstances. One of the key
aspects of the youth justice principles is encouraging young people to accept
responsibility for their
Applying significant
discounts in response to guilty pleas would seem to be one of the obvious ways
that the Court can provide such
encouragement.
Victim Impact
Victim Impact Statements (VIS) were tendered. They all arise from the first
Greene had been attending a school assembly at Gowrie primary School. The pistol
had been pointed directly at her face during the
offending. She did not nominate
who did so in her VIS. She reported being badly affected by the offending. At
the time she did not
know if the gun was real or if this was how she was going
to die. She is now in a constant state of fear as a result of the
Kemp was the victim from Gowrie. She remembered that the offender holding the
pistol was in the passenger seat. He pointed a gun
at her. She was shocked and
frightened. She has had trouble sleeping since the offending and was worried
prior to the sentencing
process about her VIS being tendered. The whole incident
has, unsurprisingly, caused her stress and distress.
third VIS was from a female young person at the Calwell High School. I will not
further identify her because of her age. Her account
is vivid and harrowing. The
car initially came at her head on. It then slipped and slid on the grass as it
passed her as someone
pointed a gun directly at her and told her to get down
“mother fucker”. She was terrified and was worried that she was
going to die.
young victim has had to state her experiences and thoughts repeatedly to the
police, her school, her community and her psychologist.
She remains scared,
frustrated, traumatised and furious as a direct result of the offending. It has
been a horrible and devastating
experience for
Consideration
make some general observations. All of this offending was gravely serious.
However, it is important that the Court sets out how
it comes to appraising the
objective seriousness that it ascribes to offending.
first series involved the use of a pistol. It is accepted that there is no proof
of this object being a working or loaded firearm.
It was not discharged during
the offending and it was not recovered or analysed. However, there is nothing
of the pistol that indicates it was anything other than a
firearm. Jarod (or the report author) referred to it as a firearm in the
objection was taken to that or any other aspect of the PSRs. Whatever it was, it
was a pistol of some type – be that
a firearm, replica firearm or gel
blaster or something else – and it had the same effect on the victims of
the offending.
It was brandished with the intent of inspiring fear. I will
sentence on the basis that it was not a working or loaded firearm as
there is no
proof of those aggravating circumstances.
is an element of adoption of American gun and “gangsta” culture in
this series. Like most aspects of sentencing
this is a double-edged sword.
First of all, there is the immaturity associated with culture replication.
there is the
recognition of fear caused by the American
reality of mass shootings – particularly at schools. Australians are very
the reality of regular mass shooting deaths at American schools and the
possibility that such
may occur in Australia is not remote.
The offending could never have been expected to not be taken as a deadly threat.
and although it was not broached in the PSRs, the second series occurred only 10
months after the multiple stabbing murders
at Westfield Bondi Junction shopping
centre. That horrific event is entrenched in the memory of Australians. As a
nation we are acutely
aware that people can be killed at shopping centres for no
reason. This added threat factor may not have been on Jarod’s mind
– but courts can no longer assume that victims do not fear death in
Bondi-like circumstances.
fact that both sets of offending caused lockdowns in a school and in a shopping
centre further informs the court of the objective
seriousness of the
the first series, I will not take into account the aggravating circumstance of
Jarod being subject to a suspended sentence of
imprisonment as I intend to
impose that sentence. This is because the suspended sentence order was breached
by like and more severe
R v Massey (No 3)
[2021] ACTSC 156
, these are the applicable
considerations for measuring objective seriousness in ride/drive
in the context of CH
(a) There was a single driver and two passengers in the vehicle;
(b) The length of the driving was about 18-20 kms (not including circular
driving at the school);
(c) The manner of driving included refusal to stop for police, speeding, driving
on the incorrect side of the road, performing burn-outs
or circle-work on school
grass, driving the vehicle at school children and use of the vehicle to commit
the offence of Causing Public
(d) The vehicle was damaged to an unknown extent by driving it into a police
(e) It can be assumed that given the vehicle was abandoned after the collision
with police that it was only this intervention that
stopped the driving and
further offending.
(f) This offender was a front seat passenger and not a driver.
choose to add some commentary to the learned decisions of the superior courts on
this offence. This Court regularly deals with
the offence of Ride/Drive Motor
Vehicle Without Consent in the context of young offenders. The Court only ever
sees a single offender
involved when the offending involves the use of a
motorcycle, moped or scooter. Even then a pillion passenger is sometimes
The very nature of young offending is that the joy is derived from
sharing the experience with passengers. Absent passengers, it
is highly likely
that this type of offending would not occur with young people.
this case Jarod was an integral part of the voyage. The pistol used in the
offending was shared between him and the driver. It
would seem that he recorded
the Mugga Lane part of the offending. Both decamped from the abandoned vehicle.
Nothing suggests that
he withdrew from or did not agree to any part of the
driving. There seems to be little basis to differentiate from the criminality
the driver and Jarod as the front passenger in the circumstances of this
Court finds that the objective seriousness of the matter was high – above
the median for this type of offending.
CH 1089/2024 offence of Act To Cause Public Alarm is of low prevalence. I agree
with the prosecution submissions that these following
factors contribute to the
assessment of objective seriousness. I have added some of my own:
(a) A pistol was produced and pointed at multiple people on multiple occasions.
It was accompanied by the threat and command to
get on the ground. The use of
a pistol makes the use of lethal force in response by police more likely;
(b) A whole school (including many individual direct
victims) and two other adults were affected by the offending;
(c) The school was locked down for two hours as a result of the offending;
(d) The offending involves a rolled up count that encompasses all of the
(e) The threat of driving at victims and the pointing of the firearm were both
objectively and subjectively serious and deadly threats;
(f) The impact on the victims has been profound.
Court finds that the objective seriousness is somewhere just above the median
level of objective seriousness. Factors that may
have increased the objective
seriousness might include the application of physical force, injuries caused by
those fleeing the offending
and actual shots being discharged.
the second series, the CH 392/2025 offence of Joint Commission Aggravated
Robbery has had significant attention from the superior
courts. Jarod was on
bail. This is an aggravating feature. The statutory aggravations of joint
commission and the use of the machete
are also present. These are the
features of
this charge:
(a) The robbery was committed by a 17 year old offender with a history of two
sentences of imprisonment for the same offence type;
(b) A machete that was capable of killing or inflicting serious injury was
produced and swung at a victim by the offender;
(c) The offending involved limited planning and appeared to be an on the spot
decision (apart from the bringing of a machete to a
shopping centre);
(d) No actual violence other than a push was used, but the obvious threat of use
of the machete was made;
(e) The victim was in a vulnerable position as a shop worker;
(f) The item taken was a pair of Nike brand shoes to an unknown value; and
(g) A plea of guilty was entered in circumstances where the footage of the
offending made for a very strong prosecution case.
matter falls in the upper median level of objective seriousness.
common assault CH 395/2025 is a non-battery assault that involved brandishing
the machete. It lies in the lower mid-range of
objective seriousness.
CH 396/2025 theft of the shirt involved the theft of a $299 garment. The value
speaks to the seriousness of the offending in circumstances
where there is no
sentimental or other value attached to the
It can be dealt with in
the absence of a sentence of imprisonment.
final Ride/Drive Motor Vehicle Without Consent charge (CH 397/2025) is a benign
version of the offence. I agree with the prosecution
assessment of the features
of objective seriousness:
(a) The period of driving is unknown;
(b) No use of the vehicle to commit an offence is alleged;
(c) The young offender was the driver;
(d) Nothing about the manner of driving is alleged;
(e) There was a single adult passenger in the vehicle.
accept the prosecution submission that the matter can be dealt with in a manner
that does not involve imprisonment.
Parity between co-offenders
sentenced the two co-offenders as follows:
(a) For the driver the relevant charges are:
1085/2024 Drive Motor Vehicle Without Consent - three months imprisonment
reduced from four months for the guilty
1082/2024 Act To Cause Public Alarm – nine months imprisonment reduced
from 12 months for the guilty plea; and
1017/2024 Drive Motor Vehicle At Police - 12 months imprisonment.
(b) For the rear seat passenger, the relevant charge is CH 1010/2024 Ride/Drive
Motor Vehicle Without Consent. He was sentenced to
88 Days imprisonment reduced
from 120 days for the guilty plea with a further two day reduction for time in
custody. That sentence
was wholly suspended.
65․ The adult co-accused in series two is yet to be sentenced.
Sentences of the Court
cancel and impose the suspended sentence of 24 days on CH 1640/2023. That
sentence will be backdated (to take into account the
date that Jarod was taken
into custody on the second series and then backdated a further two days for the
time in custody on the
first series) to run from 4 March 2025 to 27 March
series one convictions are recorded on each charge:
(a) On CH 1089/2024 - Act to Cause Public Alarm, I impose a sentence of nine
months imprisonment reduced from 12 months on account
of the guilty plea. That
sentence will be backdated to run from 28 March 2025 to 27 December 2025. There
is no basis for concurrency
with the imposed suspended sentence as I have not
taken it into account as an aggravating feature on this charge; and
(b) On CH 1007/2024 – Ride/Drive Motor Vehicle
without consent, I impose a sentence of three months imprisonment reduced from
four months for the guilty plea. That sentence will be partially concurrent to
allow for totality and will run from 28 November
2025 to 27 February 2026.
series two convictions are also recorded on each charge:
(a) On CH 392/2025 Joint Commission Aggravated Robbery, I impose a sentence of
12 months imprisonment reduced from 16 months for
the guilty plea. That
sentence will be concurrent as to two months with 1007/2024 to allow for
totality and will run from 28 December
2025 to 27 December 2026;
(b) On CH 393/2025 Act with Intent to Cause Public Alarm, I impose a sentence of
nine months reduced from 12 months on account of
the guilty plea. To allow for
totality that sentence will run from 28 June 2026 to 27 March 2027;
(c) On CH 394/2025 Possess Offensive Weapon I impose a sentence of rising of the
(d) On CH 395/2025 Common Assault, I impose a sentence of one month imprisonment
reduced from six weeks for the guilty plea (and
acknowledge that this is
slightly more than a 25 per cent reduction). That sentence will run from 13
March 2027 to 12 April 2027
to allow for totality;
(e) On CH 396/2025 Minor Theft, I impose a conviction and fine of $300 reduced
from $400 with no time to pay; and
(f) On CH 397/2025 Ride/Drive Motor Vehicle Without Consent I impose a
conviction and a fine of $1500 reduced from $2000 with no
time to pay.
total sentence of two years, one month and nine days is imposed. That sentence
will run from 4 March 2025 to 12 April 2027.
people cannot be sentenced to parole or Intensive corrections
. This remains so even
when they are adults being sentenced for youth offences. As was teased out in
these proceedings young offenders
who have turned 18 are not eligible for the
Supreme Court Drug and Alcohol Sentence List.
has himself accepted that he cannot comply with the close supervision of a
therapeutic corrections order. He has been assessed
as having a high risk of
re-offending.
those circumstances I impose a partially suspended sentence meaning that the
sentence of two years, one month and nine days will
be suspended after 15 months
– that being the shortest appropriate
that Jarod should spend in
custody for this offending. He will then be released on a 12 month suspended
sentence order with a ten
month and nine day sentence hanging over him.
suspended sentence order will require ACT Corrections supervision for the whole
of the 12 months and allows for assessments, programs
and counselling as
directed, medical treatment and supervision as directed, rehabilitation programs
as directed, and education and
training condition as directed. There are no
alcohol and drug conditions as this offending was sober
I certify that the preceding seventy-three [73] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Sentence of his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Zeinab Elsheekhly
Date: 31 July 2025
S375AA(12)(a)
PSR dated 13 January 2025 at
PSR dated 13 January
(Sentencing) Act
(ACT) generally in this
Second PSR at
Children and Young People Act 2008
See also recently
[2025] ACTSC
46 NSWLR 346 also
Hall v R; Barker v R
[2017] ACTCA
ACTCS 383 at [72]
reflection the start point for this sentence appears to be mercifully low. It
has not been appealed to my knowledge and I will
observe parity in those
circumstances.
[2023] ACTCC
See s133G CYP Act
RTF format (233 KB)
Signed PDF/A format