APPLICANT1 2025161 v ACT RETAIL INVESTMENTS PTY LTD ABN 53 093 631 586 AND ICON RETAIL INVESTMENTS LIMITED ABN 23 074 371 207 TRADING AS ACTEWAGL RETAIL (Energy & Water) [2025] ACAT 49 (1 July 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
APPLICANT1 2025161 v ACT RETAIL
INVESTMENTS PTY LTD ABN 53 093 631 586 AND ICON RETAIL INVESTMENTS LIMITED ABN
23 074 371 207 TRADING
AS ACTEWAGL RETAIL (Energy & Water)
[2025] ACAT
EW 2025/161 and EW 2025/162
Catchwords: ENERGY & WATER
– Application for hardship
assistance in relation to utility services – Whether applicants are
consumers – Whether
respondent proposed to withdraw utility services
– Whether the respondent has caused, or would cause, substantial hardship
by failing to provide, or withdrawing, a utility service – Whether payment
of a customer debt in relation to residential premises
would cause substantial
hardship for the first applicant – Meaning of “substantial
hardship” – Non-publication
and pseudonym orders
Legislation cited:
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
Utilities Act 2000
National Energy Retail Law (ACT) Act 2012
National Energy Retail
Law (South Australia) Act 2011
(SA) Schedule
Legislation Act 2001
Subordinate
Legislation cited:
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedures Rules
2024, rule 144
National Energy Retail Rules, rule 111
Cases cited
Applicant 4102023 v ACTEWAGL Retail
[2024] ACAT 61
Council of The Law Society of The Australian Capital Territory v R
[2025] ACAT 8
Masson v Parsons
[2019] HCA 21
Powell v Evreniades
[1989] FCA 114
(1989) 21 FCR 252
Texts/Papers cited:
Dictionary.com (online)
Merriam-Webster Dictionary (online)
Cambridge Dictionary (online)
Presidential Member J Lucy
Senior Member Amanda Nuttall
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY ) EW 2025/161
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) EW 2025/162
APPLICANT1 2025161
First Applicant
APPLICANT2 EW 2025161
Second Applicant
ACT Retail Investments Pty Ltd
ABN 53 093 631 586
Icon Retail Investments Limited
ABN 23 074 371 207
trading as ActewAGL Retail
Presidential Member J Lucy
Senior Member A Nuttall
The Tribunal orders that:
first applicant is to be referred to as ‘Applicant1 2025161’.
second applicant is to be referred to as ‘Applicant2 2025161’.
is to be no publication by either party or any other person of the matters
contained in the documents filed with the Tribunal
or received by the Tribunal
for the hearing.
is to be no public access to the file or to any audio or written records of
proceedings.
......................................
Presidential Member J
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
was an application, by a married couple, for hardship assistance in relation to
their gas and electricity accounts.
dismissed the hardship complaint about the gas service, because there was no
evidence that the applicants’ gas service was
likely to be disconnected.
In those circumstances, the tribunal does not have any powers to make orders
under the hardship legislation.
dismissed the hardship complaint about the electricity service because one of
the applicants earns a very high income. We were
not satisfied that the
applicants would suffer substantial hardship if the utility provider
disconnected their electricity service
or that payment of the debt owed on the
electricity account would cause them substantial hardship.
first and second applicants are married with two young children and live
together at an address in Canberra. The gas and electricity
accounts are in the
first applicant’s name. The first applicant is not in paid employment, but
the second applicant is.
30 May 2023, the first applicant applied to the tribunal for hardship assistance
with her electricity and gas accounts. The respondent
supplies the first applicant with both electricity and gas.
July 2023, the outstanding balance on the first applicant’s electricity
account was $4,039.95 and the outstanding balance
on her gas account was
May 2024, the tribunal’s registry staff requested the first applicant to
complete an updated hardship assistance application
form. Her husband, the
second applicant, then submitted a new application in his name on 25 May
tribunal appears to have treated the new application as having been made by both
applicants.
matter was adjourned several times and came before the tribunal, differently
constituted, on 26 February 2025. The material before
the tribunal on that date
indicated that the outstanding balance on the first applicant’s
electricity account was $7,500 and
the outstanding balance on her gas account
was $918.03.
26 February 2025, the tribunal discharged the first applicant’s debt on
her gas account. It also discharged $4,000 of the
first applicant’s debt
on her electricity account, conditional upon her paying the first fortnightly
instalment of $200 to
the respondent utility by 12 March 2025. The tribunal did
not have any documentary evidence before it about the applicants’
The orders noted that, “if the applicant encounters any further difficulty
in paying any of his utility bills, he can
file a new application seeking relief
for any hardship he then suffers.”
payment of $200 was made on the first applicant’s electricity account on
26 February 2025 and a subsequent payment of $200
on that account was made
on 27 March 2025. A credit report dated 12 May 2025 indicates that no other
payments were made on that account
after the hearing on 26 February 2025.
credit report dated 12 May 2025 for the first applicant’s gas account
indicates that no payments were made on her gas account
after the tribunal made
a declaration discharging her debt on 26 February 2025, with the possible
exception of a payment of $150
which was made on that day.
11 March 2025, the first applicant made another application to the tribunal for
hardship assistance in relation to her gas and
electricity accounts. That is the
application which was before us.
the application form, the first applicant indicated that her husband’s
fortnightly wages were $5,600 on average and that
her fortnightly expenditure
included $1,062 for rent/mortgage and $1,200 for food, as well as credit card
repayments of $200, loan
repayments of $800 and buy now / pay later repayments
first applicant provided payslips in support of the application. These showed
that, as at 25 February 2025, the second applicant
had earned $158,938.39 in the
2024/2025 financial year to date. His gross wages for that fortnight, after
superannuation had been
deducted, were $7,431.79.
provided credit reports to the tribunal. These indicated that, as at 12 May
2025, the first applicant’s outstanding
balance on her electricity account
was $3835.22 and the average amount of her fortnightly usage was $182. They also
indicated that,
at 12 May 2025, the amount outstanding on the first
applicant’s gas account was $123.18.
stated in an email sent to the tribunal dated 11 March 2025 that it could offer
the first applicant a payment plan of $466
per fortnight for her electricity
account on its hardship program (known as the “Staying Connected
program”). That would
cover both ongoing usage and repayment of her debt.
On 11 March 2025, her debt was $7,300.99 and the fortnightly repayment figure
$466 was based upon that level of debt.
did not provide any indication of how much the first applicant would now need to
pay on its Staying Connected program, in
light of the reduction of her
electricity debt by $3,000.
matter came before us for hearing on 14 May 2025. The first and second
applicants were both named as applicants in the tribunal’s
file. However,
only the second applicant appeared at the hearing. The second applicant informed
us that he was appearing on behalf
of himself and his wife (the first
applicant). We were satisfied that the first applicant had received notice of
the hearing.
did not appear at the hearing. Its non-appearance is expressly permitted by rule
144(4) of the
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedures Rules 2024
which provides:
“The respondent is not required to attend
the hearing of a hardship application unless directed by the
second applicant took an oath and gave sworn evidence. His evidence included
that his income had not changed since February 2025
(the date of the payslips
provided to the tribunal).
asked by the tribunal members how payment of the bills could cause him
substantial hardship, he said that last year he had “some
obligation back home” and had to return due to his mother’s health.
The second applicant did not explain where
“home” was, but the
tribunal inferred it was in another country. The second applicant said that,
while he was away, the
bills built up and he could not catch
asked why he had only made one payment to ActewAGL of $200 for electricity since
the previous hearing, instead of fortnightly
payments of $200, he
last month was a very, like, so many long weekend and as a contractor, if I
don't show up, I don't get paid. And I have
been sick. I had to take two days
off last week, so I could ...(inaudible)... The day before yesterday I went to
pay $200 but certain
things happened yesterday. It's a very nightmare day. I
lost my mobile alone with my cards and all and later on I found it. Even
reported to the cops. They came over here and they told that there is some sort
of disputed transactions happening. Almost $300
of transactions that happened
yesterday. So it didn't quite happen yesterday. I tried to make some payment
amount yesterday, but
it didn't quite happen.
second applicant said, however, that he could afford to pay $200 per fortnight
on his wife’s electricity
He later said he may be
able to pay $500 per
Legislative scheme
Utilities Act 2000
provides for the making
of complaints to the Tribunal about utilities.
table in section 172 of the Act provides for the persons who may apply to the
Tribunal about specified matters. Relevantly, a “consumer”
to the Tribunal in relation to the following complaint:
utility fails to provide a utility service to consumer or withdraws a utility
service from consumer, and failure or withdrawal
causes substantial hardship, or
is likely to cause substantial hardship, to
“consumer” is defined in the Dictionary to the Act to mean a
customer for the service or an occupier of the customer’s
premises and to
include an invitee of the customer or occupier.
section 172 of the Act refers to the withdrawal of a utility service, it is
plain from other provisions that this includes
an anticipated withdrawal of the
service. Section 178(1)(b) of the Act provides that the section applies if the
Tribunal is satisfied
that the respondent to a complaint has caused,
, substantial hardship by failing to provide, or withdrawing, a utility
service (emphasis added). Section 179(1) provides that the
section applies to
“a complaint about the actual
or potential
withdrawal of a utility
service” (emphasis added). Accordingly, reading the provisions
harmoniously, a complaint under section
172 extends to a complaint about a
proposed withdrawal of a utility service.
orders the Tribunal may make if satisfied that the respondent has caused, or
would cause, substantial hardship by failing to provide,
or withdrawing, a
utility service include:
(a) directing the respondent not to withdraw the
with or without an
ancillary direction;
(b) directing the respondent to restore a withdrawn service within 24
with or without an
ancillary direction;
ancillary direction which the Tribunal may make is that the service not be
withdrawn during a stated period or unless the consumer
fails to comply with a
stated condition.
tribunal also has powers under Part 12 of the Act to make a declaration
discharging a customer debt or part of a customer
A precondition to the
discharge of debt by the tribunal is that “the ACAT is satisfied that
payment of a customer debt in relation
to residential premises would cause
substantial hardship for the
Does the tribunal have jurisdiction in this matter?
order for the tribunal to have power to make any orders under Part 12 of the
Act, it must first be satisfied that the complaint
falls within the table in
section 172 and is made by a person identified in that table. The relevant
category here
a utility fails to provide a utility service to consumer or withdraws a
utility service from consumer, and failure or withdrawal causes
substantial
hardship, or is likely to cause substantial hardship, to consumer
are satisfied that both applicants are “consumers” (within the
second column) because the first applicant is a customer
for the gas and
electricity services and the second applicant is an occupier of the
customer’s premises.
tribunal must be satisfied when dealing with hardship complaints, before its
power to make orders is enlivened, that “the
respondent has caused, or
would cause, substantial hardship by failing to provide, or withdrawing, a
relation to the applicants’ hardship claim in respect of the first
applicant’s gas service, we are not satisfied that
they have established
that ActewAGL proposes to withdraw the service. There is no evidence that
ActewAGL has sent the first applicant
a reminder notice or a disconnection
warning notice, as required under the National Energy Retail Rules before
disconnection can
debt is very low ($123.18). The Australian Energy Regulator’s minimum
amount for disconnection is
these reasons, we are not satisfied that ActewAGL has withdrawn or proposed to
withdraw the applicants’ gas service. Accordingly,
we do not have power to
make orders granting relief in respect of the complaint about the first
applicant’s gas service.
have dismissed the applicants’ application for hardship assistance in
relation to the potential withdrawal of the gas service
Electricity
is no evidence that ActewAGL has sent the first applicant a reminder notice or a
disconnection warning notice in relation to
her electricity service, as required
under the National Energy Retail Rules before disconnection can
However, the first
applicant owes several thousands of dollars to ActewAGL in respect of her
electricity account. This means that
there is a real possibility that ActewAGL
proposed to disconnect the electricity, before the first applicant made her
hardship application
to the tribunal on 11 March 2025.
might have considered asking the parties for more evidence about threatened
disconnection, had we not taken the view that we would
not have granted the
applicants any relief, even if they could establish that ActewAGL proposed to
withdraw the electricity service.
Meaning of “substantial hardship”
indicated above, the gateway to the Tribunal’s power to make orders under
Part 12 of the Act is its satisfaction that “the
respondent has caused, or
would cause, substantial hardship by failing to provide, or withdrawing, a
utility service.”
phrase “substantial hardship” is used in two contexts in Part 12 of
the Act. First, it is used in the context that
a complaint under that Part
includes that the withdrawal of a utility service would cause “substantial
This language
is echoed in section 172(1)(b) of the Act, which provides that if the tribunal
is satisfied that “the respondent
has caused, or would cause, substantial
hardship by failing to provide, or withdrawing, a utility service,” the
tribunal may
make orders mentioned in section 172(2).
the phrase “substantial hardship” is used in relation to the effect
which payment of a debt would have on a
customer. Section 180(1)
If the ACAT is satisfied that payment of a customer
debt in relation to residential premises would cause
substantial hardship
for the customer, the ACAT may, in writing, declare that the debt is discharged
in whole or to a stated extent. (emphasis added)
term “substantial hardship” is not defined. In
Bell, Gageler, Keane, Nettle and Gordon JJ said:
will not construe a provision in a way that departs from its natural and
ordinary meaning unless it is plain that Parliament
intended it to have some
different meaning”.
definitions of “hardship” include:
(a) (something that causes) difficult or unpleasant conditions of life, or an
example of this: economic
(b) a condition of life that causes difficulty or
(c) something that causes or entails suffering or
(d) a condition that is difficult to endure; suffering; deprivation;
oppression.
term “substantial” means “large in size, value, or
importance,”
“considerable in quantity
significantly
our view, without intending to be exhaustive or definitive, the phrase
“substantial hardship” in Part 12 of the Act
refers to a condition
that is significantly difficult to endure and entails significant suffering or
deprivation. There are varying
degrees of hardship which may be suffered by an
individual. The term “substantial” does not require the hardship in
to be extreme, but requires it to be serious or of
significance.
Would withdrawal of the electricity service cause substantial
are not satisfied that ActewAGL would cause the applicants substantial hardship
by withdrawing their electricity service.
second applicant has a very high income and uses that income to pay utility
bills for the home in which he lives. In light of
the second applicant’s
evidence that his income had not changed since February 2025, we estimate him to
be on an income of
over $200,000 per annum. Whilst the applicants have some
debts and high regular outgoings, some of these appear to relate to
discretionary
spending (such as a reported $1,200 fortnightly expenditure on
food). This discretionary spending could be reduced without causing
substantial hardship.
if their electricity were to be disconnected the applicants would likely be able
to open a new account with another electricity
provider and continue to be
provided with an electricity service, or the first applicant may be able to
enter into a payment plan
with ActewAGL. Alternatively, the second applicant
could apply for an electricity account in his name and the applicants could be
provided with electricity in that way. Under section 22(1) of the National
Energy Retail Law,
“retailer must make an offer (a
standing offer
) to provide
customer retail services to small customers for whom it is the designated
these reasons, we are not satisfied that the applicants would suffer substantial
hardship if their electricity service were to
be disconnected. This means the
tribunal does not have power to make any orders in relation to their hardship
application for relief
in relation to their electricity service. We have,
however, considered whether we would have discharged the first applicant’s
debt if we had found that the applicants, or either of them, would suffer
substantial hardship if their electricity service were
disconnected.
Debt discharge
primary relief the applicants sought in relation to their electricity service
was a declaration that the first applicant’s
electricity debt was
discharged. This is a remedy available only to a customer (that is, only
available to the first applicant and
not to the second).
if disconnection of the first applicant’s electricity account would cause
her substantial hardship (contrary to our finding),
we do not consider that the
precondition for discharging the first applicant’s debt is fulfilled. That
is, we are not satisfied
that “payment of a customer debt in relation to
residential premises would cause substantial hardship for the
regard to the second applicant’s high income, we find that payment of the
first applicant’s electricity debt would
not cause the applicants
substantial hardship, particularly if they paid it off over a period of time.
The period the second applicant
spent with his sick mother in 2024 has now
passed. His evidence is that he continues to earn a very high income. We are
that he could pay the amount offered to the first applicant by
ActewAGL on a payment plan, which would now be significantly lower
than $466 per
fortnight, without either of the applicants suffering substantial hardship.
also note that the tribunal discharged $3,000 of the first applicant’s
electricity debt in February 2025. Had we been satisfied
of other matters
favourable to the applicants, we would have considered dismissing the matter
under section 176(1)(f) of the Act,
on the basis that “the matter
complained of has already been dealt with adequately by the
Non-publication orders
the hearing, the Tribunal decided to make orders on its own motion under section
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
), and pursuant to the tribunal’s implied incidental powers, before
publishing this decision, to protect the applicants’
information.
39 of the ACAT Act confers power on the Tribunal to make orders, on its own
initiative, prohibiting the publication of evidence
given at the hearing and of
matters contained in documents filed with the tribunal or received in evidence
by the tribunal for the
hearing. Before making the order, the Tribunal must be
satisfied that the right to a public hearing is outweighed by competing
The right to a public
hearing is outweighed by competing interests if the Tribunal is satisfied that
the application, or part of
the application, should be kept private because the
interest of the private lives of the parties require the
are satisfied that the private lives of the applicants require privacy, and that
the right to a public hearing is outweighed by
the competing interest in
maintaining their privacy.
take into account, in making the s 39 order, that section 184(1)(a) of the Act
provides that the Tribunal must preserve the confidentiality
of information
disclosed to, or obtained by, the Tribunal in the exercise of its functions
under Part 12, including personal information.
information” is defined in the Dictionary to the Act
by reference
(Cth). “Personal
information” is defined in
information or an opinion about an identified individual,
or an individual who is reasonably identifiable:
(a) whether the information or opinion is true or not; and
(b) whether the information or opinion is recorded in a material form or
information the applicants provided to the tribunal about their personal and
financial circumstances is sensitive. It is “personal
information”
because it is information about them (identified individuals). The second
applicant was the only person who attended
the hearing other than the Tribunal
members. Even though we did not make an order that the hearing was a closed
hearing, the names
of applicants in hardship matters are not displayed in
tribunal lists and we consider that the information was provided to the tribunal
confidentially.
tribunal also has an implied incidental power to make orders that an applicant
be referred to by a pseudonym and that there be
no access to the file or to any
records of proceeding.
satisfied, for the reasons given above, that it is in the interests of justice
to make such orders.
these reasons, we have made the following additional orders:
first applicant is to be referred to as ‘Applicant1 2025161’.
second applicant is to be referred to as ‘Applicant2 2025161’.
is to be no publication by either party or any other person of the matters
contained in the documents filed with the Tribunal
or received by the Tribunal
for the hearing.
is to be no public access to the file or to any audio or written records of
proceedings.
......................................
Presidential Member J Lucy
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
Date(s) of hearing:
Applicants:
Second applicant in person
Respondent:
No appearance
Transcript of proceedings, 14
May 2025, page 4, lines 33-35
Transcript of proceedings, 14
May 2025, page 5, lines 8-32.
Transcript of proceedings, 14
May 2025, page 6, lines 21-30
Transcript of proceedings, 14
May 2025, page 6, lines 34-36
Transcript of proceedings, 14
May 2025, page 8, line 28
Act, ss 169-184
Act, s 172, table, item 3
Act, s 179(2)(a)
Act, s 179(3)
Act, s 179(2)(b)
Act, s 179(3)
Act, s 179(3)
Act, s 180(1)
See definition of
“consumer” within the Dictionary in the Act
Act, s 178(1)(b)
National Energy Retail
Rules, rule 111(1)(c) and (d), as applied by
National Energy Retail Law (ACT)
Legislation Act 2001
Australian Energy Regulator,
AER final decision on the minimum disconnection amount
<https://www.aer.gov.au/news/articles/communications/aer-final-decision-minimum-disconnection-amount>
National Energy Retail
Rules, rule 111(1)(c) and (d), as applied by
National Energy Retail Law (ACT)
Legislation Act 2001
Act, s 178(1)(b)
Act, s 172, table, item
[2019] HCA 21
Cambridge Dictionary
(online) ‘hardship’
<https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/hardship>
Cambridge Dictionary
(online) ‘hardship’
<https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/hardship>
Merriam Webster Dictionary
(online) ‘hardship’
<https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/hardship>
Dictionary.com (online)
‘hardship’ <https://www.dictionary.com/browse/hardship>
Cambridge Dictionary
(online) ‘substantial’
<https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/substantial>
Powell v Evreniades
[1989] FCA 114
(1989) 21 FCR 252
For a comparable view, see
Hill J’s discussion of the term “serious hardship” in
Powell v Evreniades
[1989] FCA 114
(1989) 21 FCR 252
The National Energy Retail
Law set out in the schedule to the
National Energy Retail Law (South
Australia) Act 2011
(SA) is applied as a territory law by
National Energy
Retail Law (ACT) Act 2012
ACAT Act, s 39(1)
ACAT Act, s 39(5)(b)
Applicant 4102023 v
ACTEWAGL Retail
[2024] ACAT 61
Council of The Law Society of The
Australian Capital Territory v R (a pseudonym)
[2025] ACAT 8
RTF format (288 KB)
Signed PDF/A format