Police v Axl Joseph (a pseudonym) [2023] ACTCC 1 (7 September 2023)
CHILDRENS COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Police v Axl Joseph (a pseudonym)
[2023] ACTCC 1
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
7 September 2023 (oral) and 6 October 2023
Magistrate Stewart
See [126]-[129]
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – Australian Capital Territory
Childrens Court - sentencing of young offenders – sentencing practice
– relevant considerations – parity –
offending whilst on
conditional liberty – totality – Aboriginal offenders –
– consideration of dismissal under
care and protection provisions or sentencing at law – imprisonment only
appropriate
option on some charges – significant time in custody –
partially suspended sentence – absence of bail support program
Aboriginal young people or children – absence of culturally specific
Legislation Cited:
Children and Young People Act 2008
Court Procedures Act 2004
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Road Transport (Safety and Traffic Management) Act 1999
Cases Cited:
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37; 249 CLR 571
DPP v Calhoun
[2023] ACTSC 189
Geagea v The Queen
[2020] NSWCCA 350
Kelly v Ashby
[2015] ACTSC 346
MT v The Queen
[2021] ACTCA 26
R v Blackburn (No 1)
[2020] ACTSC 373
R v Eichmann
[2019] ACTSC 212
R v Elphick
[2021] ACTSC 9
[2021] ACTSC 138
R v Massey (No 1)
[2020] ACTSC 256
R v Massey (No 3)
[2021] ACTSC 156
[2010] NSWSC 653
R v Ogle (No 2)
[2018] ACTSC 126
R v Seymour
[2021] ACTSC 152
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269
[2002] NSWCCA 343
The Queen v Haven (a pseudonym)
[2022] ACTCA 61
Texts Cited:
Bugmy Bar Book Project Committee,
Bugmy Bar Book
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Prosecution)
Axl Joseph (a pseudonym) (Young Person)
Representation:
E Bayliss (Prosecution)
S Brown (Young Person)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Legal Aid ACT
File Numbers:
2023; CH 1492-1493
2023; CH 198
2022; CH 208
2023; CH 244
2023; CH 246
2023; CH 248
2023; CH 250
2023; CH 289-290
2023; CH 452-453
2023; CH 668
2023; CH 830
MAGISTRATE STEWART:
Introduction
is a sentencing decision of the Australian Capital Territory Children’s
Court (ACTCC). A pseudonym has been used in the
hope that the young offender is
not identified, embarrassed or prejudiced by this decision.
deceased Aboriginal people are referred to, but not identified, in this
sentenced Axl on 7 September 2023 and indicated that I wished to publish written
reasons for those sentences. His story is one
of young offending and the trauma
and social deprivation that exists within our community.
have decided to structure this decision in an unusual way. Normally when
sentencing an adult, the personal details of the offender
are left until after
discussing the factual nature of the offending and are referred to as
“subjective features”. Given
that Axl is not yet an adult, I have
decided to focus on him first.
is aged 15 years. He is a proud Ngemba young person who is continually
exploring and learning about his family, his family stories
and culture. Our
legislation defines him as a ‘young person’ because he is 12 years
or older, but not an adult.
decline to make any observations about his physical appearance or attributes
because that would only assist in identifying him.
my own observations in Court, Axl is bright, responsive, communicative and
polite. There is nothing about his behaviour that
suggests he is performing for
the Court. I saw that he was able to listen for extended periods during the
sentencing submissions
and my oral sentence that formed part of this decision.
It seemed to me that he was absorbing the material and when I questioned
gave every indication that he understood what was being said and the enormity of
it all. I formed the view that Axl was genuinely
taking part in the process of
his sentence and was also genuinely sorry for his criminal
is challenging to put appropriate wording to what life has provided for Axl thus
far, so I will leave it plain and somewhat short.
Axl’s ‘subjective
re-reading and considering in light of the expected lived experience of an
average Australian 15-year-old. Axl:
born in late 2007 suffering from Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome and then spent
several weeks in the Canberra Hospital Neonatal Intensive
four other siblings from his mother but has had little contact with them due to
them being in need of care and protection and
in different care placements;
one other sibling from his father, but I do not know if Axl is in contact with
removed by authorities from his mother’s care immediately after his birth
due to her substance abuse, schizophrenia and
the death of Axl’s fifth
maternal sibling;
the first seven weeks of his life in hospital and was then placed in the care of
an Aboriginal foster carer;
with his father from mid-2008 until September 2011 when his father was
placed in foster care due to his mother’s inability to care for him;
quickly transferred back to the care of his father and paternal grandmother that
same month with his father resuming sole care
weeks later;
placed in the sole care of his paternal grandmother in 2016 as his father could
not manage Axl’s behaviour;
living with his father in Canberra in October 2018;
living with an aunt in Sydney in February 2019;
again in his father’s care in Canberra in April 2019 until his father was
incarcerated;
taken to Sydney in July 2019 to live with his aunt;
returned to his father’s care in January 2020 until an emergency action
removal by authorities in September 2021;
Experienced
the death of his mother in October
only met his mother twice in her life and is under a mistaken belief that she
died from food poisoning;
placed with his aunt in Sydney until that broke down and he self-placed with his
father in Canberra in December 2022;
allegedly assaulted by his father
in January 2023 and placed in emergency accommodation.
been in and out of custody since that date;
not engaged in education consistently for over two and a half years;
using cannabis at age 12 as it soothed his aggressive and irritable
only ever used another illicit drug once;
aware that his grandmother is a member of the stolen generation having been
removed from her family at the age of five and sent
to work for a “white
family in [a town in country News South
from auditory hallucinations and from symptoms that are suggestive of complex
post-traumatic stress disorder, major depressive
disorder, generalised anxiety
disorder, cannabis use disorder and first episode psychosis. Those symptoms
“occur on a background
of attachment disruption, grief and loss, in utero
exposure to illicit drugs and trauma including physical abuse and
intergenerational
“ongoing psychiatric care and
“assertive, wrap-around community support which is culturally appropriate
and trauma-informed”;
to work in the construction industry and/or play NRL football for a
has expressed that he believes he is a bad person due to his offending and is
concerned by way of the perception others may have
of him as a
He has acknowledged the
stupidity of his actions.
his solicitor Axl expressed that he is particularly concerned that his offending
will result in rejection and/or abandonment
by his family. It was also conceded
that such remorse must be considered in the context of his re-offending whilst
on conditional
Pre-Sentence Report
comprehensive and most helpful 26 page pre-sentence report dated 4 September
2023 was prepared for this sentence. I thank the authors
for their concerted
efforts. The report sets out Axl’s performance and engagement whilst on
remand at the Bimberi Youth Justice
Centre (BJYC):
[Axl] has engaged in programs and schooling positively and demonstrates kind
and respectful behaviour towards all people within the
centre. He has not been
involved in any incidents or received behavioural breaches and rather
demonstrates positive role modelling
and leadership skills. He completes all his
chores without prompting, follows staff directions and offers to assist others
when needed.
[Axl] is proud of his culture and has a strong sense of cultural
identity. Outside of the school timetable, he has connected with
First Nations
Counsellor through Relationships Australia, the Gugan Gulwan Art program, and
the Justice Health Aboriginal Liaison
Officers. He’s also had some
engagement with Ted Noffs, Indigenous Defence Recruitment (sports only) and the
Canberra Raiders...
[Axl] presents as a kind and reflective young person, who is
looking to improve his future and current
circumstances.
is said to have been an exemplary student whilst studying
He has completed the
preparatory work to apply for a learner’s licence, commenced a Certificate
III in Hospitality and completed
qualifications in first aid, Responsible
Service of Alcohol and Crystalline Silica Exposure Prevention. A transition
plan for schooling
was in place pending Axl’s eventual release from
has never been employed but wants to find work.
accepted these reports as evidence of real prospects of rehabilitation for Axl.
He thrives when he has appropriate support around
the time of sentence Axl had spent seven months and seven days in custody on
remand for these offences.
Criminal History
had no criminal history at the time of sentence and was to be treated as a first
The Sentencing Power of the ACTCC
ACTCC has a potential jurisdiction to hear all criminal charges summarily except
for those punishable by imprisonment for
The ACTCC has a
for each charge dealt with
There is no limit to
the accumulation of sentences for multiple charges
a practical sense this means that if a charge can be dealt with adequately with
a sentence of no more than 2 years imprisonment
it may be dealt with by the
ACTCC rather than being committed to the Supreme Court for
Step One – Which Court Should Sentence Axl?
the process of determining whether the ACTCC or the Supreme Court should
sentence a young offender the Court must have regard to
the factors in
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) which
(13) Before the Childrens Court decides whether a case can properly
be disposed of summarily, the court must consider the following:
(a) relevant representations made by the defendant;
(b) relevant representations made by the prosecutor in the
defendant’s presence;
(c) the facts of the case;
(d) the seriousness of the alleged offence;
(e) the circumstances in which the offence is alleged to have been
(f) the defendant’s age;
(g) the defendant’s apparent maturity;
(h) the defendant’s apparent mental capacity;
(i) the suitability of the penalties that the court is empowered
(j) the difficulty of any question of law that is likely to
prosecution invited me to consider those matters for charge CH2023/198 Culpable
Drive Cause Grievous Bodily Harm (Culpable Driving)
and sought to make no
submissions on the other charges.
defence submitted that I should deal with all of the charges and the prosecution
provided submissions as to the considerations
that were appropriate in making
the decision about the appropriate jurisdiction for sentence.
prosecution pointed out the factual nature of the case and circumstances in
which the offence was committed, the grave seriousness
of the charge, fairly
referred to the defendant’s age, maturity and mental capacity, drew my
attention to relevant sentencing
authorities in terms of the suitability of the
limits of the sentencing power in this Court and politely left the final
consideration
prosecution’s position was that the relevant charge may well have resulted
in a term of imprisonment over 2 years and serious
consideration was be given to
whether the matter should have been committed to the Supreme Court for sentence
rather than finalised
in the ACTCC.
Ultimately,
I decided that I had sufficient jurisdiction to sentence Axl on all the charges
that he had entered pleas of guilty to,
meaning that his sentence would take
place entirely in the ACTCC before me. Charge CH2023/198 was the only charge
that really called
for a close assessment. It was obvious that the remaining 18
charges could be quite adequately dealt with by a sentence of two years
imprisonment or another lesser sentence type. That decision involved considering
(13) factors that have just been set out above.
paid close attention to all of the cases provided by the prosecution. There is
no doubt that the Culpable Driving charge was a
serious one. It involved a
lengthy pursuit by police, high speeds, driving in the oncoming lane and a
collision that caused significant
spinal and other injuries to another innocent
found that the most helpful cases were NSW guideline sentencing judgement in
55 NSWLR 252
R v Ogle (No 2)
[2018] ACTSC 126
Ogle (No 2)
at [214] the Court held that in relation to
sentencing for dangerous driving causing death, “a custodial sentence will
be appropriate unless the offender has a low level of moral culpability,
as in the case of momentary inattention or misjudgment.”
observed, earlier in its judgment at [205], that “in determining the
appropriateness of full time custody and the
length thereof, the sentencing
judge must give close attention to the degree of moral culpability involved.
This is a critical component
of the objective circumstances of the
decision in
also established that where the offender’s moral
culpability is high, a full-time custodial head sentence of less than three
years (in the case of death) and two years (in the case of grievous bodily harm)
would not generally be appropriate: at [229]. This
statement was
based upon a “typical case”. In the case of a low level of moral
culpability, a lower sentence would
be appropriate.
Court observed at [204] that a “typical case” will
young offender
(noting that this does not refer to young meaning under the age of
good character with no or limited prior convictions
or permanent injury to a single person
victim is a stranger
or limited injury to the driver or the driver’s
of guilty of limited utilitarian value
29. The Court went
on to list a number of aggravating factors that would inform the assessment of
the offender’s moral culpability
at [216] to [217]:
and nature of the injuries inflicted
of people put at risk
of intoxication or of substance abuse
or aggressive driving
Competitive
driving or showing off
of the journey during which others were exposed to ris
of warnings
police pursuit
of sleep deprivation
this matter, many of the aggravating features discussed in
present. The prosecution noted:
victim’s C2, C3, and C4 vertebrae were broken and required surgery, and
the insertion of six screws and two rods, measuring
four centimetres each, into
three vertebrae. The report of Dr Barry also detailed swelling of the spine,
separation of the atlantoaxial
ligament and a small haematoma at the level of
C1/2 vertebrae. This has had not only a life long physical impact on the victim,
impacted his mental health, financial wellbeing, his independence, and his
offending occurred in the context of a police pursuit involving dangerous
driving, which lasted approximately 10 minutes;
speeds involved were significant, particularly with regard to the 5 seconds
prior to the collision;
driving immediately prior to the collision was on the wrong side of the road and
into incoming traffic;
driver was affected by cannabis;
driver was 15 years old, and not entitled to apply for a driver’s
car used was a stolen motor vehicle;
young person made admissions to his father during a recorded phone call to the
effect of “I hit a man, [name redacted] was
calling me”, suggesting
that he was using his mobile phone at the time of driving, being evidence of
inattention.
, the offender was aged 24 and was travelling 59 km over the
speed limit. Another road user’s vehicle was struck and the injuries
suffered were similar to that of the victim in this matter. There was a guilty
plea and efforts had been made to rehabilitation.
The Supreme Court imposed a
sentence of 19 months and seven days suspended after serving seven months
imprisonment.
has grown up in circumstances that few would trade their own position in life
for. His social, economic and intellectual deprivation
is at the extreme end of
the range. His mental health is perilous. The accumulation of trauma that he
has experienced himself in
his short life is amongst the worst that a court
might see. Axl also bears the weight of a further cultural traumatic load due
him being born an Aboriginal person.
major factor in considering sentence is Axl’s young age. Young people are
not to be sentenced as adults and I have set out
the legal considerations for
sentencing young people later in this decision. They are the genesis of why age
is such a relevant
factor when sentencing children and why this Court sentences
in such a different way to the adult courts of the Territory.
considering all of the
factors, I found that sentencing Axl to more than
two years imprisonment on this charge would have been so excessive that it would
have created an appealable error. Thus, the two-year limit on sentencing
Step Two – A Consideration of the Law, the Facts and the Submission
of the Parties
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
governs the sentencing of children
and young offenders. In
The Queen v Haven (a
[2022] ACTCA 61
the Court of Appeal summarised a
number of principles which flow from Chapter 8A at [66]:
...In order to emphasise their significance, it is useful to summarise what
they [the Chapter 8A provisions] require:
a) the court must consider the purpose of promoting the rehabilitation
of the young offender and may give more weight to that purpose
gives to any of the other purposes stated in
b) the court must have particular regard to the common law principle of
individualised justice:
court must have regard to
(s 133D(1))
d) the young offender’s culpability for the offence having regard to his
or her maturity;
e) the young offender’s state of development;
f) the past and present family circumstances of the young offender;
g) a sentence of imprisonment imposed on a young offender must be a last resort
and for the shortest appropriate term:
h) the court must consider making a combination sentence consisting of the
sentence of imprisonment and a good behaviour order with
a supervision
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
ACT sets out about five pages of
mandatory considerations for all criminal offenders.
MT v The Queen
[2021] ACTCA 26
’), the court noted at [64] (
We infer that, when the 133C requirement to pay
“particular regard” to “individualised justice” is read
with the discretion to give more weight to the sentencing purpose of
rehabilitation, the result is that, if a young offender has
good prospects of
rehabilitation, those prospects will weigh heavily in the sentencing exercise.
[2010] NSWSC 653
, Johnson J observed
emphasis added
Although accepted to be of less significance than when
sentencing adult offenders, consideration of general deterrence and retribution
cannot be ignored when sentencing young offenders: KT v R at 578 [24]. The
greater the objective gravity of an offence, the less
likely it is that
retribution and general deterrence will give way to the interests of
rehabilitation: IE v R
[2008] NSWCCA 70
39. In DPP v Calhoun
The Supreme Court sentenced a young offender for culpable
drive causing death. His Honour Justice Mossop said:
Although the
offender’s submissions placed much emphasis upon the significance of
rehabilitation and the desirability of him
doing that in the community, the
prosecution correctly pointed out that the legislature has used very specific
which retain the court’s discretion as to the weight to be
attributed to rehabilitation. The requirement to have “particular
regard” to the common law principle of individualised justice does not
detract from that discretion. Consistently with the
terms of the statute,
rehabilitation is obviously a very significant sentencing consideration for
minors who commit crimes. However,
it remains one purpose of sentencing amongst
the range of purposes set out in
Ultimately each relevant purpose of
sentencing must be given some weight and the balance between those purposes is a
matter of intuitive
is a descending scale of punishments available to the ACTCC:
Imprisonment;
suspended sentence of
imprisonment;
sentence order;
and good behaviour order;
reparation order;
non-association or place restriction
driver licence disqualification
accommodation order;
with no further penalty;
non conviction order and good behaviour
non conviction
should be noted that intensive corrections orders and parole are not available
as sentencing options for children and young people.
lack of structured options for good behaviour orders is a matter of concern.
The PCYC runs a four day per week program named
“Project 180”. It
is an intervention and diversion program for young people. The program is full
and oversubscribed
with lengthy waiting lists. I was not made aware of any other
such program that could be used as part of a good behaviour order to
is no culturally specific sentencing program that is available for Aboriginal
children and young people in the ACT.
is one further, possible and unique outcome for children and young people only.
Court Procedures Act 2004
(ACT) is entitled
“Procedural provisions – proceedings involving children and young
people”. Within that part lies
Division 7A.2 which deals with care and
protection considerations in criminal proceedings for children and young people.
is worth setting out in full as it details the discretionary power to
dismiss criminal proceedings where the court is satisfied that
the child or
young person is in need of care and protection and the court finds that it is in
the best interests of that person to
dismiss the charge or charges.
Proceedings dismissed or adjourned
for care and protection reasons
(1) If, when hearing an indictment against a child or young person, the court is
satisfied that the child or young person is in need
of care and protection, the
(a) dismiss the indictment; or
(b) adjourn the proceeding for up to 15 days.
includes information (see
Legislation
(2) If a court acts under subsection (1), the court must, as soon as
practicable but not later than 2 working days after the day it
give a statement of the reasons for the action to—
(a) the director‑general; and
(b) the public advocate; and
(c) if the child or young person is an Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander person—the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
children and
young people commissioner.
(3) The statement of reasons must contain the following information about the
proceeding:
(a) if the proceeding has been adjourned—the reason the
proceeding was adjourned;
(b) the circumstances the court is aware of that led to the child
or young person coming before the court;
(c) the factors that satisfied the court that the child or young
person is in need of care and protection.
(4) The director‑general must treat a statement of reasons
given to the director‑general under subsection (2) as if it
were a report made under the
Children and
Young People Act 2008
, section 356 (Offence—mandatory
reporting of abuse).
(5) In this section:
in need of care and protection
, for a child or young
person—see the
Children and Young People Act 2008
, section 345.
Director‑general must report
to court, public advocate and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children and
young people
commissioner
(1) This section applies if—
(a) a proceeding has been adjourned under
section 74K
(b) the court has given the director‑general a
statement of reasons under
section 74K
(2) Not later than 15 days after the day the court adjourns the
proceeding under
section 74K
the director‑general must tell the public advocate, the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children and young people
commissioner and the court, in writing—
(a) what action the director‑general has taken, is
taking or proposes to take under the care and protection chapters in relation
the child or young person; or
(b) if the director‑general proposes to take no action
under any care and protection chapter in relation to the child or young
person—that the director‑general proposes to take no
(3) However, for subsection (2), the director-general need only tell the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children and young
people commissioner
relation to an Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander child or young person.
(4) Without limiting when the director‑general is taken to
have complied with subsection (2), the director‑general is
taken to have complied with that subsection if
the director‑general—
(a) makes an application under the care and protection chapters in
relation to the child or young person; and
(b) gives a copy of the application to—
(i) the public advocate; and
(ii) if the child or young person is an Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander person—the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
and young people commissioner.
Court action after
adjournment
(1) This section applies when a proceeding adjourned under
section 74K
(1) comes before the court again.
(2) The court may dismiss the proceeding—
(i) the director‑general has, under
(2) (a), told the court what action
the director‑general has taken, is taking or proposes to take
under the care and protection
chapters in relation to the child or young person;
(ii) the court is satisfied that taking the action is in the best
interests of the child or young person; or
(i) the director‑general has, under
section 74L
(2) (b), told the court that
the director‑general proposes to take no action under any care
and protection chapter in relation
to the child or young person; and
(ii) the court is satisfied that it is in the best interests of
the child or young person that the director‑general takes no
(c) the director‑general has made an application
under the care and protection chapters in relation to the child or young
(3) The court may also make any other order or take any other action in
relation to the indictment against the child or young person
that the court
considers appropriate.
have replicated a table of the charges helpfully set out by the Crown
Prosecutor:
CHARGE NUMBER
CHARGE DETAILS
MAXIMUM PENALTY
CH2022/1490
Drive motor vehicle without consent
500 PU/ 5 years/ both
PEF - $5,000/ 2years/ both
CH2022/1492
Aggravated dangerous drive (first offender, fail to stop, driving with drug
in blood, in excess of speed limit by more than 30%)
300 PU/ 3 years/ both
Auto disqualification – 12 months
CH2022/1493
Drive unlicenced (first)
Culpable drive cause GBH
Auto disqualification – 6 months
Not give assistance after accident causing injury
200 PU/ 2 years/ both
30 January – 2 February 2023
On conditional liberty
Ride motor vehicle without consent
500 PU/ 5 years/ both
PEF - $5,000/ 2years/ both
Make off without payment
50 PU/ 6 months/ both
Drive motor vehicle without consent
500 PU/ 5 years/ both
PEF - $5,000/ 2years/ both
Drive unlicenced (first)
Drive unlicenced (first)
Drive motor vehicle without consent
500 PU/ 5 years/ both
PEF - $5,000/ 2years/ both
Aggravated dangerous drive (repeat offender, fail to stop, driving in
excess of speed limit by more than 30%, and with three people
under 17 years old
in the vehicle)
500 PU/ 5 years/ both
Auto disqualification – 12
PEF - $5,000/ 2years/ both
Possess prohibited weapon
500 PU/ 5 years/ both
Unlawful possession of stolen property
50 PU/ 6 months/ both
On conditional liberty -
Drive unlicenced (first)
Drive motor vehicle without consent
500 PU/ 5 years/ both
On conditional liberty - bail
Drive motor vehicle without consent
500 PU/ 5 years/ both
Drive unlicenced (first)
On conditional liberty - bail
Fail to appear
200 PU/ 2 years/ both
The 27 December 2022 Series (CH2022/1490, 1492, 1493, CH2023/198,
was the driver of a stolen white Jeep Compass, seen by police at 6:41pm on 27
December 2022. Police in a marked vehicle followed
the Jeep, noting it was a
stolen motor vehicle. A pursuit lasting approximately 10 minutes ensued, whereby
the young person drove
around 15 kilometres. Police lost sight of the vehicle at
the intersection of Kingsford Smith Drive and Southern Cross Drive, after
vehicle turned right onto the incorrect side of the road. The various aspects of
dangerous driving include:
at excess speed;
Dangerously
overtaking another vehicle and causing evasive action to be taken by that other
through a red light; and
the incorrect side of the road and driving on that road at
after that pursuit had ceased, police observed the Jeep crashed at the
intersection of Southern Cross Drive and Ross Smith
Crescent, Scullin, ACT.
Police observed a Mazda 3 with significant damage and the victim trapped in the
vehicle. Police observed
two young people running from the scene.
analysis of data obtained from the Jeep’s airbag deployment control
seconds prior to the airbag deployment time, the vehicle was traveling at
123km/h in the 80km/h zone, which is 53.4% above the speed
that same time the vehicle was being driven driving on the wrong side of a dual
carriage way towards oncoming traffic.
was detected in Axl’s blood, at a level which impaired his ability to
properly control the motor vehicle.
physical injuries suffered by the victim have been previously set out. I
received a victim impact statement from him and his brother.
It is clear that
the offending has not only had an enduring physical impact on the victim, but
there are consequential impacts on
his mental health, independence, financial
wellbeing and his family. He continues to suffer pain, reduced range of movement
impacted ability to drive.
Aggravated Dangerous Drive (CH2022/1492) carries the following statutory
circumstances of
aggravation:
to stop for police;
in excess of speed limit by more than 30%; and
with a prescribed drug in blood.
Supreme Court has previously articulated the following relevant factors in
assessing the objectiveness seriousness for the offence
of aggravated dangerous
driving. As will be seen, there is a significant overlapping with the
considerations from
manner of driving, and whether other traffic users are put at risk, which
includes a consideration of excessive speed, impaired
driving, poor driving such
as driving on the incorrect side of the road or on a footpath, driving through
red traffic lights, erratic
driving, and being involved in a police
state of the traffic in the area where the driving occurred and the identities
of the other parties that were present, such as
whether it was near a school
area and whether there were pedestrians or drivers nearby. The more persons
exposed, the more serious
period of driving, and the distance travelled;
actual collisions with other vehicles, roadworks or
structures;
the collision cause damage or injuries, those are relevant aggravating
there were any passengers in the
driving that forms the particulars of this charge are the driving that occurs
prior to the culpable drive causing grievous bodily
harm charge (from
approximately 6:50pm, when the young person turns right onto Southern Cross
Drive, from Kingsford Smith drive).
statement of facts outline that the young person was driving for a period of
approximately 10 minutes and travelled approximately
15 kilometres. There were
various aspects of driving that were dangerous. The vehicle consistently
travelled at speeds well over
the limit. Axl was attempting to evade police.
offending was made more serious (aggravated) because Axl was driving the vehicle
in breach of bail conditions. After the collision
Axl attempted to flee the
scene and he was pursued by police on foot.
of those features indicate to me that the offending towards or slightly above
the mid-range of objective seriousness for the charge.
was accepted by the prosecution that this offence has significant overlap with
the culpable drive causing grievous bodily harm
charge and that care had to be
taken to avoid ‘sentencing overlap’ by considering concurrency and
prosecution submitted that the Court should give weight to the sentencing
purposes of general deterrence, specific deterrence
(noting the young person was
on conditional liberty), accountability, denunciation, recognition of harm and
protection of the community
and rehabilitation.
the charge CH2023/198 Axl was charge with culpable driving by virtue of both
driving negligently and whilst under the influence
of alcohol, or a drug, to
such an extent as to be incapable of having proper control of the vehicle.
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT), defines driving negligently for the
purposes of this section as, “...a person shall be taken to drive a motor
negligently if the person fails unjustifiably and to
to observe the standard of care that a reasonable person would have
observed in all the circumstances of the case”.
particulars of this charge are, chronologically after the aggravated dangerous
drive, at about 6:50pm, the Jeep turned right onto
Southern Cross drive from
Kingsford Smith drive, entering onto the incorrect side of the road, and prior
to the collision was travelling
in the direction of incoming traffic at a speed
of 123km/h in a 80km/h zone, while under the influence of cannabis to such an
as to be incapable of having proper control of the vehicle.
I set out at paragraph 17 above, many of the aggravating features discussed in
are present. The offending must be categorized as being at least
within the mid range of objective seriousness.
Geagea v The Queen
[2020] NSWCCA 350
the offence
of Failing To Provide Assistance is directed, at least in part, towards
alleviating suffering and preserving dignity.
DPP v Calhoun
[2023] ACTSC 189
, Mossop J said:
The legislature has enacted a standard of common decency imposed upon drivers
involved in traffic accidents on a road. The gravity
of the accident and the
knowledge of the need for assistance are the most significant features that
determine the seriousness of
the provision.
the circumstances of this matter, whilst the rendering of assistance immediately
may not have reduced the extent of the injuries
suffered, it
alleviated suffering and preserved the dignity of the victim. Axl should have
called emergency services and remained with the
victim until their
arrival. It is clear from the admissions made by the young person, that he
was in possession of a mobile phone.
prosecution submitted that the offending spoke to Axl acting out of selfishness,
self-interest and perhaps fear, at the expense
of the interest of the victim.
Those submissions required an overlay that also considered age, maturity and
cultural experience.
CH2022/1490 relates to Axl driving the Jeep without the consent of the owner.
The Supreme Court has previously articulated
the following relevant factors in
assessing the objectiveness seriousness for the offence of dishonestly driving
or riding a motor
vehicle without
the offender drove or rode in the vehicle: see
[2018] ACTSC 43
duration of the driving or riding;
period of time over which the owner was deprived of the
nature of the driving;
of the vehicle, or damage to the vehicle;
the vehicle was used in the commission of other offending;
inconvenience or loss caused by taking the vehicle from the
young person was the driver of the Jeep from 6:41pm – 6:51pm on 27
December 2022. The vehicle travelled approximately 15
kilometres during this
time. This charge has significant overlap with the charges of aggravated
dangerous drive and culpable drive,
it was submitted that the aggravating
features of this offending including the significant destruction of the Jeep.
the dangerous
manner in which it was driven and that the vehicle was used in the
commission of the other offending.
victim impact statement from the owner was received and considered. Both the
taking and the driving of a motor vehicle without
consent are serious because of
the owner’s dependence on such a valuable purchase:
R v Blackburn (No
[2020] ACTSC 373
was submitted, and I agree, that this offence fell towards the mid range of
objective seriousness.
The 30 January – 2 February
2023 Series (CH2023/240-242, 244, 246, 248, 252, 668)
charge CH2023/240 – Ride motor vehicle without consent - the statement of
facts tendered set out that Axl was a passenger
in the VW Jetta for five minutes
from 11:55pm on 31 January 2023 – 12:00am on 1 February 2023. That same
vehicle was used in
the commission of the make off without payment offence
(CH2023/241).
offences fall within the low range of objective seriousness.
victim detailed the harm suffered as a result of this offence and it was taken
into account.
charge CH2023/242 - Drive Motor Vehicle Without Consent - Axl was the driver of
a BMW from 3:22am to 3:27am on 1 February 2023.
The vehicle was ultimately
located by police at 8:30pm that day.
this period of driving the young person was also unlicenced, which is separately
was no victim impact statement, but I accept that there was inevitable
inconvenience and expense caused to the victim. I find
that the offending falls
within the lower range of objective seriousness for these charges.
CH2023/246 - Drive motor vehicle without consent relates to an Audi A3 that was
driven by the young person from approximately
8:30pm to 8:45pm on 2 February
2023. The nature of that driving is the subject of the aggravated dangerous
drive charge. Briefly,
it involved a collision, a lengthy police pursuit,
driving at significant speeds, and other vehicles being required to take evasive
action. The vehicle was damaged in the collision with police, described in the
facts as “significant damage to the right side
of the Audi A3.” A
tyre was also deflated in an attempt by police to ‘stop stick’ the
vehicle during the pursuit.
this period of driving the young person was also unlicenced, which is separately
charged. Both charges lie within the median
level of objective
seriousness.
victim impact statement from the owner of the vehicle was received and
considered.
CH2023/248 Aggravated Dangerous Driving has the following statutory
circumstances of aggravation:
to stop for police;
in excess of speed limit by more than 30%; and
with three people under 17 years old in the vehicle.
is a repeat offender in relation to the offence.
statement of facts outline that Axl was driving for a period of approximately 15
minutes and travelled through various streets
in Macgregor.
vehicle consistently travelled at speeds well over the speed limit. During the
pursuit, the Audi undertook vehicles in front of
it and almost collided with the
gutter on three occasions, crossed double unbroken lines on five occasions,
swerved onto the wrong
side of the road towards an unmarked police vehicle with
lights and sirens activated, drove on the wrong side of the road and caused
other vehicles to take evasive action.
driving involved a collision with a police vehicle with an unsuccessful attempt
to swerve around the police vehicle, and after
colliding, continuing to
accelerate forward and push past the vehicle.
road conditions were dark. There was obvious traffic.
driving only ended after tyre deflation device were successfully deployed by
is obvious that Axl was attempting to evade police. He was in breach of bail
conditions that were set to prevent him from driving.
He attempted to flee the
scene and was pursued by police on foot. All of those are aggravating features.
offence falls in the mid to higher range of objective seriousness for the
CH2023/668 – Possess Prohibited Weapon related to the simple possession of
a flick knife upon arrest. Given that there
was no evidence concerning its past
or intended future use, this is a minor example of the offence.
is a charge of Unlawful Possession of Stolen Property relates to criminal
liability for possessing items which in all the
circumstances were reasonably
suspected of being stolen or otherwise unlawfully obtained. Axl is not
criminally responsible for the
taking of those items.
items possessed were a BMW key, a Hyundai Santa Fe key and a wallet containing
an ACT driver licence and bank cards. They are
items which would cause
inconvenience to the owners when lost and a functional purpose and an
inconvenience in replacing. There is
no direct evidence as to the value of the
items possessed. There is no particular sentimental value for those
charge is rolled up to combine a number of similar charges but falls towards the
lower range of objective seriousness for the
February 2023 Series CH2023/289-290
charge CH2023/289 - Drive Motor Vehicle Without Consent - Axl was the driver of
the Skoda as it was driven through Florey at high
speed and in a way that caused
another road user to take evasive action to avoid a collision. The vehicle also
travelled through
a red light.
vehicle was ultimately located by police in Macgregor, about an hour after Axl
was observed driving the vehicle.
was driving whilst unlicenced, which is separately charged as CH2023/290. He
was on bail after the commission of serious driving
offences in similar
circumstances.
offending is below the mid-range of objective seriousness.
The 23 March 2023 Series CH2023/452-453
charge CH2023/452 - Drive Motor Vehicle Without Consent - Axl was the driver of
the BMW for a brief period in Fyshwick. There
was nothing remarkable about the
manner of driving.
was driving whilst unlicenced, which is separately charged as
CH2023/453.
offending lies at the lower end of objective seriousness for both charges.
The June 2023 Charge - CH2023/830 – Fail to Appear
charge arose in circumstances where Axl was granted day bail to attend various
programs to assist in his rehabilitation. He absconded
from the Ted Noffs Street
University, in breach of bail, and subsequently failed to return to Court for
his bail to be revoked. Axl
was detected on 16 June 2023 and did not voluntarily
hand himself into police or the Court.
court record reflects that 9 June 2023 was a mention date only and the offending
lies towards the lower end of the range of objective
seriousness for failing to
The decision of
and Sentencing
Aboriginal Offenders
has endured an extremely traumatic upbringing which undoubtedly engages the
principles discussed by the High Court in
[2013] HCA 37; 249 CLR 571
confirmed that when sentencing Aboriginal offenders "full weight" should be
given to an offender's deprived background in every sentencing
decision. I am
compelled to give full weight to Axl’s ‘subjective features’
that I set out at the beginning of
this decision.
Bugmy Bar Book
in detail some of the experiences relevant to many Aboriginal
alcohol spectrum disorders;
to domestic and family violence;
Incarceration
of a parent or care-giver;
Interrupted
school attendance and suspension;
of home care
sexual abuse;
exposure to alcohol and other drug abuse,
generations and descendants;
brain injury;
impairment;
Unemployment;
dispossession;
socio-economic status; and
of imprisonment or remands in custody.
is clear that Axl has been exposed to many of those experiences, or his personal
history is relevant to them.
prosecution submitted that the
principles would operate in this
matter to moderate the young person’s moral culpability for his offending
and limit the weight
to be given to general deterrence. However, they submitted
that general deterrence still had a moderated role to play noting the
seriousness of the offending conduct. I accept those
submissions.
The decision of
and Impaired
Mental Functioning
is a Victorian case that helpfully set out sentencing principles for criminal
offenders suffering from impaired mental functioning:
Impaired mental functioning, whether temporary or permanent ("the
condition"), is relevant to sentencing in at least the following
1. The condition may reduce the moral culpability of the offending conduct,
as distinct from the offender’s legal responsibility.
Where that is so,
the condition affects the punishment that is just in all the circumstances; and
denunciation is less likely to
be a relevant sentencing objective.
condition may have a bearing on the kind of sentence that is imposed and the
conditions in which it should be served.
3. Whether general deterrence
should be moderated or eliminated as a sentencing consideration depends upon the
nature and severity
of the symptoms exhibited by the offender, and the effect of
the condition on the mental capacity of the offender, whether at the
time of the
offending or at the date of sentence or both.
4. Whether specific
deterrence should be moderated or eliminated as a sentencing consideration
likewise depends upon the nature and
severity of the symptoms of the condition
as exhibited by the offender, and the effect of the condition on the mental
capacity of
the offender, whether at the time of the offending or at the date of
the sentence or both.
The existence of the condition at the date of sentencing (or its foreseeable
recurrence) may mean that a given sentence will weigh
more heavily on the
offender than it would on a person in normal health.
6. Where there is a
serious risk of imprisonment having a significant adverse effect on the
offender’s mental health, this will
be a factor tending to mitigate
punishment.
prosecution submitted that it is not currently clear whether these conditions
give rise to the application of the
principles.
defence submitted that all off the offending, bar the failure to appear,
pre-dated the Young Person’s clinical psychiatric
diagnosis and that there
is a causal connection between his mental condition and his offending (prior to
26 April 2023). The defence
pointed to the compulsion to do certain things by
way of auditory hallucinations, the presence of persecutory delusions
(pertaining
to fears of being followed) in circumstances where failing to stop
for police was a material ingredient to the Young Person’s
most serious
offences. Ultimately the defence submitted that Axl’s psychiatric
his moral culpability; and
the importance of deterrence (both general and specific).
Kasinathan report was not tendered. There was no evidence before me linking the
hallucinations and commands as being causative
of Axl’s criminal behaviour
and I do not sentence on that basis.
sense and life experience informs the Court about there being multiple
explanations for fleeing from a police pursuit and collision
scene – the
thrill of the chase, consciousness of guilt and a desire to avoid apprehension
being primary ones.
Offending whilst on conditional
respect to all but the first series of offences, Axl was on conditional liberty
at the time of the commission of the offences.
That is, he was subject to bail
with specific conditions about not driving.
on conditional liberty at the time of the commission of the offences is a
serious aggravating feature at sentence, but care
is required to avoid double
punishment:
Kelly v Ashby
[2015] ACTSC 346
. The defence conceded
that this was an aggravating feature of the offending and I took it into
deeply concerns me to have learnt from this and other matters in the ACTCC that
there is no bail support service for Aboriginal
children and young people
charged with criminal offences. Such a service might have improved Axl’s
chances of not reoffending
and of appearing in Court. I gave that fact some
weight when considering the seriousness or aggravating nature of offending
on bail. Axl’s age and immaturity were other relevant
Parity Between Co-Offenders
respect to the charges arising from offending on 27 December 2022, a co-young
person was charged with riding in a stolen motor
vehicle and was sentenced to a
non -conviction order.
relation to the offending on 30 January to 2 February 2023, the sole co-young
people that has been sentenced prior to Axl received
a non conviction order and
a good behaviour order for 6 months.
the offending on 23 March 2023, one co-young person has been sentenced to two
months’ imprisonment, suspended after serving
one month with a six month
good behaviour order.
The Type of Sentence Required
prosecution submitted that no sentence other than a term of imprisonment was
appropriate for the culpable drive causing grievous
bodily harm charge
(CH2023/198), and aggravated dangerous drive charge on the same date
(CH2022/1492), aggravated dangerous drive
on 2 February 2023 (CH2023/248), and
drive motor vehicle without consent (CH2023/242, 246) arising on that date, and
subsequent dates
(CH2023/289, CH2023/452) called for periods of imprisonment to
be imposed.
prosecution submitted that a further sentence involving custody and followed by
a lengthy period of supervision in the community
would be appropriate as
described in
at [68], [69]:
A “combination sentence” of full-time imprisonment followed by
a good behaviour order enables the imposition of a very
short sentence of
full-time imprisonment, followed by a good behaviour order. For example, such a
sentence may be appropriate for
a young offender who is in full-time detention
when they appear for sentence, if the sentencing court considers that they
be released forthwith, subject to a significant period of supervision on
a good behaviour order.
A “combination sentence” comprising a suspended sentence and a
good behaviour order enables the imposition of a partly
suspended sentence
within which the unsuspended part is of any appropriate length and, following
release, the failure of the young
offender to comply with the conditions of the
associated good behaviour order places them at risk of serving the suspended
the sentence in full-time detention. Such a sentence simultaneously
supports good behaviour while disincentivising antisocial behaviour
“carrot and stick” approach to behavioural reform).
defence conceded that no sentence other than a term of imprisonment was
appropriate in relation to the following offences:
driving causing grievous bodily harm on 27 December 2022 (CH2023/198);
dangerous driving on 27 December 2022 (CH22/1492);
dangerous driving on 2 February 2023 (CH23/248); and
motor vehicle without consent on 23 March 2023
(CH23/452).
Ultimately,
I agreed in part with both of these submissions. I decided that most of the
charges should be dismissed pursuant to Division
7A.2 of the
Court Procedures
ACT this was because, as per the
report, Axl is a child in
need of care and protection and it was clearly in Axl’s best interests for
me to dismiss those charges.
Axl is young, has no criminal convictions and has
led an extremely deprived life. He deserves the opportunity to proceed through
this stage of immaturity and destructive criminal behaviour to a crime free and
constructive adult life. A host of criminal convictions
from childhood would
seem unlikely to assist him in achieving that purpose – particularly in
circumstances where the sentences
for those offences would be largely consumed
or completely overlapped by the sentences of the most serious
did not think it was in Axl’s best interests to dismiss what I thought
were the three most serious charges. They were so
serious that I thought it
was in his best interests to recognise those charges and his behaviour by
sentencing him at law and not
dismissing them for care and protection reasons.
decided that the three most serious charges should form a sentence that was
structured to reflect adequate punishment in the circumstances
of Axl and his
offending, deter Axl and other young people from committing those offences,
allow for community protection, make Axl
accountable, denounce his conduct,
recognise the effect on the victims and most importantly - promote Axl’s
rehabilitation.
sentenced Axl to imprisonment on only two charges out of 21 because I thought
that there was no other appropriate other option for
I found, after
considering everything that you have just read and been referred to, that there
were proper, lesser, options for all
of the other charges. As I stated
previously – for most of those 19 remaining charges dismissal was my
there had been a place available on the PCYC Project 180 program I would have
fashioned the sentence to include it. Similarly,
had there been any Aboriginal
specific sentencing options I could also have considered fashioning them into
the sentence. There
did consider the principle of totality when sentencing on the two charges where
imprisonment was imposed. Because they were different
sets of offending,
because the second occurred whilst on bail for the first and because of the
unique youth specific way I have dealt
with these offences, I felt that there
was no need to overlap the sentences in the circumstances. In other words when
I stood back
and looked at the over sentence it did not require an
adjustment.
Sentence of the Court
is the transcript of how I sentenced Axl:
HIS HONOUR: [Axl], one thing that concerned me when I read all of this
material was the fact that you are worried that people aren't
going to like you
because of all of this. It is not that people don't like you, it is just that
they don't like what you have done,
and they are two very different things.
Everybody is capable of turning around things from past behaviour. There is
this world to stop you from succeeding, okay?
AXL’S FATHER: That's right.
HIS HONOUR: And I have some belief that you are able to succeed. There
are plenty of jobs and plenty of ways that you can use this
past behaviour for
other people's benefit. You can help other young people, in time, not do this.
So this is not the end for you.
You are not someone who needs to be locked up
with the key thrown away. You are someone who is very young who needs to help
and you need others to help you to turn things around, but I am
confident that if you get that help, you can do pretty much whatever
THE YOUNG PERSON: Thank you.
HIS HONOUR: You have good, sound goals for the future and I believe you
can achieve those if you stop offending. So I have made
this sentence fit you
to try and encourage you to stop offending. I am not going to say anything else
because I am going to have
pages and pages and pages of things to say about all
of this material that I have considered about your past, in particular, and
there needs to be more resources to help you within the ACT, but what I have
done is this.
On charge 1492/2022, which was the aggravated dangerous driving
charge, that is from 27 December 2022 when you were just a few days
than 15, I am finding that charge proved and I am convicting you and I am
sentencing you to a two‑year good behaviour
order. That is going to fit
in with what I have done with some other charges.
The purpose of that order, primarily, is to assist you, is to keep you on
a long period of supervision by CYPS to help you. That
will take you through to
just short of your 18th birthday, so about four months short. As I said,
that is designed to assist you.
The kick with that is that I am disqualifying
you for 12 months from driving, so you won't be able to get your learner's
months on that charge.
The most serious charge that I have got to deal with you for is
(CH2023/198)
the culpable driving causing grievous bodily harm to that
gentleman there. You injured him in a terrible way and he did not deserve
I have considered all of the materials before me. In particular, I have had the
closest regard to the New South Wales Supreme
Court decision of Whyte and the
ACT decision of R v Ogle (No 2).
I note the guilty plea. I thought that an appropriate start point for a
matter such as this, in all of the circumstances of this
young person, was
12 months imprisonment. I have reduced that to nine months on account of
the guilty plea. There will be a disqualification
for 12 months. That is
concurrent with the earlier disqualification and it will be suspended after
seven months and six days. [Axl]
has served that time, so if he wishes to sign
the good behaviour order that I have in mind, he will be released on that charge
On the further charge of
(CH2023/248)
aggravated dangerous driving,
I have held that there is no other appropriate sentence than the sentence of
imprisonment. That offending
occurred on 2 February 2023. [Axl] was only
a month older then than the previous charge. I thought that an appropriate
start point
there was four months imprisonment. I have reduced that to three on
account of the guilty plea. In my view, it should be wholly
cumulative on the
nine months, after considering totality. So the total sentence will be
12 months imprisonment, wholly suspended
after seven months and six days,
and there will be a further 12 month disqualification on the top, so you
are disqualified from driving
for two years.
On the rest of the charges, charges of 2022/1490, 1492, 1493 and of
2023/208, 240, 241, 242, 244, 246, 248, 250 and 252, I have come
to a different
conclusion. Considering
section 74M
Court Procedures Act 2004
my view it is [Axl’s] best interests that those matters be dismissed.
There are many reasons for that but one of the most
striking reasons is that
I've already dealt with him in a most serious way for three other offences and
for those three other offences
that I've just read out the sentences on, in my
view it was not in the best interests of [Axl] to dismiss those charges.
He had to be dealt with at law and had to be sentenced at law. On the
remaining charges, all of 2023/668, 830, 452, 453, 289 and
290, I could not use
Court Procedures Act
. That is because the mechanism for
section 74M
, the report under
section 74K
and L, was not ordered to include
those charges and it appears to me on a basic reading of
section 74M
use that section where they are not the subject of a report. Given that my
intention was to dismiss all of those charges
pursuant to
section 74M
, for those
one, two, three, four, five, six charges, I have dealt with them all in the same
They are proved and dismissed pursuant to
because I find
special or exceptional circumstances. That is, that essentially due to an
administrative oversight of the court I
could not use
section 74M
them and I have dealt with [Axl] in a most serious way for the three most
serious charges that he has committed. [Axl],
I want to read to you the
two-year good behaviour order. That applies from today and that's for charge
1492 which was the first
dangerous driving charge. You are to be under
supervision for 24 months or such lesser period as appropriate by the
director-general.
You are to report to Child and Youth Protection Services straightaway and
you are to attend any educational, vocational, psychological,
psychiatric or
other assessments, programs or counselling as directed. You are to supply
samples of your breath, blood, hair, saliva
and urine for alcohol or drug
testing if required and you're to undertake medical treatment and supervision if
you are directed.
You're to attend any rehabilitation programs as directed and
any education and training programs as directed and you're not to drive
vehicle for that two years, okay. That works in exactly with the two years
worth of disqualifications that I've given you.
On the two sentences of imprisonment, I have imposed exactly the same
suspended sentence order. They add up to 12 months. They're
backdated to
31 January this year and they're suspended after seven months and six days
because you have served seven months and
six days. If you were an adult and I
had sentenced you to 12 months imprisonment you would have been eligible
potentially for parole
one month and six days ago so on one view of it you've
perhaps done a little bit longer than you might have. That suspended sentence
order says that you're sentenced for 12 months altogether imprisonment. It's
backdated to 31 January this year.
It's suspended after serving seven months and six days which means you're
eligible for release now. You're to be on supervision for
12 months and you're
to report to CYPS straightaway and the conditions are the same as your good
behaviour order. You're to attend
anything in terms of education, assessments,
programs or counselling and you supply samples of breath, blood, hair, saliva or
for alcohol or drug testing. You're to undertake medical treatment and
supervision as directed, any rehabilitation program and any
education and
training program and you're not to drive a motor vehicle.
For the next year, you've got nearly five months imprisonment hanging over
your head. That's to protect the community and it's to
send you a message that
if you re-offend, particularly with driving, you are going to get that five
months, or six days less of five
months, to serve plus whatever sentence you get
for any breaching behaviour. If, as I hope, there's no more offending from you,
that's the end of it. You get the help of those good behaviour orders and you
move on with your life. But what you've got hanging
over your head for a year
is another five months basically to serve if you do anything wrong. Do you get
THE YOUNG PERSON: I do.
HIS HONOUR: As I said, it's to stop the risk to everybody in the
community from your extraordinarily dangerous driving and it's to
back on track, okay. Do you understand how the sentences work?
THE YOUNG PERSON: Yes, I do.
HIS HONOUR: No driving for two years.
THE YOUNG PERSON: Yes.
HIS HONOUR: No offending for 12 months otherwise you go back in and serve
the rest of that five months. Do you understand?
THE YOUNG PERSON: Yes, I do.
dispositions of each charge are repeated in this
CHARGE DETAILS
DISPOSITION
CH2022/1490
Drive motor vehicle without consent
Dismissed per
s74M(2)(a)(ii)
CH2022/1492
Aggravated dangerous drive (first offender, fail to stop, driving with drug
in blood, in excess of speed limit by more than 30%)
Convicted. 2 year good behaviour order imposed. Disqualified for 12
months concurrent with CH 23/198
CH2022/1493
Drive unlicenced (first)
Dismissed per
s74M(2)(a)(ii)
Culpable drive cause GBH
9 months imprisonment suspended after 7 months and 6 days by a 12 month
good behaviour order. 12 months disqualification
Not give assistance after accident causing injury
Dismissed per
s74M(2)(a)(ii)
30 January – 2 February 2023
Ride motor vehicle without consent
Dismissed per
s74M(2)(a)(ii)
Make off without payment
Dismissed per
s74M(2)(a)(ii)
Drive motor vehicle without consent
Dismissed per
s74M(2)(a)(ii)
Drive unlicenced (first)
Dismissed per
s74M(2)(a)(ii)
Drive unlicenced (first)
Dismissed per
s74M(2)(a)(ii)
Drive motor vehicle without consent
Dismissed per
s74M(2)(a)(ii)
Aggravated dangerous drive (repeat offender, fail to stop, driving in
excess of speed limit by more than 30%, and with three people
under 17 years old
in the vehicle)
3 months imprisonment wholly suspended by a 12 month good behaviour order.
12 months disqualification cumulative on CH2023/198.
Possess prohibited weapon
Unlawful possession of stolen property
Dismissed per
s74M(2)(a)(ii)
Drive unlicenced (first)
Drive motor vehicle without consent
Drive motor vehicle without consent
Drive unlicenced (first)
Fail to appear
note that the parties did not make a submission about the use of
Court Procedures Act 2004
(ACT) in the absence of an accompanying
report. The force of
(1) has been brought to my attention in another
matter since sentencing Axl.
is now my view that a dismissal pursuant to
could have been used
instead of finding charges proved and dismissing them pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
ACT. If I receive no submissions to the
contrary from either party within seven days of this decision, I intend to use
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
ACT in Chambers and amend the
sentences by dismissing charges 2023/668, 830, 452, 453, 289 and 290 pursuant to
s 74K(1)(a)
Court Procedures Act 2004
I certify that the preceding one hundred and twenty-nine [129] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of
his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Jonathan Pears
Date: 06 October 2023
A child is a defined to be aged
under 12. See
Children and Young People Act 2008
See the pre-sentence
report dated 4 September 2023
Taken from the s74L
report dated 23 February 2023 except where otherwise
Pre-sentence report dated 4 September 2023 page
“He punched me like
a man” Report of Ms Connaughton, Psychologist dated 24 January 2023 at
Ibid at page
Ibid at page
TX 7 September 2023
Remorse is a
relevant consideration for sentence under the considerations at
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Pre-sentence
Report dated 4 September 2023 at page 17.
Magistrates
Court Act 1930
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
Noting that
had not yet come into effect as at the date of Axl’s sentence.
I note that no guidance is
given in the decision about what “young offender” means i.e.
offenders under the age of 18
or young adults. At paragraph 204 of
, Spigelman CJ ‘reformulates’ the guideline set out in
R v Jurisic
[1998] NSWSC 423
(1998) 45 NSWLR 209
includes that ‘[a] frequently recurring case of an offence under
’ has the characteristic of involving a ‘young offender’
(paragraph [204]). The term ‘young offender’
is not defined within
the decision by his Honour, and the term ‘young offender’ is not
used again within the decision.
, Spigelman CJ describes the
characteristics of offences contained within
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW). This includes a reference to the Hansard where the Attorney-General
introduced the amending legislation. This included a statement
many cases the drivers and those killed or injured are young people or
children’ (page 227 of
). His Honour quotes the decision of
R v Musumeci
(Court of Criminal Appeal, 30 October 1997,
unreported)
at page 228, including dealing with ‘youthful
offenders’. From my reading of the decision, Spigelman CJ refers to his
previous guideline decision (
) which in turn refers to the Hansard
where the refence to ‘young offenders’ originates. In terms of the
age of the offender
, this is not mentioned within the decision.
The original sentencing decision of the District Court of NSW is not available.
I note that there is no reference to the offender being
‘young’ within the circumstances of the case (from paragraph
and no pseudonym is used – indicating that Whyte was an adult.
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
with additional considerations for young offenders contained
The requirements of good
behaviour orders for young offenders are set out in
(Sentencing) Act 2005
additional considerations for young offenders as per
A conviction without
penalty is not specifically mentioned in the sentencing legislation. For a
recent precedent of its use see
Director of Public Prosecutions v Holder (No
[2023] ACTSC 167 (SCC
2022; SCC 82
per Baker J at
Crimes (Sentencing)
Road Transport
(Safety and Traffic Management) Act 1999
R v Massey (No 3)
[2021] ACTSC 156
R v Eichmann
[2019] ACTSC 212
R v Seymour
[2021] ACTSC 152
R v Massey (No 3)
[2021] ACTSC 156
R v Blackburn (No
[2020] ACTSC 373
R v Seymour
[2021] ACTSC 152
R v Elphick
[2021] ACTSC 9
R v Massey (No 1)
[2020] ACTSC 256
[2021] ACTSC 138
Bugmy Bar Book
Project Committee,
Bugmy Bar Book
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
(2007) 16 VR 269
at paragraphs
(Sentencing) Act 2005
(Sentencing) Act 2006
RTF format (679 KB)
Signed PDF/A format