Pesec v Zivko [2025] ACTCA 37 (2 September 2025)
Pesec v Zivko [2025] ACTCA 37 (2 September 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
Pesec v Zivko
[2025] ACTCA 37
Hearing Dates:
Decision Date:
Taylor, Charlesworth and Stewart JJ
Catchwords:
– appeal from costs orders – issue of duplicative
representation – whether primary judge erred in concluding that
date of the offer of compromise there was no possibility of conflict between
interests – whether joint offer of compromise
indicative of commonality of
interest – discretionary nature of costs orders – cross-appeal
Legislation Cited:
Corporations Act 2001
Supreme Court Act 1933
Cases Cited:
Harvard Nominees Pty Ltd v Dimension Agriculture Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2023] FCAFC 140
299 FCR 224
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Pesec v Zivko (No 3)
[2024] ACTSC 325
Pesec v Zivko (No 4)
[2024] ACTSC 361
Statham v Shephard (No 2)
(1974) 23 FLR 244
Zeltner v Deputy Registrar of the Supreme Court (No 2)
[2022] ACTCA
Anthony Pesec (Appellant and Cross-Respondent)
Josip Pavao Zivko (First Respondent)
Frank Crnkovic (Second Respondent)
Mirko Skrnjug (Third Respondent)
Rein Heins (Fourth Respondent)
Noel Edward McCann (Fifth Respondent)
XO 1 Pty Ltd (Sixth Respondent)
Consolidated Builders Limited (Seventh Respondent and
Cross-Appellant)
Representation:
Mr M Pesman SC with Mr R Higgins (Appellant and Cross-Respondent)
Mr D Thomas SC (First and Sixth Respondents)
Mr J Hutton SC with Ms Z Graus (Second to Fifth Respondents)
Mr M O’Meara SC (Seventh Respondent and Cross-Appellant)
Chamberlains Law (Appellant and Cross-Respondent)
Allens (First and Sixth Respondents)
Thomson Geer (Second to Fifth Respondents)
Clayton Utz (Seventh Respondent and Cross-Appellant)
File Number:
AC 37 of 2024
Decision Under Appeal:
Court: Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory
Before: McCallum CJ
Date of Decision: 21 November 2024
Case Title:
Pesec v Zivko (No 4)
[2024] ACTSC 361
Introduction
appeal relates to a question of costs.
primary judge dismissed an action commenced by Mr Anthony Pesec against
Consolidated Builders Limited (‘Consolidated’),
its managing
director (Mr Josip Zivko) and (relevantly) four of the Company’s
non-executive directors:
Pesec v Zivko (No 3)
[2024] ACTSC 325
Pesec (No 3)
). Mr Pesec was later ordered to pay the
defendants’
v Zivko (No 4)
[2024] ACTSC 361
Pesec (No 4)
). The relevant
cost orders required Mr Pesec to pay:
(a) the costs of the non-executive directors and, separately the costs of the
Company up to and including 10 August 2022; and
(b) the costs of the non-executive directors and the Company on the basis that,
from 11 August 2022, those defendants were to be
treated as having been
represented by the same counsel and the same solicitors, with the intent that
those defendants be allowed
a single set of costs from that date.
this proceeding, Mr Pesec appealed from the judgment and orders in
and Consolidated commenced a cross-appeal from the cost orders.
The appeal and cross-appeal were set down for hearing together.
the commencement of the hearing, the appeal was dismissed with costs after
Mr Pesec confirmed that it was not maintained. An issue
arose as to
whether Consolidated required leave to appeal from the cost
Supreme Court Act 1933
Harvard Nominees Pty Ltd v
Dimension Agriculture Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2023] FCAFC 140
299 FCR 224
Colvin, Stewart and Feutrill JJ. It is not necessary to express a
concluded view on that question. That is because Mr Pesec acknowledged
that leave should be granted in the event that there was merit in any one of the
grounds relied upon. Consolidated also acknowledged
that the outcome should
turn on the merits of its grounds.
is convenient to now refer to the cross-appeal as simply “the
Reasons of the primary
case that Mr Pesec took to trial was considerably narrower than that
initially framed in his originating application. By the
conclusion of the trial
his claim was limited to an allegation that the defendants had engaged in
oppressive conduct and so contravened
Corporations Act
(Cth) in two respects, the first relating to asymmetry in information
regarding the value of Consolidated’s assets and the
second relating to a
remuneration package agreed with Mr Zivko involving an option to purchase
the abandoned claims were allegations that the directors were in breach of
fiduciary and statutory duties owed to Consolidated.
primary judge referred to the principles discussed
Statham v Shephard (No 2)
(1974) 23 FLR 244.
There, Woodward J said that a court would not ordinarily allow two sets of
costs in a case where there is no possible conflict of
interest between
defendants in the presentation of their cases. To that, he added three provisos
(at 246 – 247):
... In the first place, if a conflict of interest appears possible
but unlikely, the defendants should make any necessary inquiries
plaintiff as to the way in which his case is to be put if this would resolve the
possibility of conflict between the defendants.
Secondly, there could be circumstances in which, although the defendants are
united in their opposition to the plaintiff, their relationship
to each other
might be such that they would be acting reasonably in remaining at arm’s
length during the general course of
litigation.
Thirdly, even if defendants are acting reasonably in maintaining separate
representation for some time or for some purposes, they
may still be deprived of
part of their costs if they act unreasonably by duplicating costs on any
particular matter or at any particular
primary judge described the defence of Mr Pesec’s claims as
“vigorous and comprehensive” (
Pesec (No 4)
later adding that “their separate submissions” both on substantive
points and on the question of costs “in
large measure repeated and
fortified each other’s points” (
Pesec (No 4)
primary judge said that at the outset of the proceeding, the relief that
Mr Pesec sought had “plainly put the interests
of the directors in
conflict with the interests of the company, as it was alleged that the
non-executive directors breached fiduciary
and statutory duties owed to the
Company” and equitable relief had been sought on that basis (
at [24]). Her Honour said that the claims of breach of duty gave
rise to conflicting interests justifying a decision to have separate
representation at that stage.
primary judge said that by the time of the trial, it was clear that the claims
alleging breach of directors’ duties were
not pressed, notwithstanding
that the originating application had not been amended. Her Honour said that
“the interests of
all defendants were very much aligned, to the point
where they presented as a large team, cooperatively dividing topics among
themselves”
with the effect that Mr Pesec faced a “triply
well-armed” opposition (
Pesec (No 4)
primary judge accepted that there would have been a divergence of the interests
between Mr Zivko
those of Consolidated in the
event that the occasion arose to consider whether there should be an order
rescinding the issue of shares
to Mr Zivko and his associated entity.
However, in relation to the non-executive directors, her Honour said (
... It was not explained how, in circumstances where Consolidated
joined the non-executive directors in defending their decision,
the interests of
the non-executive directors (in that capacity) would have diverged from
Consolidated’s at that point. ...
primary judge discerned a central proposition from the cases that the factors
that govern the Court’s discretion as to costs
are different from the
considerations that govern a litigant’s choices about participation and
representation.
primary judge went on to conclude:
Consolidated
submitted that, at all points, Mr Pesec sought relief which was
‘either against Consolidated or which was relief
with the capacity to
adversely affect the interests of Consolidated (ie, claims for rescission of
shares issued to the first and
sixth defendants)’. Consolidated
submitted, and I accept, that it was both necessary and appropriate that
Consolidated respond
to those claims. What was not explained was how, in
respect of either of the limbs of Mr Pesec’s case at hearing,
Consolidated’s
interests were in conflict with those of the non-executive
directors such that separate representation was necessary.
am satisfied that, from at least the time the joint offer of compromise was
sent, there was no real possibility of conflict between
Consolidated’s
interests and those of the non-executive directors. Accordingly, Consolidated's
separate representation at
the hearing resulted in significant duplication of
costs at the Bar table.
is not to say that the defendants were not entitled to separate representation;
on the contrary, I have no doubt that was good
strategy. However, given the
measure of overlap in the issues addressed by the defendants and their clear
alignment against Mr Pesec,
which was evident at the hearing and can be
traced back at least as far as the offer of compromise, I am satisfied that
should not have to bear the costs of both sets of lawyers at the
costs orders were framed so as to require an assessment of costs on the basis
that the defendants were to be treated as having
been represented by the same
counsel and the same solicitors with the intent that Mr Pesec pay a single
set of costs from the date
on which the offer of compromise was made. That date
was 11 August 2022.
its grounds of appeal, Consolidated contends that the primary judge erred in two
respects: by concluding that from 11 August 2022
there was no
possibility of conflict between the interests of Consolidated on the one hand
and the non-executive directors on the
other, and by having regard to the offer
of compromise as indicating that there was no real possibility of such a
Consolidated contends that the primary judge should have found that there was no
material alteration in the position immediately
before the joint offer of
compromise was sent (on 11 August 2022) to that which existed at all points
afterward, so as to justify
depriving Consolidated of a costs order to which it
would otherwise have been entitled.
Consolidated acknowledged, the power to award costs is discretionary. An appeal
court should only interfere with a costs order
if there is error of the kind
identified in
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR
(at 504 – 505), namely:
The manner in which an appeal against an exercise of discretion should be
determined is governed by established principles. It is
not enough that the
judges composing the appellate court consider that, if they had been in the
position of the primary judge, they
would have taken a different course. It
must appear that some error has been made in exercising the discretion. If the
upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or irrelevant matters
to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does
not take into
account some material consideration, then his determination should be reviewed
and the appellate court may exercise
its own discretion in substitution for his
if it has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how the primary judge
has reached
the result embodied in his order, but, if upon the facts it is
unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that
in some way
there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which the law
reposes in the court of first instance. In
such a case, although the nature of
the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is reviewed on
the ground that
a substantial wrong has in fact occurred.
Zeltner v Deputy Registrar of the Supreme
Court (No 2)
[2022] ACTCA 30
(at [47] – [48]).
was submitted that the joint offer of compromise ought not to have been taken
into account as indicative of a commonality of interest
between Consolidated and
the non-executive directors.
our view, the submissions overstate the significance of the joint offer of
compromise in the reasoning of the primary judge. The
primary judge did not
find that the commonality of interests commenced on the day of and by virtue of
the joint offer of compromise.
Rather, her Honour had regard to the degree of
commonality in the presentation of the cases at trial and the degree of
duplication
of resources devoted to the defence of Mr Pesec’s claims
on substantially the same bases. The primary judge said that there
commonality of interest that could be identified
from the date
that the joint offer of compromise was made. Given what is said below, it was
open to the primary judge to reach a
position more adverse to Consolidated than
that in fact reached.
Consolidated
further submitted that the primary judge failed to take into account two
relevant considerations, the first being the
circumstance that it was not
reasonable to expect Consolidated and the non-executive directors to abandon the
separate representation
they had engaged before the claims alleging breach of
directors’ duties were abandoned, the second being the possibility that
the claims alleging breach of directors’ duties might re-emerge, so
re-enlivening a “contingent” conflict that
justified the separate
representation from the outset.
problem with that submission is that the primary judge did not make a finding
that Consolidated was not entitled to have separate
representation. Rather, her
Honour concluded that in a case where there was a likelihood of conflict of
Consolidated and the non-executive directors
re-emerging, Consolidated should have corresponded with Mr Pesec to seek
clarification
primary judge focus upon the aligned cases in fact presented at
the trial. Her
Honour identified the case as one falling within the first or third scenarios
discussed by Woodward J in
, concluding that Mr Pesec
should not have to pay all of the costs of both legal teams given the
duplication in the conduct of their
defences. In that regard, the primary judge
had the unique advantage of observing the trial and the utilisation of the
legal resources. There is no basis to interfere with the
conclusions her Honour reached.
is sufficient to dispose of the grounds of appeal. We will order that the
appeal be dismissed without addressing the question
concluding, we add that it is not at all clear to this Court how the interests
of Consolidated and the non-executive directors
could be in conflict in the
defence of a claim involving an allegation of breach of directors’ duties.
Those duties are owed
to Consolidated and only Consolidated could sue for their
breach. This Court was informed that Mr Pesec was unsuccessful on an
application for leave to bring a derivative action alleging breach of
statutory duties, in Consolidated’s name. It is not
at all clear how the
allegation of a breach of directors’ duties could have been maintained
Consolidated on the originating application from the outset. If
there was any uncertainty as to whether an allegation of breach
directors’ duties at general law might “re-emerge”, then it
was open to Consolidated to seek to have such a
claim struck out on the basis
that it is the only proper plaintiff on such a suit – noting also that
although such a claim
was foreshadowed in the originating process it was never
pleaded in the statement of claim. In addition, it was open to Consolidated
remain agnostic in connection with those causes of action that did not give rise
to a conflict of interest.
Consolidated
submitted that it had an interest in maintaining a defence to the claim against
the non-executive directors, which although
ultimately not pressed was never
formally abandoned, because of its interest in “the efficient and proper
administration of
the company”. It submitted that that interest was
potentially damaged by the claim for equitable compensation to be paid to
breach of directors’ duties, and that the conflict between its interest
and those of the directors would arise at the
point at which there was a finding
of breach of duties because at that point it would be entitled to compensation
from the directors,
i.e. it was a contingent conflict. We reject those
submissions. The company had no legal interest in defending the claim by one
its shareholders against one or more of its directors.
addition, it is reasonable to presume that Consolidated defended
Mr Pesec’s claims on the instructions of the very directors
said to have engaged in the conduct amounting to oppressive conduct of
Consolidated’s affairs, being the very directors
alleged to have breached
duties owed to Consolidated. In that sense it might be said that whilst the
suit was about Consolidated,
and whilst it was named as a defendant, the case
Consolidated in a sense that might give rise to a
realistic likelihood of a conflict of interest emerging. The circumstance that
Consolidated might be ordered to rescind transactions for the issues of shares
is not of itself suggestive of conflict in the trial
of the dispute, but rather
a consequence of the grant of relief should the dispute be resolved in
Mr Pesec’s favour.
Accordingly,
even if this Court had occasion to re-exercise the discretion afresh, we would
likely arrive at the same conclusion,
albeit by a different route, questioning
whether it was reasonable for Consolidated to have participated in the trial to
that it did. That would have resulted in a potentially less
favourable outcome for Consolidated with respect to the recovery of
will be an order dismissing the cross-appeal, with costs following that event in
the ordinary course.
those reasons, the following orders are made:
(a) The cross appeal is dismissed.
(b) The cross appellant is to pay the cross-respondent’s costs.
I certify that the preceding thirty [30] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Court
Date: 2 September 2025
RTF format (182 KB)
Signed PDF/A format