Thomson and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Ors [2008] ACTAAT 27 (24 October 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: THOMSON AND ACT
PLANNING & LAND AUTHORITY & ORS
[2008] ACTAAT 27
(24 OCTOBER
Catchwords:
National Capital Plan – Main Avenues and Approach
Routes – Territory Plan – Corridors and Office Sites Policies
– development on “landmark node” – overlooking and
bulk and scale
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1989, s 43B
Australian Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act 1988
Old Narrabundah Community Council Inc. & Anor and ACT Planning &
Land Authority & Ors
[2008] ACTAAT 14
(13 May 2008)
Quaine & Okech and ACT Planning and Land Authority
[2004] ACTAAT
(21 September 2004)
Stoddart and Ors and ACT Planning and Land Authority & Anor
(21 December 2007)
Stone and ACT Planning and Land Authority & Ors
[2008] ACTAAT 27
(10 April 2008)
Ms P O’Neil, Senior Member
Mr R Nichols, Member
Mr J Ashe, Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/51
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
JUDY THOMSON
ACT PLANNING &
AMALGAMATED
Parties Joined
Ms P O’Neil, Senior Member
Mr R Nichols,
Mr J Ashe, Member
The decision under review is varied as follows:
(1) Insert a new Condition 10(a)(iv) to read:
“the proposed central and western 11-storey buildings re-sited so that
the development shall allow for a minimum of 2 hours
direct sunlight between the
hours of 9am and 4pm to openings of all habitable rooms in adjoining
developments and that the walls
of the main facade (excluding portico, fin
walls, balconies, shade devices and condenser units) are within no less than
the boundary facing Goodwin Street.”
(2) Insert a new Condition 10(b)(x) to read:
“all relevant revisions to the building to accommodate the revisions
required by Condition 10(a)(iv) above.”
(3) Amend Condition 10(c)(v) by deleting the words “contained within
the basement” and substituting in lieu thereof the
words “contained
wholly within the block boundaries”.
(4) Insert a new Condition 10(c)(xix) to read:
“all relevant revisions to the building to accommodate the revisions
required by Condition 10(a)(iv) above.”
(5) Amend Condition 10(e)(iii) by deleting the words “
Environment
Protection Regulation 1997
” and substituting in lieu thereof the words
Environment Protection Regulation 2005
(6) Amend Condition 12 by adding the words “to maximize the safe
crossing of students” after the words “adjacent
to Lyneham High
(7) Insert a new Condition 12(a) to read:
“that, prior to completion of works on-site, TAMS will complete a
Traffic Management report for Goodwin Street for review of
any potential adverse
traffic impacts resulting from the development.”
(8) Delete Condition 14 and substitute the following:
Traffic Management
14(a) that at all times during construction, the site and surrounds shall be
managed in accordance with a Temporary Traffic Management
Plan, prepared by a
suitably qualified person and approved by the manager, Asset Use, Territory and
Municipal Services. The Plan
is to address, as a minimum:
(i) measures to be employed during construction to manage all traffic,
including construction traffic in and around the site;
(ii) provision of safe pedestrian movement around the site;
(iii) the provision of parking for construction workers; and
(iv) associated traffic control devices,
but will not include provision for left-out traffic (southbound) on to
Goodwin Street nor right-in traffic to the site from Goodwin
14(b) that a copy of the Temporary Traffic Management Plan will be forwarded
by the manager, Asset Use, to Dr David Blaazer and Ms
Judy Thomson for
consideration prior to approval.”
....................................
Senior Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/51
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
JUDY THOMSON
ACT PLANNING &
AMALGAMATED
Parties Joined
REASONS FOR DECISION
24 October 2008 Ms P O’Neil, Senior Member
Mr R Nichols,
Mr J Ashe, Member
This review is about a proposal by Amalgamated Property Group Pty Ltd
“the developer”
) to undertake development at the
intersection of Northbourne Avenue and Mouat Street, Lyneham. Block 1 Section
53 of Lyneham (
“the block”
) is 11,242 square metres and is
currently occupied by the City Gate Motel. It is bounded by Goodwin Street to
the west while to
the south it faces Oliver Street in part, with the remainder
of the southern boundary adjoining multi-residential development. The
Planning and Land Authority (
“the respondent”
) approved the
development proposal but two nearby residents of Lyneham, Ms Judy Thomson and Dr
David Blaazer, opposed the approval
“the objectors”
The National Capital Plan & the Territory Plan
2. The ACT (Planning and Land Management) Act 1988 (Cth) at section 9
The object of the
is to ensure that Canberra and the
and developed in accordance with their national significance.
3. The National Capital Plan, established under that Act, under the heading
“Main Avenues and Approach Routes” states
A traveller’s first impression of a city’s character is gained
upon approach and arrival. When arriving in Canberra it
is important that the
traveler is immediately aware of the special symbolic and functional
significance of the National Capital.
It goes on to identify Northbourne Avenue as a “Main Avenue”, the
object for planning and development of which is to:
.......... establish and enhance the identity of the approaches to the
Central National Area as roads of National Significance and,
where relevant, as
frontage roads for buildings which enhance the National Capital function and as
corridors for a future inter-town
public transport system.
4. “Special Requirements” are prescribed for Northbourne Avenue
including height requirements for the buildings flanking
identification of a small number of “landmark nodes” including at
the intersection of Northbourne Avenue and
Mouat Streets where the parapets of
buildings may be up to 32 metres above natural ground level.
5. Variation 96 to the Territory Plan is specifically identified in the
National Capital Plan as giving expression in the Territory
Plan to the National
Capital Plan’s development requirements for Northbourne Avenue.
Introduced in June 1999, it amended Part
B2E: Corridors and Office Sites Land
Use Policies (
“the policies”
) of the Territory Plan.
Consistent with the objectives in the National Capital Plan, the policies
provide for buildings up to 25
metres along Northbourne Avenue, but at six
“landmark nodes” located at major intersections on Northbourne
Avenue, including
this block, the building height shall be 32 metres.
6. A “landmark” is defined in The Macquarie Dictionary
Edition) as:
1. a conspicuous object on land that serves as a guide, as to a vessel at
sea. 2. a prominent or distinguishing feature, part,
event, etc. 3.
something used to mark the boundary of land.
7. Thus it is clear that this block has been identified by the Commonwealth
and ACT legislatures as one of national significance
with a requirement for the
building on it be conspicuous or prominent one that marks the commencement of a
main avenue into Canberra.
The Proposed Development
8. The developer’s proposal is for an apartment building comprising a
series of three tower blocks, referred to below as Tower
1, Tower 2 and Tower 3,
each being 32 metres high and sited at an angle on the block with curved sides
addressing the intersection.
Along the southern side of the block facing the
existing nearby residential development but not visible from Northbourne Avenue
a three-level building, joined to two of the towers. The development would
contain a total of 344 residential apartments, with underground
car parking.
9. Southwell Park, an area of playing fields and sports facilities, lies to
the north of the block across Mouat Street. To the south-east
Northbourne Avenue major commercial buildings either have been, or are proposed
to be, constructed. The Dickson Group
Centre, including shops, restaurants and
leisure facilities, is located nearby. The precinct to the south and west of
is residential. It now consists of a mixture of detached and attached
dwellings. Two and three storey residential redevelopment
is allowed under the
Territory Plan and there is evidence of a current proposal for that to occur in
Oliver Street.
10. The objectors do not oppose the demolition of the existing motel
buildings nor the proposed change of lease. Rather their opposition
hearing was directed to the height and scale of the building in relation to
nearby residential development and the related
issues of setbacks, overlooking
and overshadowing. The Tribunal received evidence from Ms Thomson and Dr
Blaazer. Expert evidence
for the developer was given by the project architect,
Mr Christopher Millman and from Mr Paul Cohen, a qualified town planner.
Owen Pankhurst, an officer of the ACT Planning and Land Authority who had been
responsible for the assessment of the proposal,
gave evidence for the
respondent.
Overlooking
11. Ms Thomson lives in a house in Goodwin Street, located 90-100 metres
from the block. She is concerned that parts of her home
and in particular her
back yard will be overlooked from people on the balconies of the apartments in
the tower blocks of the proposed
development so as to interfere with her
back yard. At the hearing, Ms Thomson illustrated her concerns
by comparison with distances from the Tribunal’s premises to
London Circuit. In response to questions from Ms Thomson, Mr Cohen opined that
the sight of people on the balconies of
the apartments would be drawn to distant
vistas, rather than down into the backyards of residents of Lyneham.
12. Ms Thomson referred to
Stone and ACT Planning and Land Authority
[2008] ACTAAT 27
(10 April 2008) where impact of overshadowing and
development
on an adjoining block the Tribunal decided that “the burden
should not be on the applicants to respond to the overlooking and
by drawing blinds, when the setback requirements have not been met.”
This case differed in that Ms Thomson’s
concern about overlooking arises
from proposed development at a much greater distance. Attention was also drawn
Stoddart and Ors and ACT Planning and Land Authority & Anor
(21 December 2007) which dealt with direct overlooking into a back
yard. Mr Cohen said that the distances both horizontally and
vertically in that
case, where the proposed balcony was 9 metres from the common boundary and 3
metres above ground level, were not
to be compared with the distances in this
case. Mr Mossop referred in submissions to
Old Narrabundah Community Council
Inc. & Anor and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Ors
(13 May 2008) in which the Tribunal found that a distance of 20 metres
was sufficient to minimise any potential impact of overlooking
over 90 metres between Ms Thomson’s
such as to render any overlooking of no significance in terms of the Territory
Plan. We accept
their submissions.
13. The setback controls applying to the proposed development are found in
paragraph 4.1 of Part B2E of the Territory Plan. The setbacks
vary depending on
the particular frontage and the height of the elements of the buildings, ranging
from 5 metres at the ground floor
level on the southern side where the
development adjoins Section 53 to 25 metres on the Northbourne Avenue frontage.
14. Schedule 2 of Part B2E includes the following performance criterion and
acceptable standard:
Setback – Corridors
To maintain and enhance the quality of corridors by providing sufficient
land for landscaping in front of buildings.
Acceptable Standard
Minimum front setback: 10 metres except where alternative provisions are
made in area specific policies.
15. There is a relevant Area Specific Policy in paragraph 4.1 (c) of Part
B2E which provides for a minimum setback of 20 metres for
parts of buildings
over 3 storeys. Paragraph 4.1 (e) provides that balconies and awnings may
extend up to 1.5 metres within the minimum
setback provided they are lightweight
in appearance and predominantly transparent. The only setbacks in contention in
this case are
those applying to the western side of Tower 3 where the
development faces Goodwin Street.
16. As a consequence of the proposal, discussed below, to move Tower 3 to
the west in order to improve the availability of sunlight
to the houses to the
south of Towers 2 and 3, parts of Tower 3 encroach on the 20 metre setback
facing Goodwin Street. The main face
of Tower 3 is in three planes with setbacks
of 15.65, 15.81 and 16.3 metres. Therefore the maximum encroachment of the main
is 4.35 metres. An external fin wall is 15.5 metres from the boundary, i.e.
an encroachment of 4.5 metres; the condenser enclosure
is 12.6 metres from the
boundary, i.e. an encroachment of 7.4 metres; and the balconies are 14.1 metres
from the boundary, i.e. an
encroachment of 5.9 metres or 4.4 metres once the
allowance for balconies of 1.5 metres is taken into account.
17. Paragraph 11.2 of Part A3 of the Territory Plan provides as follows:
Where the relevant authority is satisfied that a proposal conforms fully
with the intent of all applicable provisions of this Plan,
will not cause any
significant environmental impacts and achieves high standards of architectural
and urban design, it may approve
minor departure
from numerical
controls applying to that proposal
(emphasis added).
18. It has been necessary therefore for the Tribunal to consider whether the
proposed encroachments constitute a minor departure
from the 20 metre control
and if so whether the requirements of paragraph 11.2 are met.
19. Dr Blaazer was of the view that the encroachments should be seen not as
a merely numerical departure from the setback control
but as real, physical
encroachments. He submitted that the encroachments were so substantial as a
percentage of the 20 metre setback
provision that they could not be seen as a
minor departure. He was also of the view that the proposed development could not
without breaching the setback requirements or alternatively the
requirements for provision of sunlight to the adjacent properties.
20. Mr Cohen noted that in
Quaine and Okech
(see further below) the
Tribunal found that the most useful definition of ‘minor’ for the
purposes of the Territory Plan
is that from the Shorter Oxford Dictionary, as
comparatively small or unimportant
. In his view the departure
from the Territory Plan is acceptable because it is unimportant. Mr Cohen
described a number of features
of Goodwin Street that he considered relevant to
the setback issue: there is a considerable canopy of trees in Goodwin Street,
means that the views of buildings are filtered through the trees; the
houses on both sides of Goodwin Street are set back more or
less uniformly
between 7 and 8 metres from the front property line and clearly forward of the
setbacks for the proposed development;
the road reservation is 30 metres wide,
which together with the 7-8 metres setback of the houses opposite Tower 3 means
would be a distance of some 52 metres or more from the face of Tower
3 to the nearest house, which in his opinion is a substantial
separation; this
separation is greater than the proposed 32 metres height of the building, and
where the distance between buildings
is greater than the height of the proposed
development, 4 metres is a minor consideration; the bulk of the building and its
height would be such that in the view from the road the intrusion would
not be discernible in the contrast between the tower to the
east and the low
rise buildings to the west. Mr Cohen was of the view that the proposed departure
from the setback controls is acceptable
and justifiable in order to maintain a
high standard of architecture, and that fiddling with the design in order to
meet the setback
control was not justified in the circumstances of the proposed
development.
21. Mr Pankhurst considered that the encroachments are only minor and meet
the requirements of Part A3, paragraph 11.2 as they do
not cause any significant
adverse environmental impacts, and contribute to the high quality architectural
features of the building’s
bulk and scale, and do not have a significant
visual impact on the streetscape. Mr Pankhurst agreed that from a design
it would be better if Tower 3 did not move back to the east, which was
discussed as an option in the hearing, as he thought that
the current proposal
provides better separation between the apartments in Towers 2 and 3; his view
was that the current proposal
provides better visual separation between the two
towers and is aesthetically superior. In response to Dr Blaazer, Mr Pankhurst
that the proposed encroachments are minor both numerically and in terms
of impacts.
22. Mr Millman’s view is that the development as currently proposed
provides a better design outcome for the surrounding neighbours
by allowing
better sunlight penetration between Towers 2 and 3 and also for the residents of
the proposed development. Mr Millman
informed the Tribunal that if it were
necessary in order to comply with the setback provision to move Tower 3 back to
the east of
its current proposed location that this would lead to interfacing
issues between Towers 2 and 3 and would require the installation
screens on the apartments on the upper three floors at the south-eastern corner
of Tower 3. Mr Millman informed the Tribunal
that the proposed condenser
enclosure, which is the closest element of Tower 3 to the Goodwin Street
boundary, encloses the condensers
for the air conditioning units for each of the
apartments; it removes them from the balconies and provides a visually superior
better noise outcome than the more common arrangement which puts the
condenser units on the apartment balconies. Compliance with
the setback
requirement could require redesign of the condenser enclosure and possibly the
placement of the air conditioning units
on the apartment balconies. Mr Millman
thought that there would be little difference in the effect on the Goodwin
Street streetscape
from the proposed development with encroachments compared
with the alternative option without encroachments. He noted that Goodwin
is a fairly wide street and that the proposed development would have a greater
setback than the other buildings on Goodwin
Street. He thought that a difference
of 4 metres in the setback would make very little difference visually.
23. Mr Mossop submitted that the Tribunal should also have regard to the
step-down effect of the 3-storey element of the building
facing Goodwin Street,
which has a setback provision of 5.5 metres, and would be closer to Goodwin
Street than the tower element
of the building. He also submitted that the
Tribunal should have regard to the future character of Goodwin Street, which is
to change as a result of the zoning provisions in the new Territory Plan.
24. The question of what constitutes a ‘minor departure’ for the
purposes of Part A3, paragraph 11.2 of the Territory
Plan was considered by the
Tribunal in
Quaine & Okech and ACT Planning and Land Authority
ACTAAT (21 September 2004). The Tribunal found in that case that the most useful
definition of ‘minor’ for the
purposes of the Territory Plan is the
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary definition ––
comparatively
small or unimportant
. The Tribunal has adopted that definition in the
current case and takes the view that a departure from a numerical control can be
considered to be minor if it is numerically small or unimportant in the sense
that it does not have important or significant consequences.
25. The Tribunal has received persuasive expert evidence from Mr Cohen, Mr
Pankhurst and Mr Millman that there would be no important
or significant adverse
consequences from a failure to meet the 20 metre setback requirement. The
Tribunal has also heard that there
would be significant adverse architectural
and design consequences if it were necessary to move Tower 3 to the east in
order to meet
the setback requirement. Neither the applicant nor Dr Blaazer
provided any persuasive evidence of adverse consequences flowing from
proposed encroachments. The Tribunal has concluded therefore that the
encroachments constitute a minor departure from the numerical
26. In deciding whether to approve a departure from the numerical control,
the Tribunal must also consider the other elements of
Part A3, paragraph 11.2 as
set out above. The Tribunal notes that Part B2E, Schedule 2 includes a
performance criterion for the setbacks
applying to developments in the
Northbourne Avenue corridor:
to maintain and enhance the quality of corridors
by providing sufficient land for landscaping in front of buildings
Tribunal is satisfied that even with the encroachments there will be sufficient
land for appropriate landscaping and that this
performance criterion is met.
The Tribunal is satisfied that the proposed development conforms fully with the
intent of all applicable
provisions of the Territory Plan, will not cause any
significant adverse environmental impacts, and that the proposed development
achieves a high standard of architectural and urban design. For these reasons
the Tribunal has concluded that it should approve the
departures from the 20
metre setback facing Goodwin Street.
27. The design of the proposed development includes some other relatively
small encroachments into the applicable setbacks. They
are not in contention and
in the Tribunal’s view are only minor departures from the numerical
controls. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the requirements of Part A3, paragraph
11.2 are met in relation to these encroachments and has concluded that they
should also
be approved.
Overshadowing
28. When the development application was notified for public comment, more
than 20 objectors raised the issue of overshadowing that
would be created by the
development. Of these objectors 11 live immediately to the south of the subject
land, on that part of a
multi-unit development known as The Pines, which is
number 26 Oliver Street. None of the persons likely to be affected by
overshadowing
appeared before the Tribunal and consequently there was no
evidence or argument to support their letters of objection which formed
the “T” documents made available to the Tribunal.
29. Shadow diagrams had been prepared by the developer and were available
for public inspection and these were assessed by the respondent.
determining the application the respondent assessed the overshadowing effect by
applying the provisions of section 4.1
(d) of the Part B2E of the Plan. The
relevant part of the provision is:
d) Side and Rear Boundary Setbacks
For buildings taller than 3 storeys, the side and rear setbacks shall
A minimum of
5 metres from any southern boundary and shall allow for a minimum of 2 hours
direct sunlight between the hours of 9am
and 4pm to openings to all habitable
rooms in adjoining developments;
30. The “T”
documents reveal that the respondent approved the application but as a result of
a submission from an adjoining
owner subsequently realised that the
overshadowing of adjoining dwellings, specifically Units 4, 5 and 6 at 26 Oliver
not meet the above standard and was in contravention of the Territory
31. The developer prepared amended drawings which moved the central tower
8.3 metres to the west and the western tower 4.15 metres
to the west. Revised
overshadowing diagrams indicated that a minimum of 2 hours of sunlight on the
June could just be achieved in relation to Units
4, 5 and 6 within The Pines. To reflect the amended plans, Mr Pankhurst for the
respondent proposed that additional conditions be applied. The movement of the
central tower resulted in a different impact on Blocks
1, 2 and 3 on the south
side of Oliver Street. The revised shadow diagrams showed that these blocks
also received a minimum of 2
hours’ sunlight on 21 June and in fact will
achieve a minimum of over 3 hours’ sunlight if measured between the hours
of 9.00 a.m. and 4.00 p.m. Mr Cohen and Mr Pankhurst confirmed that, in their
opinion, the minimum requirement of 2 hours was met.
Mr Cohen and Mr Pankhurst
had both used the standard in section 4.1(d) in their assessment without
expressing any doubt that it
was the applicable statutory standard.
32. The Tribunal raised the question during the hearing as to why the
standard of section 4.1(d) was applied to the overshadowing
resulting from the
part of the building proposal which was along the southern boundary, a front
boundary to Oliver Street. The provision
is one that apparently relates to side
and rear boundaries. The Tribunal asked whether other standards should be used
such as that
found in the Urban Housing Code or the Apartment Guidelines (a
guideline that applies to residential apartments buildings over 3
Both these documents use 3 hours between the hours of 9.00 a.m. and 3.00 p.m. as
the appropriate standard for sunlight
access at the winter solstice. The
Tribunal understands that the standard is established at the winter solstice as
this represents
the minimum available sunlight hours and at all other times
during the year available sunlight will be greater.
33. The Tribunal has made decisions in a number of cases where overshadowing
of adjoining properties has been an issue of contention.
The respondent has
regularly argued that the desirable standard for solar access is 3 hours of
sunlight between the hours of 9.00
a.m. and 3.00 p.m. Sometimes this has been
the provision of a particular Code; but even where no such code has effect the
has argued that this standard should be applied and has justified it
because it is the standard within the Australian Model Code
for Residential
Development (AMCORD).
34. Mr Mossop, in his submission, considered that “in strict
terms” the provision 4.1(d) did not apply to the boundary
on the north
side of Oliver Street, but that the respondent had applied it consistently to
the whole of the southern boundary. He
commented that whilst section 4.1(i) of
the Plan provided that “development may be required to meet relevant
performance based
elements of the Urban Housing Code” this was
discretionary and the provisions themselves were not mandatory. Similarly the
Apartment Guidelines were not mandatory nor in his view were they specifically
designed for the type of development mandated for
the landmark nodes.
35. Mr Walker put the development into the context of both the National
Capital Plan and the Territory Plan in which the approaches
to Canberra have
special significance and that Northbourne Avenue has special controls arising
from Plan Variation Number 96 that
will result in buildings generally up to 25
metres in height being built along it. Additionally there are two intersections
Avenue where landmark nodes are identified and which allow buildings to
32 metres in height. The subject land is a landmark node
and as a consequence a
building of 32 metres is expected. The whole site is defined as a node and the
Plan provisions do not suggest
simply a landmark building addressing the
intersection. Mr Walker argued that the only overshadowing controls that should
were those which were derived specifically in the context of the
Northbourne Avenue redevelopment and that standards such as the
Urban Housing
Code and Apartment Guidelines were derived for other and more general
application. The Tribunal accepts the force
of this argument.
36. The Tribunal accepts the desirability of the additional conditions of
approval suggested by Mr Pankhurst and referred to above,
with some minor
changes. In the absence of evidence from objectors about the design of their
houses and the locations of habitable
rooms and private open spaces or the
specific impact on them, the Tribunal accepts that as the minimum standards of
the Plan are
met there is no inconsistency with the Plan.
Bulk and scale
37. Dr Blaazer submitted that the building was of inappropriate scale and
height. He noted that the block was large and rectangular,
with its frontage to
Northbourne Avenue being shorter than those to other streets. He drew attention
to specific references in planning
documents to the corridor, to Northbourne
Avenue and its intersection with Mouat Street in connection with the landmark
nodes. Accordingly
he argued that the provision of Part B2E should be applied
only to the eastern end of the block closest to the intersection of Northbourne
Avenue and Mouat Streets. At the western end away from Northbourne Avenue
regard should be had to the provisions of section 3.6
of Part B1 governing
development and redevelopment in suburban areas and should, he said, apply. He
cited the following Objectives
as relevant:
To ensure development respects characteristic features of existing
attractive streetscape such as building scale, height and setbacks,
character and architectural style and is compatible with adjoining
development.
To retain a limited level of flexibility to accommodate a variety of
additional housing to meet changing community needs and preferences.
38. Dr Blaazer submitted that the proposed development, while meeting the
objectives of a landmark development at its eastern end,
did not respect the
scale and height of the low rise residential development to its west and south.
The solution, he submitted,
was for a development of two towers only, with the
western tower removed. The landmark character would be retained by two towers,
while compatibility with the surrounding low rise residential area on Goodwin
Street would be enhanced, access to sunlight for dwellings
located to the south
would be improved and any interface issues between the towers would be resolved.
39. It was pointed out by Mr Walker for the developer in response that the
whole of the block is specifically identified as a landmark
node. Control
4.1(b) in Part B2E reads:
Landmark nodes are identified along Northbourne Avenue where it intersects
with Antill Street and Mouat Streets and Wakefield and
Macarthur Avenues and
include the following sites:
– Section 7 Block 9
– Section 1 Block 1
Section 33 Block 15
Section 50 Block 12 and Section 53 Block 1
– Section 58 Block 8
40. Given that clear reference to the whole of Section 53 Block 1
as a landmark node, we accept that the B2E policies apply across
block. Nevertheless, we note that the development does contain a lower three
level element at its rear which will not
be visible from the corridor. It was
argued for the developer that the landmark needed not only to be 32 metres so as
to distinguish
it sufficiently from other buildings along Northbourne Avenue
where 25 metre high buildings are permitted but also that it should
attention in other ways, for example in this case by its curved walls and open
spaces created between the three towers. We accept
the expert evidence that all
three towers contribute to the landmark character of the proposed development
and that to reduce it
to two towers of 32 metres would reduce, although not
remove, its impact as a landmark. Moreover it is not the task of the Tribunal
to engage in redesign of proposed developments but to assess the proposed design
against the relevant planning provisions.
41. Dr Blaazer referred to evidence that the landmark nodes were the only
sites in the ACT, apart from those in town centres, where
building 32 metres in
height were permitted. Of the landmark nodes, only two were surrounded by low
rise residential development.
Of those two, only this landmark node had
residential dwellings to its south. Thus he submitted that the imposition of
node policies on the whole of the block meant the residents of this
area were receiving less favourable treatment than those of other
42. Mr Mossop for the respondent accepted that the effect of the Part B2E
policies as they apply to landmark nodes could result in
a different and lesser
standard of residential amenity and respect for neighborhood character than may
apply in other areas. Nevertheless,
he submitted, the Territory Plan is clearly
intended to operate so as to apply different standards to different areas. Mr
drew attention to the opening words of Part A of the Territory Plan,
The fundamental purpose of the Territory Plan (Plan) is to manage land use
change and development within the ACT ....
This area of the ACT is one where change is clearly anticipated in the
Territory Plan.
43. Concerns about traffic management were expressed by the objectors and
other nearby residents when the development was being assessed
respondent. Agreement was reached between the parties prior to the hearing
before the Tribunal that, if the decision under
review were to be affirmed by
the Tribunal, conditions of approval would be amended to take those concerns
44. As the parties have reached an agreement, confirmed in writing and in
person before the Tribunal, as to the terms of part of
the decision that is
acceptable to them and as the Tribunal is satisfied that a decision consistent
with those terms would be within
the powers of the Tribunal, we have pursuant to
section 43B of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1989 given effect to the
of that agreement in our decision.
45. The Tribunal finds that the decision under review should be affirmed,
subject only to the inclusion of additional conditions
generally as proposed by
the respondent in relation to the Goodwin Street setback, the location of the
towers and visitor parking,
and the amendments to the conditions relating to
traffic agreed by all parties.
PUBLICATION DETAILS
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by Member's
________________________________________________________________________
JUDY THOMSON
RESPONDENT:
ACT PLANNING & LAND
PARTIES JOINED:
DAVID BLAAZER; AMALGAMATED PROPERTY GROUP PTY LTD
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
MR D MOSSOP
PARTIES JOINED:
MR P WALKER (FOR AMALGAMATED PROPERTY GROUP PTY
SOLICITORS: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
ACT GOVERNMENT SOLICITOR
PARTIES JOINED:
CLAYTON UTZ
OTHER: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
PARTIES JOINED:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
MS P O’NEIL, SENIOR MEMBER
NICHOLS, MEMBER
MR J ASHE, MEMBER
DATE/S OF HEARING:
22-24 SEPTEMBER 2008
DATE OF DECISION:
_______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (126 KB)
Signed PDF/A format