DPP v Ali (No 5) [2025] ACTSC 486 (23 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
DPP v Ali (No 5)
[2025] ACTSC 486
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
(1) For the offence of act of indecency upon a person under the age of 10
years pursuant to s 61(1)
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) (CC 2024/52), the
offender is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for two years, commencing on
20 August 2024, and expiring
on 19 August 2026.
(2) I set a non-parole period of 18 months, which will expire on 19
February 2026.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – act of indecency upon a person
under the age of 10 years – offender employed as educator at a childcare
centre – single act of indecency on 4-year-old
child attending centre
– significant breach of trust – general deterrence of prime
importance – prospect of deportation
at conclusion of sentence of
imprisonment – sentence of full-time imprisonment imposed
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Cases Cited:
[2023] ACTSC 345
DPP v Moala (No 3)
[2023] ACTSC 306
[2002] NSWCCA 320
R v Shrestha
[1991] HCA 26
[2003] NSWCCA 147
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
Director of Public Prosecutions
Muhammad Ali (Offender)
Representation:
M Dyason (DPP)
S Baker-Goldsmith (Offender)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Tim Sharman Solicitors (Offender)
File Number:
SCC 81 of 2024
Introduction
this year, after a short trial before a jury, Muhammad Ali (the offender) was
found guilty of an offence of committing an
act of indecency on a person under
the age of 10. The maximum penalty for that offence is imprisonment for 12
years. It is now my
task to sentence him.
victim of the offence, who I will not name, attended a childcare centre where
the offender was employed as an assistant educator.
One day, when he was 4 years
of age and being supervised by the offender, the offender briefly touched and
squeezed the young boy’s
penis over his clothing.
Breach of Trust
will be speaking later about the assumptions made by the criminal law regarding
the harm that such brief contact causes, but for
now I will speak about the
gross breach of trust involved.
Four-year-old
children are vulnerable in the extreme. They are powerless to resist this type
of offending, and they are often incapable
of reporting it. As a childcare
worker the offender can have been under no misapprehension concerning the
vulnerability of the child
in this matter.
children of that age depend on adults to care for them. It is a modern necessity
of life that many of them will be placed in childcare
centres. The parents of
such children place their trust in the workers at such facilities. There is no
way that they can interrogate
the workers to determine whether their child is
safe, or the likelihood that the worker will do them harm. Parents have no
but to trust that their children will be cared for. They have to trust
the welfare of their children to people like the offender
who are strangers to
them. They are entitled to assume that such people will do what they have been
entrusted to do, that is, care
for their children. They are entitled to assume
that their children will not be used by a childcare worker for their own sexual
gratification
as the offender has done here.
have referred to the breach of trust involved in this matter as
“gross”. Indeed, it is hard to imagine a more significant
trust than the abuse of a four-year-old child by a worker entrusted with that
child’s care in a childcare centre.
Prior Offence
Remarkably,
this is not the first time that the offender has faced sentence for offending of
this kind. In November 2023, Baker J
sentenced him for a similar offence
committed at the same childcare centre (
DPP v Ali (No 3)
[2023] ACTSC 345
]). He had pinched another boy’s penis through his
pants. He pleaded not guilty but was found guilty by a jury.
J imposed a sentence of imprisonment of 18 months with a non-parole period of 12
months. The sentence dated from 20 November
2023 so that the non-parole period
expired on 19 November 2024 and the total sentence on 19 May 2025. Since then,
he has been bail
refused and his continued detention was because he was facing
trial for the offence for which I will now sentence him.
her sentencing judgment Baker J assessed the objective gravity of the offence
before her. I have come to the same conclusion, which
is not surprising given
the similarity of the offender’s misconduct on both occasions.
J also summarised and made findings regarding the offender’s subjective
features. The material before me is relevantly
identical to the material before
her Honour and there was no challenge to her Honour’s findings.
Accordingly, I can be very
brief when I refer to the offender’s
background.
offender completed high school in Pakistan. He moved to Australia, firstly to
pursue a certificate in project management and
then to acquire a diploma of
early childhood education. He started work as a security guard before becoming
employed in the childcare
industry in a casual capacity from 2014. He was
unemployed on two occasions because of drug use. After the second period of
unemployment,
he obtained work at the childcare centre where the offence
has some problems with his mental health. The offender's psychiatrist diagnosed
him with suffering from schizophrenia with differential
diagnoses of
schizoaffective disorder or bipolar affective disorder. The offender told the
author of a pre-sentence report that he
had previously undergone depot
injections of antipsychotic medication to regulate mental health related
concerns, and this was confirmed
by the offender's psychiatrist.
offender rarely consumes alcohol but, as is obvious from the circumstance that
he has had periods of unemployment due to his drug
use, he is a drug user, or at
least he was a drug user; using cannabis, cocaine and oxycodone at various
times. There is no connection,
however, between his drug use and his offending.
Apart from the offence dealt with by Baker J, he has a relatively minor
history. There's an offence of drink driving in 2013 and drug driving
regards the mental illness from which the offender apparently suffers, there was
no submission before me, nor before Baker J, that
what has become known as the
“Verdins Principles” are engaged: see
R v Verdins
The evidence before me does not justify any finding that
offender’s moral culpability was reduced because of his mental health
issues, nor that he would serve his time in custody harder than a person without
these illnesses, or that his mental health would
be adversely affected by a
period of imprisonment.
offender relied on references from his brother and a friend. The utility of
those references was limited, however, because the
authors of the references
expressed doubts about whether the offender was actually guilty of the offences
which the two juries have
found proved.
any case, this is one of those cases where the offender’s prior good
character assisted him to get his job as a childcare
worker, which in turn put
him in a position where he could commit the offence for which I will sentence
those reasons any positive aspects of the offender’s prior character are
of no relevance to me in determining what sentence
to impose upon him.
Current Sentencing Practice
was referred to a number of comparative cases by the prosecutor. I mean no
criticism of him when I say that those cases were of
limited utility. Perhaps
there is something to be thankful for in the unavailability of a large pool of
sentences imposed in relation
to offences involving a breach of trust as
significant as this one. And, as I will explain later, the sentence imposed by
J is the best guide of all to current sentencing practice for
offences of this type.
General Deterrence
the circumstances of this case general deterrence is of prime importance. There
are many aspects of life where risks cannot be
eliminated. It is a sad thing to
say, but it is true, that ultimately regulation, licensing and working with
children checks can
never eliminate the risk that people like the offender will
be employed in a childcare centre and will give in to whatever urge it
makes them choose to act the way the offender has in this case.
have a part to play in making childcare centres as safe for children as they can
possibly be. One way the courts do that is
through imposing significant, even
harsh, sentences when offending of this kind is detected.
caring for a child must be made aware that if they do what the offender did in
this case, they will go to jail for a significant
Personal Deterrence
offender has expressed no remorse. Presumably based on what the offender has
told him, his brother wrote a letter addressed to
me in which he expressed his
belief in the offender’s innocence. Given the lack of any acceptance of
responsibility by the
offender, there is little to indicate that the offender
would not act the same way again if given the chance.
he will not be able to work in a childcare centre again, but the likelihood that
he will be deported immediately on his
release from custody (a subject to which
I will return) raises the possibility of him working in a childcare centre
outside of Australia.
In any case it is inevitable that he will come into
the sentence I impose upon him must bring home to him the serious consequences
for him if he offends against children in the future.
courts assume that the more intimate the contact the greater the harm, that does
not mean that touching and squeezing a child’s
penis over his clothes is
incapable of causing significant harm. One only has to spend a short time in the
criminal courts in Australia
to understand that some people are profoundly
harmed by conduct the criminal law regards as relatively minor.
is apparent that the young boy the subject of the present offence has suffered
greatly since the offender’s abuse of him.
His family have suffered too.
It is impossible to determine whether the entirety of this harm is a consequence
of this offending.
I tend to think that it is, but whether it is or not
doesn’t really matter.
criminal law assumes that children will be greatly harmed by being sexually
abused, especially where such abuse represents a gross
breach of trust as in the
present case. That is so whether victim impact statements are read or not.
Consequences for a victim of
child sexual abuse such as those described by the
parents in the present case are entirely foreseeable. Such consequences are one
of the reasons, if not the primary reason, for significant sentences being
imposed for sentencing of this kind.
sentencing the offender for his other offence, Baker J eloquently referred to
the effects of sexual offending being not limited
to the particular child
victim, but that they “ricochet across the families of those victims and
through the broader community”.
It is clear beyond doubt that her
Honour’s observations apply in the present case. The parents of the young
child in this case
have suffered greatly too, in ways which were also
foreseeable.
then we have the effect on the wider community. This case will only add to the
recent publicity given to incidents where children
have been physically or
sexually abused by childcare workers. How are parents supposed to respond to
cases of this kind? Do they
abandon the use of childcare centres which would
often result in them having to give up employment? Do they become hypervigilant
which risks distressing their children through constant questioning? There is no
good solution to the dilemma which cases such as
this present to the many
parents who, as part of modern life, need someone to look after their
I endorse what Baker J said about this topic:
However, against these matters, is the very young age of the victim (4 years),
and his acute vulnerability. For young children such
as KC, childcare centres
are of critical importance. Childcare centres provide a supportive and caring
environment for children to
develop cognitively, socially and emotionally. Young
children depend upon their carers to meet these needs, and not to abuse their
vulnerability. Childcare centres also enable parents to engage in paid
employment, and for many families, including single parent
families, including
single parent families, the availability of childcare is necessary for the child
to grow up in an environment
of economic stability. Accordingly, it is vital
that parents and other caregivers can have trust in childcare institutions: see
Isolated Incident?
the prosecutor and Ms Baker Goldsmith for the offender submit that the sentence
imposed by Baker J was correct in the circumstances
before her Honour. I note
that the sentence was not the subject of an appeal and, having regard to her
Honour’s judgment I
agree with the joint position advanced by the parties
the caution expressed by the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal in
[2002] NSWCCA 320
, where an attempt to mount a parity argument based on a
single comparative case was described as “deeply flawed”, in
unusual circumstances of this case where another judge has sentenced the same
offender for a relevantly identical offence, I
will use the sentence imposed by
her Honour as a benchmark when determining the sentence I will impose.
her Honour was sentencing the offender for a single offence. Her Honour’s
sentence was based on the assumption that
the offence before her Honour was an
isolated one: see
now know that that was not the case. Even taking her Honour’s sentence as
a starting point, the fact that it is now the case
that the offender is being
sentenced for a second offence of indecently touching a child in his care, must
be recognised by imposing
on him for this offence, a sentence harsher than that
of Baker J.
that the child the victim of the present offence said that the child the subject
of the offence before Baker J was present at
the relevant time, it is
possible that both boys were indecently touched as part of the one incident. On
the other hand, the evidence
of the boys was that they were touched by the
offender in different locations, which suggests the possibility that on two
occasions the offender has indecently touched a child at the childcare
centre and that the offending with which I am dealing was
it is not necessary to resolve this issue. Whether the boys were touched at the
same time or not, it is necessary for
me to impose a harsher sentence than that
of Baker J. If they were indecently touched at the same time, then the
offence with which
I am dealing is aggravated by the presence of another child.
If they were not indecently touched at the same time, then the offence
which I am dealing is not an isolated example of such sexual misconduct by the
offender. Whichever alternative is correct, the
offender is deserving of a
longer sentence than that imposed by Baker J.
should make something clear. At the time he was sentenced by Baker J he had been
found guilty of a single offence. Appropriately
therefore he was sentenced on
the assumption that this was an isolated incident. We now know that this is not
the case. No part of
the sentence I impose on the offender today is intended to
in some way “correct” the sentence imposed by Baker J because
what we now know.
is not a lot that the offender can rely on to mitigate his sentence. He has not
expressed remorse. There is nothing to suggest
that he has good prospects of
rehabilitation. The references attesting to his good character are of little
assistance because they
question whether he is guilty of offences which two
juries have found proved beyond reasonable doubt. And for reasons I have already
explained his mental illness does not reduce his moral culpability or otherwise
effect the sentence to be imposed upon him.
Baker-Goldsmith accurately concedes that no sentence other than one of actual
imprisonment is appropriate. Applying the principle
of totality there will be a
modest degree of concurrence with Baker J’s sentence. The degree of
concurrence will be modest
to reflect that the offence for which I am imposing
sentence was committed upon a completely separate victim. The harm this
complainant
has experienced is not moderated by the fact that the offender has
done this to another child.
Deportation
evidence before me was that upon the offender’s release from prison after
serving the sentence I will shortly impose upon
him, he will be kept in
immigration detention until his deportation from Australia. The offender has
received various letters form
Australian Border Force to that effect. This
prompted Ms Baker-Goldsmith to submit that rather than imposing a sentence of
imprisonment
which included a non-parole period, I should decline to set a
non-parole period, with the effect that her client would have to serve
entirety of the sentence I will impose upon him without the possibility of
clarified her submission as being that the sentence I should impose would be the
same length as the non-parole period I would
have otherwise imposed.
will not do what Ms Baker-Goldsmith suggests. Her submission is based on the
assumption that there will be no change to the offender’s
visa status
between now and when his sentence will end. I have no material before me to
decide the validity of such an assumption.
It is likely he will be deported, but
that there will be a change in his visa status is not impossible.
importantly, the High Court has spoken on this issue:
R v Shrestha
). At 72-73, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ give
two compelling reasons why the likelihood of deportation should not of itself
a judge to conclude that it is inappropriate to set a period of
eligibility for parole. In
[2003] NSWCCA 147
JA, with whom Hidden J and Carruthers AJ agreed, said that
authority for the proposition that:
The fact that, upon release, the applicant may be deported so that the
conditions of the non-parole period may not apply to her after
she has left
Australian is not a matter to be taken into consideration when determining what
that period should be.
also, in this jurisdiction,
DPP v Moala (No 3)
[2023] ACTSC 306
sentence the offender as follows:
(1) For the offence of act of indecency upon a person under the age of 10 years
pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) (CC 2024/52), the offender is
convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for two years, commencing on 20 August
2024, and expiring
on 19 August 2026.
(2) I set a non-parole period of 18 months, which will expire on 19 February
I certify that the preceding forty-four [44] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Sentence of his Honour Acting
Date: 30 October 2025
RTF format (200 KB)
Signed PDF/A format