Police v Beech (a pseudonym) [2025] ACTMC 1 (21 January 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Police v Beech (a pseudonym)
[2025] ACTMC 1
Hearing Dates:
12-14 November 2024
Decision Date:
Magistrate Temby
I find the Defendant:
(1) Not guilty of the first charge (proceedings CC2023/9995)
(2) Guilty of the second charge (proceedings CC2023/9996)
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– Sexual offences – Acts of indecency
–Meaning of “incapable of agreeing to an act because of
intoxication”
– Recklessness
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
(1)(a)(ii),
Crimes Act 1900
s 61HJ(1)(c)
Cases Cited:
Mahmood v Western Australia
[2008] HCA 1
(2008) 232 CLR 397
Agresti v The Queen
[2017] ACTCA 20
R v MZ (No 3)
[2021] ACTSC 322
Text Cited:
Crimes (Consent) Amendment Act 2022
Explanatory Statement to the
Crimes (Consent) Amendment Bill 2022
Crimes (Consent) Amendment Bill 2018
Explanatory Statement for the
Crimes (Consent) Amendment Bill 2018
Crimes (Consent) Amendment Act 2002
Explanatory Statement for the Crimes (Consent) Amendment Bill 2002
Shannon Snelleksz (Informant)
Paul Beech (a pseudonym) (Defendant)
Representation:
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
ACT Legal Aid (Defendant)
File Numbers:
CC 9995 of 2023
CC 9996 of 2023
MAGISTRATE TEMBY:
case is about two incidents that took place at K Bar Karaoke (
karaoke bar in Belconnen, in the early hours of 17 August 2023.
is alleged that the Defendant committed two acts of indecency on the
Complainant, the first by kissing her without consent in the
hallway of K-Bar
(the hallway incident – proceedings CC2023/9995), and the second, in the
male bathroom of K-Bar, by pulling
down her underwear and pants and bending her
over, again without consent (the bathroom incident – proceedings
CC2023/9996).
Defendant does not dispute that the acts occurred, nor that the acts were
committed on another person (the Complainant). He submits,
however, that the
Complainant consented to the acts. The parties agree that, if the Complainant
consented to the acts:
(1) the acts would therefore not be indecent; and
(2) the element of the charge requiring proof that the Complainant did not
consent, would not be made out.
Defendant accepts that, if the Complainant did not consent, the two acts were
indecent, being acts that are contrary to community
standards of decency. I
agree. However, the Defendant submits that even if the complainant did not
consent, he was not reckless as
to her consent, being the final element of the
are a number of decision-making principles that are relevant to the
determination of criminal proceedings.
Prosecution of course bears the onus of proving the guilt of the Defendant. The
Defendant does not have to prove that he did not
commit the offences with which
he is charged. The standard of proof the Prosecution must meet is proof beyond
reasonable doubt and
the Defendant cannot be found guilty unless the evidence
which I accept satisfies me beyond reasonable doubt of his guilt. If I am
satisfied that there may be an explanation consistent with the innocence of the
Defendant, or I am unsure of where the truth lies,
then I must find that the
charge has not been proved to the standard of proof required by law.
burden of proof on the Prosecution does not mean that the Prosecution must prove
every fact in dispute beyond reasonable doubt,
only that it must prove the
elements of the charge beyond reasonable doubt.
must determine whether each of the witnesses is a reliable witness. That is,
whether I can rely on the evidence that the witness
gives and so find the facts
witness’s evidence
and reject part of that evidence or accept or reject it
all. The law does not require me to give all evidence the same weight.
must determine the facts in accordance with the evidence, considering it
logically and rationally, without acting capriciously or
irrationally. I must
not let emotion enter into the decision-making process. I must bring an open and
unbiased mind to the evidence
but I may use my common sense and experience in
assessing the evidence. Both the Prosecution and the Defendant are entitled to
verdict free of partiality, prejudice, favour or ill-will.
Defendant does not have a criminal record. The parties agreed that that fact
could be taken into account in assessing the probability
of the Defendant
committing the offence charged. I accept the position of the parties in this
respect, although the probative value
of the Defendant’s lack of
antecedents as the sole evidence of his good character is not significant:
v Cumberbatch (No 5)
[2002] VSC 289
Melbourne v R
(1999) 198 CLR
give myself what is known as the
direction (
(1987) 11 NSWLR 12).
Where, as here, an element of the commission of an
offence depends on the evidence of a single witness – being the evidence
of the complainant in relation to whether she gave the Defendant consent to
engage in the acts the subject of the charges –
the evidence of that
witness must be scrutinised with great care to satisfy myself that I can safely
act upon her evidence to the
standard required in a criminal trial. Ultimately,
I must be satisfied of the evidence of that witness beyond reasonable doubt as
to the relevant elements.
Defendant also requested that I give myself a
Mahmood v Western Australia
[2008] HCA 1
(2008) 232 CLR 397).
He seeks that direction
on the basis that:
(1) CCTV footage should have been obtained from K-Bar, as it would have shown
the conduct engaged in by the Defendant and the complainant
in the hallway;
(2) only a handful of civilian witnesses were interviewed and gave evidence,
whereas there were a number of additional people who
attended K-Bar. The
Defendant submits that the other people who were present could have given
evidence as to the interactions between
the Defendant and the complainant and
that police should have approached each witness.
as the CCTV footage is concerned, the relevant chronology shows that the matter
was investigated promptly by NSW and ACT police
but the footage had been deleted
by the time ACT Policing formally requested it from K-Bar. There is therefore an
explanation for
why the evidence was not presented by the Prosecution.
this respect, I note that the incident was reported to [redacted] police on 18
August 2023, ACT Policing was tasked with the investigation
of the incident on
22 August 2023 and the Informant made an urgent (24 hour) request for the CCTV
footage on 30 August 2023. She
attempted to speak to the owner of K-Bar between
22 August and 30 August 2023, but he did not have familiarity with the CCTV
ACT Policing attended on 1 September 2023 but the footage from 17 August
2023 had been deleted by that time.
do not consider that a
direction is required in relation to the
absence of the CCTV footage.
respect to the Prosecution’s failure to interview and lead evidence from
additional witnesses, there is nothing to suggest
that they saw or heard
anything of relevance to these proceedings, or at least nothing of any relevance
beyond the evidence which
was given by the witnesses who were called by the
Prosecution. Their relevance to the Prosecution case appears to have been
as the key witnesses were identified by police and called as witnesses
by the Prosecution.
Nevertheless,
there were a number of people who stayed at K-Bar until the end of the evening
who may have observed interactions between
the Defendant and the complainant
(including of interactions which were not observed by the witnesses who were
called), but from
whom statements were not obtained and who were not called as
witnesses. Ultimately, the absence of evidence from these witnesses
something that has a significant bearing on my decision, but I do take it into
account in determining whether I should entertain
a reasonable doubt about the
Defendant’s guilt.
The offence and the issue of
The offence
offence of an act of indecency without consent is set out in
Crimes Act 1900
). References to statutory
provisions in this decision are to the Act unless otherwise stated.
Section 60 states:
A person who commits an act of indecency on, or
in the presence of, another person without the consent of that person and who is
as to whether that other person consents to the committing of the act
of indecency is guilty of an offence punishable, on conviction,
by imprisonment
for 7 years.
note that an act of indecency is a sexual act (s 50C(1)(a)(ii)) and that s 60 is
a sexual offence consent provision (s
starting point for consideration of the question of consent is s 50A. It
An object of this part is to recognise the following in
relation to a sexual act:
(1) consent to participate in a sexual act is not to be
(2) every person has a right to choose not to participate in
a sexual act;
(3) a consensual sexual act involves ongoing and mutual
communication and decision-making by the people participating in the sexual
is defined in s 50B to mean informed agreement to the sexual act that
(a) freely and voluntarily given; and
(b) communicated by saying or doing something.
67 provides circumstances where a person does not consent. Relevantly, it
(1) For a sexual offence consent provision, and without limiting the
grounds on which it may be established that a person does not
consent to an act
mentioned in the provision, a person does not consent to an act mentioned in the
provision if the person—
(g) is incapable of agreeing to the act because of intoxication; or
N.B. s 67(6) defines intoxication by reference to s 30 of the Criminal Code.
That provision says: “”intoxication”
means intoxication because of the influence of alcohol, a drug or any
other substance.”
(2) A person also does not consent to an act with another
person (the “accused person”) only because the
(a) does not say or do something to resist the act;
(b) consented to—
act with the accused person; or
same act with the accused person at a different time or place;
(3) If it is established that an accused person who knows, or is
reckless about whether, the consent of another person to an act mentioned
a sexual offence consent provision has been caused by any of the
circumstances set out in subsection (1) (a) to (o), the accused
person is taken to know that the other person does not consent to the
(4) An accused person is taken to know that another person does not
consent to an act mentioned in a sexual offence consent provision
any belief that the accused person has, or may have, that the other
person consents to the act is not reasonable in the circumstances.
(5) For subsection (4), without limiting the grounds on which it may be
established that an accused person’s belief is not reasonable
circumstances, the accused person’s belief is taken not to be
reasonable in the circumstances if the accused person
did not say or
do anything to ascertain whether the other person consented.
67A is also relevant. It states:
(1) This section applies to a proceeding for an offence against
a sexual offence consent provision.
(2) In deciding a person’s (the accused person ) knowledge
or belief, or recklessness, about whether another person consented
mentioned in the provision, the trier of fact—
(a) must consider all the circumstances of the case, including anything
the accused person said or did; but
(b) must not consider
the accused person’s self-induced intoxication.
What does it mean, for the purposes of s 67(1)(g), to be incapable of
agreeing to an act because of intoxication?
Context for the introduction of s 67(1)(g)
to the law regarding consent in relation to sexual offences were made in 2022 by
Crimes (Consent) Amendment Act 2022
. The Explanatory Statement to the
Crimes (Consent) Amendment Bill 2018
stated that the purpose of the Bill
Crimes Act 1900
to align with contemporary community
understandings and expectations of consensual sexual activity
said that the amendments to be made to the Act:
principle, meaning and definition of sexual consent from something that is
presumed and can be negated, to something that
is unassumed and must be given.
This is a communicative model of consent – one which is underpinned by
principles of agency,
autonomy and responsibility and is based upon a culture of
healthy, respectful relationships.
Crimes (Consent) Amendment Act 2022
was one of a number of pieces of
similar legislation that were enacted in various jurisdictions, including in
NSW. As had been recommended
by the ACT Standing Committee for Justice and
Community Safety, following its inquiry into the
Crimes (Consent) Amendment
, the ACT did not progress legislative change until after the NSW
Law Reform Commission concluded its inquiry into sexual offences.
for present purposes, one of the recommendations of that report, which was
published in September 2020, was that the law
should protect complainants who
are intoxicated to the point that they cannot consent to sexual activity.
Paragraph 67(1)(g) was
introduced into the Act, as part of the changes made by
Crimes (Consent) Amendment Act 2002
, against that background.
to its insertion, the issue of intoxication in the context of consent was dealt
with in s 67(1)(e). That provision provided
For sections 54,
55(3)(b), 60 and 61(3)(b) ... the consent of a person ... to the committing of
an act of indecency ... is negated
if that consent is caused ... by the effect
of intoxicating liquor, a drug or an anaesthetic.
Court of Appeal considered this provision in
Agresti v The Queen
). Having noted at [75] that consent required
free and voluntary consent, at [156] the Court identified that the task for the
Prosecution
in that case was to establish:
... that any apparent
consent to the act of sexual intercourse by the complainant was negated by her
intoxication; in other words,
that the effect of the complainant’s
intoxication was so substantial that it caused her to be unable to consent to
of sexual intercourse”.
language of s 67(1)(g) of the Act differs from how intoxication was previously
addressed in s 67(1)(e) in relation to issues of
consent, most notably in the
way that it deems consent not to have been given rather than providing for
circumstances where any apparent
or assumed consent is negated. However, the
drafting of s 67(1)(g) (in combination with s 50B) reflects the test ultimately
articulated
. Its insertion was certainly not intended to
introduce a higher test, as noted in the revised Explanatory Statement to the
Crimes (Consent) Amendment Bill 2022
Test to be applied
Accordingly,
the test to be applied under s 67(1)(g), having regard to s 50B, is whether the
Prosecution has established that the
effect of the Complainant’s
intoxication was so substantial that it caused her to be incapable of giving
informed agreement,
freely and voluntarily, to the acts engaged in by the
in this sense does not mean mental incapacity or cognitive impairment more
generally (which is addressed in s 67(1)(l)),
and nor does it require that the
Complainant have been unconscious (which is addressed in s 67(1)(n)). On the
other hand, mere impairment
of judgment or reduction of inhibition as a result
of being intoxicated will not establish an incapacity.
key issues for resolution in this matter are:
(1) whether it is possible that the Complainant said or did something to
communicate her agreement to the acts the subject of each
of the incidents;
(2) whether, regardless of what the Complainant said or did, she was incapable
of agreeing to the acts because of intoxication; and
(3) if the Complainant did not agree to the acts, or was incapable of agreeing
to them, whether the Defendant was reckless as to
the Complainant’s
The witnesses
General observations
of the witnesses were current or former [redacted] students who had been in
Canberra from 16 to 18 August 2023 for a series of
soccer matches. They were
from the [redacted] and [redacted] campuses and were using the matches in
Canberra as practice for an intervarsity
soccer tournament that was to be held
as part of the national university games later that year. There was a
men’s team and
a women’s team.
additional witnesses were the Informant and the Complainant’s roommate, Ms
Ware (a pseudonym).
parties agreed that all of the witnesses did their best to recall the matters
they were asked about when giving evidence and that
there are no issues as to
the honesty of any of the witnesses.
gave careful consideration to the capacity of the witnesses to recall the
relevant events surrounding the incidents, given that
they occurred more than 12
months ago and the witnesses were all intoxicated to some extent at the time. Of
the witnesses who gave
evidence at the hearing, it is apparent that Ms Rickard
(a pseudonym) and Mr Walsh (a pseudonym) were the least intoxicated. They
assessed their level of intoxication to have been around a 3 out of 10 level of
intoxication at the time of the incidents and Ms
Rickard recalled that she did
not drink very much.
Complainant was the most intoxicated. Ms Rickard said that the Complainant was
around an 8 out of 10 level of intoxication. Accepting
the obvious limitations
on a numerical assessment of intoxication, I note that her presentation towards
the end of the night was
consistent with her being significantly intoxicated and
witnesses described her as being more intoxicated than others.
despite the witnesses’ various levels of intoxication, there is
considerable consistency in the evidence between the
witnesses (including the
evidence given by the Complainant), and the witnesses were clear about the parts
of the evening they recalled
and the parts that they did not. There was no
indication that the witnesses exaggerated or embellished any of their evidence.
Accordingly,
I do not consider that the evidence given by any of the witnesses was unreliable
in a general sense. In fact, I consider
that the evidence was generally
reliable. As the Defendant’s Counsel urged me to do, I have scrutinised
the evidence of the
witnesses in relation to the key issues with great care to
ensure that I can properly act on that evidence.
two key witnesses are the Complainant and Ms Rickard. The Complainant was
involved in the relevant incidents and Ms Rickard observed
the first of them and
observed the Complainant’s presentation after each incident. She was the
primary person to interact with
the Complainant.
is apparent that Ms Rickard paid particular attention to the Complainant at the
relevant times because she was concerned for her
welfare. The other witnesses
were able to provide some contextual evidence, but the determination of the
matter principally relies
on the evidence that the Complainant and Ms Rickard
find that Ms Rickard was a reliable witness. Her evidence was clear, considered
and consistent with evidence given by other witnesses.
She was clear in
refutations she gave in cross-examination of propositions with which she
disagreed, but readily accepted propositions
that were consistent with her
recollections, including propositions that may have seemed detrimental to the
Prosecution case. She
made reasonable concessions in terms of the limits of her
recollection. Ms Rickard did not drink a substantial amount of alcohol
evening and it does not appear that she was impacted by intoxication to an
extent that might have impacted her perception
or recollection of events.
also accept that the Complainant was a reliable witness. Her evidence, both in
court and in her evidence-in-chief police interview,
was notable for the open,
honest, matter of fact way that she answered questions, without a hint of
exaggeration. She gave clear
evidence as to the details that she remembered and
those that she did not. Like Ms Rickard, the Complainant readily accepted
propositions
put to her in cross-examination that may have seemed detrimental to
the Prosecution case.
assessing the Complainant’s evidence I have had regard to the
significantly intoxicated state that she ended up being in
by the end of the
evening, which resulted in her having some sort of a ‘black-out’ at
some point, around midnight. The
Complainant said that she went from feeling
quite intoxicated to having no recollection. She said she had never experienced
note that Ms Rickard said that she had observed a couple of occasions when the
Complainant was sufficiently intoxicated that she
could not remember the
previous night. However, this was not a case where the Complainant did not
remember the previous night. She
had a good recollection of the events leading
up to her arrival at K-Bar and a recollection of various events after that time
was consistent with the evidence of other witnesses.
after the ‘black out’, it is not correct that she had no
recollection. What occurred was that she experienced a significant
shift in the
way she remembered the evening from that point. She had a memory, in the form of
what she perceived to have been a bad
dream when she awoke in the morning, of
certain interactions with the Defendant. That memory comprised both a mental
picture of some
of her interactions with the Defendant and of the sensations she
experienced. As I will discuss later in these reasons, she recalled
heaviness of her arms, the feeling of the Defendant pulling her pants and
underwear down, the wetness of the Defendant’s
kisses, the pressure on her
back when she was bent over in the men’s bathroom and the pressure on her
hips from the Defendant’s
hands when he was kissing her.
Complainant was honest about the limitations in her recollection and made
reasonable concessions in that regard. She accepted
in cross-examination that
her mental picture of the evening was hazy and that the details of what occurred
are murky. She said that
she did not entirely trust her memory.
said that, she did recall aspects of her experience after the point that she
‘blacked out’ and she was clear in
her evidence as to those events
which she recalled and those which she did not.
have noted above the physical sensations that she recalled in relation to her
interactions with the Defendant. Her evidence was
also consistent with the
evidence of other witnesses. For example, her recollection of being pushed up
against a wall by the Defendant
is consistent with Ms Rickard’s evidence
and her recollection of being taken into a bathroom and the Defendant locking
door is consistent with the observations of the witnesses who found them
both in the locked room in the men’s bathroom. Her
recollection of the
layout of the bathroom matched the layout of the bathroom that could be seen in
the video that the Informant
took in conducting a walk-through of the K-Bar
premises and her evidence that the Defendant pulled her underwear down is
with his DNA being found on the back of her underwear (and the
Defendant’s concession that he did so). The accounts she gave
to the university, to Ms Ware and to the forensic officer have all been
consistent.
the Defendant’s Counsel suggested to the Complainant that she may have
simply adopted what Ms Rickard told her as her
recollection, the Complainant was
clear in explaining that she had recalled particular events through her
‘dream’, and
thought about the dream, before anybody told her
anything in the morning. She conceded that it is possible that she said she had
her hands by her side when the Defendant was kissing her because that is what Ms
Rickard told her, but she independently had a recollection
of not using her
hands at all and of her arms being heavy.
is also to be observed that the Complainant recalled details that Ms Rickard
could not have known, such as how wet the kiss from
the Defendant was and having
her pants and underwear pulled down and being bent over in the men’s
bathroom. The Complainant
also recalled details that Ms Rickard is unlikely to
have discussed with the Complainant, such as the layout of the men’s
It is also to be observed that the Complainant’s recollection of
what Ms Rickard told her had happened the next day is expressed
differently to
how the Complainant had described her recollection. I do not consider that the
Complainant simply adopted what Ms
Rickard said had happened as her own
recollection.
note that the Defendant’s Counsel also submitted that I should have
concerns about the reliability of the Complainant’s
evidence because,
according to the Defendant’s Counsel, the Complainant wrote in her
complaint to the university, and stated
in her evidence-in-chief interview, that
the Defendant had dragged her into the men’s bathroom. The
Defendant’s Counsel
submitted that she did not properly disclose in the
complaint that that assertion had been adopted from what Ms Rickard had told
and that it was fanciful in any case given the distance between the karaoke room
and the men’s bathroom.
the Complainant in fact wrote in her university complaint that the Defendant
pulled her away from the group and took her
into a bathroom, locking the door
behind them. That is far from fanciful. Indeed, it is likely what occurred.
the Complainant said in her evidence-in-chief interview with police that she did
not recall how she got to the bathroom but
thought that she was pulled there
based on what Ms Rickard had told her about the way she walked back to the hotel
and the need for
Ms Rickard to assist her. I do not consider that it is at all
significant that she did not explain the source of each statement in
university complaint, which was a 12-line summary of the incident written
shortly after she returned to [redacted].
Summary of events
leading up to the incidents
evidence of the witnesses was consistent that:
(1) the players from the two campuses travelled to Canberra and stayed at the
Abode Hotel in Belconnen;
(2) on the evening of 16 August 2023, a number of the players had a drink at the
hotel bar before the players went to The Lighthouse
Pub for dinner. They got
there around 7 or 7.30pm. There were around 25 players at dinner. Each of the
witnesses gave evidence that
they had further drinks at the pub; and
(3) after dinner, some of the players went to a skate park before attending
K-Bar. About 15 players went to K-Bar although they did
not all stay until the
end of the evening. They arrived at around 11pm. Each of the witnesses gave
evidence that they had further
drinks there.
Complainant said that she probably had a drink at the hotel bar before going
out, two ciders or ginger beers at the pub with dinner,
and three shots before
leaving the pub. She placed herself at a 3 or 4 level of intoxication at the
time she left the pub. Ms Rickard
put her at a 5 or 6 out of 10. She observed
her to be speaking loudly, laughing, swaying a little bit, but not overly
slurring her
words. Again, noting the obvious limitations in relying on a
numerical assessment of intoxication, the Complainant was clearly already
intoxicated, either approaching or at a medium level of intoxication by the time
she arrived at K-Bar.
of the players hired a karaoke room at K-Bar. The karaoke room was the first
room on the right down a hallway leading away from
reception. The bathrooms were
located further down the hallway.
Complainant shared some wine at the karaoke bar with Mr Craig (a pseudomyn) and
Mr Grutt (a pseudonym). The Complainant said that
she shared a bottle she had
bought and probably some of a second bottle that Mr Grutt bought, but she could
not remember. She thought
that she only had around two small glasses from the
first bottle.
Craig said that he, Mr Grutt and the Complainant each bought a bottle to share
and that they used standard glasses. I do not know
whether they shared the
bottles equally, but it appears that the Complainant had her fair share of the
first bottle and at least
had some of the second bottle as well. Ms Rickard said
that the Complainant was drinking quite a bit at K-Bar, including wine and
possibly spirts as well as she saw the Complainant ordering a vodka. Whatever
the precise number or volume of alcohol that the Complainant
drank, I accept Ms
Rickard’s observation that the Complainant drank quite a bit at
Complainant said that she was an 8 out of 10 level of intoxication when Mr Grutt
bought the second bottle of wine, which is when
she started to have trouble with
her memory. The Complainant’s assessment that she was an 8 out of 10 level
of intoxication
is consistent, at least in terms of her level of intoxication
towards the end of the evening, with Ms Rickard’s and Mr Craig’s
assessment of her at that point and I accept that that was her level of
intoxication towards the end of the evening. It is consistent
Complainant having arrived at K-Bar already approaching or at a medium level of
intoxication and drinking quite a bit there.
It is also consistent with evidence
that was given in relation to the Complainant’s level of functioning,
which I have discussed
in further detail below.
as the conduct of the Defendant and the Complainant is concerned, the
uncontested evidence of the witnesses was that:
(1) the Defendant sat next to Mr Craig on the couch most of the time in the
karaoke room;
(2) the Defendant and the Complainant sang a song together and danced together
for around 10 minutes. Initially that was in a small
group and later it was just
by themselves;
(3) the Complainant and the Defendant sat down next to each other after
(4) Mr Walsh saw the Defendant and the Complainant sitting close to each other
on the couch at one point, with the Defendant’s
hand on the
Complainant’s thigh. The Complainant kept her hands to herself. Mr Craig
saw the Defendant and the Complainant
sitting close to each other towards the
end of the evening. It is possible that the evidence of Mr Walsh and Mr Craig
concerns the
same moment;
(5) some of the [redacted] women’s players arrived around midnight. The
Complainant was in the karaoke room when the introductions
were conducted with
these players and recalled introductions being made;
(6) towards the end of the evening, there were three instances where the
Defendant and the Complainant were intimate:
(b) the first, in the hallway outside the karaoke room;
(c) the second, further down the hallway, outside the bathrooms; and
(d) the third, inside the men’s bathroom.
indicated at the beginning of these reasons, it is the first and third of these
instances that are the subject of the charges against
First incident – the hallway kiss
is not in dispute that the Defendant kissed the Complainant against the hallway
wall opposite the karaoke room door. It appears
that this incident occurred
towards the end of the evening. Ms Rickard estimated that it was around 1.15am
Shearer (a pseudonym) gave evidence that the Complainant said, on the car ride
her against a wall at K-Bar,
and forced himself on her to kiss her, although it did not hit her until later
that she was uncomfortable
with the situation. The Complainant recalled the kiss
being really wet – a lot of saliva.
Complainant gave evidence that she felt pressure on her hips. This is supported
by Ms Rickard’s observation that the Defendant
had his hands on the
Complainant’s hips. Ms Rickard said that she did not see the Defendant
hold her against the wall but said
that the Complainant appeared to be pressed
against the wall while he was holding her.
my general observations in relation to the reliability of the evidence of the
Complainant and, in particular, Ms Rickard, and
the consistency between their
evidence, I accept the above evidence. I find that the Defendant forced the
Complainant against the
hallway wall and put pressure on her hips with his
Complainant said that she did not kiss the Defendant back or, if she did so,
only minimally. She said her arms were by her side.
the Complainant’s recollection is largely consistent with Ms
Rickard’s observations, which were that the Complainant
reciprocating like a ‘make-out’. Ms Rickard said that the
Complainant was not touching the Defendant back, her
hands were by her side and,
while she was kissing the Defendant, Ms Rickard could not tell the extent. She
could see their heads
move from side to side and their lips connecting. In
cross-examination, Ms Rickard said that she did not see the Defendant first
the Complainant but saw them while the door to the karaoke room was open. She
said that the door was open for a minute but she
assumed that the kiss went for
longer than that.
Complainant said that she did not want to kiss the Defendant in the hallway
because at no point in the evening did she think of
the Defendant ‘like
that’. She said that it is very unlikely that her opinion of him became
favourable at any point because
it was around that period in her life that she
realised that she was only attracted to women.
Complainant said that she was not enjoying herself and did not want what was
happening. She said that she did not give the Defendant
consent to kiss her and
felt confused.
said she would normally push someone off her if she wanted a situation like that
to stop, but she felt like she was not able to
do that on this occasion. She
said she felt frozen. Ms Ware said that the Complainant told her that her arms
were heavy so she could
not push the Defendant away.
accept this evidence. I find that the Defendant was kissing the Complainant in
the hallway outside the karaoke room. I do not know
how long the kiss lasted
for, but it was clearly more than a minute. As I have already found, the
Complainant had her back against
the wall and the Defendant had his hands on her
Complainant was not an active participant in the kiss. Her arms were by her side
and she only kissed the Defendant minimally.
is because she was not attracted to the Defendant and did not want him to kiss
her. She did not enjoy being kissed by him. At
some point, she wanted to push
him away but her arms felt too heavy for her to do so.
she would even kiss him minimally in these circumstances is a little hard to
understand, although it is perhaps explained by the
Complainant’s
observation that she was confused and did not immediately appreciate that she
was uncomfortable with the situation.
I have no doubt that that observation
reflects the fact that the Complainant was significantly intoxicated at the
impression is that, as a result of her intoxication and confusion, she went
along with what was happening to some extent. It does
not appear that the
Complainant froze, in the sense that that word might ordinarily be used in the
context of an unwanted sexual
act, albeit that I accept that the Complainant
felt that her arms were heavy and that she was unable to push the Defendant away
she wanted to.
What happened between the hallway kiss and
the incident inside the men’s bathroom?
Rickard gave evidence that, during the incident in the hallway outside the
karaoke room, she called out to the Complainant from
the karaoke room and the
Complainant responded, popping her head to one side and the Defendant pulled
away. Ms Rickard asked her
to come over and the Complainant did so almost
straight away, although she was swaying somewhat, sat down in an uncontrolled
and continued to sway slightly when seated. Ms Rickard said that the swaying
was subtle, but she was able to detect it because she
knew the Complainant
Rickard asked if the Complainant was okay. She wanted to check-in because she
could tell that the Complainant was intoxicated and
wanted to make sure she was
safe. The Complainant said she was fine, but Ms Rickard said that her speech was
slurred and she was
not completely tracking with her eyes, which were only half
open. Ms Rickard asked if the Complainant understood what was going on
Complainant did not answer. Ms Rickard said that the Complainant looked
confused. That is consistent with the Complainant’s
evidence that she was
Rickard was distracted by someone else and the Complainant had left the room by
the time Ms Rickard returned her attention to her.
Rickard looked for the Complainant and found her with the Defendant further down
the hallway near the bathrooms. This was about
10 minutes after she had spoken
to the Complainant on the couch.
Rickard observed the same situation as outside the karaoke room, with the
Complainant against the wall, the Defendant kissing her,
the Defendant’s
hands on her hips, the Complainant not a particularly active participant, with
her arms by her side, but nevertheless
kissing the Defendant back.
Rickard saw them kissing for about 30 seconds before she was distracted by
someone leaving the bar and she went to make sure she
was okay before she came
accept that the interactions that Ms Rickard observed, and the
Complainant’s physical presentation, were as Ms Rickard described
Second incident – inside the men’s
Complainant said that she and the Defendant went into a bathroom and, within the
bathroom, a lockable room to the right. Consistently
with the layout of the
bathroom shown in a video of K-Bar taken by the Informant, the Complainant
recalled a urinal to the left of
the room, a sink in the middle and the lockable
room to the right.
Complainant said that the Defendant took her into the bathroom but also said
that she did not remember exactly how they got into
the bathroom. Later in her
evidence she indicated that she assumed that the Defendant led her into the room
given that Ms Rickard
had to assist her to get back to the hotel.
Complainant said that the Defendant closed and locked the door. The Complainant
said that the Defendnat continued the conduct
from the hallway, pushing her
against the wall and kissing her.
her evidence, the Complainant said that she thought that the Defendant pulled
her pants and underwear down and pushed her down
so that she was bending over at
a 90 degree angle. The Defendant’s hand was on her lower back. At another
point in her evidence,
the Complainant said she did not remember the Defendant
pulling her pants and underwear down, so much as she remembered the feeling
them being pulled down. Ms Ware gave evidence that the Complainant told her that
the Defendant pulled her pants and underwear
find that the Defendant pulled down the Complainant’s pants and underwear.
The Defendant concedes that he did so. The Complainant’s
recollection in
this respect is also consistent with the fact that it was only the Defendant and
the Complainant in the room and
forensic evidence showed that DNA found on the
back of the complainant’s underwear that was not the Complainant’s
100 billion times more likely to be from the Defendant than from an unknown
individual unrelated to the Defendant.
the reasons which follow, I find that the Complainant did not assist the
Defendant to pull her pants or underwear down.
Complainant remembered trying to keep balanced, but she did not remember where
her hands were. The Complainant said that she did
not really understand what was
going on and did not know what to do. She felt that it all happened so
Complainant gave evidence that she believed that she did not want to be in the
bathroom with the Defendant, but she could not
exclude the possibility that she
wanted the Defendant to touch her and does not remember now.
Complainant said that she did not give the Defendant consent to pull down her
pants and underwear. Ms Ware said that the Complainant
told her the same
find that the Defendant led the Complainant into the male bathroom. In
circumstances where the Complainant was not attracted to
the Defendant and did
not enjoy being kissed by him, it is very unlikely that she would have initiated
a further intimate interaction
with him, and it is even more unlikely that she
would have chosen that location. The likelihood that the Defendant led the
Complainant
into the bathroom is also supported by the fact that the Complainant
was having difficulty walking at around this time, as I will
discuss shortly,
and by the Complainant’s evidence that she did not want to be in the
men’s bathroom.
the same reasons, I accept the Complainant’s evidence that, in the
bathroom, the Defendant led the Complainant into the
lockable room and locked
the door. I accept the Complainant’s evidence that the Defendant pushed
her against the wall and kissed
her before he pulled down her pants and
underwear and pushed her down so that she was bending over at a 90 degree angle.
the Complainant’s evidence that the Defendant put pressure on her
back when he pushed her down. The Defendant concedes that
he pulled the
Complainant’s pants and underwear down and bent her over.
some point, Ms Rickard came to find the Complainant again. She thought that the
Defendant and the Complainant were in the bathroom,
however she did not go in.
She thought that they were doing their own thing and went back to the karaoke
Rickard went to the bathroom and knocked on the
door, telling the Complainant
and the Defendant that they had 10 minutes left, then went back to the karaoke
room to pack up. She
did not go into the bathroom as she did not want to intrude
on the Defendant and the Complainant’s privacy.
Rickard went back to the bathroom after about 5 minutes. The bathroom door was
open. Mr Jack (a pseudonym) was using the toilet
and Ms Shearer was using the
sink. It was at that point that Ms Rickard said that she realised that the
Complainant and the Defendant
were in the room within the bathroom. She knocked
on the door as they had to leave, but she received no response.
Rickard and Mr Craig both banged on the door. Mr Craig told the Defendant that
they had to go. Ms Rickard recalled that Mr Craig
said ‘let her go
mate’. While the other witnesses did not recall him saying that, I accept
Ms Rickard’s evidence
that he did say those words, given that she had a
specific recollection of the interaction.
Complainant said that she pulled her pants up before the Defendant opened the
door. Ms Rickard said that the Complainant and the
Defendant came out of the
room together about one to two minutes after Ms Rickard and Mr Craig banged on
the door. Mr Craig described
them coming out of the room in awkward
Complainant did not remember anything from the evening after that
What happened after the bathroom incident?
the Complainant came out of the bathroom’s internal room, Ms Rickard led
her out of the bathroom and out of the bar. She
did not like the situation and
wanted the Complainant to be safe.
Shearer observed the Complainant to be quite intoxicated and drowsy, with her
arm over Ms Rickard’s shoulder. She said that
the Complainant could not
hold herself up well, her eyes were not fully open and she was walking a bit
outside, Ms Rickard asked the Complainant if she was okay. She said she did not
know. Ms Rickard asked the Complainant what happened
and the Complainant said
that she was not sure.
Rickard and Ms Shearer helped the Complainant back to the hotel. They both gave
evidence that they had one of the Complainant’s
arms over each of their
shoulders. Ms Rickard at least had her other arm around the Complainant’s
waist. She said that Ms Shearer
was doing the same thing.
seen CCTV footage of the hotel foyer, in which she was not assisting the
Complainant, Ms Shearer accepted that it was possible
that her recollection was
not correct and that she did not help the Complainant, however I accept the
evidence of Ms Rickard and
Ms Shearer that they both assisted the Complainant
albeit that Ms Shearer did not do so the whole way.
Shearer accepted that it was possible that the Complainant could have walked on
her own, but it was not very likely. She said that
Ms Rickard was assisting her
most, if not all, of the walk back.
CCTV footage of the hotel foyer supports the evidence that the Complainant
required assistance walking back to the hotel although,
at least at the moment
that she arrived back in the foyer, it was only Ms Rickard who was assisting
her. That footage suggests that
she guided rather than carried the Complainant.
That is consistent with Ms Rickard’s evidence that she was only carrying
Complainant’s weight a little bit and that the Complainant was able to
support her body weight. That is, that Ms Rickard was
providing stability.
Complainant, Ms Rickard and Ms Shearer were talking on the way back. Ms Shearer
and Ms Rickard had the impression that the Complainant
was responsive to
Rickard and Ms Shearer assisted the Complainant upstairs to her room. Ms Rickard
assisted the Complainant into bed, took her shoes
off, put water beside her bed
and put her phone on its charger. The Complainant was responsive to questions
asked of her, including
whether she wanted water and where her phone charger
Complainant woke up still dressed in her clothes, including still having her
hair clip in, with the only thing she wasn’t
wearing from the night before
being her shoes.
find that the Complainant was highly intoxicated at the time she exited the
bathroom. She was drowsy, her eyes were not fully open
and she needed assistance
to walk. While she could bear weight, she required assistance to provide her
with stability and guide her
in the right direction. Despite the level of her
intoxication, she was able to respond to questions and was able to recall where
her phone charger was in her room, although she appeared confused by her
interaction with the Defendant in the bathroom.
Is it possible that the Complainant said or did something to communicate her
agreement to the acts the subject of
each of the incidents?
The hallway incident
Complainant was neither attracted to the Defendant nor wanted him to kiss her.
It is very unlikely that the Complainant verbally
consented to being kissed by
is it at all likely that she verbally consented after the Defendant started
kissing her. The Complainant was not enjoying herself.
She did not want what was
happening. Her statements in that regard are supported by the way she described
how wet the Defendant’s
kiss was and the limited extent to which she
participated in the kiss.
was not touching the Defendant back, with her hands by her side with her palms
next to her legs. At some point she wanted to push
the Defendant away but her
arms felt heavy and she was unable to do so. Ms Rickard observed that she looked
a bit weird – stiff
– when the Defendant was kissing her.
the Complainant gave evidence that she could not exclude the possibility that
she wanted the Defendant to touch her and simply
did not remember having that
feeling, she also said that she did not believe that it was possible that she
wanted that to occur.
In my view, her concession that she could not exclude the
possibility simply reflected the fact that her memory of the incident was
complete, and was not a concession that it was a realistic possibility.
is clear that it was the Defendant who initiated the kiss. When they were
sitting next to each other on the couch in the karaoke
room, the Defendant put
his hand on the Complainant’s thigh. She kept her hands to herself. In the
hallway, the Defendant forced
himself on the Complainant to kiss her. She had
her arms by her side. She was not attracted to the Defendant and did not want to
kiss him. While they sang a song together, and danced together at one point,
initially in a group and then by themselves, the evidence
in that respect did
not identify what occurred between the two of them (if anything) prior to or
during those interactions.
the Complainant did kiss the Complainant back. As I have found above, I accept
that she only did so minimally, but she did
kiss him back.
is explicable in the circumstances, as I have suggested above, by the
possibility that the Complainant, intoxicated and confused,
went along with what
was happening, at least to some extent. Her actions also need to be understood
in the context of the circumstances
which existed. She was significantly
intoxicated, her back was against the wall and the Defendant’s hands were
holding her
hips. He was in a position of control.
Nevertheless,
through her action of kissing him back, she indicated that she agreed to the
Defendant kissing her. It is not possible
to draw a line, at least not on the
evidence in this case, between kissing that is too minimal to constitute
agreement and kissing
that is sufficiently substantive to do so.
am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the Complainant’s action in
kissing the Defendant in the hallway did not amount
to agreement by conduct.
The bathroom incident
Complainant said that she did not give the Defendant consent to pull down her
pants and underwear. Ms Ware said that she told
her the same thing. I accept the
Complainant’s evidence.
said that she did not want to be in the men’s bathroom. She was clear that
it was not the case that she might have forgotten
wanting to be in the
men’s bathroom with the Defendant, having regard to everything else she
recalled of that evening. She
said that every other recollection of her
interaction with the Defendant was not positive and she did not feel that that
she wanted, even though she could not exclude the possibility that she
had some positive interactions with the Defendant.
noted in relation to the hallway incident, while the Complainant gave evidence
that she could not exclude the possibility that
she wanted the Defendant to
touch her and simply did not remember having that feeling, she also said that
she did not believe that
it was possible that she wanted that to occur. As I
found above, her concession that she could not exclude the possibility simply
reflected the fact that her memory of the incident was not complete, and was not
a concession that it was a realistic possibility.
She was not attracted to the
Defendant and had not enjoyed him kissing her in the hallway. Around that time
in her life she realised
that she was only attracted to women.
the hallway incident, the Defendant was the initiating party. He led her into
the men’s bathroom and into the lockable
room within the bathroom. He
locked the door and pushed her against the wall and kissed her. He pulled her
pants and underwear down
and pushed her down so that she was bending over. The
Complainant was significantly intoxicated and did not fully understand what
going on. She did not know what to do and felt that everything was happening
quickly. Again, the Defendant was in control.
all the circumstances, it is not a realistic possibility that the Complainant
gave the Defendant verbal consent for him to pull
down her pants and underwear
and bend her over, nor that she did anything to communicate her consent.
was not attracted to the Defendant and did not want him to kiss her. She did not
enjoy being kissed by him. She did not want to
be in the men’s bathroom,
but had been led there by the Defendant. She was significantly intoxicated and
needed assistance
to walk. She did not fully understand what was going on. The
Defendant had pulled her pants and underwear down and bent her over.
is one thing for the Complainant to have reciprocated the Defendant’s
kisses to some extent in the hallway (outside the karaoke
room and the
men’s bathroom), particularly given the state she was in, but the
Defendant’s actions in the bathroom were
another thing entirely. It was a
sexual act of a materially different character.
a matter of law, the consent that the Complainant might have given the Defendant
for him to kiss her outside the men’s bathroom
did not extend to the
further conduct in which he engaged (s 67(2)(b)(i)). As a matter of fact, in all
the circumstances, it also
does not support an inference that the Complainant
may have consented to the further conduct.
alleged conduct in the men’s bathroom did not involve any mutuality. It
involved the Defendant pulling down the Complainant’s
pants and underwear
and the Defendant bending her over. The Complainant did not assist him. It is to
be kept in mind that the Complainant
will not have consented to the acts that
the Defendant performed only because she did not say or do something to resist
(s 67(2)(a)).
fact that the Defendant performed those acts without the agreement or assistance
of the Complainant is consistent with the fact
that, when the Complainant woke
up in the morning, she noticed blood in her underwear, which was the result of
her menstrual cup
having been displaced. The Complainant explained that she had
inserted it earlier in the evening, around 7 pm, knowing that she would
to change it until the morning. She said that it forms a strong seal (suction)
when inserted and that it takes quite a bit
of pressure to take it out, but that
it was at an angle when she woke up.
is clear that it was the Defendant, and not the Complainant, who displaced the
menstrual cup. The Complainant understood how the
cup worked and she would not
have accidentally displaced it. If the Complainant had wanted to remove the cup,
she would have done
given the function of the menstrual cup, the Complainant would not have broken
the seal and simply left it displaced at an
angle. Nor is there any prospect
that she would have been content for the Defendant to do so.
am fortified in my view that the Defendant pulled the Complainant’s pants
and underwear down, and bent her over, without her
agreement or assistance, by
the fact that it is clear that he engaged in some other act without her
agreement or assistance, shortly
thereafter, which resulted in the
Complainant’s menstrual cup being displaced.
Defendant submitted that I should make something of Mr Craig’s evidence
that he recalled the Defendant and the Complainant
coming out of the locked room
in the bathroom in awkward silence. The Defendant submits that it indicated a
sense of embarrassment,
which is inconsistent with the Complainant having been
subjected to unwanted sexual acts.
do not accept that submission.
I am not confident that Mr Craig, who rated his level of intoxication as being 8
out of 10, was capable of accurately discerning
whether the Defendant and the
Complainant were awkward in their exit, or whether the other people who were
present in the men’s
bathroom, including Mr Craig, themselves felt awkward
Complainant.
Given Ms Rickard’s observations as to the Complainant’s
physical presentation – in particular that she was intoxicated
– I am doubtful that she exited in awkward silence.
even if the Complainant had exited in awkward silence, that would not establish
that the Complainant had consented to the
acts which took place in the locked
room. It would not even be indicative that she had consented. It would not be
surprising for
a person who had been subjected to unwanted sexual acts to be
embarrassed to realise that third persons were aware that sexual acts
likely to have taken place.
am satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that it is not possible that the
Complainant said or did something to communicate any agreement
to the Defendant
pulling her pants and underwear down and bending her over.
2 – Was the Complainant incapable of agreeing to the acts the subject of
the incidents because of intoxication
the conclusion I have reached in relation to the absence of any consent on the
Complainant’s part for the Defendant to
perform the impugned acts in the
men’s bathroom, Issue 2 strictly only needs to be considered in relation
to the incident in
the hallway. However, for completeness, I have considered the
issue in relation to both incidents.
Complainant’s level of intoxication is likely to have been very similar at
the time of the hallway and bathroom incidents,
given that the two incidents
occurred in close temporal proximity to one another. I have nevertheless
considered the impact of her
intoxication on her capacity to consent in relation
to each incident separately.
the significant shift that occurred after the ‘black out’, in terms
of the impact of the Complainant’s intoxication
on her level of
functioning, it is possible that there was a decline in her level of functioning
between the hallway and bathroom
incidents. Indeed, while certain aspects of her
presentation were similar between the two incidents, there are differences,
particularly
in relation to her capacity to walk.
What was the
level and impact of the Complainant’s intoxication?
Shearer took a video of the Complainant singing in the karaoke room between 12
and 1am. I observed from the video footage that
the Complainant was holding a
microphone and singing, with no obvious difficulty with her coordination.
by the end of the evening when the incidents occurred, the Complainant was
significantly intoxicated. She was around an 8
out of 10 level of intoxication.
She was more out of it, and more intoxicated, than everyone else.
‘blacked out’ in some way after the video was taken. While the
Defendant submitted that that is not necessarily a
symptom of someone being too
intoxicated to consent, and that it is possible to have memory loss with only a
moderate level of intoxication,
the ‘black out’ marked a significant
shift in the impact of the Complainant’s intoxication on her, both in
of her mental and physical functioning.
the Defendant submitted that the relationship between the Complainant’s
physical incapacity and her mental incapacity
is unknown, the fact that her
intoxication had an impact on both aspects of her functioning is relevant to the
determination of whether
the level of her intoxication was such that she was
incapable of agreeing to the acts engaged in by the Defendant. The greater the
impact on the Complainant’s overall functioning, the stronger the
inference is that she was not mentally capable of giving
Impact at the time of the hallway incident
I have noted previously, the complainant did not enjoy being kissed by the
Defendant in the hallway and wanted to push him away
but her arms felt too heavy
for her to do so. She felt confused during the incident.
she was called into the karaoke room by Ms Rickard, the Complainant was swaying
as she walked towards Ms Rickard and swaying
as she sat on the couch with Ms
Rickard. The swaying was subtle, however, as noted above, Ms Rickard observed
that her speech was
slurred and she was not completely tracking with her eyes,
which were only half open. While she told Ms Rickard that she was fine,
Complainant appeared confused to Ms Rickard, as the Complainant gave evidence
that she was.
considerations, particularly the Complainant’s state of confusion, support
the conclusion that the Complainant was incapable
of consenting to the acts
engage in by the Defendant.
that conclusion, the Defendant points to the fact that Ms Rickard called the
Complainant into the karaoke room and the Complainant
popped her head to one
side and walked over to Ms Rickard almost immediately. While the fact that she
was able to respond to her
name being called is not inconsistent with her being
confused during the incident, it does suggest that she had some awareness of
what was going on around her. The fact that she kissed the Defendant back also
indicates that she had some awareness of what was
regard to all the circumstances, I am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
the impact of the Complainant’s intoxication
on her level of functioning
was such that she was incapable of agreeing to the Defendant kissing her.
Impact at the time of the bathroom incident
noted above, prior to the hallway incident, the Complainant had experienced the
‘black out’. She had begun to be physically
impacted as well, with
her arms feeling heavy while the Defendant was kissing her and she was beginning
to lose coordination. She
was swaying as she walked towards Ms Rickard after the
hallway incident and swaying on the couch as she spoke to her, albeit subtlely.
She was slurring her words and her eyes were only half open.
the bathroom incident, the Complainant did not fully understand what was going
on and did not know what to do.
exiting the bathroom, she was drowsy and her eyes were pretty much closed. The
Defendant submits that the limited extent to which
the Complainant was able to
open her eyes can be explained by tiredness, however I accept the evidence of Ms
Rickard and Ms Shearer
that it was the result of the Complainant’s
intoxication.
Complainant could not hold herself up well and needed assistance to walk. While
she could bear weight, she required assistance
to provide her with stability and
guide her in the right direction. Her level of physical functioning had clearly
deteriorated since
the hallway incident.
Ms Rickard asked the Complainant outside K-Bar if she was okay, she said she did
not know. When Ms Rickard asked her what happened,
the Complainant said that she
was not sure. While, as the Defendant submits, the Complainant might have
understood the first question
to refer to her general welfare, Ms
Rickard’s question as to whether the Complainant knew what had happened
cannot be explained
on that basis. It was clearly directed to the incident in
the men’s bathroom, from which Ms Rickard had just taken the Complainant.
Further, the Complainant’s presentation on exiting the bathroom is
consistent with her not being fully aware of what was happening.
In contrast to
the hallway incident, the Complainant had little to no awareness of what was
going on around her.
I have noted earlier in these reasons, the Complainant’s menstrual cup was
partially displaced during the bathroom incident.
It seems highly unlikely that
the Complainant would consciously permit that to occur.
find that both the Complainant’s physical and mental functioning had
deteriorated between the hallway and the bathroom incidents.
note that the Complainant was able to respond to questions on the walk back to
the hotel and she was able to recall where her phone
charger was in her room.
However, as I have noted, in responding to Ms Rickard’s initial questions
on the way back she said
that she did not know if she was okay and was not sure
what had happened between herself and the Defendant.
while her recollection of the location of her phone charger does demonstrate
some level of awareness and mental capacity
at that point, it appears to have
been at least 20 minutes after leaving K-Bar (having regard to the time taken to
walk back to the
hotel and the time the Complainant spent with Ms Rickard and Ms
Shearer in the foyer). During the majority of that time, the Complainant
walking outside in the no-doubt brisk air of an early August morning, which may
have facilitated a reduction of the degree to
which she was impacted by
intoxication. Nevertheless, she still crashed on her bed without getting changed
or taking her hair clip
out, with Ms Rickard needing to take off her shoes for
regard to the Complainant’s mental and physical presentation and, in
particular, to the fact that she did not fully understand
what was going on in
the men’s bathroom and afterwards was not sure what had happened, I am
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
that the Complainant was not capable of freely
and voluntarily agreeing to the acts the Defendant performed in the men’s
because of her level of intoxication. I am satisfied that the effect of
her intoxication was so substantial that it meant that she
was unable to
note that the Defendant submitted, in relation to Issue 3, that it is
significant that Ms Rickard did not perceive the Complainant
to be at such a
level of intoxication that the Complainant could not consent. The Defendant
pointed to the fact that Ms Rickard left
them to kiss in the hallway outside the
men’s bathroom and did not intervene when they were in the bathroom.
the question as to whether the Complainant was too intoxicated to consent is, of
course, a question for the Court, I accept
that Ms Rickard was in a good
position to make an assessment from her knowledge of the Complainant and her
observations of the Complainant
on the relevant evening. I also accept that her
decision to leave the Defendant and the Complainant to their own devices in the
provides some indication that she may have considered that the
Complainant was capable of consenting.
her actions must be placed in the appropriate context. She had called the
Complainant away from the Defendant when he was
kissing her in the hallway
precisely because she did have concerns about the Complainant’s
comprehension as to what was happening.
She checked on her when they were in the
hallway outside the men’s bathroom because she maintained her concerns
following her
interaction with the Complainant on the couch.
she decided to respect the Defendant’s and the Complainant’s
welfare, when she left
them in the bathroom together (initially without saying anything and later when
she gave them a 10 minute
warning because K-Bar was closing) is unclear. Perhaps
she thought that they were still kissing. She did not know what they were
and she seemed to have been surprised and concerned to learn, later, that they
were behind the locked door together.
Ultimately,
Ms Rickard did not possess all of the evidence that is available to me and she
did not have the opportunity for calm reflection
that I have had. I have taken
her actions into account, but remain of the view that, on all the evidence,
there is no doubt that
the Complainant was unable to consent because of
intoxication.
conclusion provides a further reason why I am satisfied that the Complainant did
not consent to the acts engaged in by the Defendant.
That is, even if, contrary
to the conclusion I have reached on Issue 1, it was possible that the
Complainant said or did something
indicating her agreement to the acts that the
Defendant performed, she was incapable of providing consent because of
intoxication.
Issue 3 – Was the Defendant reckless as to
the Complainant’s consent?
What is the test for recklessness?
is the common law test for recklessness that applies to the offence of act of
R v MZ (No 3)
[2021] ACTSC 322.
R v MZ (No 3)
Loukas-Karlsson J stated at [25]:
As outlined
MZ v The Queen
at [24] and
at [19], recklessness is
established in one of three ways:
(b) If the accused actually knew that the complainant did not consent; or
(c) If the accused realised there was a possibility that the complainant did not
consent and went ahead anyway; or
(d) If the accused did not even consider the issue of consent and did not care
whether the complainant consented.
am not to take into account the possibility that the Defendant was intoxicated
in deciding the Defendant’s knowledge (or recklessness)
as to whether the
Complainant consented to the relevant acts (s
Parties’ submissions
Prosecution
Prosecution says that the Complainant’s level of intoxication, and
inability to look after herself towards the end of the
evening, must have been
obvious to the Defendant (and yet he proceeded to engage in the acts that he
Prosecution further submits that any belief that the Defendant held that the
Complainant was capable of consenting was unreasonable
given her level of
intoxication (relying on s 67(4)).
Defendant submits that it is important to understand what the Defendant knew at
the time of the incidents. In this respect, he
submits that he:
(1) did not observe the Complainant drinking excessively – she was just
another member of the group;
(2) would not have observed signs of extreme intoxication – the
Complainant was not incoherent, falling over or vomiting;
(3) would have observed the Complainant kissing him back;
(4) would have observed the Complainant being taken away by Ms Rickard into the
karaoke room, but then continuing with him in the
hallway; and
(5) would have observed Ms Rickard coming to check on the Complainant but then
leaving them alone.
Defendant submits that it is significant that Ms Rickard did not perceive the
Complainant to be at such a level of intoxication
that the Complainant could not
consent. She left them to kiss, left them in the hallway and left them behind a
closed a door. The
Defendant submits that Ms Rickard might have been distracted
from looking out for the Complainant, but there is no evidence that
distractions concerned anything important.
Defendant notes that, apart from Ms Rickard, no one was concerned about the
Complainant’s level of intoxication or expressed
any concern for her
safety (at least at K-Bar).
Defendant submits that the Prosecution has not established that the Defendant
knew that the Complainant was not consenting, nor
that he must have realised
that she did not consent and went ahead anyway and nor that he did not consider
the question of consent
and did not care whether the Complainant consented or
Consideration
I have found earlier in these reasons, I am not satisfied that the
Complainant’s action in kissing the Defendant in the hallway
amount to agreement by conduct, nor that the impact of the Complainant’s
intoxication on her level of functioning was
such that she was incapable of
agreeing to the Defendant kissing her in the hallway. Accordingly, my
consideration of whether the
Defendant was reckless as to the
Complainant’s consent only concerns the bathroom
Recklessness as to lack of consent to the acts
performed in the bathroom
have found that the Complainant did not do or say anything to indicate that she
consented to the Defendant pulling her pants and
underwear down and bending her
over. The Defendant thus knew that he performed those acts without the
Complainant’s consent.
Defendant could not assume, from the fact that the Complainant went into the
bathroom with him, that she consented to the acts
he performed on her in there.
She did not want to be in the men’s bathroom and it was the Defendant who
led her into the bathroom
if the Complainant had agreed to go into the bathroom with the Defendant, it
does not follow that she consented to whatever sexual
acts the Defendant wanted
to perform in there.
could the Defendant assume that, because the Complainant kissed him back to some
extent in the hallway, she consented to a different
sexual act in the
men’s bathroom (s 67(2)).
Recklessness as to the effect of
the Complainant’s intoxication
Defendant submits that he did not observe the Complainant drinking excessively,
however the evidence does not support such a finding.
There is no evidence as to
whether the Defendant observed the number of drinks that the Complainant
consumed. If he was watching
her closely, he would have seen her drink six
drinks prior to arriving at K-Bar, by which time she was at or approaching a
level of intoxication, followed by several glasses of wine, possibly in
addition to spirits. That is an excessive amount of alcohol.
or not the Defendant was paying attention to the volume of alcohol that the
Complainant was consuming, he would have observed
that she was significantly
intoxicated at the time he kissed her and led her to the men’s bathroom,
being around an 8 out of
10 level of intoxication. He would have observed that
the Complainant appeared more intoxicated than anyone else and that there had
been a significant shift in her presentation since the time he was singing with
her in the karaoke room.
the time that the Defendant kissed the Complainant in the hallway, he may not
have appreciated the impact of the Complainant’s
level of intoxication,
particularly given the Complainant’s capacity to respond to Ms Rickard
calling her from the karaoke
said that, his experience kissing the Complainant, both in the hallway outside
the karaoke room and outside the men’s
bathroom, was that she was not an
active participant. Ms Rickard observed that she was stiff. The Complainant was
only kissing the
Defendant back minimally.
would be unusual for a person to participate in a kiss in that way unless they
were an unwilling participant or impacted by intoxication
(or both). In my view,
it must have been apparent to the Defendant that the Complainant’s
engagement with him was impacted
to some extent by her intoxication,
particularly as that lack of engagement continued during the bathroom incident.
as I have found above, the Complainant’s level of physical functioning
deteriorated between the hallway and bathroom
incidents, most notably in
relation to her walking capacity. It had changed from a subtle sway to the
Complainant not being able
to hold herself up well. She needed assistance to
Defendant would have observed the Complainant walking away from him in the
hallway to the karaoke room. Having led her to the
bathroom, the Defendant must
have realised that she was not steady on her feet at the time of the bathroom
incident. He would also
have observed that she was drowsy and her eyes were
pretty much closed.
Defendant was also aware that Ms Rickard had shown concern in relation to the
Complainant’s engagement with the Defendant.
She had called the
Complainant away from the Defendant when he was kissing her in the hallway and
she had checked on the Complainant
when the Defendant was kissing her outside
the men’s bathroom. The Defendant must have realised that Ms Rickard was
for the Complainant’s welfare and, given the Complainant’s
presentation, the Defendant must have realised that it was
possible that Ms
Rickard was concerned that the Complainant could not look after herself because
of the level of her intoxication.
is so, even though Ms Rickard did not intervene when she saw them kissing
outside the men’s bathroom, or when she initially
advised them that K-Bar
was closing. Ms Rickard’s observation of them kissing outside the
men’s bathroom was brief and
it must have been obvious to the Defendant
that Ms Rickard was checking on them.
that stage too, the sexual acts engaged in by the Defendant had not progressed
beyond kissing the Complainant. To the extent that
the Defendant’s
assessment of the Complainant’s capacity to consent was influenced by Ms
Rickard’s actions, he
would have appreciated that Ms Rickard’s
concern for her friend’s capacity to consent to the Defendant kissing her
be of a different level to any concern she might have with respect to the
Complainant’s capacity to consent to other sexual
Rickard’s decision to leave the Defendant and the Complainant in the
bathroom together, and to simply provide a 10 minute
warning when the K-Bar was
closing, does lend greater support for the view that she considered that the
Complainant was capable of
consenting to the Defendant’s actions. However,
as I have noted in relation to Issue 2, she did not know what the Defendant
the Complainant were doing and she seemed to have been surprised and concerned
to learn, later, that they were behind the locked
door together.
Regardless,
I do not consider that Ms Rickard’s decision to give the Defendant and the
Complainant a time warning, rather than
demand their exit, played any part in
the Defendant’s assessment of the Complainant’s capacity to consent.
The combination
of matters I have referred to above must have caused the
Defendant to realise that:
(1) the Complainant was not just drunk, but significantly intoxicated; and
(2) it was possible that the effect of the Complainant’s intoxication was
so substantial that it meant that she was incapable
of giving informed, free and
voluntary agreement to the acts he engaged in.
the Defendant went ahead anyway. As I found in relation to Issue 1, he did so
despite the fact that the Complainant did not participate
in those acts.
Defendant submits that I should make something of the fact that the Complainant
continued to kiss him in the hallway after she
spoke with Ms Rickard. The fact
that she kissed him back provides some indication that she was capable of
consenting to the kiss,
however the manner in which she did so cast doubt on
that capability. I also note that it was most likely to have been the Defendant
who led the Complainant away from the karaoke room and down the hall and that it
was he who initiated the kiss with the Complainant
outside the men’s
bathroom, rather than the Complainant having initiated any of that conduct.
am satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that the Defendant realised that there
was a possibility that the Complainant was unable
to consent to the acts he
performed on her in the bathroom, because of intoxication, but he performed
those acts anyway.
to the first charge – proceedings CC2023/9995 (the hallway incident), I am
not satisfied that the Prosecution has established
that the Complainant did not
consent to the Defendant kissing her, nor that she was incapable of consenting
to that act because of
intoxication. Accordingly, I find the Defendant not
guilty of the offence charged.
to the second charge – proceedings CC2023/9996 (the bathroom incident), I
am satisfied that the Prosecution has established
that the Complainant did not
consent to the Defendant pulling her pants and underwear down and bending her
over and, further, that
the Complainant was incapable of giving consent to those
acts in any event because of intoxication. I am also satisfied that the
Defendant knew that the Complainant did not consent to those acts and, further,
that he realised that there was a possibility that
the Complainant was incapable
of consenting because of intoxication but went ahead anyway. Accordingly, I find
the Defendant guilty
of the offence
I certify that the preceding one-hundred and ninety-eight [198] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of
his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Niamh Dwyer
Date: 21 January 2025
RTF format (404 KB)
Signed PDF/A format