Hartfield v Calvary Healthcare ACT Ltd (No 4) [2025] ACTSC 488 (31 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Hartfield v Calvary Healthcare ACT Ltd (No 4)
[2025] ACTSC 488
Hearing Date:
11 September 2023 – 15 September 2023; 14 December 2023 – 15
December 2023; 13 May 2024 – 14 May 2024
Decision Date:
Judgment is entered for the plaintiff in the sum of $118,306.
Catchwords:
– MEDICAL NEGLIGENCE – where plaintiff
suffered ectopic pregnancy – where plaintiff had a history of ectopic
and miscarriage – where plaintiff discharged from hospital where
ectopic pregnancy had not been excluded – where ectopic
pregnancy ruptured
while the plaintiff was at home – where urgent salpingectomy later
performed – where plaintiff rendered
unable to naturally conceive
– MEDICAL NEGLIGENCE – whether defendant
breached its duty of care in failing to perform a diagnostic laparoscopy during
the plaintiff’s first hospital admission – where expert evidence was
that laparoscopy presents its own risks –
where expert evidence suggests
likelihood of laparoscopy leading to successful salpingostomy was low –
breach of duty and causation
on primary case not established
– MEDICAL NEGLIGENCE – whether hospital
breached its duty of care in discharging the plaintiff while at risk of ectopic
pregnancy without providing adequate advice concerning risk of ectopic pregnancy
– where plaintiff suffered psychiatric injury
– whether contributory
negligence – claim established – damages awarded
Legislation Cited:
Administrative Arrangements 2019 (No 1)
(Wrongs) Act 2002
Liability Act 2002
Court Procedure Rules 2006
rr 1241, 1243
Health Infrastructure Enabling Act 2023
Legislation Act 2001
(ACT), dictionary
Public Sector
Management Act 1994
Cases Cited:
AB v Australian Capital Territory
[2018] ACTSC 16
Alananzeh v
Zgool Form Pty Ltd
[2024] ACTSC 16
Alananzeh v Zgool Form Pty Ltd
[2025] ACTCA 19
ASIC v Hellicar
[2012] HCA 17
Austen v Tran
[2023] ACTCA 44
Brandi v Mingot
Dixon v Foote & Calvary Health Care ACT Limited
Fuller v Australian Capital Territory
[2024] ACTCA
Gestmin SGPS v Credit Suisse (UK) Ltd
[2013] HWHC (Comm) 3560
Hartfield v Calvary Healthcare ACT Ltd
[2023] ACTSC
Hartfield v Calvary Healthcare ACT Ltd (No 3)
[2024] ACTSC
Heron v McGregor
(1986) 6 NSWLR 246
Horne v J K Williams
Contracting Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 58
; 104 MVR 1
J and E Vella Pty
Ltd v Hobson
[2023] NSWCA 234
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
Kelly v The King
[2024] VSCA 69
Kuhl v Zurich Financial
Services Australia Ltd
[2011] HCA 11
243 CLR 361
Ling v Pang
[2023] NSWCA 112
McLennan v Meyer Vandenberg
[2020] ACTCA
Nominal Defendant v Cordin
[2017] NSWCA 6
v Vergottis
[1968] Lloyds LR 403
Read v Burns
[2017] ACTSC 184
Rogers v Whitaker
[1992] HCA 58
175 CLR 479
Rosenberg v
[2001] HCA 18
205 CLR 434
S and XT v Calvary Health Care
ACT trading as Calvary Hospital and Dr Andrew Foote
[2018] ACTSC
Smith v Samuels
(1976) 12 SASR 574
SSABR Pty Ltd v AMA Group
[2024] NSWCA 175
Strong v Woolworths Limited
[2012] HCA 5
Tabet v Gett
[2010] HCA 12
240 CLR 537
The Property
Investors Alliance Pty Ltd v C88 Project Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2023] NSWCA
Vairy v Wyong Shire Council
[2005] HCA 62
223 CLR 422
Wallace v Kam
250 CLR 375
Watson v Foxman
[1995] NSWCA 497
(1995) 49 NSWLR 315
Government Insurance Office of New South Wales
[1981] HCA 38
Wilkins v Council of the City of Broken Hill
[2005] NSWCA 468
Texts Cited:
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Psychiatric Disorders
Psychiatric Association, 5
Explanatory Statement,
Health Infrastructure Enabling Bill 2023
Emily Hartfield (Plaintiff)
Calvary Healthcare ACT Ltd (Defendant)
Representation:
D Toomey SC with D Richards (Plaintiff)
J Morris SC with E Elbourne (Defendant)
Maliganis Edwards Johnson (Plaintiff)
ACT Government Solicitor (Defendant)
File Number:
SC 251 of 2022
Table of Contents
before 10:30am on the morning of 31 July 2019, the plaintiff, Ms Emily
Hartfield, attended what was then the Calvary Hospital
in North Canberra (the
Hospital). She was five weeks pregnant. The plaintiff had previously had two
miscarriages and an ectopic pregnancy
(where a fertilised egg implants and grows
outside of the uterus, commonly in the fallopian tube), the latter of which had
in the loss of the plaintiff’s right fallopian tube. The
plaintiff was suffering pain and bleeding, and feared that she may
suffering from a second ectopic pregnancy. If untreated, an ectopic pregnancy
can be dangerous, and can result in death.
plaintiff was admitted into hospital and various investigations were undertaken.
The plaintiff was discharged home at around 1:30pm
the following day, 1 August
2019. At the time of the plaintiff’s discharge, her diagnosis was a
pregnancy of unknown location:
neither a miscarriage nor a tubal ectopic
pregnancy had been ruled out.
plaintiff’s pain increased whilst she was at home over the evening of 1
August 2019 and into the following morning. The
plaintiff returned to the
Emergency Department of the Hospital at approximately 6:00am on 2 August 2019.
An ectopic pregnancy was
diagnosed and the plaintiff was taken into emergency
surgery, where she underwent a laparoscopic left salpingectomy (a procedure
the removal of her remaining fallopian tube).
plaintiff seeks damages against the Hospital for negligence. The
plaintiff’s primary case is that the Hospital should have
performed a
laparoscopy (keyhole surgery of the abdomen and pelvis) on her first admission.
She contends that a laparoscopy would
have revealed the ectopic pregnancy,
enabling the performance of a salpingostomy (a procedure for the removal of an
ectopic pregnancy
from a fallopian tube which does not involve removal of the
tube itself). The plaintiff further contends that, if a salpingostomy
performed, she had a reasonable chance of retaining her natural fertility.
the alternative, the plaintiff contends that the Hospital breached its duty of
care to her by discharging her on 1 August 2019,
in circumstances where an
ectopic pregnancy had not been ruled out, she was still in pain, and where she
had not been provided with
adequate advice concerning the seriousness of her
plaintiff submits that if she had not been discharged from the Hospital at that
time, she would have been in hospital when her
pain noticeably increased later
that evening. She contends that if she had been in hospital when her pain
increased, a successful
salpingostomy may have been performed; or, in the
alternative, that she would not have sustained psychological injury (namely,
Traumatic Stress Disorder), which, she contends was caused by the distress
and fear which she suffered in the lead up to the emergency
surgery that was
performed on 2 August 2019.
the reasons outlined below, I am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that the plaintiff has established that the defendant
should have performed a
laparoscopy during her first admission. I am also not satisfied on the balance
of probabilities that, if
such a procedure had been performed, it would have
been followed by a successful salpingostomy. Accordingly, the plaintiff has not
established liability on her primary case.
I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the defendant breached its
duty of care by discharging the plaintiff
in the circumstances that occurred
(that is, without offering the plaintiff an opportunity to remain in hospital
for observation
and pain management and without full information being provided
to the plaintiff about her condition, and the risk posed by increasing
am also satisfied on the balance of probabilities that this breach caused the
plaintiff to suffer both physical and psychological
harm. The defendant is
liable for the damages caused by this negligence.
proceedings
proceedings were listed for hearing in September 2023 with a four day estimate.
That hearing ultimately extended over five days,
and encompassed oral evidence
from the following witnesses:
(a) The plaintiff;
(b) The plaintiff’s sister, Madeleine Hartfield;
(c) Wendy Dansby, a registered nurse who attended the plaintiff on 31 July 2019
and 1 August 2019;
(d) Dr Yogesh Bodulkar, the attending obstetrics and gynaecological registrar
who examined the plaintiff on 31 July 2019 and 1 August
(e) Dr Uche Menakaya, the on-call obstetrics and gynaecological consultant who
examined the plaintiff on 31 July 2019 and was involved
in the decision to
discharge her on 1 August 2019;
(f) Associate Professor Louis Izzo, obstetrician and gynaecologist, Dr Vince
Lamaro, obstetrician and gynaecologist, and Professor
Jonathan Hyett,
obstetrician and gynaecologist, each of whom gave medical evidence in an expert
(g) Dr Stephen Allnutt, forensic psychiatrist, and Dr Antonella Ventura,
psychiatrist, who gave evidence in an expert conclave; and
(h) Dr Felicity Brims, the plaintiff’s treating gynaecologist and a
fertility specialist.
the conclusion of the first hearing, the parties sought an opportunity to
provide written submissions to the Court, and for the
proceedings to be
adjourned to enable oral submissions to follow the exchange of those written
submissions. I acceded to this application
and made orders for the filing of
written submissions by both parties, and for the hearing of oral submissions on
15 December 2023.
its written submissions, the defendant objected to the plaintiff’s
reliance on the alternative case referred to at [5] above.
On 13 December 2023,
the plaintiff made an application for the hearing of the oral submissions to be
vacated. After hearing from
the parties on this application, I vacated the
hearing and made orders granting leave to the plaintiff to file and serve an
Statement of Claim, with an order that costs be costs in the cause:
Hartfield v Calvary Healthcare ACT Ltd
[2023] ACTSC 401
Hartfield (No
). In brief, I held that whilst the plaintiff’s alternative case was
within the scope of the original pleadings, it could have
been more clearly
articulated, and that the pleadings should be amended to make the alternative
case abundantly clear. Senior Counsel
for the plaintiff accepted that the
defendant should be afforded an opportunity to plead a case of contributory
negligence in reply.
He also accepted that the plaintiff should be recalled to
permit the defendant to cross-examine her about on issues relevant to the
plaintiff’s alternative case.
proceedings were listed for further hearing in May 2024 to enable this to occur.
Prior to that hearing, I made further rulings
concerning the pleadings and the
Hartfield v Calvary Healthcare ACT Ltd (No 3)
[2024] ACTSC 137.
At the final hearing, the plaintiff was recalled and cross-examined. The
defendant also adduced evidence from Dr Yvonne Skinner,
forensic psychiatrist,
in relation to the plaintiff’s claim for damages relating to her alleged
psychological injury.
plaintiff’s medical history
plaintiff, Ms Hartfield, was born on 18 June 1991 and is currently 34 years
plaintiff has previously suffered two miscarriages, the first in 2013, and the
second in 2015.
4 November 2015, the plaintiff presented to Calvary Hospital after 17 days of
vaginal bleeding, cramping and abdominal pain. She
was diagnosed as having an
ectopic pregnancy in her right fallopian tube. The plaintiff underwent a
laparoscopic (“keyhole”)
right salpingectomy (removal of part or all
of the fallopian tube). During the laparoscopy, two peritoneal windows and
endometriosis
were identified.
early 2016, the plaintiff became pregnant with her daughter. The plaintiff
subsequently gave birth to her daughter at Calvary Hospital
on 9 October
24 April 2018, the plaintiff presented to the Calvary Hospital Emergency
Department with increasing pain and nausea. The plaintiff
underwent a
laparoscopic left ovarian cystectomy and a hysteroscopy (examination of the
inside of the uterus) on 26 April 2018 to
remove a cyst on her left ovary. This
surgery was performed without complications.
plaintiff’s first admission (the events the subject of the present
July 2019, the plaintiff became pregnant, as confirmed by Human Chorionic
Gonadotropin (hCG) levels from a blood test requested
by her General
Practitioner.
the evening of 30 July 2019, the plaintiff began experiencing abdominal pain in
her lower left-side abdomen, cramping and spotting.
At that time, she had been
experiencing vaginal bleeding for six days.
following morning, the plaintiff called her sister, Madeleine Hartfield.
Madeleine Hartfield went to the plaintiff’s house,
where she found the
plaintiff in pain, holding her stomach. The plaintiff immediately drove herself
to hospital, leaving her daughter
in the care of her sister.
10:19am, she presented to the Hospital, where she was triaged and examined by
Emergency Department staff.
Department examination (10:19am)
The Emergency Department Records
Emergency Department Records of the Hospital record that the plaintiff presented
to the Emergency Department at 10:19am and was
assessed as having a triage level
of three. The presenting problem is described as “pain - abdo/
pelvis/ perineal”. The
nurse assessment record states that the plaintiff
was complaining of left sided abdominal pain, that the plaintiff was 5/40 weeks
gestation and had vaginal spotting and cramping pain. The record further records
that the plaintiff reported a history of a previous
ectopic pregnancy and two
miscarriages.
first entry in the Patient Progress Notes (the Progress Notes) on 31 July 2019
does not appear to have a time recording. It states
that the plaintiff had
reported a previous ectopic pregnancy, on the right hand side, which had
ruptured and required surgery. The
note further states that (i) the plaintiff
reported a 5/40-week gestation based on her last menstrual period; (ii) the
had been bleeding (spotting) for the past 6 days; (iii) the plaintiff
had been suffering pain since the previous day, which was “getting
worse”; and (iv) the plaintiff was allergic to penicillin and opioids. The
note records that the “plan” was to
obtain an ultrasound on an
“urgent” basis as well as obtaining various blood tests.
The plaintiff’s evidence
plaintiff said that at the time she went to hospital, the pain was
“excruciating”, and felt like she was being “stabbed”
the left side of her body. She said that based on how she was feeling and the
pain, she thought that she was having an ectopic
pregnancy. She said that she
told the nurse that she believed she was having an ectopic pregnancy.
hospital records contain a chart recording the plaintiff’s MEWS (Modified
Early Warning Scores) records for the duration
of her first admission. That
chart indicates that the plaintiff’s respiratory rate, oxygen saturation
levels, heart rate, blood
pressure and temperature were within normal levels,
giving MEWS scores of 0 at each observation throughout 31 July 2019 and 1 August
2019, other than at 10:40am on 30 July 2019 (at which time the plaintiff is
recorded as having a temperature MEWS of 1, by reason
of a lower than normal
temperature). The row for “pain score” (between 0, indicating no
pain and 10 indicating worst
pain) is not filled out for any entry on 31 July
2019 or 1 August 2019.
examination at 10:45am on 31 July 2019
The nursing notes
a record entitled “Emergency Department Assessment”, the
plaintiff’s presenting problem is described as “lower
abdo pain L)
hand side cramping spotting 4/40 weeks gestation”. The entry for
“Relevant Patient Medical/Surgical History”
records “ectopic
pregnancy Nov 2015 – removal of R) [right fallopian rube]”. Under
the heading “Medication
taken prior to arrival”, it is recorded that
the plaintiff had taken paracetamol at 7:30am. On a pain scale of six faces
progressively from a happy expression to distressed expression, the
third face in the sequence is circled.
first entry in the nursing notes was written by Nurse Dansby at 10:45am. That
note states:
Pt has self presented to ED with L) Lower abdo pain with onset last evening. Pt
has Hx [history] of ectopic pregnancy in 2015 R)
tubes removed. Pt has allergies
to penicillin and most opioids. Pt is 4/40 weeks gestation. A patent and clear,
B spontaneous, RR
[respiratory rate] 19, SPO2 [oxygen levels] 100% on RA [room
air]. C HR [heart rate] regular 90bpm cap refill C3 sec. D Pt alert
The plaintiff’s evidence
plaintiff gave evidence that when she was first seen by a nurse, she told the
nurse that she had “experienced two miscarriages
before and an ectopic
pregnancy, and that the pain that [she] was feeling ... like [she] was having
another ectopic pregnancy”,
although she could not remember “word
for word” what she had said.
plaintiff gave evidence that she informed the nurse that she was in
“severe pain”. She recalled that the nurse was
writing at the time
but was unsure whether she noted this down.
Nurse Dansby’s evidence
Dansby did not have any recollection of her interactions with the plaintiff.
Nurse Dansby could not categorically state whether
the plaintiff at any time
told her she was in severe pain; or if she at any time observed the plaintiff in
severe pain. However,
Nurse Dansby gave evidence that she would have recorded
that the plaintiff was in severe pain if the plaintiff had made this
Dansby confirmed that she had filled in the diagram of cartoon faces. She gave
evidence that the estimate depicted referred
to her observations, rather than
the plaintiff’s self-reported pain. She also gave evidence that the third
face indicates the
patient is “neutral” – that is, not in pain
but not happy.
ultrasound report dated 11:43am on 31 July 2019 recorded a clinical history of
“?ectopic pregnancy. hx of ectopic pregnancy
on right + surgery. pain to
left lower abdo. 5/40 gestation, no u/s for this pregnancy. ++ pain and PV
bleeding.” Under the
heading “Findings”, the report states:
The uterus, endometrium and ovaries appear normal. No adnexal masses. A small
amount of free fluid is seen in the pelvis. No ultrasound
evidence of a [sic] an
intra or extrauterine gestation.
consultation with Dr Bodulkar
approximately 2:30pm on 31 July 2019, Dr Bodulkar held a consultation with the
plaintiff. Dr Bodulkar conducted a physical examination
of the plaintiff at this
consultation, which included an abdominal examination.
The Progress Notes
Patient Progress Notes, which were written by Dr Bodulkar, record that the
plaintiff was “conscious/comfortable” upon
a physical examination,
that she had “no guarding/rigidity”, “[minimal] tenderness in
[left side] iliac fossa”,
and that she was stable. The Progress Notes also
record a “DD” [Differential Diagnosis] of “Risk/ Ectopic due
past history”; “Ongoing miscarriage” and “PUL”
[Pregnancy of Unknown Location].
apparently separate entry (without a time notation) states that “pt
complains of [increasing] pain to RIF [right iliac fossa]
from 1 hour ago”
and that a phone call had been made to the O & G Registrar. The entry also
records “[h]e will call
anaesthetics for pain review”.
The plaintiff’s evidence
plaintiff recalled Dr Bodulkar discussing the ultrasound, and her beta-hCG
levels in this consultation. She also recalled that
Dr Bodulkar advised her that
it was likely that she was having a miscarriage and that the pain was
“likely from an ovulation
plaintiff initially did not recall any conversation about the risk of an ectopic
pregnancy, or any conversations about the prospect
of surgery in this
consultation. However, in cross-examination, she accepted that she was told
generally about the plan for her treatment,
including that she should have
“nil by mouth” in case surgery was required.
plaintiff denied that she was “comfortable” during this examination.
In her evidence in chief, the plaintiff said
that during this consultation, she
was experiencing severe pain, and she said that she told Dr Bodulkar that this
was the case. However,
in cross-examination, she stated that she had confused
the times, and that she did not tell Dr Bodulkar that she was in pain severe
during the first consultation, but just said words to the effect of that she was
“coping”. She maintained that she was
“curled up”,
“in a ball” and that she was “putting pressure on the left
side of [her] body”.
Dr Bodulkar’s evidence
Bodulkar gave evidence that the notation in the Progress Notes reflected his own
observations, rather than anything the plaintiff
said. He considered that
“signs of discomfort” would include a patient being visibly in pain,
unable to provide a medical
history, lying down or curling up, using a heat pack
or pillow, holding on to a carer, or asking for pain relief. He stated that
these signs are not recorded in his notes, they were not present. He also gave
evidence that if the plaintiff had reported that
she was in severe pain at the
time, he would have recorded this in his notes and would have offered her pain
medication.
Bodulkar also gave evidence that where a patient presents with abdominal pain
and a history of ectopic pregnancy and abdominal
pain, the first thing he will
check for is the signs of an acute abdomen, such as guarding and rigidity, to
determine whether urgent
surgery is required.
Bodulkar explained that where there is a risk of ectopic pregnancy, an attempt
will be made to identify the ectopic pregnancy using
an ultrasound. He accepted
that the symptoms of an ectopic pregnancy and an ongoing miscarriage overlap,
and that the plaintiff’s
symptoms were consistent with both
Bodulkar stated that he would have discussed the suspicion and risk to patient
of an ectopic pregnancy with the plaintiff during
this initial consultation. In
particular, he believed that, when taking the plaintiff’s medical history,
he would have explained
that he was doing so due to her history of ectopic
pregnancy. He accepted, however, that he did not make a note of this discussion,
and that it would have been important to do so. Nonetheless, Dr Bodulkar
maintained that he would have discussed the risk of an ectopic
pregnancy with
the plaintiff.
– Fentanyl administered
notes record that the plaintiff was given 50 mg Fentanyl at 5:00pm.
– Nursing note
the entry for 6:03pm on 31 July 2019, “Nurse Anita” recorded in the
nursing notes that the plaintiff had a “MEWS
level of 1” (although
the MEWs chart records a MEWS level of 0 at this time), and notes that the
plaintiff had been given 50mg
of Fentanyl at 5:00pm. The note further records
that the plaintiff had been “received by O & G” and later,
“admitted”.
A further sentence is illegible. Nurse Anita was not
called to give evidence.
– Fentanyl administered
notes record that the plaintiff was given a further 25 mg of Fentanyl at
consultation with Dr Bodulkar and Dr
8:30pm, the plaintiff was examined by Dr Bodulkar and Dr Menakaya. At this time,
Dr Menakaya conducted a physical examination and
a bedside ultrasound. This
was about 20 minutes after the plaintiff had been administered Fentanyl.
The Progress Notes
Progress Notes for this examination, which were recorded by Dr Bodulkar,
indicate that on a physical examination, the plaintiff
did not have an
“acute abdomen” (that is, she did not display guarding rigidity or
tenderness). The plaintiff’s
pulse rate was 87 and her blood pressure was
120/64. The notes describe the plaintiff as “stable”. The bedside
was “unremarkable”, but indicated the presence of a left
corpus luteum (a physiological finding in pregnancy or menstruation
cause pain).
Progress Notes also record that there was a “D/W [discussion with] patient
#DD: ongoing miscarriage / PUL [pregnancy of
unknown location]”. Under the
heading “Plan”, the notes state that the plaintiff’s hCG
levels should be tested
and that if hCG levels are decreasing, the patient may
be discharged home.
The plaintiff’s evidence
plaintiff recalled that Dr Menakaya performed a physical examination of her
during this consultation.
plaintiff gave evidence that during this consultation, Dr Bodulkar and Dr
Menakaya explained to her that her pain was likely the
result of an ovulation
issue. She said that it was explained that the ultrasound had not identified
where the pregnancy was. She
recalled a discussion about her differential
diagnoses, which she understood included a miscarriage or a pregnancy of unknown
The plaintiff recalled the possibility of a pregnancy of unknown
location being explained, but she did not recall being told that
she might be
having an ectopic pregnancy. She also did not believe that the plan for her
treatment was discussed.
relation to her pain levels at the consultation, the plaintiff gave evidence
that she informed Dr Menakaya that she was experiencing
pain on her left side,
similar to the pain experienced during her ectopic pregnancy in 2016. In
cross-examination, the plaintiff
accepted that she had told Dr Menakaya and Dr
Bodulkar that her pain had decreased after taking Fentanyl.
Dr Bodulkar’s evidence
Bodulkar gave evidence that the 8:30pm consultation occurred because the
plaintiff had complained of increased pain.
Bodulkar gave evidence that the plaintiff’s observations were stable. He
maintained that the absence of tenderness in the
abdomen indicated that the
plaintiff’s pain had subsided. He explained that the plan for the
plaintiff was made on the basis
that the pain had subsided. He acknowledged that
it was possible that the plaintiff’s pain had been reduced by the
which had been administered 20 minutes before the consultation. He
could not say whether he was aware at the time of the consultation
plaintiff had recently been administered pain medication. However, he explained
that the consultation had been arranged
because the plaintiff was complaining of
recent pain, and was requiring more painkillers.
Bodulkar agreed that, because an ectopic pregnancy carried a greater risk to the
plaintiff than miscarriage, he would have been
anxious to rule out a diagnosis
of an ectopic pregnancy. He acknowledged that in light of the plaintiff’s
high risk of ectopic
pregnancy, it would be important to make a note if the
plaintiff was informed of this risk. He accepted that no such note was made,
could not say whether the absence of such a note from the medical records
indicated that the plaintiff was not informed of this
Bodulkar explained that the plan for the plaintiff’s treatment should be
read in light of the circumstances in which it was
made – in particular,
that the plaintiff had been admitted at high risk of ectopic pregnancy. He noted
that the plan was also
made on the basis that there had been no ultrasound
findings, the plaintiff’s vital observations were stable, and she
minimal tenderness upon physical examination. He also explained that
the plan did not necessarily need to be followed if the plaintiff’s
circumstances changed.
Dr Menakaya’s evidence
Menakaya gave evidence that the plaintiff was admitted in order for her to be
observed and for additional tests to be conducted,
for the purpose of reaching a
probable diagnosis. Noting an ectopic pregnancy had not been located on the
previous ultrasound, he
accepted that it was important that he check for other
signs of that condition.
Menakaya gave evidence that he had consulted the medication chart, and knew that
the plaintiff had taken Fentanyl, but he was not
aware that the administration
of the drug had occurred just 20 minutes before the consultation. He
acknowledged that the pain medication
could have been a “confounding
factor” in his examination of the plaintiff.
Menakaya explained that the ultrasound revealed a corpeus luteum in the
plaintiff’s left ovary, which he considered was the
likely cause of the
plaintiff’s pain. The ultrasound did not show any increasing blood in the
plaintiff’s abdomen. Dr
Menakaya noted that an ultrasound is the best
available tool to identify an ectopic pregnancy, but acknowledged that the
possibility
of an ectopic pregnancy could not be excluded based only on
ultrasound results. He said that this was the reason the plaintiff was
overnight for continued monitoring of her symptoms and other parameters. He also
acknowledged that left sided pain was also
consistent with an ectopic pregnancy.
Dr Menakaya accepted that a miscarriage or a corpus luteum each carried
less risk than an ectopic
pregnancy, and that if the pregnancy was ectopic, the
plaintiff was in grave danger.
Menakaya gave evidence that his normal practice would be to talk to and examine
the plaintiff, discuss his findings and discuss
her options, including advising
her that an ectopic pregnancy was one of the potential differential diagnoses.
Menakaya initially said that whilst he would have advised the plaintiff that she
was potentially suffering from an ectopic pregnancy,
he did not believe he would
have advised the plaintiff that an ectopic pregnancy would result in her losing
her remaining tube, as
further assessment was needed at that time. He also later
clarified that he would not have discussed the risks of ectopic pregnancy
death with the plaintiff before she had been diagnosed with that condition.
Menakaya stated that, during this consultation, he was not able to exclude a
tubal ectopic pregnancy, and that this possibility
made it too risky to send the
plaintiff home at that time. However, he said that while that possibility
continued on 1 August 2019,
the “parameters changed”. He was not
asked to explain which parameters he was referring in this answer.
– Fentanyl administered
medication record states that the plaintiff was administered an additional 25mg
of Fentanyl at 11:10pm.
examination at 1:45am on 1 August 2019
the entry for 1:45am on 1 August 2019, “Nurse Xu” recorded that the
plaintiff was “alert and orientated”,
and that the plaintiff was
“given Fentanyl as charted” with good effect. Nurse Xu was not
called to give evidence.
examination at 5:30am on 1 August 2019
5:30am on 1 August 2019, it was recorded by Nurse Xu that the plaintiff
“slept most of the time during the night”,
and that her observations
were stable. The notes also recorded that the plaintiff’s pad had been
half bloodied, and that her
pad was changed.
The plaintiff’s evidence
plaintiff accepted that she had slept for “most” of the night,
although her sleep was intermittent. The plaintiff
also agreed that her pad
being half bloodied was a decrease from the previous day.
examination at 7:15am on 1 August 2019
The nursing notes
nursing note entry for 7:15am on 1 August 2019 (which was completed by Nurse
Dansby) recorded that the plaintiff was handed over
at 7:05am. The note records
that the plaintiff states “mild pain”. A MEWS score of zero was also
The plaintiff’s evidence
her evidence, the plaintiff recalled that during this examination, she rated her
pain as 6 out of 10, and that she was given paracetamol.
This does not accord
with the nursing notes, which only record the plaintiff complaining of 6 out of
10 pain later at 10:10am that
morning. There was no dispute that the plaintiff
did complain of 6 out of 10 pain at 10:10am.
Nurse Dansby’s evidence
oral evidence, Nurse Dansby clarified that her assessment of the
plaintiff’s MEWS score being 0 indicates that all of the
plaintiff’s
vital signs were “within range” at that time
Dansby could not recall whether or not the plaintiff told her she was in
“severe pain” at this time, but gave evidence
that if the plaintiff
had so reported, she would have recorded it in her notes. Similarly, Nurse
Dansby said that if the plaintiff
was curled up in a ball, in the foetal
position, or if the plaintiff had reported that she knew she had an ectopic
pregnancy and
required surgery, these observations likewise would have been
examination at 10:10am on 1 August 2019
The plaintiff’s evidence
plaintiff gave evidence that on the morning of 1 August 2019, she had a
discussion with nursing staff concerning her pain levels.
She recalled telling
the nurse that she was “still in pain”. The plaintiff said that the
nurse asked her to rate her
level of pain out of ten, with one being a low level
pain and ten being an extreme level of pain. The plaintiff gave evidence that
she rated her pain as being “6 out of 10”. The plaintiff recalled
that she was given paracetamol, which she said had
“some effect”.
The plaintiff gave evidence that her pain was severe when she asked for
paracetamol.
The nursing notes
nursing note dated 10:10am on 1 August 2019 recorded as follows:
Bloods requested in notes however no blood forms given. Blood taken and sent.
Paracetamol given as [incomplete]. Pt states 6/10 pain.
Nurse Dansby’s evidence
oral evidence, Nurse Dansby said that paracetamol was given to the plaintiff at
this time to manage the plaintiff’s pain.
She accepted that the plaintiff
“said she was in pain”. This was Nurse Dansby’s final
interaction with the plaintiff.
consultation with Dr Bodulkar
Progress Notes
Progress Notes for the 11:30am consultation were completed by Dr Bodulkar. The
notes record that the plaintiff was admitted for
“DD” [differential
diagnosis], and lists “spontaneous miscarriage ongoing, PUL [pregnancy of
unknown location]
and ectopic” as possible diagnoses. The notes record
that the plaintiff is at “high risk of ectopic [pregnancy] in view
Progress Notes further record that “[per vaginum] bleeding settled down
from 7pm till now. 3 pads changed with very minimal
loss” and “abdo
pain is less now and has taken only paracetamol”. The Progress Notes also
record that the plaintiff’s
hCG levels had fallen from 2738 on 31 July
2019 to 2071 on 1 August 2019.
Progress Notes state that on examination, the plaintiff was
“stable/comfortable” and her pulse, blood pressure and
saturation levels were within normal range. The results of a physical
examination are described as “soft” with
“no guarding/
rigidity/ tenderness. Nil acute abdomen”.
Progress Notes also contain a list of issues discussed with the plaintiff. This
list includes, among other things, “unplanned
pregnancy”,
“improved symptomology”, a social work referral (which is recorded
as “declined”), “good
family support”, and “plan
after d/w [discussion with] consultant”.
The plaintiff’s evidence
noted above, at 10:10am on 1 August 2019, the plaintiff had told Nurse Dansby
that her pain was a 6 out of 10, and was given paracetamol
to treat the pain.
The plaintiff said that at the time of her consultation with Dr Bodulkar, the
pain had been reduced, “not
[by] a huge amount, but enough that I could
straighten up my legs in the bed”.
plaintiff gave evidence that Dr Bodulkar told her that her pain levels were
going down, and that she could go home. She said that
Dr Bodulkar told her that
if she was “in any more pain [she] would come back to hospital”. The
plaintiff maintained that
there were no discussions about the possibility of the
pregnancy being ectopic, nor was there any discussion about other options
investigating the possibility of an ectopic pregnancy whilst in hospital.
plaintiff gave evidence that she was upset about being told that she was being
discharged because she had a small child at home,
and was worried that she could
not manage the pain with Panadol and Nurofen. She said that she was worried that
she was going to
be by herself if the ectopic pregnancy ruptured. She explained
that she was still “convinced [she] was having an ectopic
pregnancy”.
She acknowledged that she did not raise these concerns with Dr
Madeleine Hartfield’s evidence
plaintiff’s sister, Madeleine Hartfield, went to the hospital on 1 August
2019. She recalled that she was with the plaintiff
during a consultation at this
time with a male doctor.
Hartfield recalled that the male doctor asked the plaintiff if she needed home
support, a counsellor or psychiatric care
prior to discharge. She did not
otherwise recall what had been said. She said that the plaintiff was not holding
her stomach when
she was examined, and did not recall whether the plaintiff was
grimacing in pain at the time of the examination.
Dr Bodulkar’s evidence
Bodulkar gave evidence that, at the time of this consultation, the
plaintiff’s hCG levels had reduced by 24 – 25% since
the previous
day, constituting a “significant fall” in the hCG levels. The
plaintiff also suffered no ongoing per vaginum
bleeding at this time.
Bodulkar said that he performed a physical examination. He reported that the
plaintiff’s vital signs were stable, and that
her abdomen was soft and no
longer tender. Dr Bodulkar noted that “abdo pain is less now”, with
that pain being managed
with paracetamol. On this basis, Dr Bodulkar formed the
view that the plaintiff’s pain had started to improve, and that she
“comfortable”
Bodulkar gave evidence that, at this point, he diagnosed the plaintiff as
suffering from an ongoing spontaneous miscarriage, although
he could not rule
out a pregnancy of unknown location or ectopic pregnancy due to the
plaintiff’s medical history. Dr Bodulkar
gave evidence that the standard
treatment for a suspected miscarriage is to “wait and see how the natural
process of miscarriage
happens” and that hospital admission is generally
not required.
referred to his notation that reads “discuss with patient”, Dr
Bodulkar gave evidence that this “probably”
means that he informed
the plaintiff of her falling hCG levels, and discussed the improvement of her
symptomology. He further gave
evidence that he referred the plaintiff to a
social work service, which she declined.
Bodulkar gave evidence that if the plaintiff had complained of severe pain
during this consultation, he would have recorded that
complaint in his notes. He
similarly would have recorded if the plaintiff had been curled up in a
foetal-like position. He did not
recall the plaintiff looking pale or clenching
consultation between Dr Bodulkar and Dr
Progress Notes
entry in the Progress Notes for 12:00pm on 1 August 2019 records that Dr
Bodulkar had a consultation with Dr Menakaya concerning
the plaintiff’s
Progress Notes record that the outcome of this consultation was a plan for the
plaintiff to be discharged home, with “outreach
follow up”, to have
her hCG levels tested the following week, and to follow up with the Emergency
Department if there were
any concerns.
Dr Menakaya’s evidence
Menakaya gave evidence that he had no recollection of discussing the plaintiff
with Dr Bodulkar, though accepted that such a conversation
must have taken
place, given the reference to the conversation in Dr Bodulkar’s notes.
Menakaya could not recall whether Dr Bodulkar informed him that the plaintiff
had reported suffering 6 out of 10 pain. However,
he also gave evidence that if
he had been aware of the plaintiff’s pain score, he would
“likely” have elected to
examine the plaintiff himself. Further, had
he known of this pain score, he said that he would not have advised that the
be discharged.
Dr Bodulkar’s evidence
oral evidence, Dr Bodulkar confirmed that the plan referred to in the notes was
“[Dr Menakaya’s] plan as per [his]
review”. Dr Bodulkar was
unable to recall whether he informed Dr Menakaya of the plaintiff’s
complaint that she was suffering
from 6 out of 10 pain.
consultation
plaintiff saw Dr Bodulkar again at around 12:25pm on 1 August 2019. The
plaintiff’s sister, Madeleine Hartfield, was also
present at this
consultation.
Progress Notes
Progress Notes of this consultation record that “red flags” had been
“explained”, pathology forms had
been given to the plaintiff and
that the “patient plan” had been explained.
The plaintiff’s evidence
her evidence, the plaintiff said that she recalled Dr Bodulkar told her that he
was discharging her, that she needed to present
to her GP later in the week for
further blood tests, and that if she experienced “any more pain”,
she should present
Dr Bodulkar in which the term “red flags” was used. The
gave evidence that her pain levels remained “about the same” as they
were during the 11:30am consultation.
Madeleine Hartfield’s evidence
Hartfield, the plaintiff’s sister, gave evidence that while she recalled
being present at this consultation, she could
not recall any of the substance of
what was said during this consultation.
Dr Bodulkar’s evidence
Bodulkar gave evidence that during this consultation, he informed the plaintiff
of Dr Menakaya’s “patient plan”.
Dr Bodulkar said that he
reminded the plaintiff to be alert to any new or worsening symptoms. Dr Bodulkar
explained that whilst he
had “red flags” in his notes, he would not
have used that expression with the plaintiff. When asked what “red
referred to, Dr Bodulkar said:
So it is for the patient's clinical condition. So in this case, if the patient
has come with pregnancy, abdominal pain and vaginal
bleeding then we will tell
them those relevant red flags as maybe increase bleeding, increased pain, or if
this person was probably
high risk for ectopic, then we'll say that if you have
dizziness or if you pass away then someone has to bring her. [T191.20]
Bodulkar gave evidence that he did not recall the plaintiff looking pale or
clutching her abdomen during this consultation. He
also did not recall the
plaintiff telling him that she was having an ectopic pregnancy. He gave evidence
that if any of these things
had occurred, he would have recorded that in the
The nursing notes
nursing notes record that the plaintiff was transferred to the ward at around
12:25pm, and that her vital signs were stable at
nursing notes entry for 1:30pm records that the patient stayed in the ward for
approximately one hour, and was discharged home.
Those notes further record that
the plaintiff “walking outside ward to wait for husband to pick up”.
The author of that
record was not called to give evidence.
The plaintiff’s evidence
noted above, the plaintiff was discharged at around 1:30pm on 1 August 2019. She
said that her pain levels at this time were about
the same level as when she saw
Dr Bodulkar at 12:25pm on 1 August 2019. The plaintiff said that when she
left the hospital, her pain
was still on the left side, and she was
“hunched over” as she walked to the car.
her further cross-examination in May 2024, the plaintiff confirmed that, shortly
before her discharge from hospital, she informed
Dr Bodulkar that she suspected
she was experiencing an ectopic pregnancy, and that if she was to experience a
rupture while at home,
she was concerned that she would not know how to manage
it. She said that Dr Bodulkar told her to return to the hospital should her
pain increase. The plaintiff agreed that she was aware of the implications of a
rupture, having experienced a previous rupture in
Madeleine Hartfield’s evidence
Hartfield gave evidence that when they left hospital, the plaintiff remained in
pain. She said that she could not recall
if the plaintiff was grimacing, but she
said that the plaintiff “had a look on her face that she was in
pain” and was
holding her abdomen. She did not recall having to assist the
plaintiff in walking to, or getting into, the car.
Hartfield said that she was concerned about the plaintiff being discharged, but
she did not recall saying anything to the
plaintiff or to medical staff about
her concerns.
Discharge Summary
record entitled “Medical Nursing Discharge Summary” records that the
plaintiff’s discharge time was 1:30pm on
1 August 2019. The record states
that the plaintiff’s diagnosis was “abdo pain”. Under the
entry “Discharge
Advice and Special Instructions” is written:
“To present to Emergency Department in case of any Concern/
Deterioration.”
plaintiff returns home
Hartfield drove the plaintiff home. Madeleine Hartfield described the plaintiff
as remaining in pain once they arrived home,
with “a grimace on her face,
holding her stomach, hunched over, pale in her skin”.
plaintiff walked up the stairs to her house and went straight to her bedroom
where she lay down with a heater pack and her electric
blanket. She took some
more pain relief (Panadol) and stayed in bed.
some point during the afternoon, the plaintiff’s then husband (who had
been deployed overseas at the time) returned home.
The plaintiff’s sister
then left the plaintiff with her husband.
around 6:00pm – 7:00pm on the evening on 1 August 2023, while at home, the
plaintiff’s pain increased. She began sweating,
which the plaintiff
explained, occurs when she is in significant pain.
her further cross-examination, the plaintiff accepted that it was
“likely” that she turned her mind to the prospect
of returning to
the hospital when her pain increased, but did not do so. She took some
paracetamol and “just laid on [her]
side to just try and deal with
it”. She recalled that the pain she was experiencing at this time was not
as severe as the pain
she experienced during the 2015 rupture, and said that she
decided to “stay at home and see what happens”. After 7:00pm,
plaintiff said that she was “on and off sleeping”, sleeping for five
or ten minutes and then reshuffling to get comfortable,
before then dozing in
approximately 2:00am on 2 August 2023, the plaintiff experienced a sharp, sudden
onset of acute pain in her left tip shoulder as
well as vaginal bleeding. She
gave evidence that this pain was “the exact same pain” as the pain
she experienced during
her previous ectopic pregnancy, but on the opposite side.
She went to her ensuite bathroom suffering a “vomiting dizzy spell”.
plaintiff agreed that this was a very significant change in her symptoms. She
did not wake up her husband. She said that she was
terrified about going in and
having further surgery, and potentially dying. She said that she knew that these
symptoms were the symptoms
of an ectopic pregnancy.
plaintiff gave evidence that she then “tried to go back to bed with some
more pain relief, but the pain was so excruciating
that [she] ended up waking up
[her] ex-husband to take [her] to the hospital”. She said that this was
around 5:00am. The plaintiff
said that they had to wait for her parents to wake
up so that they could “tag team” with her daughter.
plaintiff said that after waking at 2:00am until she woke her husband at 5am,
she was “preparing [her]self”, “digesting
happening” and “waiting for a reasonable time to call someone ... to
come and look after [her] child so [she]
could go to the hospital”. She
said she had “never felt so much fear”. She accepted that if she had
been thinking
rationally, she would have called an ambulance immediately upon
the onset of this pain. However, she described experiencing an adrenaline
and that it felt like an “out of body” experience. She was also
concerned about disturbing her parents, sister and
husband during the night.
plaintiff’s re-admission and surgery on 2 August
plaintiff returned to the Hospital on 2 August 2019 at 6:38am, where she
presented to the Emergency Department with abdominal
pain, per vaginum bleeding,
and left shoulder pain. At about 7:45am, she was reviewed by a nurse from the
Emergency Department, who
conducted a bedside ultrasound which identified free
fluid in the plaintiff’s pelvis. She was again reviewed at 8:05am and
reviewed by the attending obstetrics and gynaecological registrar at 8:20am. The
attending registrar diagnosed her with a ruptured
ectopic pregnancy and referred
her to surgery.
plaintiff was re-admitted at 9:38am and a laparoscopic left salpingectomy was
conducted to remove her left fallopian tube. As
the plaintiff’s right
fallopian tube had been removed at the time of her first ectopic pregnancy in
2015, this procedure left
the plaintiff unable to have further children
plaintiff was discharged from Hospital on 3 August 2019.
plaintiff took personal leave following the surgery from 31 July to 2 August
2019. She then took a further 11 days off work using
recreational leave. She
gave evidence that this occurred by way of a verbal agreement with her
supervisor.
7 August 2019, the plaintiff attended her general practitioner (GP) at Ochre
Health Casey. She reported being upset about the removal
of her left fallopian
tube and having difficulty sleeping since the events on 2 August 2019, and was
prescribed melatonin. The plaintiff
gave evidence that the melatonin provided
some assistance.
plaintiff returned to her GP two days later, reporting increased per vaginum
bleeding and clots but reported that she was not
experiencing pain, fevers or
dizziness. She again expressed distress about her treatment at Calvary Hospital
and particularly concerning
the decision to discharge her on 31 August 2019 even
though an ectopic pregnancy had not been ruled out.
September 2019, the plaintiff was referred to Dr Felicity Brims and organised a
fertility consultation for November that year.
She subsequently cancelled the
appointment.
plaintiff gave evidence that, following her second ectopic pregnancy, her
marriage started to break down. The plaintiff gave evidence
that although the
2019 ectopic pregnancy and its consequences were not the only factors in the
deterioration of her marriage, “it
certainly was the tipping point”.
In February 2020, the plaintiff began seeing a psychologist, Ms Izzard,
regarding her intention
to end her marriage. In her evidence, the plaintiff
explained that she was seeking an expert opinion on how the separation would
effect their daughter.
plaintiff gave evidence that, in August 2020, around the time of the one year
anniversary of the 2019 ectopic pregnancy, she experienced
a sharp decline in
her mental health. She described herself as being “highly emotional”
and “sobbing inconsolably”.
She recalled taking one week off work as
December 2020, the plaintiff began considering freezing her eggs, and was
referred by her GP to Dr Brims. After consulting Dr Brims
successful egg freezing and IVF, the plaintiff began this process in mid-late
2021 and was hoping to commence
IVF in 2024.
Brims provided a report dated 6 July 2021 and also gave evidence in the
proceedings. In brief, her evidence was that as a result
plaintiff’s bilateral salpingectomy, it is no longer possible for her to
conceive naturally and IVF is now the only
option available to the plaintiff
that would allow her to conceive. Dr Brims expressed the view that the plaintiff
“has a good
chance of falling pregnant with IVF” in view of her age,
egg count and past history of successful conceptions. The success
embryo transfer is 30%, with 80% of women under 40 falling pregnant after two
rounds of IVF.
plaintiff gave evidence that she continues to experience “broken
sleep”. She also reported suffering from reoccurring
nightmares, the
subject of which has been dying in a hospital room. The plaintiff has not sought
any medical assistance in relation
to her psychological state, besides from her
GP and her two consultations with Ms Izzard. She said that she has not done this
she did not “have a lot of faith in the medical profession at this
point in [her] life”.
plaintiff now has a new partner, with whom she intends to have two children.
They intend to undergo IVF to facilitate this. The
plaintiff explained that she
is “sad and anxious” about the prospect of undergoing IVF.
medical evidence concerning the diagnosis and treatment of the
three experts
plaintiff obtained three expert reports from Associate Professor Izzo, and a
report from Professor Hyett. Although obtained at
the request of the plaintiff,
Professor Hyett’s report was tendered by the defendant, without objection
from the plaintiff.
response to the expert evidence obtained by the plaintiff, the defendant
obtained two expert reports from Dr Vincent Lamaro, a
gynaecologist and
endoscopic surgeon.
Lamaro is the Head of the Department of Gynaecology at St Vincent’s
Hospital in Sydney, and has held this position for over
a decade. He is also a
senior lecturer at the University of New South Wales and the University of Notre
Dame, each for over 15 years.
Hyett is a Professor of Obstetrics and Gynaecology at Western Sydney University.
He has published over 300 research papers
on foetal medicine. He is also a
clinical academic working in obstetrics and maternal foetal medicine at
Liverpool Hospital, where
he runs weekly clinical sessions on antenatal and
intrapartum care, and ultrasound and foetal medicine including the diagnosis of
foetal abnormalities.
curriculum vitae for Associate Professor Izzo was not tendered. However, in
cross-examination, Associate Professor Izzo indicated
that has been in practice
for 35 years, has been on the college examination boards and has taught
registrars over that period. He
said that he was still in clinical practice, and
still performed laparoscopies, salpingotomies and salpingectomies as a part of
clinical practice. Associate Professor Izzo described himself as a
“generalist” and acknowledged that he did not have
qualifications that Professor Hyett has in pregnancy and early
Professor Izzo’s First Report
his first report, dated 1 October 2020, Associate Professor Izzo observed that
the plaintiff had had three miscarriages between
2013 and 2015 followed by an
ectopic pregnancy in 2015.
further noted that the incidence of an ectopic pregnancy in a person who has had
a previous ectopic pregnancy rises from 1–2%
Professor Izzo was of the opinion that this risk should have been factored into
the plaintiff’s management, and that
the plaintiff “should not have
been allowed to leave hospital”. He continued:
I accept that one may find issues with medical management which is usually
methotrexate in that it could not be absolutely determined
that this was not an
intra uterine pregnancy though the other criteria were met in that she was
haemodynamically stable and the hCG
concentration was not high. The case for
laparoscopy is much stronger. With a pregnancy of unknown origin, a pain in the
quadrant of the abdomen, a previous ectopic pregnancy on the other
side and a stable patient with no evidence of peritonism which
equals intra
peritoneal bleeding, there should have been an urgency to carry out a
laparoscopy in an effort to salvage the tube.
The operation of choice should
have been a salpingostomy.
Professor Izzo expressed the opinion that if a salpingostomy had been performed,
on the balance of probabilities, the plaintiff’s
fallopian tube could have
been salvaged, avoiding the “significant deleterious effects on [the
plaintiff’s] fertility
and health [including mental
Professor Izzo’s Second Report
his supplementary report dated 10 November 2021, Associate Professor Izzo
confirmed his opinion that the plaintiff’s management
by the Hospital fell
below the standard of care expected of a public hospital operating in Canberra
at that time.
particular, he explained that in view of the plaintiff’s symptoms, namely,
bleeding, pain in the lower abdomen, “more
so on the left than on the
right”, and with no evidence of an intrauterine pregnancy or gestational
sac on an ultrasound at
five weeks gestation, the pregnancy was one of unknown
origin. Associate Professor Izzo stated that it should have been recognised
there was a “high index of suspicion” for an ectopic pregnancy,
particularly given that the plaintiff had previously
had an ectopic pregnancy
and the plaintiff’s tenderness was localised on the side of her remaining
Professor Izzo expressed the view that the plaintiff should have been kept in
hospital for an early diagnosis. He agreed
that the administration of
methotrexate would not have been appropriate (both because the pregnancy was
wanted and because there
was pain and bleeding), but stated that a diagnostic
laparoscopy should have been performed “as a matter of urgency”.
explained that a diagnostic laparoscopy would have enabled a diagnosis to be
made of an ectopic pregnancy in the left tube, and
would also have enabled
treatment, namely, a salpingostomy for the removal of the portion of the tube
where the ectopic pregnancy
was located (in contrast to a salpingectomy, where
the whole of the tube is removed).
Professor Izzo again reiterated his opinion that had this procedure occurred on
the plaintiff’s first presentation,
“it is more likely than not that
the tube could have been salvaged”, adding “I believe very strongly
that had the
appropriate treatment been done on the first hospital admission,
there would have been no need to remove the tube”.
Professor Izzo acknowledged that a salpingostomy “does increase the risk
of a further ectopic in a subsequent pregnancy”,
from 10% to 20%. He
commented that this leaves “80% that an ectopic will not reoccur”,
whereas the removal of the plaintiff’s
second fallopian tube now means
that the plaintiff must have IVF to achieve another child. He concluded
“the management that
[the plaintiff] received is not management which
would be considered appropriate by one’s peers, neither now nor in
Lamaro’s First Report
his first report, dated 13 February 2022, Dr Lamaro expressed the opinion that
there was “no indication or justification
to perform anything other than
expectant management
(ie observation and surveillance with
beta-hCG ultrasound and clinical reviews)” and that “expectant
management was entirely
appropriate” (emphasis in original).
Lamaro explained that “while ... in hindsight [the plaintiff] had a left
ectopic pregnancy, the attention given to excluding
this diagnosis and the
features of her presentation ... could easily fit with a miscarriage”. In
this respect, he noted that
the plaintiff had a history of miscarriage, as well
as a history of ectopic pregnancy.
reference to relevant guidelines, including those produced by the National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE)
and the Royal College of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG), Dr Lamaro maintained that surgery by
way of a laparoscopic salpingostomy
should not have been performed at the
plaintiff’s first admission, and that discharge was appropriate. He
Within the guidelines, as long as a patient is without pain, only experiencing
light bleeding, and no location for pregnancy identified
on ultrasound, in
association with declining beta-hCG levels, [and noting a previous miscarriage
history] it would be entirely appropriate
to discharge such a patient.
Lamaro further stated that provided the patient was assessed as having capacity
to understand the potential diagnoses and risks,
the patient has sufficient home
support structures and the hospital were in close proximity, it is “very
reasonable”
to discharge the patient, and it is the current practice at St
Vincent’s Hospital to do likewise.
Lamaro explained that if the plaintiff had remained in hospital, without any
change in symptoms, there would be no further occasion
for hCG testing or
ultrasounds; “
only a symptom of pain
– which would have to be
identified by the patient – would activate the next decision
process” (emphasis added).
in mind the potential risks and complications of a laparoscopic surgery and a
general anaesthetic, Dr Lamaro was adamant that
it would not have been
appropriate to perform a surgical procedure by way of a laparoscopic
salpingostomy at the plaintiff’s
first admission. He stated:
As discussed above, based on [the plaintiff’s] specific clinical
presentation, the resolution of symptoms during observation
period, the decline
in beta-hCG by 26.2% from 2738 to 2021 [sic] within 24 hours and a completely
negative ultrasound, it would not
be appropriate to perform surgery on a patient
within that setting.
Professor Izzo’s Third Report
19 May 2022, Associate Professor Izzo provided a further report in response to
the report of Dr Lamaro.
that report, Associate Professor Izzo stated that he did not agree with Dr
Lamaro’s opinion that expectant management was
appropriate.
explaining this opinion, Associate Professor Izzo commenced by disputing
Dr Lamaro’s description of the plaintiff at her
initial presentation
as having “stable observations, left side pelvic and abdominal
discomfort”, adding “[t]his
is a strange way of defining extremely
severe pain which require[s] Fentanyl the most powerful opioid that we have at
our disposal”.
Associate Professor Izzo also again reiterated that it was
important that the plaintiff had pain on her left side, having had a previous
ectopic pregnancy on her right side. He described the risk of a repeat ectopic
pregnancy as 15% (in contrast to his previous statements
that the risk of a
repeat ectopic pregnancy was 10%).
Professor Izzo noted that the plaintiff’s beta-hCG level on 31 July 2019
was 2738, down to 2021 whilst still in hospital
the following day. (It is noted
that the reference to 2021 appears to be an error, as the plaintiff’s
recorded hCG level at
this time was 2071). He continued:
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Guideline 21 reviewed 2010
(Appendix A) states that expectant management is
an option for clinically
stable, asymptomatic women with a decreasing serum hCG initially <1000 iu. It
also states in the same
guideline that using initial upper level of serum hCG of
1000–1500 to diagnose pregnancy of unknown origin, women with minimal
no symptoms at risk of ectopic pregnancy should be managed expectantly for
48–72 hours or follow up could be considered
for active intervention is
[sic] the symptoms of ectopic pregnancy occur or serum hCG levels rise above the
discriminatory level
So in fact, again the levels of 2000 are above what the college recommends for
expectant management and even in those women it states
where there was no risk
of ectopic pregnancy. [The plaintiff], in fact had had a previous ectopic and I
have said before that increased
her risk quite dramatically to 15%. There was no
place for expectant management in such a patient.
Professor Izzo considered that it was “irrelevant” that the
plaintiff’s BhCG levels had reduced by 22.2%,
because they were still
above the margin of 2000, “again not an indication for expectant
management”. He reiterated his
view that the plaintiff “should have
been kept in hospital and operated on”.
to the choice between a salpingostomy and a salpingectomy, Associate Professor
Izzo expressed the view that “salpingostomy
is preferred for patients who
desire future child bearing and in whom the contralateral tube is absent or
damaged”. Whilst
acknowledging that the availability of IVF has “to
a certain extent decreased the need to preserve a damaged fallopian tube”,
he noted that many patients “do not have access to IVF for financial,
geographical or religious reasons” and that many
women would prefer to
fall pregnant naturally.
Professor Izzo concluded:
In summary then, I have not changed my opinion and I disagree with Dr Lamaro.
Expectant management as took place here was unacceptable,
does not follow the
guidelines, unlike what Dr Lamaro wants us to believe and with the parameters
discussed, is dangerous as we found
here with a ruptured ectopic.
From the clinical picture of the acute pain and then settling, it certainly
appears that the ectopic did not rupture till the second
presentation this is
supported by the fact that the first ultrasound did not see any free blood as
occurs with a ruptured ectopic.
Had she thus had a salpingostomy at the initial
presentation, the tube would have been preserved rather than left in the state
she is now in with the only option remaining to her is IVF.
Lamaro’s Second Report
a report dated 19 February 2022, Dr Lamaro addressed further questions asked by
the defendant in response to the third report of
Associate Professor Izzo.
Lamaro was asked to consider whether he agreed with Associate Professor Izzo
that the plaintiff was in “severe pain”
on her first admission. Dr
Lamaro did not agree.
expressing this opinion, Dr Lamaro noted that the plaintiff had inhaled
methoxyflurane, which he explained, is a drug that lasts
for around 25 minutes
and is given for acute pain relief. He noted that the plaintiff did not require
any further pain relief until
7 hours later (5pm that night), and that she had
small doses of Fentanyl at 5:00pm, 8:30pm and 11:00pm, and a dose of Paracetamol
at 2:30am. Dr Lamaro also noted that the Progress Notes recorded that the
plaintiff spent most of the night sleeping, and only required
one dose of
Paracetamol the following morning at 10:00am.
Lamaro summarised his opinion on the issue of pain as follows:
[The plaintiff] underwent multiple reviews through the day and was eventually
examined with consultant and registrar, found to be
pain free and discharged
with outpatient management.
Pain is a very subjective symptom. This patient indeed presents with pain, which
eventually completely settles by time of discharge.
While it must be taken into
account for management purposes, it is one of multiple clinical elements that
things such as threatened or complete miscarriage,
an ectopic pregnancy or a corpus luteal event or other. Typically in a patient
unable to tolerate any other pain agents, small doses of fentanyl are often used
in all emergency departments as first line rapid
analgesia, along with other
opioids such as morphine. The use of such agents does not necessarily reflect
the severity of pathology,
but rather acts as an option for a very rapid onset
agent to deal with a patient in pain.
Lamaro disagreed with Associate Professor Izzo concerning the significance of
“free fluid” in the plaintiff’s
abdomen, noting that small
amounts of free fluid are not infrequently seen in healthy females of
reproductive age.
Lamaro confirmed his view that it was appropriate to rely on the RCOG and NICE
guidelines when considering appropriate medical
practice, and noted that these
guidelines are reviewed every few years based on new data and Committee
recommendations.
Lamaro maintained that the standard of care given to the plaintiff on her first
admission was appropriate, as she had a negative
ultrasound, declining beta-hCG
levels and was “pain free” at the time of discharge. He also
reiterated that none of the
criteria for surgery were met, and indeed considered
that a surgical intervention would have itself constituted a “deviation
from standard of care”.
Lamaro concluded:
In summary, the first admission was managed well within standard of care
accepted in any public hospital in Australia. The thorough
assessment, while of
course not initially diagnosing an ectopic, had been carried out with all
appropriate steps for that specific
clinical presentation. We all feel for the
plaintiff’s experience, and wish we could have prevented this outcome when
in retrospect. However, at the plaintiff’s first presentation, the
appropriate standard of care was provided by all clinicians,
utilising the
evidence at hand and combinations of the above guidelines.
Hyett’s Report
his report, dated 22 June 2023, Professor Hyett noted that the plaintiff’s
presentation on her first admission was compatible
with a complication of early
pregnancy, and that the plaintiff’s previous history of an ectopic
pregnancy increased the risk
of her having another ectopic pregnancy.
Hyett expressed the opinion that the nature of the plaintiff’s symptoms
(light vaginal bleeding, spotting, localised
abdominal pain and diarrhoea) were
“more likely compatible with ectopic pregnancy rather than
miscarriage”.
Hyett considered that as the plaintiff was not acutely unwell on 31 July, was
haemodynamically stable and as the investigation
had concluded that she had a
“pregnancy of unknown location”, it was “appropriate to manage
the situation conservatively
and expectantly, awaiting further developments
– either in clinical presentation or with further test results”.
Hyett explained that if a laparoscopy had been performed at the time of the
plaintiff’s first admission:
(a) There would have been a “small risk” of the surgery adversely
affecting a viable pregnancy;
(b) There would have been a “small risk” that the ectopic pregnancy
would not be visible;
(c) There would have been a significant chance that the ectopic pregnancy would
“abort spontaneously without further complication”,
such that any
intervention (which would inflict more tubal damage) would have been
unnecessary;
(d) There would be a significant risk, if a tubal ectopic pregnancy was
identified and a salpingostomy (repair of the fallopian tube)
attempted, that
the procedure would not be technically possible, requiring a salpingectomy
(removal of the fallopian tube);
(e) If a salpingostomy had been successfully performed, there would be an
ongoing risk of persistent viable tubal trophoblast –
requiring ongoing
serial evaluation to track hCGs; and
(f) If a salpingostomy had been performed – damage to the tube would have
been compounded and there would be a further increase
in risk of ectopic
Hyett concluded:
Given these risks, expectant management was, in my opinion, the more appropriate
course of action. It would be normal practice to
monitor hCG changes over a 48
hour cycle and to plan a second scan for a woman with a ‘pregnancy of
unknown location’
seven days after the first scan.
Expectant management could involve either inpatient or outpatient management. As
it may take another seven days to reach a diagnosis,
the majority of women are
managed in an outpatient setting. There is a risk associated with this in so far
as if there is an ectopic
pregnancy and this ruptures then a woman could bleed
significantly – and this is a potentially life-threatening situation.
The decision as to whether a woman should be admitted or can be managed as an
outpatient will therefore depend on medical assessment
of degree of risk
(likelihood of this being an ectopic, clinical symptoms/ stability and an
individual’s personal circumstances
with respect to being alone or
accompanied at home and being able to return to hospital easily and quickly) and
should, in my opinion,
be a shared decision made with the patient.
In circumstances where a patient has been admitted overnight for observation,
symptoms have settled, and there is no evidence of
an acute complication –
with investigations that have led to the description of a ‘pregnancy of
unknown location’,
then one reasonable option for ongoing care would be to
discharge the patient home whilst awaiting further tests.
This is with the caveat that when women are discharged home in this situation,
they are assessed to ensure that they understand the
potential for a future
diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy and the small risk of rupture which will need to
be managed promptly. They
need to be able to recognise any change in symptoms
and return to the hospital in a timely fashion.
Hyett was also asked whether this opinion would alter if the plaintiff had
continuing pain at the time of discharge, that
was being managed by pain
medication. With reference to current NICE guidelines, he responded that
“significant ongoing pain”
would need to be factored into the risk
assessment concerning the relative merits and disadvantages of admission or
outpatient treatment
and continued:
A significant level of pain would make it less likely that the clinical
situation was completely stable, increasing the potential
for risk of rupture in
an outpatient environment. The balance of risk may therefore favour admission...
NICE guidelines
noted above, Professor Hyett and Dr Lamaro made express reference to the NICE
guidelines in their respective reports. These guidelines
concern the diagnosis
and management of ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage in women with complications
in early pregnancy.
NICE guidelines relevantly provide that expectant management is only an option
for women who are clinically stable and pain free,
have a tubal ectopic
pregnancy measuring less than 35 mm with no visible heartbeat on transvaginal
ultrasound, have hCG levels of
between 1000 and 1500, and are able to return for
follow-up. The guidelines also recommend that where tubal ectopic pregnancy is
being managed expectantly, hCG pathology is to be repeated 2, 4 and 7 days after
the original test.
guidelines further recommend that patients who are able to return for follow-up
be offered a choice of methotrexate or surgical
management where hCG levels
remain between 1500 and 5000, and only if they are experiencing no significant
pain, have an unruptured
ectopic pregnancy smaller than 35mm with no visible
heartbeat, and no intrauterine pregnancy as confirmed on an ultrasound scan.
management is specified as “a first-line treatment” if the patient
has an ectopic pregnancy and is suffering
from significant pain.
RCOG guidelines
noted above, Associate Professor Izzo and Dr Lamaro also cited RCOG guidelines
in their respective reports; namely, Green-top Guideline
21 on the Diagnosis and
Management of Ectopic Pregnancy.
this guideline, expectant management is recommended only for clinically stable
patients with an ultrasound diagnosis of ectopic
pregnancy and a decreasing hCG
level of less than 1500. The guideline further states that systemic methotrexate
should not be offered
unless an ectopic pregnancy diagnosis is “absolutely
clear” and a viable intrauterine pregnancy has been excluded. In
circumstances, laparoscopic salpingectomy is the preferred treatment option
under the guideline. However, the guideline
provides that salpingostomy should
also be considered if the patient has a history of fertility-reducing factors,
including a previous
ectopic pregnancy.
conclave evidence
the hearing on 13 September 2023, all three experts gave concurrent evidence via
Audio-Visual Link.
that evidence, the experts agreed that:
(a) A previous ectopic pregnancy significantly increases the risk of a further
ectopic pregnancy;
(b) A rupture of a fallopian tube can be very dangerous to the pregnant woman,
potentially resulting in death;
(c) An ectopic pregnancy can result from an already damaged fallopian tube.
Other potential causes include chromosomal abnormalities
and contralateral
(d) The significantly increasing pain which the plaintiff described as having
experienced at 7:00pm on 1 August 2019 would have been
a matter of concern to
those managing the plaintiff, if she had been under medical supervision at that
(e) By the time of the plaintiff’s ultimate admission to hospital at
6:38am on 2 August 2019, there was little prospect of
successfully
performing a salpingostomy;
(f) The plaintiff’s ectopic pregnancy did not result in a rupture of the
fallopian tube in the sense of the tube becoming “open
length”. Rather, there was bleeding within the fallopian tube which
ultimately bled into the uterine cavity and abdominally.
In other words, there
was haemmoraghing within the layer of the tube, but not external to the tube.
these matters, there was no agreement between the three experts, although there
was considerable consensus between Professor
Hyett and Dr Lamaro.
his oral testimony, Dr Lamaro maintained his view that neither a salpingostomy,
nor a laparoscopy should have been performed at
the first admission, and that
expectant management was appropriate. He confirmed that this opinion was based
on an assumption that
the plaintiff was “pain free” at the time of
discharge. In this respect, he clarified that there is a different between
“residual discomfort” and pain, noting that “if someone say
had a complete miscarriage they’re always going
to have residual
discomfort”.
Lamaro was asked whether he was aware that 20 minutes before the 11:30am
consultation, the plaintiff had been complaining of 6
out of 10 pain. He said
that he had been informed of that fact after preparing his reports. When asked
whether he agreed with the
evidence of Dr Menakaya, who had said that he would
not have discharged the plaintiff if he was aware that the plaintiff had
of 6 out of 10 pain at 10:10am on 1 August 2019, Dr Lamaro responded:
I think what I would be doing if a patient had 6 out of 10 pain I would reassess
them and I’d examine them. Now, if I found
them to have a soft non-tender
abdomen, and they only had paracetamol for that day I’d talk to them about
what they wanted
to do. And we do this all the time. And some patients will say
‘Look, I’d like to go home, I know where to come back
I’ll come back immediately. I’ve got support’, and others
would say ‘Can I stay here another day?’
And I think either are
appropriate.
Lamaro confirmed that the patient should be given a choice about whether to
remain in hospital:
.... We would talk to her about the three possible – possible diagnoses
which she’d had discussed with her – and
determined – and I
think they made comment that she had good home support and they –
everything was in place for review
as we would do with an ectopic, but if the
patient wanted to stay or if I felt she needed to, I would – I would keep
Lamaro was unequivocal in his view that it would not be appropriate to perform a
laparoscopy simply because a patient asked for
one. He explained that such an
... very much confuses the picture for the next 48 hours at least. So
you’ve got a post-operative patient. You may not have
seen anything at
that time where when there is an ectopic there. She’s then on the ward.
She’s on narcotics for post-operative
pain. She’s got shoulder tip
pain because of post-operative blood escopic [sic] gas distension, which is
there for several
days, and then picking her – picking on an early event
is near impossible because it’s confused with that early inappropriate,
my view, diagnostic laparoscopy.
Lamaro gave evidence that if the plaintiff had stayed in hospital, and then her
pain had increased (as occurred), “the intervention
would have been the
same”, that is, a laparoscopy which resulted in the performance of a
salpingectomy (rather than a salpingostomy).
contrast, Associate Professor Izzo maintained his opinion that a laparoscopy
should have been performed at the plaintiff’s
first admission. He
... the thing is she – she should have had a laparoscopy. If a tubal
ectopic pregnancy was seen, then – and then that
should have been treated
by salpingostomy because she had lost the other tube. If, however, you
couldn’t see anything –
there’s a possibility that you
don’t see much at that stage – then she could have been
conservatively treated with
methotrexate, because I believe that with a level of
2,000 and if there was an assumption that it was intrauterine, you should have
seen something inside the uterus and there was nothing seen inside the uterus.
So I think that the risk of an intrauterine pregnancy
is virtually nil.
of the experts were also asked their views concerning the significance of the
pain which the plaintiff had experienced at 7:00pm
on 1 August 2019, and at
2:00am on 2 August 2019. Dr Lamaro considered that:
... the fact that she started to have pain at 7:00pm and it escalated, and she
re-presented with severe pain at 2:00am tells us that
she bled out of that and
out of that ectopic. And so sometime between leaving the hospital and
re-presenting, she has expanded that
tube with an ectopic pregnancy that has
created then acute bleeding and its, you know, shoulder tip pain is obviously
in the peritoneal cavity which has stimulated that response. So she
has bled probably even before 7. It could have been 4 or it could
have been 6.
It may have trickled and not been seen by scan, you know, on first presentation.
I mean all that’s possible.
Lamaro later expanded upon this answer, indicating that the plaintiff would not
have had bleeding prior to discharge, but that
“somewhere between her
leaving the hospital and likely somewhere around that evening, and overnight,
that’s when a major
bleeding event has occurred”. Dr Lamaro
explained that if there had been bleeding whilst the plaintiff had been in
... it would have been very obvious. She would have had an acute abdomen. When
she was examined, everyone reports soft, non-tender
abdomen, no peritonism.
That’s not consistent with a volume of free blood in the pelvic and
abdominal cavity, and she –
you know, she would have shown some signs
– blood pressure, pulse, severe pain, and she wouldn’t have –
it described – the nurses commented that she walked out to the car
park. Those patients won’t be walking anywhere. They
will not be able to
move with that sort of pain – with that sort of rupture and free blood...
Professor Izzo agreed that once the plaintiff had shoulder tip pain “that
basically means – that’s consistent
with intraperitoneal bleed, so,
certainly, that was the end point”. He said that “something happened
before” but
that it was “difficult to pinpoint exactly the time that
the bleeding out of the tube or the rupture occurred, [for a] significant
of blood to irritate the diaphragm and then to get referred pain”.
However, he considered that the bleeding would have
occurred “soon
after” the plaintiff was released from hospital.
Hyett considered that the 7:00pm pain was “more likely to be related to
the fact that there’s bleeding into
the abdominal cavity rather than
purely within the tube”. In those circumstances, he considered that there
... little difference from an anatomical perspective and from an operative
perspective in the nature of what’s happening in
the tube, whether you had
a mild level of pain at 7:00 o’clock or a more severe level of pain at
Hyett continued:
... you can book-end the timing of intra-abdominal bleeding by the two scans. So
the first scan, there’s no significant intra-abdominal
bleeding, and the
second scan, there appears to be more significant intra-abdominal, and then
between those two time points, trying
to localise that on the basis of pain
seems reasonable. So I think by the time you’re becoming symptomatic,
it’s likely
that you have intra-abdominal bleeding at that point.
noted above, all three experts accepted that the plaintiff’s increasing
pain at 7:00pm would have been a matter of concern
to those managing the
plaintiff, if she had been in hospital at that time. Dr Lamaro considered that
it would have been appropriate
for a further ultrasound to have been taken, and
that if free blood had been seen in that scan, the plaintiff
“definitely”
would have been operated on that night. He maintained
that in these circumstances, a salpingectomy would have followed.
Professor Izzo gave evidence that an immediate laparoscopy would have been
appropriate, and maintained that it is likely
that a successful salpingotomy
would have then been performed, resulting in the saving of the plaintiff’s
fallopian tube.
Hyett described his opinion as lying “between the other two
experts”. He explained:
[M]y rationale for that would be first a successful salpingostomy would be
associated with further degree of tubal damage on a tube
that’s already
damaged and that would have an even higher chance of having an ectopic in a
further pregnancy. But, also, there
would also be quite a high chance that that
tube was so significantly damaged that, in fact, essentially you would have a
tubal cause
of infertility at that point.
And, thirdly, in the event that you then ended up going down an IVF process, in
my view, the continued presence of an inflamed and
scarred tube potentially
reduces the risk of successful conception in an IVF cycle. So, I think, if
you’re hard-headed and
not emotive about this, and if you consider that
there’s no cost associated with IVF I think that you could make an
that the most definitive treatment at this stage is a
salpingectomy...
Having said that, I recognise the comments of Associate Professor Izzo that many
women – their circumstance would be quite
desperate to save that tube and
therefore I don’t think it’s unreasonable to talk about the process
of salpingostomy.
But I think that would be with the caveat that you could only
perform – you couldn’t promise to perform that procedure.
would have to describe what the process of salpingostomy is, which is
essentially like shelling a pea out of a pod but it’s
a pea that’s
often quite strongly adhesive to the pod, and when you open the pod, the pod
typically bleeds.
So you have to use diathermy to cauterise the bleeding as you were going along,
which causes more tubal damage, and there is a risk
that you won’t remove
all of the trophoblast, so there is a risk of what’s called a persistent
trophoblast disease which
will need further follow-up, and there’s a
significant risk, particularly if you are bleeding, that you will not be able to
do that in a controlled manner and that, in the process of attempting to do a
salpingostomy, you will end up doing a salpingectomy,
and I think the patient
has to be aware of that and understand that before you start a procedure.
said that, in his experience, there was a less than 50% chance of success that a
salpingostomy would be successful, and that his
preferred treatment would have
been a salpingectomy. He said that this advice would also form part of the
consent process.
Lamaro agreed with the opinion of Professor Hyett as set out above. Adopting
Professor Hyett’s ‘pea analogy’,
he explained that:
... the peas vary, you know, through the whole pod. So you’ve got to shell
it out and then we – in that shelling process,
there’s a lot of
bleeding and then you’ve got to destroy some of that internal pod and
you’re relying on the internal
features of that pod to move the –
you know – the next pea down the pod and that... affects its ability to do
Lamaro said that, in his experience, it has “never” been possible to
do an elective salpingostomy with a bleeding ectopic
psychiatrists
Psychiatric
expert evidence was adduced from three expert witnesses; Dr Antonella Ventura,
Dr Stephen Allnutt and Dr Yvonne Skinner.
Dr Allnutt was called by the
plaintiff. Dr Ventura and Dr Skinner were called by the defendant.
Allnutt is a forensic psychiatrist with over 25 years’ experience. He
maintains both a public and private practice in New
South Wales, having
previously practised in Canada and New Zealand. He has published several
academic publications and presented
at various conferences in forensic
psychiatry.
Ventura is a psychiatrist with a Masters degree in forensic mental health. She
has a special interest in post-traumatic stress
disorder. Dr Ventura practices
within both public and private settings in New South Wales. She is also an
adjunct senior lecturer
at the University of New South Wales.
Skinner has practised as a forensic psychiatrist since 1985. She has maintained
a clinical practice since 1987 and is the President
of the Australian Academy of
Forensic Sciences.
Dr Allnutt’s report
Allnutt examined the plaintiff over audiovisual link on 10 February 2021, and
subsequently prepared a report dated 16 February
2021 at the plaintiff’s
this report, Dr Allnutt comprehensively summarised the plaintiff’s medical
and life history. Dr Allnutt noted that the plaintiff
had a happy childhood and
stable employment. At the time of Dr Allnutt’s examination, the plaintiff
was consuming alcohol infrequently
and was not using illicit drugs. Prior to 31
July 2019, the plaintiff had never sought assistance from any mental health
professionals,
and denied suffering from any mental health conditions prior to
that time. She has never been prescribed any psychiatric medications.
at 31 July 2019, the plaintiff’s husband had recently been deployed to
Papua New Guinea. She described her marriage, up until
this point, as
“happy”. Besides her husband’s absence, she reported suffering
from no other significant stresses
at this time. The plaintiff told Dr Allnutt
that she had experienced three miscarriages and one ectopic pregnancy prior to
2019, but overall thought she was “emotionally and psychologically
well” and reported no difficulties in attending to
her daily activities.
plaintiff reported taking two weeks off work following the surgery, before
returning to her work. The plaintiff said that her
attendance at work had been
erratic due to episodic pain and vomiting associated with her menstrual cycle,
which she has suffered
since the surgery. The plaintiff told Dr Allnutt that her
marriage had broken down. The plaintiff reported no other significant stresses
in her life.
Allnutt reported that:
[The plaintiff] said, “It hit me twelve months after, in fact, in August
last year”. She said there was a significant
downturn in her mood at that
stage, when she had to take two and a half weeks off work because she could not
get out of bed. She
said “I could have lost my life over this it dawned on
me that I had put my faith in the medical profession”.
Allnutt noted that there was “probably a downturn in [the
plaintiff’s] mood at that time because it was the anniversary
ectopic”, although he clarified that later in the interview, the plaintiff
said that there had been a downturn in her
mood, and her feelings of depression
had started “almost immediately after the operation”.
Allnutt noted that the plaintiff had reported feeling anxious, “going over
the fact that she could have missed out on her
child’s life and could have
passed away herself”, and that she has since become more overprotective of
her daughter.
plaintiff also told Dr Allnutt that she had an angry and negative mood. She
reported difficulty sleeping, fluctuating self-esteem,
poor focus, diminished
self-confidence and general irritability. These symptoms also worsened around
the one-year anniversary of
the surgery.
plaintiff told Dr Allnutt that she was unlikely to enter an intimate
relationship again, which she attributed to her self-consciousness
over her body
image and relative infertility. The plaintiff also told Dr Allnutt that for the
first six months following the surgery,
she would have nightmares about dying in
an operating theatre approximately two or three times a week. At the time of Dr
examination, the frequency of these nightmares had fallen to
approximately once a month. The plaintiff also reported that seeing
mothers with children would trigger “ruminative thoughts”. She
denied experiencing suicidal ideation.
Allnutt concluded that the plaintiff exhibited “a constellation of
symptoms consistent with a persistent depressive disorder,
with associated
post-traumatic stress symptoms”. Dr Allnutt observed that the
plaintiff’s depressive symptoms had fluctuated
in intensity over time,
noting her significant downturn in mood around the one-year anniversary of the
2019 ectopic pregnancy.
Allnutt described the plaintiff’s intermittent nightmares and increased
irritability as “post-traumatic stress symptoms”,
but stopped short
of diagnosing the plaintiff with “a full blown post-traumatic stress
disorder”. Rather, Dr Allnutt
concluded that “a diagnosis of a
chronic adjustment disorder with a depressed and anxious mood could be
raised”. In Dr
Allnutt’s view, the events of 31 July and 1 August
2019 had “substantially contributed to” the plaintiff’s
Allnutt was of the view that the plaintiff’s mental condition had not
stabilised, and that both improvement and deterioration
were possible.
Nonetheless, he considered the plaintiff’s prognosis to be
“relatively poor for the medium to long term”,
given the persistence
of her relative infertility and ongoing scarring. He recommended treatment of
weekly to two-weekly consultations
over six to 12 months, depending on the
plaintiff’s clinical response.
Dr Ventura’s report
Ventura carried out an assessment of the plaintiff over audiovisual link on
13 December 2022, at the request of the defendant.
plaintiff told Dr Ventura that her mental health declined following her second
ectopic pregnancy as feelings of loss from her
previous pregnancies “came
flooding back”. The plaintiff told Dr Ventura that she became irritable,
and blamed her husband
blamed her husband for “what had happened, [for]
being away and [for] not being able to advocate for her”. She reported
experiencing nightmares in the months following the ectopic pregnancy, and said
that ruminations over how she may have died and left
her daughter without a
mother made sleep difficult. She told Dr Ventura that she became emotionally
distant from her daughter, but
was still mindful of her daughter’s safety
and how much time she spent with her.
Ventura noted that the plaintiff returned to work two weeks after the ectopic
pregnancy, but could not function at her normal levels
for approximately six
months. The plaintiff informed Dr Ventura that her mental health symptoms
deteriorated around the one year
anniversary of the surgery, and that this
deterioration lasted for approximately two months.
plaintiff told Dr Ventura that her mental health has since improved, but her
fear of loss had recently been reignited as she had
entered a relationship with
a man wanting children. She continues to feel emotionally fragile when children
and pregnancies are raised,
and sometimes becomes tearful and distressed.
Dr Ventura observed the plaintiff become tearful when discussing her
pregnancies in
her examination.
Dr Ventura’s view, the plaintiff’s post-traumatic stress disorder
“was caused by the trauma of suffering from
an ectopic pregnancy, the
possible lethality of the condition and [the plaintiff’s] marked reduction
in fertility”. Although
the post-traumatic stress disorder was a
“new condition” following the 2019 ectopic pregnancy, the
plaintiff’s
earlier miscarriages and ectopic pregnancy contributed to the
condition. Accordingly, Dr Ventura considered the likely date of onset
condition to be 31 July 2019.
the basis of her examination, Dr Ventura expressed the view that the plaintiff
is “in remission” and no longer meets
the diagnostic criteria for
the diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder.
Ventura considered the prognosis of the plaintiff’s post-traumatic stress
disorder to be “good”, nothing that
the plaintiff had
“achieved a reduction in symptomology”. However, she also considered
that the plaintiff’s symptoms
may be reignited and there is a possibility
of relapse if the plaintiff suffered from further obstetrics or gynaecological
complications
in the future.
Dr Ventura considered the plaintiff to be in remission for her post-traumatic
stress disorder, she also expressed the view
that the plaintiff continues to
struggle with a “complex grief reaction” and says that the plaintiff
would benefit from
grief counselling. She recommended approximately 10 sessions
of psychological therapy.
asked to respond to Dr Allnutt’s report dated 16 February 2021, Dr Ventura
noted that Dr Allnutt had assessed the plaintiff
almost two years before her
examination. Dr Ventura said that it was “likely that [the
plaintiff’s] symptomatology was
more severe at that time”, and
suggested that this may explain the difference in the diagnostic opinions
between her and Dr
Allnutt. She said that whilst antidepressant medication may
have been appropriate in February 2021, this was no longer reasonable
the plaintiff’s then condition.
admissibility of the oral evidence of Dr Allnutt and Dr
Allnutt and Dr Ventura were scheduled to give evidence by way of AVL on the
afternoon of the fourth day of the hearing.
minutes before the experts were due to give evidence, counsel for the defendant
advised the Court that the defendant no longer
relied on the report of Dr
Ventura, and indicated that Dr Allnutt was no longer required for
cross-examination. In response, Senior
Counsel for the plaintiff indicated that
he still wished to call oral evidence from Dr Allnutt. Counsel for the defendant
then objected
to the plaintiff calling any further evidence from Dr Allnutt or
from Dr Ventura.
timing of the defendant’s objection was regrettable. I was informed that
the defendant had first notified the plaintiff
of this intention less than half
an hour before the matter was first raised in Court. Both experts were on the
line and ready to
give evidence at the time that the Court was required to rule
on the objection.
basis of the defendant’s objection was said to be a failure to comply with
r 1243 of the
Court Procedure Rules 2006
(ACT), which provides that the
oral evidence in chief of an expert is not admissible unless an expert report
has been served in accordance
with r 1241 of the Rules, which also requires
that the report contain the substance of the matters sought to be adduced in
The defendant contended that the plaintiff should not be permitted to
supplement the expert evidence in the report with further oral
evidence from the
expert in contravention of this rule. Further, counsel for the defendant noted
that Dr Allnutt had only diagnosed
the plaintiff as suffering from an adjustment
disorder. She noted that the plaintiff had also claimed damages for
post-traumatic
stress disorder in her Amended Statement of Claim. Counsel for
the defendant submitted that the calling of any further oral evidence
procedural fairness to the defendant.
Counsel for the plaintiff clarified that he did not seek to adduce evidence from
Dr Allnutt that was inconsistent with his
previous report. The
plaintiff’s Senior Counsel further indicated that Dr Allnutt had had a
further audio-visual meeting with
the plaintiff the previous week, and that Dr
Allnutt’s evidence would be that the plaintiff’s condition had
Finally, Senior Counsel foreshadowed that he proposed to ask Dr
Allnutt about the plaintiff’s alternative case; namely, “whether
plaintiff’s fear of dying and leaving her child without a mother ... has
been a major contributor to the condition which
he has diagnosed”.
defendant’s counsel indicated that she was particularly concerned that the
plaintiff had had the benefit of a further examination,
which the defendant had
not been put on notice of. There was merit in this complaint. The
plaintiff’s legal representatives
should not have had their expert examine
the plaintiff without then providing a supplementary report notifying the
defendant of the
expert’s findings.
this point, Senior Counsel for the defendant informed the Court that he would
tender Dr Ventura’s report.
considered that it was necessary and in the interests of justice for both
psychiatrists to explain their opinions, particularly
in respect of their
differing diagnoses concerning adjustment disorder and post-traumatic stress
disorder, and in respect of the
plaintiff’s alternative case. As to the
former, central to the defendant’s opposition was the proposition that an
disorder is different to post-traumatic stress disorder. That issue
could only be determined by hearing oral evidence from the experts.
second issue, in circumstances where Dr Allnutt had provided a report which
expressed the view that adjustment disorder
was caused by a combination of the
plaintiff’s knowledge of her loss of her fertility, as well as the trauma
of the events
of 1 August 2019, determination of the plaintiff’s
alternative case required him to explain whether he was of the opinion that
plaintiff have suffered psychiatric injury whether she was discharged or not.
it was unsatisfactory that the plaintiff had not notified the defendant of the
results of Dr Allnutt’s further examination,
I considered that it remained
in the interests of justice for the Court to receive the most up to date
information concerning the
plaintiff’s condition. I considered that it
would be artificial to restrict Dr Allnutt’s opinions concerning his
to what his opinion had been when he first prepared his report in
2021, particularly when he had formed the view that the plaintiff’s
prognosis was improved in comparison to his initial consideration.
then made the following ruling:
I permit the experts, Dr Stephen Allnutt and Dr Antonella Ventura, to be called.
To the extent necessary, I grant leave to the plaintiff
to adduce evidence from
Dr Allnutt of his opinions based on his examination of the Plaintiff last week.
experts then gave evidence by AVL by conclave. Their evidence did not conclude
that afternoon. However, they were able to make
other arrangements for their
evidence to continue the following morning.
the conclusion of the evidence that day, I informed the parties that I would be
available from shortly after 9:00am the following
morning, and I requested that
the parties contact the Court if anything arose overnight which could delay the
conclusion of the concurrent
communications were received from either party. However, 10 minutes after the
time that the experts were scheduled to give evidence
the following morning,
defence counsel raised a further objection to the evidence of Dr Allnutt and Dr
Ventura. The defendant’s
counsel submitted that the plaintiff should not
be permitted to put the counterfactual upon which her alternative case was based
to either expert. Again, the basis of the objection was that this was a matter
which should have been put to the experts at an earlier
point in time. The
defendant’s counsel also reiterated her complaint concerning the failure
to notify the defendant of Dr Allnutt’s
in mind the delay which the experts had already borne as a result of the
defendant’s late notifications of objections,
I held that the expert
evidence would be admitted provisionally, and that a decision would be made on
the admissibility of the evidence
as a part of the final judgment in this
noted above, in its written submissions, the defendant formally objected to the
plaintiff’s reliance on her alternative case
as not being within the scope
of the pleadings. As a consequence, the plaintiff sought leave to amend her
Statement of Claim. I granted
the plaintiff leave in
Hartfield (No 1)
Following that leave, the defendant was permitted to obtain and tender further
psychiatric evidence in response to the plaintiff’s
claim (namely, the
report of Dr Skinner, as outlined below). In oral submissions, Senior Counsel
for the defendant advised that the
objection to Dr Allnutt and Dr
Ventura’s reports was no longer pressed.
The conclave evidence
her oral evidence, Dr Ventura confirmed that she had made a diagnosis of
post-traumatic stress disorder which she considered had
resolved by 13 December
2022. By reference to the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Psychiatric
(American Psychiatric Association, 5
(DSM-V) , she explained that she was of the view that the plaintiff met criteria
(a) of that diagnosis “because
at the time she feared for her life and she
also suffered a number of other symptoms [as set out in her report]”.
Allnutt similarly confirmed that he had expressed the opinion that the plaintiff
“manifested a constellation of symptoms
consistent with a persistent
depressive disorder with associated post-traumatic symptoms”. When asked
to explain the difference
between his diagnosis and that of Dr Ventura, Dr
Allnutt responded:
... the symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder, what we call the trauma and
stressor related conditions which include post-traumatic
stress disorder and
chronic adjustment disorder and depressive conditions as well as anxiety
disorders, can all overlap. It can
make distinguishing one condition from
another difficult diagnostically and as clinicians we can often disagree. So,
you know, I
think that from our perspective, I think we would agree that she
suffered a diagnosis or psychiatric condition with symptoms of depression,
anxiety and post-traumatic stress.
Some of us would diagnose post-traumatic stress disorder, some would diagnose
persistent depressive disorder with associated post-traumatic
stress symptoms.
A diagnosis of chronic adjustment disorder is also applicable which is another
trauma and stressor related disorder.
Ventura agreed. She explained that she was “making a retrospective
diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder and I thought
that was in
remission”. She continued:
I agree with my colleague in saying that we both identified symptoms of
depression and trauma and I sort of put an emphasis on the
trauma and I
conceptualised the depressive symptoms as part of the PTSD and the prolonged
grief and Dr Allnutt had a slightly different
interpretation, but I don’t
think we’re drastically different in opinion.
two experts also agreed that the aetiology of the plaintiff’s psychiatric
condition was the experience of fearing for her
life during the 2019 ectopic
pregnancy, although Dr Allnutt identified two further causes: namely, the
experience of losing her fallopian
tube and having a traumatic pregnancy
generally. Both experts agreed that a materially contributing factor to the
plaintiff’s
condition was her being fearful for her life. Both experts
agreed that a common symptom of post-traumatic stress disorder is
“incident-specific
nightmares”, or “nightmares symbolic of the
experts also agreed that, had the plaintiff been in hospital at 7:00pm on 31
July 2019 when her pain initially increased, and
assuming that an urgent
laparoscopy would have been carried out in controlled circumstances, the
plaintiff would not have feared
for her life, and likely would not have
sustained a trauma related condition.
Ventura explained:
Had she not feared for her life and I can only make that assumption as I
don’t know what the outcome of her being in hospital
and reporting that
then earlier would be but had she not been in fear for her life because she was
in a controlled environment with
medical resuscitation immediately that about to
her it is far less likely that she would have felt out of control and in fear
her life and therefore, although, she may have been stressed by the
difficult pregnancy criteria (a) for post-traumatic stress disorder
have been met. And it’s unlikely that she would have suffered from a
trauma related condition. She may have suffered
from a grief related condition.
Dr Allnutt explained:
... the context of being in the hospital, knowing that people know what’s
going on. As Dr Ventura said in a controlled environment
where anything
went wrong that could be addressed immediately. The confidence that the
clinicians knew what they were doing and
that they were on board of what was
happening at the time would have been far less stressful than being at home
experiencing symptoms
that suggest something life threatening and then having to
get to the hospital in time to address those symptoms so as not to die.
that those circumstances are dramatic. But I agree with Dr Ventura that the
former does not – would not meet –
would probably not meet criterion
(a) but the latter would.
experts further agreed that should the plaintiff elect to undergo IVF in the
future, and should those efforts be unsuccessful
in achieving a viable
pregnancy, the plaintiff may experience an aggravation of her mental health
condition. However, they differed
in their reasons for so concluding. Dr Allnutt
stated that one of the symptoms of post-traumatic stress is being vulnerable to
that symbolise, mimic or are consistent with the trauma, and as the
plaintiff has already been exposed to fertility-related trauma,
she is more
vulnerable to being triggered by circumstances symbolising that original trauma
than someone who does not carry that
original trauma. Dr Ventura, on the other
hand, was of the opinion that, should the plaintiff undergo unsuccessful IVF,
her “accumulative
grief” of multiple lost pregnancies may be
reignited, but her trauma of fearing for her life will likely not be.
cross-examination, both experts were asked whether the plaintiff’s choice
to not attend hospital sooner was consistent, or
inconsistent, with the
plaintiff’s self-report that she was out of control and in fear of her
life. Dr Allnutt responded:
... a person in - being in hospital when you - when you're faced with a life
threatening or any medical misadventure or problem is
at - provides far greater
security than being 17 kilometres away from the hospital even if you are with
family members because you've
still got to traverse 17 kilometres. So we talked
- I think we both were referring to the environment rather than the person.
I would say that, you know, not going immediately and not waiting is
there's a number of – number of factors. It's early in
the morning, she's
got responsibilities for her child, was the pain of a severity that she felt she
needed to go, was the pain quite
– that type of pain that – that
– that made her think she may die, was it poor judgment on her part to
not go earlier. Because she was potentially putting her life at risk
if she did have a ruptured ectopic.
I think the most - the more important point is that, at some point, she believed
that she might die. Whether that occurred five
minutes before, or half an hour
before, or three hours before, I think is less relevant to the - to the
causation issue then that
she believed that she might have died of a ruptured
ectopic pregnancy. Now, that is a matter for the court to determine because
that's a factual matter and based on reliability and - of what she said.
Dr Ventura responded:
It does not appear as if, when she's starting to experience the pain at 7:00pm,
she was terribly frightened as she went to sleep.
However, it's likely that she
was very, very frightened after she's experienced the pain in her shoulder and
started to vomit.
Now, to expect a human being who was experiencing a lot of
pain, turmoil and fear to act in a controlled and rational manner, it
it's not necessarily, you know, a rational expectation, and I
think - - -
... I think we are using the word ‘out of control’ in different
– in different ways. I – I am actually putting
out there the fact
that this woman was vomiting, was about to lose a pregnancy, was in a lot of
pain. She may have not felt fully
in control of her action in a normative
manner, not in a psychotic manner, and therefore, the fact that she did not make
immediate arrangements to travel to hospital when maybe she should have,
is not indicative of the fact that she was not in fear of
Ventura continued:
There's – she may have been very, very frightened. I don't know when she
felt frightened for her life, but at some stage,
she did feel quite frightened
for her life, and I think the facts that she was – the facts were that she
was experiencing what
she had experienced before – an ectopic pregnancy
– and she had been told in the past, that can be a life‑threatening
condition. So her fear is not just subjective but she had some objective
reasons for believing that. I can't comment on how long
it took her to act on
that fear and organise herself to get to hospital.
psychiatrists agreed that other stressors in the plaintiff’s life (such as
separating from her husband, and regularly caring
for her teenage step-daughter)
may have contributed to the plaintiff’s overall distress, but they
considered that these had
not contributed to the plaintiff’s “trauma
the psychiatrists were asked about their views concerning the plaintiff’s
response, Dr Ventura reiterated her view that the plaintiff’s
post-traumatic stress disorder was in remission at the time
that she examined
her. In this respect, Dr Ventura noted that in order to meet the criteria for
post-traumatic stress disorder under
DSM-5, it is necessary for the
person’s symptoms to have a “significant impact on social,
professional or other important
areas of function or ‘marked distress
which is out of proportion to the severity or intensity of the stressor taking
into account
the external context and the cultural factors that might influence
And my argument here is that at the time I saw the plaintiff she did not have
evidence of post-traumatic stress disorder. She certainly
had residual grief
symptoms but not post-traumatic stress disorder. I did not have an opportunity
to re-examine the plaintiff during
the time she was probably being
re‑triggered by the current proceedings so it is possible that in the
context of the current
proceedings she may have developed symptoms which are
marked distress which is out of proportion with the severity and intensity
the court proceedings or it may not.
I will never know because I was never given the opportunity to examine her but I
think we need to stress the fact that it needs to
be marked distress which is
out of proportion and I don't know that anybody's really demonstrated that from
someone who I examined
to have been in remission about a year ago,
18 months ago.
Allnutt also agreed that under DSM-5, a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress
disorder requires either “clinically significant
distress or impairment in
social occupational important areas of functioning”. Dr Allnutt explained
that in his last assessment,
he found that the plaintiff had “continued to
manifest a number of symptoms” that he considered to be “of a
post-traumatic
nature”, which he believed “were [in] keeping with
what one would expect, and residual symptoms”.
Dr Skinner’s reports
Skinner provided two reports; one dated 22 March 2024, and a supplementary
report dated 29 April 2024. Both reports were tendered
by the defendant.
preparing the reports, Dr Skinner did not examine the plaintiff. However, she
did have access to the transcript of the evidence
of the plaintiff, Dr Allnutt
and Dr Ventura’s evidence, and to the plaintiff’s clinical notes
from Calvary Hospital.
Dr Skinner’s first report
her first report, Dr Skinner described the distinction between grief and
post-traumatic stress disorder; namely, that while the
pre-dominating symptoms
of a normal grief reaction are depression and intense sadness, the
pre-dominating symptoms of post-traumatic
stress disorder are intrusive
re-experiencing of the traumatic event, avoidance of reminders, alterations in
cognition, and anxiety.
She explained that post-traumatic stress disorder is
considered resolved once the patient no longer meets the diagnostic criteria
the condition, and may be considered in remission when symptoms are still
present but have decreased in severity. Dr Skinner
also clarified that a person
may exhibit symptoms of a psychiatric condition without meeting the diagnostic
criteria for that condition.
Skinner was then asked to consider the following hypothetical circumstances:
The plaintiff’s physical condition developed and progressed in the
hospital rather than at home following her discharge on
1 August 2019;
While at the hospital, the plaintiff recognised she might be experiencing a
rupture which was potentially fatal;
While at the hospital, the plaintiff would have suffered increased pain and come
to the realisation her medical condition was not
going to resolve spontaneously
and if she did not have surgery, she could die;
The plaintiff was told at the hospital that she could die and she was going to
lose the pregnancy and likely lose her fiertillity
The plaintiff was processed for and underwent surgery on an urgent basis.
Skinner found that, even in the above hypothetical, the plaintiff still would
have suffered psychological sequelae. In forming
this view, Dr Skinner concluded
that, if the plaintiff had remained in hospital, she “might have missed
her family ... and
general comforts of home”. Further, Dr Skinner also
concluded that the plaintiff would still have been aware of her risk of
even in a hospital setting, although she may have been given stronger pain
relief which may have reduced this anxiety. Dr
Skinner found that the plaintiff
would have experienced grief at the loss of her pregnancy, her fallopian tube
and subsequently,
her relative fertility.
Skinner did not believe it was possible to conclude that the plaintiff would not
have sustained a psychiatric injury had she not
been discharged from hospital on
1 August 2019. She provided two reasons for this conclusion. First, the
plaintiff said in evidence
that she was terrified of having surgery and dying,
and that prospect would have remained in hospital. Second, she would have
“emotional trauma” from the loss of her pregnancy and loss
of her fallopian tube even if she was in hospital at the time
Dr Skinner’s supplementary report
the preparation of her supplementary report, Dr Skinner had access to the
reports of Dr Allnutt, Dr Ventura and Dr Lamaro (dated
3 April 2024), as well as
the Amended Statement of Claim and the Further Amended Defence.
the supplementary report, Dr Skinner said that the plaintiff’s decision to
wait several hours before returning to hospital
after the onset of the severe
pain may have been a “psychological avoidance mechanism” in relation
to her fear of surgery.
Dr Skinner stated that this mechanism might have
still operated even if the plaintiff remained in hospital. Specifically, Dr
observed that the plaintiff may have not called for night staff in the
hope that the pain would settle. Dr Skinner concluded that
the plaintiff would
have suffered similar psychological responses whether she was at home or at
hospital when her pain increased.
Skinner then turned to consider the reports of Dr Allnutt and Dr Ventura. Dr
Skinner agreed that the plaintiff’s symptoms
are “in keeping
with” Dr Allnutt’s diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder with
associated post-traumatic stress
symptoms. However, Dr Skinner did not agree
that the plaintiff was suffering a psychiatric disorder, noting that the
plaintiff was
“functioning well”. Dr Skinner also disagreed with
Dr Ventura’s diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder as
plaintiff “did not describe the re-experiencing phenomena characteristic
of that condition”.
Skinner then considered a further report of Dr Lamaro, dated 3 April
She agreed with his opinion
that miscarriages and ectopic pregnancies requiring surgery are stressful for
any patient. Dr Skinner
accordingly found that the plaintiff has suffered
“significant emotional trauma”, characterised by grief and loss, as
a result of her four unsuccessful pregnancies. Dr Skinner considered that
this trauma would not have been avoided even if the plaintiff
had not been
discharged from hospital on 1 August 2019.
Dr Skinner’s evidence
Skinner was called to give oral evidence in these proceedings on 13 May
her evidence, Dr Skinner expressed the opinion that the most significant factors
concerning the plaintiff’s psychological
response were the fact that she
lost her pregnancy, and the fact that she had to undergo surgery which resulted
in the loss of her
remaining fallopian tube. Dr Skinner considered that the
level of pain experienced by the plaintiff at the time of the surgery was
little consequence to the psychological sequalae incurred.
Skinner explained that the plaintiff’s pregnancy and fertility were very
important to her and that the loss of those two
things would result in
“major psychological implications”. This view was based on Dr
Skinner’s clinical experience,
rather than any assessment of the plaintiff
cross-examination, Dr Skinner said that she had not previously been aware that
the plaintiff was haemorrhaging at the time. When
this was made clear, she
responded: “Okay. Indeed, she would be very anxious. I understand that,
yes”. Dr Skinner agreed
that a situation where the patient knows herself
to have suffered from a ruptured fallopian tube and to be at immediate risk of
out is more likely to result in a post-traumatic stress disorder than a
situation where a doctor explains that they suspect an ectopic
pregnancy, that
it is necessary to perform exploratory surgery, and if an ectopic pregnancy is
confirmed, the surgery will become
legislation and principles
present proceedings are governed by the
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
provides as follows concerning the standard of care
to be applied in negligence proceedings:
For deciding whether a person
) was negligent, the standard of care required
of the defendant is that of a reasonable person in the defendant’s
position who
was in possession of all the information that the defendant either
had, or ought reasonably to have had, at the time of the incident
out of which
the harm arose.
can be seen from the terms of s 42, the inquiry requires consideration of what a
reasonable person would have done, looking forward
from a point of time before
the injury, rather than retrospectively at what could have been done to avoid
the injury: see
Vairy v Wyong Shire Council
[2005] HCA 62
223 CLR 422
Rosenberg v Percival
[2001] HCA 18
205 CLR 434
. The burden of
proof lies on the injured party:
Horne v J K Williams Contracting Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 58
; 104 MVR 1 at
the present case, the relevant standard is that of a medical practitioner, as
outlined by the High Court in
Rogers v Whitaker
[1992] HCA 58
The law imposes on a medical practitioner a duty to exercise reasonable care and
skill in the provision of professional advice and
treatment. That duty is a
"single comprehensive duty covering all the ways in which a doctor is called
upon to exercise his skill
and judgment"; it extends to the examination,
diagnosis and treatment of the patient and the provision of information in an
appropriate
case. It is of course necessary to give content to the duty in the
given case.
The standard of reasonable care and skill required is that of the ordinary
skilled person exercising and professing to have that
special skill ...
43 provides as follows concerning the precautions to be taken against risk of
43 Precautions against risk—general
(1) A person is not negligent in failing to take precautions against a risk
of harm unless—
(a) the risk was foreseeable (that is, it is a risk of which the person knew or
ought to have known); and
(b) the risk was not insignificant; and
(c) in the circumstances, a reasonable person in the person’s position
would have taken those precautions.
(2) In deciding whether a reasonable person would have taken precautions
against a risk of harm, the court must consider the following
(among other
relevant things):
(a) the probability that the harm would happen if precautions were not taken;
(b) the likely seriousness of the harm;
(c) the burden of taking precautions to avoid the risk of harm;
(d) the social utility of the activity creating the risk of harm.
provides the following additional requirements when
assessing the precautions to be taken against risk of
44 Precautions against risk—other
In a proceeding in relation to liability for negligence—
(a) the burden of taking precautions to avoid a risk of harm includes the burden
of taking precautions to avoid similar risks of
harm for which the person may be
responsible; and
(b) the fact that a risk of harm could have been avoided by doing something in a
different way does not of itself give rise to or
affect liability for the way in
which it was done; and
(c) the subsequent taking of action that would (had the action been taken
earlier) have avoided a risk of harm does not of itself
give rise to or affect
liability in relation to the risk and is not of itself an admission of liability
in relation to the risk.
purpose of s 43 was explained by the Court of Appeal in
Austen v Tran
[2023] ACTCA 44
as follows:
Provisions such as
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act
were introduced in
legislation by the States and Territories of Australia following the report of
the panel chaired by the Hon Justice
Review of the Law of Negligence
(Final Report, 30 September 2002). The types of considerations referred to in
are familiar to common lawyers, because while the statutory provisions now
recalls to a substantial degree the principles relating to breach
of duty essayed in
Wyong Shire Council v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
(1980) 146 CLR 40
47–8 (Mason J). The mischief that the Ipp Panel identified and sought to
address was that it was thought that the decision
perceived to have created a situation in which lower courts might be in danger
of ignoring that the probability of a risk,
however high or low it may be, was
only one element in determining the factual question of what reasonable care
required. The Ipp
Panel referred this consideration at [7.14] of its final
... a danger that
may be used to justify a conclusion – on
the basis that a foreseeable risk was not far-fetched or fanciful – that
was negligent not to take precautions to prevent the risk materialising, and
to do this without giving due weight to the other elements
of the negligence
Court continued at [67]:
At common law, what reasonable care requires directs attention to the type of
factors identified by Mason J in
, which include the magnitude of
the risk. The inquiry is a prospective inquiry, and it is in error to reason
backwards by asking
what reasonable steps would have prevented the risk of
injury materialising, and holding a person liable in negligence because those
steps were not taken: see,
Rosenberg v Percival
[2001] HCA 18
(Gleeson CJ);
Vairy v Wyong Shire Council
[2005] HCA 62
, [128], [160] (Hayne J);
Roads and Traffic Authority (NSW) v
at [18] (Gummow J). The same observation applies to the inquiry
required by
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act
Fuller v Australian Capital Territory
[2024] ACTCA
considering questions of breach, it must be borne in mind that a number of acts
or omissions which do not constitute individual
breaches may, when combined
together, amount to a breach of duty, “as one failure augments the others
to place a plaintiff
at an unacceptable risk of injury”:
Council of the City of Broken Hill
[2005] NSWCA 468
relevance of peer professional opinion in determining whether there has been a
breach of the duty of care
is no equivalent in this jurisdiction to
Civil Liability Act
(NSW), which relevantly provides that a professional does not incur a
liability in negligence arising from the provision of a professional
it is established that the professional acted in a manner that was widely
accepted in Australia by peer professional opinion
as competent professional
practice at the time the service was provided:
KS and XT v Calvary Health
Care ACT trading as Calvary Hospital and Dr Andrew Foote
[2018] ACTSC 84
. Accordingly, in this jurisdiction, whether there has been a breach of the
duty of care is a question for the Court rather than for
the experts, although
the state of competent professional opinion and practice at the time will be a
relevant (and sometimes decisive)
consideration in determining whether a breach
has occurred:
Rosenberg v Percival
at 483; and
at [90] – [91].
application of s 110 of the Wrongs Act (principles about public
authorities)
defendant submitted that in considering whether it breached its duty of care,
consideration must also be given to s 110 of the
. Section 110
provides as follows:
authorities
The following principles apply in deciding
in a proceeding whether a public or other authority has a duty of care or has
a duty of care:
(a) the functions required to be exercised by the authority are limited by the
financial and other resources reasonably available
to the authority for
exercising the functions;
(b) the general allocation of the resources by the authority is not open to
(c) the functions required to be exercised by the authority are to be decided by
reference to the broad range of its activities (and
not only by reference to the
matter to which the proceeding relates);
(d) the authority may rely on evidence of its compliance with the general
procedures and applicable standards for the exercise of
its functions as
evidence of the proper exercise of its functions in the matter to which the
proceeding relates.
is an issue as to whether Calvary Healthcare ACT Ltd was, at the relevant time,
a “public or other authority” within
the meaning of s 110 of the
defines “public or other authority” as
Definitions—ch
In this chapter:
public or other authority
means any of the following:
(a) the Territory;
(b) an administrative unit;
(c) a territory authority;
(d) an entity prescribed by regulation for this paragraph;
(e) any entity so far as the entity exercises a function prescribed by
regulation for this paragraph.
the time of the relevant events, Calvary Health Care ACT Ltd was a publicly
listed company. On 31 May 2023, the ACT Legislative
Assembly passed the
Health Infrastructure Enabling Act 2023
Infrastructure Act
), which had the effect of enabling the Territory to
acquire from Calvary Health Care ACT Ltd part of the land that the Calvary
in Bruce stood on. The Explanatory Statement to the
Infrastructure Enabling Bill 2023
lists a number of its policy objectives, one
of which relevantly provides: “to
to a government
operated, insourced, healthcare system on the northside of
Canberra” (emphasis added). In other words, as at
31 July 2019, the
Territory merely provided the Hospital with public funding. It was not owned,
nor administered by the Territory.
these circumstances, it does not appear that Calvary Hospital would fall within
the definition of “the Territory”.
Nor is the Hospital an
“administrative unit” or a “Territory Authority”: see
Dictionary to the
Legislation Act 2001
Sector Management Act 1994
administrative unit under
means “an administrative unit for the
time being established under the
Public Sector Management Act 1994
section 13(1)
”: Dictionary to the
Legislation Act 2001
Calvary Hospital would not appear to satisfy this definition:
Public Sector Management Act 1994
(ACT) and the
Administrative
Arrangements 2019 (No 1)
(ACT), in force as at 31 July 2019. It does not
appear that any regulation has been made pursuant to
ss 109(1)(d)
Accordingly,
it does not appear that
applies to these proceedings. However, as outlined
further below, nothing turns on this, as the particular contentions made by the
defendant in reliance on
should not be accepted, regardless of whether
is capable of applying to the defendant. In these circumstances, and as the
proper construction of
was not the subject of submissions by either party,
it is not necessary to express a concluded view concerning the application of
to the defendant.
principles to be applied when considering questions of causation are set out in
s 45 of the
, which relevantly provides as
(1) A decision that negligence caused particular harm comprises the following
(a) that the negligence was a necessary condition of the happening of the harm
(‘factual causation’);
(b) that it is appropriate for the scope of the negligent person’s
liability to extend to the harm so caused (the
distinction between “factual causation” and “scope of
liability” in s 45 “should not be obscured
by judicial
Wallace v Kam
[2013] HCA 19
250 CLR 375
causation” as provided for in s 45(1)(a) of the
“entirely factual” question:
Wallace v Kam
at [14]. Factual
causation will be satisfied where a defendant’s negligence is a necessary
condition of the occurrence of the
particular harm. It is not necessary that the
negligence be the sole cause of the harm; all that is required is that the
make a “material contribution” to the harm sustained:
Strong v Woolworths Limited
[2012] HCA 5
246 CLR 182
contrast, the “scope of liability” limitation in s 45(1)(b) of the
is a “normative question”. As the Court of Appeal
McLennan v Meyer Vandenberg
[2020] ACTCA 7
Unlike s 45(1)(a), s 45(1)(b) is a normative question:
Wallace v Kam
[2013] HCA 19
250 CLR 375
. It is in this limb of the test for causation
that matters such as novus actus interviens must be considered, as they
incorporate
unexpressed value judgments: see
Nguyen v Cosmopolitan Homes
(NSW) Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 246
Thomson v Young
[2013] NSWCA
Paul v Cooke
[2013] NSWCA 311
85 NSWLR 167
Commonwealth of Australia,
Review of the Law of Negligence: Final Report
(2002) (Ipp Report) at [7.43]. In determining the scope of liability the court
is obliged to consider whether or not, and why, responsibility
for harm should
be imposed upon the negligent party.
Contributory
concerns contributory negligence. It provides as
Apportionment
of liability—contributory negligence
person (the claimant) suffers damage partly because of the claimant’s
failure to take reasonable care (contributory
negligence) and partly because of
someone else’s wrong—
(a) a claim for the damage is not defeated because of the claimant’s
contributory negligence; and
(b) the damages recoverable for the wrong are to be reduced to the extent the
court deciding the claim considers just and equitable
having regard to the
claimant’s share in the responsibility for the damage.
(2) However, if the claimant suffered personal injury and the wrong was a
breach of statutory duty, the damages recoverable by the
claimant for the
personal injury must not be reduced because of the claimant’s contributory
negligence.
(3) If an Act or contract providing for the limitation of liability applies
to the claim, the amount of damages awarded to the claimant
subsection (1) must not exceed the maximum limit applying to the claim.
(4) This section does not defeat any defence arising under a contract.
(5) This section has effect subject to part 7.1 (Damages for personal
injuries—exclusions and limitations).
Alananzeh v Zgool Form Pty Ltd
[2024] ACTSC 16
McWilliam J helpfully set
out the following principles which apply to the Court’s consideration of
contributory negligence
under s 102 of the
(a) Having regard to the words of s 102 of the Act set out above, and in
particular the phrase ‘partly because of the claimant’s
take reasonable care’ it is necessary to establish that the
plaintiffs’ failure to take reasonable care is
causally linked to the
suffering of damage.
(b) The defendants bear the onus of establishing the causal connection.
(c) The test is objective. It is in substance the same test that existed at
common law, and involves both the culpability (in the
sense of the degree of
departure from the standard of care of a reasonable person) and the relative
importance of the act of the
parties in causing damage.
of the duty of care
her Amended Statement of Claim, the plaintiff alleged that the defendant owed
her a non-delegable duty of care to provide the medical
services to the standard
expected of a reasonably competent hospital. The Amended Statement of Claim
asserts that the scope of the
duty required the defendant to:
(a) Appropriately assess, diagnose and treat the Plaintiff;
(b) Secure or arrange for appropriate investigations and/or referrals to be
effected with respect to the Plaintiff;
(c) Appropriately assess the Plaintiff upon her presentation or representation
and thereafter provide appropriate treatment and/or
undertake appropriate
investigations and/or thereafter to properly advise the plaintiff in relation to
her symptoms and/or her ongoing
clinical management and/or any steps that ought
to be undertaken with respect to her symptoms;
(d) Take reasonable steps to reduce the risk of foreseeable injury to the
Plaintiff arising from her symptoms or from the medical
services provided or
(e) Provide advice to the Plaintiff as to diagnosis;
(f) Provide advice to the Plaintiff as to a differential diagnosis;
(g) Provide advice to the Plaintiff on whether the Plaintiff required
(h) Warn the Plaintiff in relation to risks of having surgery and risks of not
having surgery;
(i) Advise the plaintiff to remain in hospital where she was, and had been,
experiencing significant pain during her admission on
31 July and 1 August and
remained at significant risk of experiencing a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.
its Further Amended Defence, the defendant admits that at the relevant time, the
Hospital owed the plaintiff a non-delegable duty
of care to exercise reasonable
care and skill in the provision of medical care, treatment and advice during her
presentations and
admissions to the Hospital on 31 July 2019 and 2 August 2019.
However, the defendant does not admit the particulars as outlined above,
simply asserts that the scope and content of the duty owed to the plaintiff by
the defendant was to be determined by ss 42 –
44 inclusive of the
response to the plaintiff’s allegations concerning the duty of care, the
defendant also alleges that:
The Plaintiff denied the Defendant the opportunity to treat her sooner by
failing to report her alleged pain or increased pain at
or shortly after
discharge, and failure to promptly re-present to the hospital as advised and in
accordance with its clinical management
plan, and accordingly, the scope of the
Defendant’s duty should not extend to any damage suffered by her following
her discharge.
her Amended Statement of Claim, the plaintiff alleges that the risk of harm to
her was evident from her medical history, including
her prior ectopic pregnancy,
miscarriage, endometriosis and peritoneal windows; and from her symptoms upon
presentation on 31 July
2019, including abdominal pain, bleeding, vomiting,
shoulder pain, and the lack of evidence of an intra-uterine pregnancy.
plaintiff contends that her condition was such that a failure to meet the
standard of care set out above would be likely to occasion
serious and ongoing
harm, including a risk of total removal of the plaintiff’s remaining
fallopian tube; the ensuing risk that
she would be unable to fall pregnant
naturally in future; and the risk that she would “suffer a ruptured
ectopic pregnancy
at home if inappropriately discharged, thereby causing
significant fear of harm or death in someone who had previously experienced
similar medical condition contralaterally, and resulting in psychiatric
Consequently,
the plaintiff alleges that the risk of harm to be addressed was foreseeable and
not insignificant, such that any reasonable
hospital would have taken reasonable
steps to address it. The plaintiff identifies the reasonable precautions the
defendant was required
to take as including the need to:
(a) appropriately assess, examine and diagnose the Plaintiff’s condition
as evidenced by the lack of intrauterine pregnancy;
(b) exclude a diagnosis of an ectopic pregnancy;
(c) advise the Plaintiff that she should undergo a diagnostic laparoscopy to
determine whether she had an ectopic pregnancy;
(d) arrange for appropriate investigations to be undertaken;
(e) arrange for appropriate referrals and testing;
(f) perform a diagnostic laparoscopy to diagnose or exclude an ectopic
(g) implement an adequate treatment plan with respect to the Plaintiff’s
(h) appropriately advise the Plaintiff in relation to her condition and in
particular any steps that ought to be taken due to the
lack of intrauterine
pregnancy; and
(i) not discharge the plaintiff where she was, and had been, experiencing
significant pain during her admission on 31 July and 1
August 2019 and remained
at significant risk of experiencing a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.
plaintiff alleges that the defendant breached this duty of care by:
(a) failing to appropriately assess, examine, diagnose and treat the Plaintiff
on 31 July 2019 and 1 August 2019;
(b) given the Plaintiff’s history, symptoms and investigations, performing
expectant management of the Plaintiff on 31 July
2019 and 1 August 2019;
(c) failing to secure or arrange for appropriate investigations to be undertaken
in respect of the Plaintiff or her condition on
and from 31 July 2019;
(d) failing to implement a proper or adequate treatment plan with respect to the
Plaintiff's condition on and from 31 July 2019;
(e) failing to diagnose the Plaintiff with an ectopic pregnancy on 31 January
2019 and 1 August 2019;
(f) failing to treat the Plaintiff's ectopic pregnancy on 31 July 2019 and 1
August 2019;
(g) failing to refer the Plaintiff to a surgeon for a diagnostic laparoscopy on
31 July 2019 and 1 August 2019;
(h) failing to perform a diagnostic laparoscopy on 31 July 2019 and 1 August
(i) failing to perform surgery on the Plaintiff for an ectopic pregnancy on 31
July 2019 and 1 August 2019;
(j) failing to advise the Plaintiff on 31 July 2019 and on 1 August 2019 of the
risks to her remaining fallopian tube should she
have an ectopic pregnancy;
(k) failing to advise the Plaintiff on 31 July 2019 and on 1 August 2019 of the
risks to her being able to fall pregnant naturally
in the future, should she
have an ectopic pregnancy;
(l) failing to ensure that any treatment recommended for the Plaintiff's
condition was reasonable, appropriate, and necessary for
her condition on and
from 31 July 2019;
(m) failing to appropriately advise the Plaintiff on and from 31 July 2019 in
relation to her condition and in particular any steps
that ought to be
undertaken considering the lack of intrauterine pregnancy; and
(n) failing to take reasonable steps to reduce the risk of foreseeable injury to
the Plaintiff arising from her condition or from
the medical services provided
or required; and
(o) discharging the plaintiff where she was, and had been, experiencing
significant pain during her admission on 31 July and 1 August
and remained at
significant risk of experiencing a ruptured ectopic pregnancy.
defendant does not admit that the risk of harm to the plaintiff was foreseeable
and not insignificant and does not admit that
any reasonable hospital would have
taken the measures set out above. The defendant further denies that its scope of
duty extends
to the harm identified in the Amended Statement of Claim, relying,
, on s 110 of the
defendant further alleges that the performance of expectant management of the
plaintiff was appropriate in the circumstances,
and that exploratory or other
surgery was clinically contraindicated and would have created additional risks
to the plaintiff. The
defendant further alleges that the decision to discharge
her was reasonable at the time and was clinically warranted.
plaintiff claims that she sustained the following injury, loss and damage as a
result of the defendant’s negligence:
(a) Rupture of left fallopian tube;
(b) Laparoscopic left salpingectomy to remove left fallopian tube;
(c) Inability to conceive naturally;
(d) Episodic pain and vomiting during menstruation;
(e) Marriage breakdown due to inability to conceive;
(f) Psychological trauma;
(g) Loss of self-esteem and confidence;
(h) Reduced quality and quantity of sleep;
(i) Persistent depressive disorder;
(j) Associated post-traumatic stress symptoms; and
(k) Post-traumatic stress disorder.
plaintiff also seeks damages for consequent economic loss, including out of
pocket expenses, past and future loss of income and
past and future domestic
assistance.
its Amended Defence, the defendant denies causation. The defendant also denies
that the plaintiff suffered any injury, loss or
damage due to any negligence on
the part of the defendant.
defendant also alleges that any injury, loss or damage was contributed to by the
plaintiff’s own negligence, including by
failing to provide the obstetric
and gynaecological registrar of various matters during his consultation with
(a) Failing to advise Hospital personnel of various specified matters concerning
her pain levels and her concerns on discharge;
(b) Disregarding medical advice to re-present to the Hospital Emergency
Department if there was any increase in pain or if she had
any concerns, because
she wanted to “try and manage it at home” on 1 August 2019;
(c) Failing to contact the Hospital, call an ambulance or re-present to the
Hospital after 7:00pm on 1 August 2019 when she alleges
she experienced an
increase in pain;
(d) Failing to contact the Hospital for advice/ support, to call an ambulance,
to ask her husband or family members to transport
her or to re-present to the
hospital after 2:00am on 2 August 2019 when she says she started experiencing
severe pain including sharp
shooting pains up her arm and into her shoulder tip,
or thereafter;
(e) Failing to contact the Hospital for advice/ support, call an ambulance, ask
her husband or family members to transport her or
re-present to the hospital at
any time prior to 6:38am on 2 August 2019.
defendant alleges in answer to the whole of the plaintiff’s claim that it
is just and equitable for the plaintiff’s
claim to be reduced pursuant to
s 47 of the
by up to 100% by reason of the plaintiff’s
contributory negligence, in circumstances in which the plaintiff “was
advice upon discharge and the Plaintiff, knowing of her risk of a possible
rupture of a possible tubal ectopic pregnancy at discharge
... did not return to
hospital as directed by the doctors, upon experiencing a change or increase in
defendant also relies upon s 110 of the
, and contends
(a) A hospital cannot, as a practical matter, retain every patient as an
inpatient until their medical condition has favourably or
fully resolved without
any risk of harm; and
(b) A hospital is entitled to discharge a patient with a medical condition which
has not favourably or fully resolved, following
clinical review, with advice to
seek medical review or return in the event of any concern or deterioration.
noted above, the plaintiff advanced a primary case and an alternative case on
liability. The following factual issues are relevant
to both claims:
(a) The weight to be given to the oral evidence of the witnesses and the
clinical notes;
(b) The plaintiff’s pain levels during the course of her first admission;
(c) What the plaintiff told medical staff about her pain levels during the
course of her first admission;
(d) The plaintiff’s pain levels at the time of discharge;
(e) What the plaintiff told medical staff about her pain levels at the time of
(f) Whether the plaintiff told medical staff that she believed she was suffering
from an ectopic pregnancy;
(g) What the plaintiff was told about possible diagnoses during the course of
her first admission;
(h) What the plaintiff was told about her possible diagnosis at the time of
(i) Whether the plaintiff currently suffers from a recognised psychiatric
illness, and, if so, what is that diagnosis? and,
(j) What, if any, inferences should be drawn from the plaintiff’s failure
to call her former husband to give evidence in her
is convenient to make findings on each of these issues before turning to the
substance of the plaintiff’s claims.
weight to be given to the evidence of the plaintiff, her sister, the medical
personnel and the clinical notes
outlined above, differing accounts were given by the plaintiff, her sister and
the medical staff as to the levels of pain reported,
and suffered, by the
plaintiff during the course of her first admission.
difference between the accounts given by the plaintiff, her sister, and the
medical personnel is not attributable to any lack
of candour on the part of the
witnesses. I find that each of the witnesses, including the plaintiff, her
sister and each of the medical
personnel, were honest witnesses, who were doing
their best to recall events that occurred a number of years ago. As Senior
for the defendant acknowledged in his oral submissions, the real issue
is one of the witness’ reliability rather than their
credibility.
difficulties in ascertaining the reliability of a witness’ evidence in a
case such as the present has been the subject of
comment in many decisions: see,
for example,
Nominal Defendant v Cordin
[2017] NSWCA 6
J and E Vella Pty Ltd v Hobson
[2023] NSWCA 234
Onassis v Vergottis
[1968] Lloyds LR 403
(1986) 6 NSWLR 246
Gestmin SGPS v Credit Suisse (UK)
[2013] HWHC (Comm) 3560 at [22]. As McLelland CJ in Eq observed
Watson v Foxman
[1995] NSWCA 497
(1995) 49 NSWLR 315
...human memory of what was said in a conversation is fallible for a variety of
reasons, and ordinarily the degree of fallibility
increases with the passage of
time, particularly where disputes or litigation intervene, and the processes of
memory are overlaid,
often subconsciously, by perceptions or self-interest as
well as conscious consideration of what should have been said or could have
said. All too often what is actually remembered is little more than an
impression from which plausible details are then, again
often subconsciously,
constructed. All this is a matter of ordinary human experience.
observations have particular resonance for the evidence of the witnesses in the
present case.
example, the plaintiff’s recollection of her first admission (both what
she experienced, and what she said) is necessarily
coloured by her later
experiences, in particular, of becoming critically ill within 12 hours of her
discharge from the hospital;
and of later coming to understand the jeopardy
which she was in fact in at the time of her discharge. It is understandable that
severe pain which the plaintiff undoubtedly experienced immediately prior
to, and after, her second admission would affect her recollection
of the pain
she was experiencing at the time of her first admission.
evidence of the medical practitioners and nursing staff must be approached with
similar caution. Dr Bodulkar, Dr Menakaya and
Nurse Dansby each frankly, and
understandably, acknowledged that they did not have a clear recollection of the
of this is to say that the evidence of any of the witnesses should be rejected
outright as unreliable. Rather, it is simply to
say that the evidence of the
witnesses concerning their recollections of the period from 31 July 2019 to 1
August 2019 must be approached
with caution. In contrast, the clinical notes
were filled in contemporaneously, at a time when litigation was not
contemplated, and
where the perceptions of the authors of the notes were not
coloured by later events.
Nonetheless,
some aspects of these notes must also be approached with caution.
care must be taken drawing inferences from the administration of Fentanyl.
Contrary to Associate Professor Izzo’s apparent
assumption, it does not
follow from the fact that the plaintiff was administered Fentanyl that the
plaintiff was in significant pain.
The evidence is that the plaintiff was
administered Fentanyl because she was allergic to opioid medications. When
assessing the plaintiff’s
pain levels, it must also be borne in mind that
the half-life of Fentanyl is 90 minutes, and so that drug would not have been
upon the plaintiff’s pain levels at any time proximate to her
it is clear from the medical notes that the plaintiff did not display any
objective symptoms of pain during her first admission.
Her heartrate, blood
pressure and temperature are each positively recorded as being within normal
ranges throughout her first admission.
However, it does not follow from these
recordings that the plaintiff was not in pain during the course of her first
admission. The
experience of pain is individual and subjective, and a patient
may experience pain even without accompanying objective symptoms,
increased heartrate or blood pressure. Although Dr Menakaya said that he
would expect objective signs of pain to accompany
a self-reported pain level of
6 out of 10, he also acknowledged that he would not disregard that subjective
report simply because
it was not accompanied by any objective sign, such as an
increased heartrate, or blood pressure.
it is clear that various aspects of the medical notes did not record all
relevant observations that were made of the plaintiff,
nor all conversations
that were had with the plaintiff. For example, the MEWs records contain a space
for recording a patient’s
report of pain. None of these were filled in for
the duration of the plaintiff’s first admission, although the clinical
make reference to the plaintiff complaining of pain at various times
during her first admission (in particular, at 10:10am on 1 August
2019, when she
complained of 6 out of 10 pain). As these records demonstrate, whilst there is
no basis to doubt the accuracy of positive
statements in the clinical notes,
care must be taken before drawing any inferences from the absence of matters in
the clinical notes.
Accordingly,
as will be discussed further below, where the plaintiff’s evidence is
inconsistent with a positive recording in
the medical notes, I have preferred
the account that is contained in the notes. However, I have proceeded more
cautiously where the
defendant has invited me to draw an inference from the
absence of a recording in the notes.
plaintiff’s pain levels during the course of her first
do not find that the plaintiff’s pain levels could be described as
“severe” at any time during her first admission.
Despite being
administered relatively small quantities of Fentanyl, the latest at 11:10pm on
the plaintiff acknowledged (consistently with what is
recorded in the nursing notes) that she was able to sleep during the night
July 2019 to 1 August 2019. Her abdomen was not found to be rigid or
guarded at the time of any examination. On the plaintiff’s
own account,
the pain that she experienced at 7:00pm on 1 August 2019 and particularly
at 2:00am the following morning was qualitatively
different from the pain that
she suffered during her first admission. In particular, it was not until 7:00pm
that the plaintiff began
sweating, a symptom which she said occurs when she is
in “significant” pain.
it does not follow that the plaintiff was not suffering from any pain during the
course of her first admission. It is clear
from the medical notes that the
plaintiff was in pain during the course of her first admission, and that at
times, that pain was
considerably more than ‘discomfort’.
Specifically, those notes record that the plaintiff self-presented to the
Department on 31 July 2019 complaining of lower left abdominal pain
which had been “getting worse” for the past 12 hours.
The plaintiff
complained of “mild pain” at 7:15am on 1 August, and later “6
out of 10” pain at 10:10am, only
an hour and a half before a decision was
made to discharge her. She was administered pain relief at various time during
the evening
of 31 July 2019 and on 1 August 2019.
Bodulkar’s record that the plaintiff was “comfortable” when Dr
Bodlukar examined the plaintiff at 2:30pm on 31
July 2019 and
“stable/comfortable” when he examined the plaintiff at 11:30am on 1
August 2019 does not detract from this
finding. Dr Bodulkar explained that this
note was based upon his own observations, rather than the plaintiff’s own
description
of her pain levels. Dr Bodulkar explained that signs of
discomfort would include that the pain was so severe that the patient was
to give a history, was lying down or curled up in bed, was using a heat pack or
pillow to hold on to, or was holding their
carer’s hand. The absence of
these kinds of observations is not inconsistent with the plaintiff experiencing
continued pain
which was more than “discomfort”.
did the plaintiff tell medical staff about her pain levels during the course of
her admission?
plaintiff gave evidence that she told Nurse Dansby at 10:45am on 31 July 2019
that she was in “severe pain”, and that
she told each nurse who did
her observations on 31 July 2019 and 1 August 2019 that she was in
“significant” pain.
whilst the plaintiff gave general evidence that she had told the doctors and
nurses that she was suffering from “severe”
pain, when asked about
what she told the doctors and nurses at specific times, the plaintiff clarified
that she had in fact reported
that her pain levels were “less” (such
as what she told Dr Bodulkar on 1 August 2019) or that she was
(such as what she told Dr Bodulkar on 31 July 2019).
notes do not record the plaintiff ever describing herself as being in
“severe” pain during the course of her first
admission. As noted
above, the notes record the plaintiff reported:
(a) That her pain had been “getting worse” over the past 12 hours on
her admission at 10:19am on 31 July 2019;
(b) That she had increasing pain during the evening of 31 July 2019 (leading to
the administration of Fentanyl);
(c) That she had “mild pain” at 7:15am on 1 August 2019; and
(d) That she had 6 out of 10 pain at 10:10am on 1 August 2019.
was no allegation in the plaintiff’s pleadings or submissions that any
nursing or medical practitioner had made a false
entry in the notes. Nor would
there be any basis for such a serious adverse finding to be made. As noted
above, I have accepted that
each of the witnesses who gave evidence before me
were honest witnesses who were doing their best to recount the truth in
with their recollections. Accordingly, where the plaintiff’s
recollection of what she told nursing and medical staff concerning
level differs from what is recorded in the notes, I have preferred the
also accept the evidence of Nurse Dansby and Dr Bodulkar that if the plaintiff
had complained of “severe” pain, they
would have made a note of this
and administered pain relief. It may be noted that the plaintiff was
administered pain relief (Fentanyl
and Panadol) on 31 July 2019 and on 1 August
2019 in response to complaints of increasing pain.
Accordingly,
I find that whilst the plaintiff complained of pain at various times during her
first admission, she did not complain
of “severe” pain to any nurse
or doctor during the course of that admission.
plaintiff’s pain levels at the time of
issue of particular importance is the degree of pain which the plaintiff was
experiencing at the time of her discharge.
plaintiff gave evidence that her pain had been severe when she asked for
paracetamol, but that the pain had “reduced”
after she had taken
paracetamol. She said that she was still in pain at the time of her discharge.
defendant noted that Dr Bodulkar gave evidence that, if the plaintiff had
reported pain at discharge or if the plaintiff had appeared
to be in pain, he
would not have discharged her, but would have kept her in hospital. The
defendant submitted that an inference should
be drawn from the fact that Dr
Bodulkar discharged the plaintiff that she made no report of pain to him.
accept that if the plaintiff had complained of severe pain to Dr Bodulkar at the
time of discharge, he would have made a note of
that complaint, and would not
have discharged her. I also accept that if the plaintiff been obviously in
severe pain at this time,
he would have documented this fact. There is no
indication in the medical notes of the plaintiff having complained of
pain after the 10:10am entry. The last medical note which
contains any positive recording of the plaintiff’s pain level was
Dr Bodulkar at 11:30am, which, consistently with the plaintiff’s evidence,
records that the plaintiff’s “abdo
pain is less now and has taken
only paracetamol”.
both the plaintiff and her sister acknowledged, the plaintiff was able to walk
unaided out of the hospital, and up the stairs to
her house unaided. Even after
the plaintiff’s pain increased at 7:00pm, she was able to go to sleep with
the aid of paracetamol.
into account each of these matters, I do not find that the plaintiff was in
severe pain at the time of her examination by Dr
Bodulkar, or at the time of
again it does not follow that the plaintiff was in no pain at the time of
discharge. The 11:30am notes record that the plaintiff’s
pain had was
“less” after taking paracetamol. The report was not of “no
pain”. There is no record of Dr Bodulkar
having asked the plaintiff what
her pain level was at that time, other than obtaining the information that her
pain was “less”.
The plaintiff’s report can only be assessed
against her previous description of her pain levels as 6 out of 10. A reduction
in pain from 6 out of 10 still left room for a not insignificant experience of
is no indication in the notes of Dr Bodulkar having asked the plaintiff what her
pain level was when he saw the plaintiff at
the time of her discharge at 12:30pm
on 1 August 2019. Given the importance of this information, I infer from the
absence of any
notation concerning the plaintiff’s pain levels at this
time that Dr Bodulkar did not ask the plaintiff what her pain levels
he spoke to her at 12:30pm.
described above, the plaintiff’s sister gave evidence that the plaintiff
was pale and holding onto her stomach as though
she was in pain when the
plaintiff walked to her car following her discharge. The plaintiff’s
sister did not embellish her
evidence. For example, she candidly stated that the
plaintiff was not holding her stomach when the plaintiff was examined by Dr
into account all of the evidence, I find that the plaintiff was in pain, but not
severe pain, at the time of her discharge.
did the plaintiff tell medical staff about her pain levels at the time of
outlined at [331] above, consistently with the notes, I find that at 11:30am,
the plaintiff reported to Dr Bodulkar that her pain
was “less” after
taking Panadol. I find that the plaintiff was not asked about her pain levels at
the time of discharge.
On the basis of the clinical notes and the evidence of
Madeleine Hartfield, I accept that the plaintiff was not displaying any overt
signs of significant pain when she was seen by Dr Bodulkar at 12:30pm on 1
August 2019.
the plaintiff tell medical staff that she believed that she was suffering from
an ectopic pregnancy?
plaintiff gave evidence that she told various medical staff that she believed
that she was suffering from an ectopic pregnancy.
She explained that she had
that belief because the pain was sharp and because it was located on the side of
the left hand side of
her abdomen. However, the plaintiff gave evidence that one
of the reasons why she did not re-present to hospital when her pain increased
7:00pm on 1 August 2019 was because the pain was different to the pain which she
experienced in her earlier ectopic pregnancy.
In answer to the question
“you knew at the time that this [7:00pm] onset of pain could’ve been
the progression of your
ectopic pregnancy?” The plaintiff responded:
Yes, but can I caveat with the fact that having previously experienced an
ectopic pregnancy, it wasn't as sharp as - as - as - as
that was and I fully
appreciate that it was a number of years since it had happened, and the pain
that I was experiencing in 2015
compared to 2019, one was a rupture and one
possibly was not at a rupture at 7.00. So I was comparing the two or I would
comparing the two.
must be borne in mind that the pain level that the plaintiff was describing at
7:00pm on 1 August 2019 was higher than the pain
levels that she had experienced
prior to, or during her first admission. Most importantly, the plaintiff said
that she commenced
sweating at 7:00pm, which was not a symptom that she
described at any time during the course of her first admission.
accept that, on presentation, the plaintiff believed that she may have been
suffering from an ectopic pregnancy, and this remained
a concern that she had
throughout her admission. However, in circumstances where the plaintiff’s
symptoms were, on her own
account, different to those she had suffered in her
previous ectopic pregnancy (and were different to the symptoms which she
later that night), I do not accept that she told the nurses or the
doctors that she
positively believed
that she was suffering from an
ectopic pregnancy, as opposed to expressing a
that she may have
been suffering from an ectopic pregnancy.
was the plaintiff told about possible diagnoses during the course of her
outlined above, the plaintiff said that during the 2:30pm consultation on 31
July 2019, Dr Bodulkar told her that she had a pregnancy
of unknown location and
that it was “likely” that she was having a miscarriage. She said
that this advice was repeated
to her at the 8:30pm consultation on 31 July 2019.
In her evidence in chief, the plaintiff said that she was never told that there
was a possibility of an ectopic pregnancy, but in cross-examination, she
acknowledged that she was told that she could not eat or
drink in case she
needed surgery.
noted above, Dr Bodulkar stated that he would have discussed his suspicions of
an ectopic pregnancy with the plaintiff during his
2:30pm consultation. In
particular, he said that he believed that he would have explained the risk of an
ectopic pregnancy when taking
the plaintiff’s medical history. He
accepted, however, that he did not make a note of this discussion, and also
agreed that
it would have been important to do so.
noted above, the notes for the 8:30pm consultation with Dr Bodulkar and
Dr Menakaya state “discussed with patient differential
diagnosis”. However, Dr Bodulkar was not able to say whether or not
Dr Menakaya specifically mentioned the possibility of a
tubal ectopic pregnancy
at that time. When it was put to Dr Bodulkar in cross-examination that this was
a matter that should have
been discussed with the plaintiff, he responded:
...there was no tubal ectopic pregnancy diagnosed by that time when this patient
has been seen, so why should we write about tubal
ectopic pregnancy in the
Bodulkar ultimately agreed that it would have been important to make a note if
Dr Menakaya had discussed the specific risk of ectopic
pregnancy, and also
agreed that no note to that effect had been written. However, he remained unable
to definitively state whether
that matter had been discussed.
outlined above, in his evidence concerning the 8:30pm consultation, Dr Menakaya
said that when he “did the scan”, he
“noticed straight away
that [the plaintiff] had a corpus luteum”. He explained that a corpus
luteum cyst is a cyst that
weeks of pregnancy. Dr Menakaya said that the cyst looks like a “balloon
filled with blood” and said that this can also cause pain. Dr Menakaya
noted that the corpus luteum cyst was located in the
left ovary. He said that
when he was scanning the plaintiff he saw the cyst and told the plaintiff that
“it looks to me that
your discomfort is because of the corpus luteum
examination-in-chief, Dr Menakaya stated that he “would have
advised” the plaintiff that if an ectopic pregnancy ruptured,
she would be
placed at considerable risk. He maintained that he would have told the plaintiff
that one of the potential differential
diagnoses that remained open was an
ectopic pregnancy. (“Absolutely I would have. That’s my normal
practice.”)
when asked whether he had told the plaintiff that rupture could result in death
and the loss of the plaintiff’s fallopian
tube, Dr Menakaya responded:
No, no, no. I don’t – what I said to her is that we had to know the
pregnancy was no location and that could be eventually
an ectopic pregnancy.
Right? Now, you’d – I note that they weren’t ectopic.
That’s the point. I am not
dealing with an ectopic right there. So why
would I then going into the details of an ectopic pregnancy when the patient is
presenting to me. It’s like telling me to talk to your patient about
cancer when he’s come in with a foot pain.
into account all of the evidence outlined above, I find that Dr Menakaya told
the plaintiff that an ectopic pregnancy was a
possible diagnosis. This is
consistent with the plaintiff’s evidence that she was told that she would
not be able to eat or
drink in case surgery was required. However, noting that
Dr Menakaya acknowledged that he told the plaintiff that a “likely”
explanation for her pain was the corpus luteus, and in view of the absence of
any notations in the clinical notes, I also find that
the discussion of ectopic
pregnancy was not a focus of that consultation and that Dr Menakaya did not
discuss the likelihood of an
ectopic pregnancy or the risks of an ectopic
pregnancy during his consultation with the plaintiff at 8:30pm on 31 July 2019.
was the plaintiff told about the possibility of an ectopic pregnancy at the time
of discharge?
plaintiff maintained that she was not told at the time of discharge that she may
have been suffering from an ectopic pregnancy.
She said that she was told that
the pregnancy was of an “unknown location”, but maintained that it
was not explained
that the pregnancy “would be in the tube”.
the plaintiff also gave evidence that she told Dr Bodulkar that she was
concerned that, if she was having an ectopic pregnancy
and the pregnancy
ruptured, she was not sure how to “manage that at home with pain
relief”. The plaintiff also accepted
that she was told that she needed to
plaintiff’s sister, Madeleine Hartfield, gave evidence that she was
present for the 11:30am and 12:25pm consultations between
the plaintiff and Dr
Bodulkar. However, all that Madeleine Hartfield recalled from the earlier
consultation was that the doctor asked
the plaintiff if she needed home support
and if she needed to seek a counsellor or psychiatric care prior to discharge.
Hartfield did not recall anything that was said in the later
consultation.
noted above, the Progress Notes record that Dr Bodulkar discussed “red
flags” with the plaintiff. Dr Bodulkar explained
that whilst he written
“red flags” in his notes, he would not have used that expression
with the plaintiff. He gave evidence
... if the patient has come with pregnancy, abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding
then we will tell them those relevant red flags as
maybe increase bleeding,
increased pain, or if this person was probably high risk for ectopic, then we'll
say that if you have dizziness
or if you pass away [sic, presumably ‘pass
out’] then someone has to bring her.
cross-examination, Dr Bodulkar stated that an increase in pain “is one of
the red flags that I have told her. Yes. That’s
right. So one of the red
in cross-examination, Dr Bodulkar volunteered:
... when we say red flags explain so this is where I want to tell you when in
spite of not writing the exact words of ectopic pregnancy,
when we have
explained the red flags we would have explained the red flags of all the
differential diagnosis which also include PUL
and ectopic so to say that we
haven't told her about ectopic is wrong.
Bodulkar’s evidence that he told the plaintiff that she should return to
hospital if she experienced any increased bleeding,
pain, dizziness or loss of
consciousness is supported by the clinical notes, and is consistent with the
plaintiff’s evidence.
Dr Bodulkar and the plaintiff each gave evidence
that there was a conversation about the plaintiff’s concern of the ongoing
possibility of an ectopic pregnancy, and that Dr Bodulkar’s response to
this concern was to remind the plaintiff to return
to hospital if she
experienced an increase in pain, bleeding, dizziness or loss of consciousness.
find that the information that was provided to the plaintiff on her discharge
was limited to that which is set out in the above
paragraph. I find that Dr
Bodulkar did not provide the plaintiff with any advice about her heightened risk
of an ectopic pregnancy,
or why it was important for the plaintiff to return to
hospital if she experienced an increase in pain or bleeding. Specifically,
find that Dr Bodulkar did not warn the plaintiff that, by reason of her history
and her symptoms, she remained at a real risk of
an ectopic pregnancy, or that
the condition, if untreated, could be fatal. I also find that Dr Bodulkar did
not warn the plaintiff
that any increase in pain or bleeding could be an early
indication that her ectopic pregnancy was rupturing, and that it was essential
that she immediately return to hospital in the event of
increase in
pain or bleeding.
reaching the findings of fact contained in the above paragraph, I have taken
into account the following matters:
(a) The discussion recorded in the clinical notes is limited to a notation that
“red flags” were discussed with the plaintiff;
(b) Dr Bodulkar’s evidence was that a conversation occurred in the brief
terms described above;
(c) The plaintiff was adamant that it was not explained to her that there
remained a real likelihood that she had an ectopic pregnancy;
(d) The plaintiff’s sister did not recall there being any discussion on
discharge other than as to the availability of home
support or counselling.
have given particular weight to the evidence of the plaintiff’s sister in
reaching this finding. Advice that the plaintiff
had a real ongoing risk of an
ectopic pregnancy; that that condition could be fatal; and that it was essential
that the plaintiff
bleeding, would have been a salient matter which would have been considerably
more memorable than an offer of counselling and/or home support. In particular,
information concerning an ongoing risk of an ectopic
pregnancy, and the need to
been important to the plaintiff’s
sister, who had attended to assist the
plaintiff and to bring her home from hospital, and who cared for the plaintiff
until the plaintiff’s
then husband returned. The plaintiff’s
sister’s evidence that the only matters she recalled being discussed were
offer of home care and counselling is cogent evidence that the tenor of the
advice provided by Dr Bodulkar was that the plaintiff’s
loss of her
pregnancy was emotionally distressing, but that the plaintiff did not have any
real risk of a potentially fatal ectopic
the plaintiff have a recognised psychiatric illness?
described above, Dr Allnutt and Dr Ventura each concluded that the
plaintiff has sustained a trauma-related psychiatric illness.
In his report, Dr
Allnutt preferred a diagnosis of a persistent depressive disorder with
associated post-traumatic stress symptoms,
whereas Dr Ventura preferred a
diagnosis of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, in remission. However, in oral
evidence, Dr Allnutt and
Dr Ventura agreed that these diagnoses overlapped and
were not “drastically different”, as both conditions are psychiatric
illnesses, characterised by symptoms of depression, anxiety and post-traumatic
the other hand, Dr Skinner did not consider that the plaintiff was suffering
from a psychiatric disorder, on the basis that the
plaintiff was
“functioning well”. Nonetheless, she agreed with that the
plaintiff’s symptoms were “in keeping
with” Dr Allnutt’s
diagnosis. Dr Skinner did not explain whether her assessment of the plaintiff as
“functioning
well” referred to the plaintiff’s presentation at
the time of the court proceedings, or referred to her presentation
at the time
of either or both of Dr Allnutt or Dr Ventura’s examinations.
contrast to Dr Allnutt and Dr Ventura, Dr Skinner did not personally examine the
plaintiff. The areas of disagreement between Dr
Skinner, on the one hand, and Dr
Allnutt and Dr Ventura on the other, concern nuanced questions such as whether
the plaintiff was
more affected by her loss of fertility, or by the traumatic
situation she had experienced. These are each matters where a personal
examination of a patient, with all of the subtleties in tone of voice, body
language, and affect that such an examination entails,
will necessarily be more
reliable than the making of inferences based on reports and transcripts of
evidence. Further, as noted at
] above, it is significant
that, at the conclusion of Dr Skinner’s cross-examination, she
acknowledged that she had previously
been unaware that the plaintiff was
haemorrhaging whilst she was in pain at 2am. She accepted that this was a matter
which was relevant
to the anxiety that the plaintiff was facing, and the
likelihood of her experience having resulted in a trauma-related psychiatric
these reasons, I accept the evidence of Dr Allnutt and Dr Ventura and find that
the plaintiff has sustained a recognised psychiatric
illness which is
characterised by symptoms of depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress. It
is unnecessary to determine whether
the better label for this illness is
post-traumatic stress disorder or persistent depressive disorder with associated
post-traumatic
stress symptoms.
absence of evidence from the plaintiff’s then
defendant submitted that the Court should draw an adverse inference against the
plaintiff pursuant to the rule in
Jones v Dunkel
because she did not call
her former husband in support of her claim.
Jones v Dunkel
is a “principle of judicial
reasoning which addresses the drawing of inferences of fact”:
[2023] NSWCA 112
. It holds that “the unexplained failure
by a party to call a witness may in appropriate circumstances support an
that the uncalled evidence would not have assisted the party’s
Kuhl v Zurich Financial Services Australia Ltd
243 CLR 361
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
101 CLR 298.
Further, “the failure to call a witness may also permit the court to draw,
with greater confidence, any inference unfavourable
to the party that failed to
call the witness, if that uncalled witness appears to be in a position to cast
light on whether the inference
should be drawn”:
rationale underlying the principle is that “the failure to call the
witness ‘serves to indicate, as the most natural
inference, that the party
fears to do so, and this fear is some evidence that the circumstance or document
or witness, if brought,
would have exposed facts unfavourable to the
at [27], citing
Jones v Dunkel
it applies, the rule does not entitle the trier of fact to draw an inference
that the uncalled evidence would have been positively
damaging to the party not
tendering it:
SSABR Pty Ltd v AMA Group Ltd
[2024] NSWCA 175
Read v Burns
[2017] ACTSC 184
(1976) 12 ALR 551
at 559 – 60. Nor can the rule be used to fill
in gaps in evidence, or convert conjecture or suspicion into inference:
at 308, 312, 320 – 1.For these reasons, generally speaking, a
Jones v Dunkel
inference will “only become material where the
balance of the evidentiary record is equivocal”:
The Property Investors
Alliance Pty Ltd v C88 Project Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2023] NSWCA 291
order for the inference to be drawn, the Court must be satisfied of three
matters: “first, it is expected or natural for
the party in question to
have called the person; second, the person’s evidence would have
elucidated a particular matter; third,
the absence of the person is
unexplained”:
at [23]. The rule has no application where there
is a reasonable explanation for failing to adduce the evidence, such as where
witness is suffering an illness, or is hostile:
Kelly v The King
[2024] VSCA 69
Smith v Samuels
(1976) 12 SASR 574 at
Any “reasonable explanation” for not calling a witness
to whom the principle applies must be established on the evidence:
Government Insurance Office of New South Wales
[1981] HCA 38
accept that the plaintiff’s former husband could have shed light on the
plaintiff’s condition when he returned home
from deployment; her condition
from after she woke him up at around 5:00am on the morning of 2 August 2019
until she was admitted
into hospital; and his perspective for the reasons for
the breakdown in their marriage.
also accept that “merely because the people involved have fallen
out”, it does not follow that “one would not
be expected to call the
at [32]. However, in the present case, the
relationship between the plaintiff and her former husband deteriorated in the
of the events in question, at least in part because the plaintiff
resented her former husband for not being present and able to advocate
behalf whilst she was in hospital to 31 July 2019 to 1 August 2019. In view the
ongoing emotional dimension of these events
for the plaintiff, I do not consider
that it is “expected or natural” for the plaintiff to have called
her now former
partner to give evidence. Accordingly, I decline to draw the
inference sought by the defendant.
plaintiff’s primary case
outlined above, the plaintiff’s primary case was that the Hospital should
have undertaken (or, at least, advised the plaintiff
to undertake) a laparoscopy
during the course of the plaintiff’s first admission on 31 July 2019 to 1
August 2019. The plaintiff
contended that if a laparoscopy had been undertaken,
it was likely that a successful salpingostomy would have been performed, which
would have saved her left fallopian tube, preserving her ability to conceive
naturally and without the assistance of IVF.
defendant appropriately accepted it owed the plaintiff a non-delegable duty of
care to exercise reasonable care and skill in the
provision of medical care,
treatment and advice during the period from 31 July 2019 to 2 August 2019. The
real issues in dispute
in respect of the plaintiff’s primary case were
breach and causation.
of duty: Should a laparoscopy and/ or a salpingostomy have been performed at any
time during the first admission?
the three experts, only Associate Professor Izzo was of the opinion that a
salpingostomy should have been performed during the
plaintiff’s first
presentation at the Hospital. As described above, both Dr Lamaro and Professor
Hyett were of the opinion
that a salpingostomy was clinically contraindicated at
all times during the plaintiff’s first presentation.
expertise of the experts was not challenged. However, the underlying assumptions
of both Dr Lamaro and Associate Professor Izzo
were challenged. The defendant
pointed out that Associate Professor Izzo’s opinion was predicated, at
least in part, on an
understanding that the plaintiff was suffering from
“severe” pain during her first presentation. Similarly, Dr
evidence was challenged by the plaintiff on the basis that he had
assumed that the plaintiff was in “no pain” at the
the reasons outlined above, whilst I have accepted that the plaintiff was in
pain, I have not accepted that the plaintiff’s
‘severe’ at any time during the plaintiff’s first admission.
Considering the whole of the expert evidence
together with this finding of fact,
I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has demonstrated that a salpingostomy
should have been
performed at any time during the plaintiff’s first
Specifically,
given the plaintiff’s history of a previous ectopic pregnancy, and her
description of pain in the left lower quadrant
(that is, on the opposite side to
her previous ectopic pregnancy), it may also be accepted that an ectopic
pregnancy remained a possible
diagnosis at all times during her first admission
(as was recognised in the medical notes). However, other diagnoses could not be
properly excluded at that time. In the absence of a positive finding of an
ectopic pregnancy on the ultrasound and the presence of
a corpus luteus cyst in
the plaintiff’s left ovary, ongoing miscarriage remained a possible cause
of the plaintiff’s
symptoms at the time of her discharge at 1:30pm on
1 August 2019. Despite the absence of any visible finding in the uterus on
ultrasound, there also remained a small possibility of a viable pregnancy.
There were no further non-invasive tests that could be
performed to definitively
confirm, or exclude, an ectopic pregnancy.
Dr Lamaro and Professor Hyett explained, the plaintiff was haemodynamically
stable. There was a “small risk” of the
surgery adversely affecting
a viable pregnancy and a “significant chance” that if the pregnancy
was ectopic, the pregnancy
would abort spontaneously, without further
complication.
importantly, any surgical intervention carries risk, and in the case of the
surgery proposed in the plaintiff’s primary
case, these risks were
substantial. As Associate Professor Izzo acknowledged, a salpingostomy could not
be performed unless the ectopic
pregnancy was visible on a laparoscopy.
Professor Hyett and Dr Lamaro each gave evidence that there was a significant
risk that any
ectopic pregnancy would not be visible on a laparoscopy if it had
been performed during the course of the plaintiff’s first
admission. A
laparoscopy that did not result in a salpingostomy or salpingectomy would have
seriously jeopardised the ongoing management
of the plaintiff’s condition.
Specifically, any further escalation in pain that may have been experienced by
the plaintiff
following the laparoscopy may have been masked by the effects of
the surgery itself. In addition, there was a real risk that a salpingostomy
could itself have damaged or scarred the plaintiff’s left fallopian tube,
adversely affecting her future fertility (including
via IVF), and significantly
increasing her risk of having a further ectopic pregnancy in the future. For
these reasons, Dr Lamaro
was of the view that the performance of a laparoscopy
on the plaintiff would have itself constituted a deviation from the appropriate
standard of care.
Professor Izzo did not squarely address these risks in his evidence, nor did he
explain why it was appropriate to proceed
with surgery despite these risks.
outlined above, there is no equivalent of
Civil Liability Act
in this jurisdiction. Accordingly, the fact that peer professionals such as
Dr Lamaro and Professor Hyett considered that expectant
management of a patient
in the plaintiff’s position accords with competent professional practice
in Australia is not determinative
of the defendant’s liability. However,
their professional opinions remain relevant to the Court’s determination
there has been a breach of the duty of care.
reasons provided by Dr Lamaro and Professor Hyett as to why a laparoscopy and
salpingostomy should not have been performed at
any time during the
plaintiff’s first admission are cogent and compelling. Accordingly,
although I accept that the risk posed
by the plaintiff’s ectopic pregnancy
was foreseeable (s 43(1)(a) of the
), and that the risk was not
insignificant (s 43(1)(b) of the
), I do not accept that a
reasonable person in the defendant’s position would have performed a
laparoscopy (s 43(1)(c) of the
). It follows that I am not
satisfied that the plaintiff has established that the defendant breached its
duty of care by failing to
perform a laparoscopy on her first admission.
conclusions as to breach are sufficient to determine the plaintiff’s
primary case. However, for completeness, I also record
that I am also not
satisfied on the balance of probabilities that if a laparoscopy had been
performed during the time of the plaintiff’s
first admission, a successful
salpingostomy would have followed.
already observed, a salpingostomy could not have been performed if the ectopic
pregnancy was not visible on a laparoscopy. For
the reasons outlined above, I
have not accepted that the plaintiff was in severe pain during the first
admission. It was not until
7:00pm on 1 August 2019 that the plaintiff’s
pain was such as to suggest that it is likely that there was sufficient bleeding
within the fallopian tube to cause swelling that would have been visible on a
laparoscopy. In these circumstances, I am not satisfied
on the balance of
probabilities that the plaintiff’s ectopic pregnancy would have been
visible if a laparoscopy had been performed
at any time during the first
even if an ectopic pregnancy had been visible on a laparoscopy, the prospects of
a successful salpingostomy were uncertain
at best. As Professor Hyett explained,
even if a tubal ectopic pregnancy was identified and a salpingostomy attempted,
a “significant risk” that the procedure would not have
been technically possible, requiring a salpingectomy to be performed.
agreed. I accept this evidence.
Accordingly,
it also follows that I am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that any
failure to perform a laparoscopy was
“a necessary condition of the
happening of the harm” (s 45(1)(a) of the
plaintiff has not established on the balance of probabilities that the defendant
breached its duty of care by failing to offer
or perform a laparoscopy during
the plaintiff’s first admission. Nor has the plaintiff established on the
balance of probabilities
that a laparoscopy would have led to a successful
salpingostomy, such as to save the plaintiff’s left fallopian tube.
Accordingly,
the plaintiff has not established liability on her primary
plaintiff’s alternative case
of the plaintiff’s alternative claim
has been referred to above, in her alternative case, the plaintiff contended
that the defendant breached its duty of care to her
by discharging her at 1:30pm
on 1 August 2019.
to this claim was Dr Menakaya’s evidence that he was not aware that the
plaintiff had reported that she had 6 out of
10 pain at 10:10am on 1 August
relevant exchange was as follows:
If you had been told that an hour and 20 minutes before Dr Bodulkar saw [the
plaintiff] at 11:30 on 1 August 2019, she had reported
6 out of 10 pain, that
would have been quite significant to your determination whether to discharge
her, would it not? --- 6 out
of 10 pain is significant pain. Yes.
Yes, and if you had been told that she had reported 6 out of 10 pain at 10 past
10.00 that morning, that would have been very significant
to your decision to
discharge? --- It is a significant consideration. Yes.
Yes, and taking a properly cautious approach in the clinical circumstances of
this case, may we assume that if you had been told
of that, that you would have
determined to keep her in hospital for further observation? --- That would not
be the only consideration
No, but if you had been told that and all other things being equal, that would
have tipped you in the direction of keeping her in
hospital, would it not?
– What I would likely do is, you know, maybe go and examine her myself.
Yes. That is, you would not have said to Dr Bodulkar, ‘that’s ok,
she’s right to be discharged?’ --- Well,
that – not a pain
score of 6 out of 10. No.
At ten past 10.00 that morning? ---
I wasn’t aware of tha
(emphasis added)
in the cross-examination, Dr Menakaya reiterated that he was not aware that the
plaintiff had complained of 6 out of 10 pain.
He also confirmed that this report
would remain significant, even if it were not accompanied by physical symptoms
of pain, such as
increased pulse rate or blood pressure. He was then asked:
Having kept her in overnight for the reasons you have told us you did, if you
had known those things [ie, that the patient had reported
6 out of 10 pain],
that would have been a strong indicator to you, would it not, even in the
presence of the drop in her hCG levels,
that she should be kept in hospital and
kept under observation?
Menakaya responded:
If I had known those, what I would have done was to investigate her more,
perhaps request another ultrasound scan.
Menakaya ultimately agreed that it was “unlikely” that he would have
discharged the plaintiff.
plaintiff’s counsel noted that all of the experts agreed that if the
plaintiff had been in hospital at the time that she
experienced an increase in
pain at 7:00pm, further action would have been taken by the Hospital, the only
difference being that Dr
Lamaro would have requested a further ultrasound,
whereas Associate Professor Izzo and Professor Hyett would each have proceeded
immediately to a laparoscopy.
plaintiff’s alternative claim was in two further alternative parts:
(a) First, that if the plaintiff had been in hospital when her pain increased at
7:00pm, she would have undergone a laparoscopy,
which would likely have been
followed by a successful salpingostomy, such that her left fallopian tube would
have been saved; or
(b) Second, that even if it has not been established that her fallopian tube
would have been saved (either because it would not have
been appropriate to
undertake a salpingostomy at 7pm or if that procedure was unlikely to have been
successful), she would not have
sustained psychological harm if she had not been
discharged because a salpingectomy would have been performed during the evening
of 1 August 2019, rather than in the emergency situation that unfolded on 2
August 2019.
defendant’s submissions concerning the plaintiff’s alternative
the defendant appropriately accepted that the Hospital owed a non-delegable duty
of care to the plaintiff to exercise reasonable
care and skill in the provision
of medical care, treatment and advice during the period from 31 July 2019 to
2 August 2019.
oral submissions, Senior Counsel who appeared for the defendant accepted that
the risk of injury, including psychiatric injury
was foreseeable. This
concession was correctly made. As Senior Counsel acknowledged, the doctors had
made a differential diagnosis
of ectopic pregnancy with respect to the
plaintiff. There was no dispute that the rupture of an ectopic pregnancy can be
and potentially fatal to the pregnant woman. It is clearly
foreseeable that a patient may suffer both physical and emotional harm
patient is not provided with appropriate care in connection with that
dispute between the parties on the alternative case was again focussed on issues
of breach and causation. In his oral submissions,
Senior Counsel for the
defendant contended that the Hospital did not breach its duty of care by
discharging the plaintiff. He observed:
[H]ospitals routinely discharge somebody from hospital whose clinical condition
has not resolved. And whether it’s a broken
leg, whether it’s a
laceration, whether it’s an excised melanoma, whether it’s an
amputation, people are commonly
discharged with pain relief without the clinical
condition actually resolving. It hasn’t concluded. There is still the
opportunity
to – the hope is that the condition will improve.
There’s the opportunity that it will not.
And to that extent, the hospital – a relevant consideration as set out in
the defence is that we say, looking at the broad
scope of the operation of the
hospital, the hospital cannot retain everybody in hospital whose condition
hasn’t resolved.
Counsel acknowledged that it would not have been appropriate to discharge the
plaintiff if she was in “really significant
pain” at the time of
discharge. He contended that the Court would not be satisfied that the plaintiff
was in “significant
pain” at any time during her first
to causation, the defendant submitted that because the plaintiff was suffering
from a life-threatening condition, she would have
suffered psychological injury
even if she had not been discharged on 1 August 2019. The defendant also
submitted that the plaintiff
was given clear advice to return to hospital if her
pain worsened. The defendant submitted that the plaintiff’s failure to
so was the cause of any damage that she sustained, rather than the
Hospital’s decision to discharge her. In the alternative,
the defendant
submitted that any award of damages should be reduced by up to 100% by reason of
the plaintiff’s contributory
negligence.
Determination
as to liability on the plaintiff’s alternative
Breach of duty
alluded to above, the question of breach depends in part on the Court’s
findings as to the level of pain that the plaintiff
was in at the time of
discharge. Senior Counsel for the defendant properly acknowledged that a
decision to discharge the plaintiff
would have constituted a breach of duty if
the plaintiff was in “really significant pain” at the time of
discharge. Dr
Lamaro and Professor Hyett (if not Associate Professor Izzo) each
expressed the opinion that there would be no breach of the Hospital’s
of care if the plaintiff was in “no pain” at the time of
the reasons outlined above, I have concluded that the true position was
somewhere between these two extremes. Whilst the plaintiff
“really significant pain”, it is also incorrect to describe her as
being in “no pain” (or as only
suffering discomfort) during the
course of her first admission. The clinical notes demonstrate that the plaintiff
had described herself
as having 6 out of 10 pain at 10:10am on 1 August 2019
(that is less than an hour and a half prior to Dr Menakaya’s decision
discharge the plaintiff). In cross-examination, Dr Menakaya acknowledged that a
report of 6 out of 10 pain was “significant
noted above, Dr Menakaya gave evidence that if he had known that the plaintiff
had complained of 6 out of 10 pain earlier that
morning, it is
“unlikely” that he would have discharged her. Care must be taken
with this kind of
ex post facto
evidence about what a person would have
done in a hypothetical situation:
Rosenberg v Percival
at [158]. However,
here the evidence was that of a medical professional, who is able to draw upon
his usual practice, education and
experience in answering this hypothetical
all of these circumstances, I accept Dr Menakaya’s evidence that, if he
had been aware of the plaintiff’s recent complaint
of 6 out of 10 pain at
10:10am on 1 August 2019, it is unlikely that he would have discharged her.
Rather, at the very least, Dr
Menakaya would have personally examined the
plaintiff before making any decisions concerning her discharge.
Bodulkar likewise gave evidence that if he had known that the plaintiff was
continuing to suffer pain, he would not have discharged
her. When asked what
action he would have taken if the plaintiff had complained of any pain at
12:25pm on 1 August 2019, Dr Bodulkar
Then we would have given her pain relief for that particular period, we
wouldn’t have discharged her pending how her pain resolved,
pain resolves, then again, we have to revisit everything.
outlined above, the plaintiff did not complain of pain at 12:25pm on 1 August
2019; but nor was she asked whether she remained
in pain at that time. For the
reasons provided above, I have found that whilst the plaintiff’s pain had
reduced from the 6
out of 10 pain which she had reported at 10:10am that
morning, the plaintiff remained in a level of pain which was more than
at the time of discharge. I find that if the plaintiff had been asked
her pain levels by either Dr Menakaya, or Dr Bodulkar at that
time, she would
have so reported.
it does not automatically follow that negligence has been established. The
question that must be addressed is whether a reasonable
person in the position
of Dr Menakaya and/or Dr Bodulkar would have discharged the plaintiff.
was no dispute that an ectopic pregnancy may be dangerous to a pregnant woman.
If the ectopic pregnancy ruptures, the condition
may be fatal. The plaintiff had
a 10% to 15% risk of ectopic pregnancy by reason of her previous history of an
ectopic pregnancy.
The risk of both physical and psychological harm if the
plaintiff had an ectopic pregnancy which later ruptured whilst the plaintiff
was at home and not under medical care was both foreseeable and not
insignificant (ss 43(1)(a) and (b) of the
). I did not
understand the defendant to submit otherwise.
question which is at the heart of the issue of breach in this case concerns
whether a reasonable person in the defendant’s
position would have
declined to discharge the plaintiff in order to protect against these
noted above, s 42 of the
provides that when deciding whether a
defendant was negligent, the standard of care required of the defendant is that
of a “reasonable
person in the defendant’s position who was in
possession of all the information that the defendant either had, or
reasonably to have had
, at the time of the incident out of which the harm
arose” (emphasis added).
information that ought to have been known about the plaintiff at the time of
discharge was as follows:
(a) The plaintiff had a previous history of an ectopic pregnancy, which had
resulted in the removal of her right fallopian tube;
(b) The plaintiff had consistently complained of pain in the left quadrant of
her abdomen (although there is one entry from an unidentified
author describing
pain in right iliac fossa, that entry is immediately preceded by a description
of pain in the left quadrant);
(c) There was no visible ectopic pregnancy on the ultrasound;
(d) There was no visible pregnancy in the plaintiff’s uterus visible on
the ultrasound;
(e) There was a visible corpus luteum on the plaintiff’s left ovary seen
on the ultrasound, which was a possible explanation
for the pain which the
plaintiff was experiencing;
(f) The plaintiff’s hCG levels had reduced from 2738 on 31 July 2019 to
2071 on 1 August 2019;
(g) The plaintiff had been admitted into hospital and observed overnight. Her
clinical observations had remained stable, despite
the plaintiff only having
been administered with relatively low doses of painkillers (Fentanyl and
Panadol) during that time, with
the last administration of Fentanyl occurring at
11:10pm on 1 August 2019;
(h) Other than “minimal tenderness” at 8:30pm on 31 July 2019, the
plaintiff did not display pain in response to palpation
of her abdomen at any
time during the course of her admission;
(i) The plaintiff complained of increasing pain leading to her presentation at
hospital on the morning of 31 July 2019; increasing
pain over the afternoon/
evening of 31 July 2019 (as demonstrated by the increased doses of painkillers),
lessening pain overnight,
and then increasing pain again, to 6 out of 10,
followed by a reduction of pain in response to the administration of Panadol on
August 2019;
(j) The plaintiff remained in pain at the time of discharge. This pain was not
severe, but it was more than discomfort; and
(k) The plaintiff lived less than 15 minutes’ drive from the hospital.
noted above, the experts expressed differing views as to whether it was
reasonable for the plaintiff to be discharged on the information
that ought to
have been known at the time of discharge.
Professor Izzo maintained that discharge was not appropriate. However, this
opinion was inextricably connected to his conclusion
that a laparoscopy was the
only appropriate course. I have rejected that opinion for the reasons outlined
contrast, both Dr Lamaro and Professor Hyett expressed the opinion in their
reports that it was “reasonable” to discharge
the plaintiff home.
However, Dr Lamaro’s opinion was predicated on an understanding that the
plaintiff was in “no pain”
at the time of discharge, and Professor
Hyett’s opinion that discharge was reasonable was predicated on the
understanding that
her “symptoms [had] settled”. As outlined above,
I have not accepted that the plaintiff was in no pain. Her symptoms
his report, Professor Hyett went on to address whether his opinion would alter
if the plaintiff had had continuing pain at the
time of discharge, and where
that pain was being managed by pain medication. As noted above, Professor Hyett
considered that “significant
ongoing pain” would need to be factored
into the risk assessment concerning the relative merits and disadvantages of
or outpatient treatment and continued:
A significant level of pain would make it less likely that the clinical
situation was completely stable, increasing the potential
for risk of rupture in
an outpatient environment. The balance of risk may therefore favour admission...
also noted at [
] above, Dr
Lamaro was asked in oral examination what he would do if he had been told that
the patient had 6 out of 10 pain prior
to discharge. He responded:
I think what I would be doing if a patient had 6 out of 10 pain I would reassess
them and I’d examine them. Now, if I found
them to have a soft non-tender
abdomen, and they only had paracetamol for that day I’d talk to them about
what they wanted
to do. And we do this all the time. And some patients will say
‘Look, I’d like to go home, I know where to come back
I’ll come back immediately. I’ve got support’, and others
would say ‘Can I stay here another day?’
And I think either are
appropriate.
Lamaro confirmed that the patient should be given a choice about whether to
remain in hospital:
.... We would talk to her about the three possible – possible diagnoses
which she’d had discussed with her and determined
– and I think they
made comment that she had good home support and they – everything was in
place for review as we would
do with an ectopic, but if the patient wanted to
stay or if I felt she needed to, I would – I would keep her.
Hyett likewise emphasised the need for shared decision making between the
Hospital and the patient. In his report, he emphasised
that when a patient in
the plaintiff’s position is discharged home, “they are assessed to
ensure that they understand
the potential for a future diagnosis of ectopic
pregnancy and the small risk of rupture which will need to be managed promptly.
need to be able to recognise any change in symptoms and return to the
hospital in a timely fashion”.
short, both Dr Lamaro and Professor Hyett agreed that the appropriate course
upon being informed that the plaintiff had recently
complained of an increase of
pain to 6 out of 10 would have been for the consultant to examine the plaintiff
for himself, and that
if there was ongoing pain, the plaintiff should only be
discharged if the plaintiff, after provision of full advice about the potential
risk of an ectopic pregnancy, chose to go home, understanding the need to return
to hospital immediately if her pain or bleeding
opinions of Dr Lamaro and Professor Hyett are consistent with the tenor of the
NICE and RCOG guidelines. These protocols state
that expectant management is not
appropriate for a patient who has been diagnosed with an ectopic pregnancy
unless the patient is
“pain free” (NICE Guidelines) or
“clinically stable” (RCOG Guidelines).
NICE and RCOG guidelines did not strictly apply, because the plaintiff had not
received a definitive diagnosis of an ectopic pregnancy
(as noted above, ongoing
miscarriage remained a possible diagnosis, which also explained the
plaintiff’s symptoms). However,
where the plaintiff remained in pain, and
that pain had sharply increased during the morning, before then reducing
somewhat with
the administration of Panadol, the plaintiff’s then current
hCG levels assumed more significance. The plaintiff’s blood
indicated that whilst the plaintiff’s hCG levels had reduced
significantly, from 2738 on 31 July 2019 to 2071 on
1 August 2019, they
still remained above the level which NICE and RCOG guidelines prescribed as
acceptable for expectant management
an ectopic pregnancy were
confirmed. A material increase in the plaintiff’s reported pain therefore
warranted further investigation,
and a cautious approach to the question of
determining the question of the scope of the duty, and whether the duty has been
breached, the defendant relies on s 110 of the
(extracted at
] above), which sets out
principles which must be taken into account when deciding whether a
“public or other authority”
has, or has breached, a duty of care.
discussed at [
] above, there is a strong
argument that the Hospital was not a “public or other authority” to
which s 110 applied at
the relevant time. However, it is unnecessary to resolve
that question in the present case, because the particular contentions made
the defendant in reliance on s 110 should not be accepted, regardless of whether
s 110 applies.
defendant made two submissions in reliance on s 110. The first was that
“[a] hospital cannot, as a practical matter, retain
every patient as an
inpatient until their medical condition has favourably or fully resolved without
any risk of harm”. The
second was that “[a] hospital is entitled to
discharge a patient with a medical condition which has not favourably or fully
resolved, following clinical review, with advice to seek medical review or
return in the event of any concern or deterioration”.
propositions are too widely stated and are, for that reason, apt to mislead. The
question in the present case is not whether
a hospital is required to retain
of their medical condition where the
patient’s medical condition has not favourably resolved. The question is
whether it was
reasonable for a hospital to discharge the particular patient
(that is, the plaintiff) with her particular medical condition, and
particular risks that were attendant on that condition.
the present case, there was no evidence adduced by the defendant that there was
any resourcing, financial or other impediment to
retaining the plaintiff at the
time that she was discharged. There was no evidence that there was a shortage of
beds available at
the time in question. On the contrary, Dr Menakaya said that
it is “unlikely” that he would have discharged the plaintiff
had been aware that she was suffering 6 out of 10 pain at 10:10am that morning.
Accordingly, even if the defendant was an entity
to which s 110 applies, that
provision does not support its submissions in the present case. See similarly
AB v Australian Capital Territory
[2018] ACTSC 16
assessment of whether there has been a breach of the hospital’s duty of
care must, in these circumstances, be assessed by
reference to s 43 of the
Wrongs Act.
Section 43(2) of the
relevantly provides
that when deciding whether a reasonable person would have taken precautions
against a risk of harm, the Court
must consider:
(a) The probability that the harm would happen if precautions were not taken;
(b) The likely seriousness of the harm;
(c) The burden of taking precautions to avoid the risk of harm; and
(d) The social utility of the activity creating the risk of harm.
considering the question of breach, it is necessary to bear in mind that the
plaintiff’s alternative case was not limited
to an allegation that she
should not have been discharged. The plaintiff also alleged that the defendant
breached its duty by not
“appropriately advising [her] in relation to her
condition and in particular any steps that ought to be undertaken due to the
lack of an intrauterine pregnancy” (see above at [292]). That is,
consistently with the evidence of Dr Lamaro and Professor
Hyett, the plaintiff
contended that, given her high risk of an ectopic pregnancy, she should not have
been discharged without discussion
of the option of remaining in hospital for
ongoing observation until her pain resolved or stabilised, and without being
advised that an ectopic pregnancy remained a likely cause of her
symptoms, and the need to return to hospital immediately in the
event of any
increase in pain and/or bleeding.
framed, the first three of the s 43(2) considerations weigh in favour of a
finding of breach:
(a) The “probability that harm would happen” (s 43(2)(a)) if the
plaintiff was discharged without adequate advice was
significant. As noted
above, the experts agreed that the plaintiff had a 10% to 15% chance of an
ectopic pregnancy based on her history.
Her symptom of contralateral pain, which
had not resolved, was consistent with an ectopic pregnancy, and a diagnosis of
pregnancy had (properly) not been excluded at the time of discharge.
(b) The “likely seriousness of the harm” (s 43(2)(b)) was, as noted
above, also significant. A rupture of the ectopic
pregnancy carried a risk of
serious harm (both psychological and physical) or death.
(c) Whilst it may be accepted that a hospital’s resources are not
infinite, the burden of providing appropriate advice to a
patient when being
discharged despite the possibility of an ongoing serious condition is not heavy,
and providing a patient such
as the plaintiff with the option of remaining in
hospital for an additional period of observation was not, in the circumstances
the present case, overly onerous (s 43(2)(c)).
to s 43(2)(d), the provision of medical services to patients with serious health
conditions is an activity of high social utility
(s 43(2)(d)). This matter is
neutral when assessed against the breach that is alleged in the present
into account each of the s 43 matters, I find that the Hospital had a duty of
care not to discharge the plaintiff without discussing
whether she wished to
remain for observation and pain management, and without providing her with
appropriate information concerning
the likelihood of an ectopic pregnancy, the
significance of increased pain and bleeding in that connection, and the need to
to hospital immediately in the event of an increase in pain and/or
information was important. It must be accepted that the plaintiff was generally
aware of the possibility that she was suffering
from an ectopic pregnancy, and
the possible risk to her life and her health in the event of rupture (indeed,
the plaintiff’s
alternative case is predicated on the plaintiff having
that knowledge). However, the plaintiff’s previous ectopic pregnancy
occurred in November 2015, nearly four years before, on 1 August 2019.
reason of her history and her symptoms (which included ongoing contralateral
pain), the plaintiff had a relatively high risk of
an ectopic pregnancy. An
ectopic pregnancy had not been ruled out. The plaintiff had earlier been told by
Dr Menakaya that her pain
was most likely caused by the cyst in her left
ovary. This would have desensitised her to the significance of pain as a warning
of an ectopic pregnancy. In these circumstances, she needed to be told that
an ectopic pregnancy remained very much ‘on the
cards’, and that she
it was critical that she was alert to any increase in pain or bleeding, as those
symptoms would heighten
the likelihood of an ectopic pregnancy, which would
place her in grave danger if medical action was not promptly taken.
plaintiff was not given an opportunity to remain in the hospital. She was
informed that she was being discharged, and was simply
told to return to the
hospital if her pain or bleeding increased, or if she passed out. As outlined
above, she was not provided with
information of her ongoing risk of an ectopic
pregnancy, or the significance of symptoms such as increased pain as indicating
she may be suffering from an ectopic pregnancy rather than an ongoing
miscarriage.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the defendant breached the
duty of care which it owed to the plaintiff
by not discussing whether she wished
to remain for observation and pain management, and without providing her with
appropriate information
concerning the likelihood of an ectopic pregnancy, the
significance of increased pain and bleeding in that connection, and the need
noted above, the plaintiff raised two separate claims in respect of her
alternative case.
the plaintiff submitted that, had she not been discharged at 1:30pm and instead
remained in hospital until 7:00pm on 1 August
2019, medical staff at the
Hospital would have become aware of the plaintiff’s increased pain levels,
and a laparoscopy would
have been performed shortly after that time. The
plaintiff further submitted that, after receiving appropriate advice, she would
have expressed a preference that a salpingostomy be performed so as to save her
remaining fallopian tube, and that the Court would
conclude, on the balance of
probabilities, that her fallopian tube would have been so saved.
consensus of the experts was that the increase in pain at 7:00pm was likely to
have been caused by bleeding within the fallopian
tube. In these circumstances,
I accept that it was more likely than not that the ectopic pregnancy would have
been visible on a laparoscopy
had a laparoscopy occurred at that time.
as Dr Lamaro and Professor Hyett explained, once there was bleeding in the
fallopian tube, the prospects of a successful
salpingostomy were minimal. As
noted above, Dr Lamaro said that, in his experience, it has “never”
been possible to do
an elective salpingostomy with a bleeding ectopic pregnancy.
Whilst Professor Hyett said that he would have offered a salpingostomy
patient in the position of the plaintiff, he expressed a preference for a
salpingectomy and considered that there was a “less
than 50 percent
chance” that a salpingostomy would be successful.
am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that a salpingostomy would have
been successfully carried out if the plaintiff
had not been discharged at
1:30pm. It follows that the plaintiff has not established that the
defendant’s negligence caused
the loss of her left fallopian tube.
Accordingly, the plaintiff’s claims for damages for the loss of her left
fallopian tube
and for the loss of her fertility must be dismissed.
leaves the plaintiff’s alternative claim, which was that even if a
salpingostomy could not have been successfully performed
when her pain increased
at 7pm, as the plaintiff would have been in hospital at the time that her
fallopian tube began to rupture,
her pain levels would have been managed, she
would have proceeded to surgery calmly, and would not have suffered psychiatric
or psychiatric harm to the same extent as in fact occurred.
considering the question of causation on this counterfactual, I have kept in
mind that the breach that I have found is not the
decision to discharge
simpliciter. I accept the evidence of Dr Lamaro and Professor Hyett that it
would have been open to the Hospital
to discharge the plaintiff if, after full
advice had been given, she had agreed to be discharged. As outlined above, the
breach that
I have found is of discharging the plaintiff without discussing with
her the option of remaining in hospital for ongoing observation
until her pain
had resolved or stabilised, and without adequately advising her that an ectopic
pregnancy remained a likely cause
of her symptoms, and the need to return to
hospital immediately in the event of any increase in pain and/or bleeding.
these circumstances, causation can only be established if I am satisfied that
the plaintiff would not have agreed to be discharged
if she had been adequately
informed of these matters, or that, having been so advised, the plaintiff would
have immediately returned
to hospital when her pain started to increase at
7:00pm on 1 August 2019.
am satisfied that the plaintiff would not have agreed to be discharged if the
option of staying in hospital for further observations
had been offered. The
plaintiff remained in significant, albeit not severe, pain at the time of her
discharge. I accept the evidence
of both the plaintiff and her sister that they
were both concerned about the plaintiff’s ability to manage her pain at
There was not a pressing need for the plaintiff to return home. The
plaintiff’s daughter was being looked after by her parents,
and her then
husband had been recalled from his deployment. I accept that the plaintiff would
not have agreed to be discharged if
she had been offered the opportunity to
remain in hospital for further observation and management of her pain, and if
she had been
provided with adequate information concerning her ongoing risk of
an ectopic pregnancy.
the alternative, I am satisfied that even if the plaintiff had agreed to be
discharged, if she had been provided with adequate
advice, she would have
returned to Hospital when her pain increased at 7:00pm. The plaintiff explained
that the reason she did not
on 1 August 2019 was because she decided to “persevere” with the
pain. This decision, which may seem irrational in hindsight, can only be
understood in the context of the plaintiff’s experiences
over the previous
24 hours and in the context of the advice that she had been given. The
plaintiff’s reports of increased pain,
including a reported increase to 6
out of 10 pain that morning, had been responded to by the administration of
painkillers. As noted
above, the plaintiff had been previously told that her
pain was likely caused by the cyst in her left ovary. This, combined with
lack of proper advice about the likelihood that she was suffering from an
ongoing ectopic pregnancy, had the result that the
plaintiff did not appreciate
the danger that she was in when her pain increased at 7:00pm on 1 August 2019.
this respect, it is also important to note that the plaintiff had not engaged in
any irrational conduct in connection with her
condition prior to this time. She
had appropriately presented to hospital the previous day with a concern that she
may have been
suffering from an ectopic pregnancy. As discussed further below,
the plaintiff’s failure to return to hospital at 2:00am may
irrational, but this irrational behaviour should be understood as occurring in
the context of the extreme pain and fear
that she was in at that time. It does
not support an inference that the plaintiff would have behaved irrationally at
7:00pm if she
had been provided with appropriate advice in connection with her
second causation issue, which is related to the above, concerns the connection
between the plaintiff’s psychiatric injury
and her discharge. The
plaintiff submits that she would not have suffered a psychiatric injury if she
had remained in hospital at
the time that her pain levels increased. The
defendant submitted that the plaintiff would have suffered psychiatric injury in
event, even if she had remained in hospital when her pain started to
her report, Dr Skinner suggested that the plaintiff’s decision to wait
several hours before returning to hospital after the
onset of severe pain may
have been a “psychological avoidance mechanism” in relation to her
fear of surgery and speculated
that this mechanism might have functioned even if
the plaintiff had remained in hospital, for example, by not calling for the
disagree. Whilst the plaintiff was in hospital over 31 July 2019 to 1 August
2019, she regularly notified staff when her pain levels
increased. There is no
reason to infer that she would not have done likewise if she had remained in
hospital on the evening of 1
August 2019. Further, from 7:00pm, the
plaintiff had objective signs of pain, such as sweating. From 2:00am, she was
vomiting. Those
objective pain symptoms would have been observed by hospital
staff (as Dr Lamaro testified “that’s what we’re there
watch”), and would have been medically addressed, both by the
administration of pain relief and ultimately by the performance
of an ultrasound
and laparoscopy.
described above, both Dr Allnutt and Dr Ventura agreed that the plaintiff
suffered from a trauma related psychiatric condition
arising from the events of
1 August 2019. Importantly, both agreed that, had the plaintiff remained in
hospital at 7:00pm on 1 August
2019, and assuming an urgent laparoscopy was
carried out in “controlled circumstances” where the plaintiff did
for her life, it is likely that she would not have sustained a trauma
related condition. I accept their evidence.
so finding, I have accepted that there may still have been delays in surgery
being performed on the plaintiff if she had not been
discharged, and had instead
remained in hospital at 7:00pm on 1 August 2019. For example, there may have
been delays in obtaining
the ultrasound and/or in arranging for surgery to occur
overnight. I accept that it is likely that the plaintiff would have suffered
degree of anxiety and distress during the time when she was awaiting surgery.
However, as Dr Allnutt and Dr Ventura explained,
it was the experience of
uncontrolled pain which was foundational to the trauma response which the
plaintiff suffered. If the plaintiff
had been in hospital, her pain levels would
have been monitored by hospital staff and alleviated by the administration of
pain killers
such as Fentanyl. I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that the plaintiff would not have suffered from a trauma related
psychiatric
condition if this had occurred. This is not a case where the plaintiff has
simply lost a chance of a better outcome;
Tabet v Gett
[2010] HCA 12
240 CLR 537.
as the defendant submitted, any psychological injury which the plaintiff would
have suffered in any event, due to the loss
of her pregnancy, the loss of her
fallopian tube, and the stress of surgery, must be disentangled from the damage
that was sustained
as a result of the defendant’s negligence. I accept
that the plaintiff would have suffered some grief from the loss of the
pregnancy, her fallopian tube and her natural fertility. However, I do not find
that this grief would have amounted to a psychiatric
illness. The plaintiff had
previously suffered miscarriage and an ectopic pregnancy without that
follows that the defendant’s negligence made a “material
contribution” to the harm sustained by the plaintiff
and the requirement
for “factual causation” under s 45(1)(a) of the
has been demonstrated.
remaining causation issue concerns the second limb under s 45(1)(b) of the
Act, namely, whether it is appropriate for the “scope of
[the defendant’s] liability to extend to the harm so caused”.
outlined above, this is a “normative question”, which requires the
making of an evaluative judgment as to whether
liability should be imposed.
defendant submitted that its scope of liability should not extent to the harm
caused to the plaintiff for two reasons. The defendant’s
first submission
was an echo of its submissions in respect of the alleged breach of the
defendant’s duty of care. Specifically,
the defendant again noted that it
is not possible for a hospital to keep everyone whose condition has not
resolved, and pointed out
that it will always be foreseeable that a person may
suffer both physical and psychological harm if their condition deteriorates
after discharge. For these reasons, the defendant submitted that causation
should be limited under s 45(1)(b) of the
, so as to guard
against the possibility of unlimited liability.
defendant’s second submission concerned the failure of the plaintiff to
and then significantly
increased again at 2:00am. The defendant noted that the plaintiff acknowledged
that she had understood that
she was to re-present to hospital if her pain
increased. The defendant submitted that it should not be held liable for damages
the plaintiff could have avoided the injury sustained if she had followed
Dr Bodulkar’s advice.
when assessing these questions it is necessary to bear in mind that the breach
that I have found was in the discharge of the
plaintiff without giving her an
opportunity to remain in hospital for observation and pain management, and
without adequately informing
the plaintiff of her heightened risk of an ectopic
pregnancy, and the significance of
an increase in pain in connection with
that condition. This finding of breach does not have a consequence of imposing
unlimited liability
on hospitals and other health care providers.
seen in this light, it is also clear that the plaintiff’s failure to
pain at 7:00pm does not break
the chain of causation, either in a factual, or in a normative sense. The
failure of the Hospital to
involve the plaintiff in the discharge decision and
to explain to the plaintiff her ongoing risk of an ectopic pregnancy and the
significance of pain in that connection was operative at the time that the
plaintiff determined not to return to hospital at 7:00pm.
The plaintiff did not
advice about the severity of her
condition. Further, as explained below, at
2:00am, the plaintiff’s pain levels were such that she was not able to
rational decision-making.
these circumstances, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the
plaintiff has established causation under both s 45(1)(a)
and 45(1)(b) of the
Contributory negligence
] above, in its
Amended Defence, the defendant relied on contributory negligence,
particularised as follows:
(a) Failing to advise Hospital personnel of various specified matters concerning
her pain levels and her concerns on discharge;
(b) Disregarding medical advice to re-present to the Hospital Emergency
Department if there was any increase in pain or if she had
any concerns, because
she wanted to “try and manage it at home” on 1 August 2019;
(c) Failing to contact the Hospital, call an ambulance or re-present to the
Hospital after 7:00pm on 1 August 2019 when she alleges
she experienced an
increase in pain;
(d) Failing to contact the Hospital for advice/ support, to call an ambulance,
to ask her husband or family members to transport
her or to re-present to the
hospital after 2:00am on 2 August 2019 when she says she started experiencing
severe pain including sharp
shooting pains up her arm and into her shoulder tip,
or thereafter;
(e) Failing to contact the Hospital for advice/ support, call an ambulance, ask
her husband or family members to transport her or
re-present to the hospital at
any time prior to 6:38am on 2 August 2019.
(a) was not referred to in the defendant’s closing submissions. I
understand that the allegation contained in that
paragraph was made in the event
that the plaintiff was in severe pain at the time of discharge. I have not so
found. The plaintiff
answered all of the questions that were asked by her, which
included advising medical staff that her pain had reduced (the clear
implication
being that she remained in pain). She also expressed her concern about being at
She was not required to do more.
to paragraphs (b), (c) and (e), on first consideration, it may appear that the
plaintiff should be found guilty of contributory
negligence for failing to
re-present to the Hospital. The plaintiff agreed that she was told that she
should re-present to the Hospital
if her pain increased. Whilst the plaintiff
did not consider that she could have driven herself to hospital, the plaintiff
that she could have called her sister, her parents or an ambulance. The
plaintiff accepted that it was “likely” that
she turned her mind to
the prospect of returning to the Hospital at this time. The plaintiff did not
instead took some paracetamol and “just laid
on [her] side to just try and deal with it”.
the plaintiff’s acts must be viewed in the context of the whole of the
advice that she was given. As outlined above,
the plaintiff was discharged
despite having complained of 6 out of 10 pain earlier that day, and where she
remained in pain at the
time of discharge. The defendant failed to adequately
inform the plaintiff of her ongoing risk of an ectopic pregnancy, and the
significance
an increase in pain in connection with that condition.
The advice given to the plaintiff to return to hospital in the event of an
increase in pain was undermined by the inadequate advice that was provided to
the plaintiff, in particular, the failure to explain
to her that she remained at
high risk of an ectopic pregnancy, and the failure to explain to her why it was
important that she return
to hospital in the event of
increase in
pain. In these circumstances, the defendant has not established that the
plaintiff suffered damage “partly because
of [her] failure to take
reasonable care” (s 102(1) of the
position is even clearer with respect to the plaintiff’s failure to return
to hospital at 2:00am on 2 August 2019. In her
further cross-examination, the
plaintiff provided the following explanation of her thought processes at 2:00am:
So I was preparing myself and I think I mentioned in the – in the last
evidence that – and correct me if I'm wrong I'm
just – I'm trying to
think out loud here, that I think it was – I was digesting what was
happening and I was, in essence,
you know, waiting for a reasonable time to call
someone to – to come and look after my child so I could go to the
following exchange then followed
Morris SC: So did you think of – you must have thought of waking your
husband and asking him to take you to the hospital?
Plaintiff: I did, but I – I like to caveat with the fact that there was a
– I’ve never felt so much fear. And I
can't tell you what was going
on in my head, apart from not being a burden on whoever had to take me to the
hospital. So in my view,
what happened was I was worried about waking up my
parents to come and look after my child, so then waking up my husband to then
my ex husband to then take me to the hospital. I just wasn't clearly and
– and I – I have never felt so much adrenaline
through my body and I can’t tell you if this was a 10-minute period of
where I was – what I was thinking
or if this was over two hours. It was
just – I had to – I just felt I was having an out of body
experience.
Morris SC: I understand you were fearful, all right? I understand you were
fearful and I'm not challenging the suggestion that you
were in pain and you
were concerned, right? I accept that. But you made a decision not to wake your
husband, correct?
Plaintiff: I – yes.
Morris SC: You made a decision not to ring the ambulance, right?
Plaintiff: Yes.
Morris SC: You made a decision – and I'm – I understand there were
all sort of issue of whether your father – your
mum and dad or your sister
might have answered the phone had you called them. But these were all options
that you thought about
and decided not to take it because you didn't want to
interrupt anybody; is that right?
Plaintiff: Absolutely, and from rational thought, you know, sitting here today,
if this was happening immediately, of course I would
call an ambulance.
That’s, you know, that’s – I'm a grown up. That's, you know
– it's irresponsible to
think otherwise, but in that moment, I don't know
what was going through my brain.
short, the plaintiff’s experience of pain at 2:00am was of such a severity
as to interfere with her capacity to engage in
rational decision-making. This
inability to engage in rational decision-making was itself directly caused by
the defendant’s
negligence. In these circumstances, I do not accept that
the plaintiff’s failure to return to hospital at 2:00am amounted to
failure to take reasonable care.
Accordingly,
I find that the defendant has not established that the plaintiff is guilty of
contributory negligence.
assessment of damages must proceed on the basis of the particular breach that I
have found.
outlined above, the plaintiff has not established that the defendant should have
performed a laparoscopy, or a salpingostomy, at
any time during her first
admission. Further, the plaintiff has not demonstrated on the balance of
probabilities that any salpingostomy,
whether performed during the first
admission, or performed on or shortly after 7:00pm on 1 August 2019 would have
been successful.
In other words, there is nothing that the Hospital could, or
should, have done which would, on balance, have successfully saved the
plaintiff’s left fallopian tube. In these circumstances, the
plaintiff’s claim for the loss of an organ (her left fallopian
tube), loss
of fertility and ongoing pain and vomiting during menstruation must be
remaining damages that are sought relate to the physical pain which the
plaintiff suffered from 7:00pm on 1 August 2019, psychological
disorders, namely
post-traumatic stress disorder and depression, and her marriage breakdown. As
the defendant submitted, any psychological
injury which the plaintiff would have
suffered in any event, due to the loss of her pregnancy, the loss of her
fallopian tube, and
the stress of surgery, must be disentangled from the damage
that was sustained as a result of the defendant’s negligence.
the alternative case, the plaintiff claimed that her compensable injuries were
as follows:
Significant actual physical hurt
after discharge on 1 August 2019
until Emergency Surgery on 2 August 2023, including actual physical hurt
(i) Increasing pain from around 6:00pm or 7:00pm on 1 August 2019;
(ii) Extreme pain at 2:00am when the plaintiff started getting shooting pains
into the left side of her arm into her shoulder;
(iii) Pain from vomiting at 2:00am;
(iv) After trying to go back to bed after taking pain relief waking up in
excruciating pain;
(v) Excruciating pain between waking up and waiting for her parents to arrive
and arriving at Calvary Hospital at 6:38am on 2 August
(vi) Excruciating pain between arrival at Calvary Hospital at 6:38am and being
booked for emergency surgery at 9:35am on 2 August
(vii) Excruciating pain while undergoing the ultrasound at 8:40am on 2 August
2019 which confirmed the rupture;
(viii) Excruciating pain while waiting to be put under a general anaesthetic
which commenced sometime after 10:00am on 2 August 2019.
(A total of about 8
hours between excruciating pain commencing at 2:00am and surgery at 10:00am).
Actual physical hurt
from the emergency life saving surgery on 2
August 2023, as opposed to what would have been an orderly informed surgery
either a salpingostomy or salpingectomy;
Emotional harm
from the fear of the possibility of death from about
2:00am on 2 August 2019, knowing that her symptoms were similar to the 2015
threatening ectopic rupture, while at home in an uncontrolled environment until
general anaesthetic commenced at about 10:00am
on 2 August 2019, a period of
Emotional harm
from being aware that her remaining fallopian tube was
rupturing meaning she may never be able to have a natural birth again;
Emotional harm
for a psychiatric injury of either a post traumatic
stress disorder or a chronic adjustment disorder and depressive condition;
Emotional harm
for ongoing psychiatric symptoms, including regular
nightmares for more than 4 years since 2 August 2019;
Emotional harm
for a material contribution to the breakdown of the
plaintiff’s marriage from the plaintiff’s lack of support during
discharge from hospital on 1 August 2019;
Loss of amenities of life
for the past 4 years from the DSM-V
psychiatric injury and the emotional harm suffered above;
Loss of amenities of life
for the past 4 years from the actual
physical harm arising out of the lack of sleep from the regular nightmares which
can be disabling
and effect [sic] energy levels and motivation;
Future emotional harm
for permanent ongoing psychiatric residual
symptoms (residual symptoms accepted by Dr Allnutt and Dr Ventura);
Future emotional harm
for relapses of unknown duration for future
triggering events;
Future loss of amenities of life
from the PSM-V [sic] from a
psychiatric injury or symptoms of a psychiatric injury, or relapses after a
triggering event;
Future loss of amenities of life
from actual physical harm arising
out of the lack of sleep from regular nightmares effecting [sic] energy levels
and motivation;
) Future loss of amenities of life
from actual physical harm arising
out of psychiatric symptoms suffered following a relapse from a triggering
accept that the plaintiff should be compensated for her increasing pain from
around 6:00pm or 7:00pm on 1 August 2019, although
I note that the plaintiff was
able to doze, albeit fitfully from this time until 2:00am. I also accept that
the plaintiff should
be compensated for the severe pain which she suffered from
2:00am until she was administered pain medication (Fentanyl) at approximately
8:00am in the Hospital on 2 August 2019. Noting that the plaintiff gave no
evidence as to her pain levels after 8:00am, I do not
accept that the plaintiff
is entitled to be compensated for any pain after the administration of that
medication.
have found that the plaintiff suffered from a psychiatric illness, characterised
by depression, anxiety and post-traumatic symptoms
as a result of the
defendant’s negligence. The plaintiff should be compensated for this
injury and its consequences (in particular,
loss of sleep and nightmares).
outlined above, Dr Allnutt and Dr Ventura differed in their opinions as to the
plaintiff’s prognosis: Dr Allnutt initially
considered the
plaintiff’s prognosis to be poor, but on a further examination, considered
her prognosis to be much improved,
albeit that some symptoms remained. In
contrast, Dr Ventura considered that the plaintiff was in remission.
find that this difference can be explained by the passing of time between
Dr Allnutt’s first examination of the plaintiff,
Dr Ventura’s
examination of the plaintiff and then Dr Allnutt’s second
examination. As Dr Ventura explained in her report,
it is likely that the
plaintiff’s symptoms were more severe at the time that she was first
examined by Dr Allnutt, and the
plaintiff’s symptoms had then largely
resolved by the time she was examined by Dr Ventura. I accept Dr Allnutt’s
that, at the time of his last examination, the plaintiff had
“continued to manifest a number of symptoms” that he considered
be “of a post-traumatic nature”, which he believed “were in
keeping with what one would expect, and residual
symptoms”. However, I
agree with Dr Ventura that it is likely that this simply represented a
re-triggering of symptoms as a
result of the stress of the court hearing, and
the consequent need to dwell on, and to some extent, re-live the original trauma
was suffered.
find that the plaintiff’s prognosis is good, and that her primary risk of
relapse is in the event of further obstetric or
gynaecological complications in
the future. As the plaintiff is planning on undergoing IVF, I accept that there
is a real prospect
of a relapse of the plaintiff’s psychiatric illness in
the future. With treatment, I consider that the plaintiff has a positive
prognosis in the event of any such relapse.
I do not accept that the plaintiff should be compensated for “emotional
harm from being aware that her remaining fallopian
tube was rupturing, meaning
she may never be able to have a natural birth again” (particular (d)
above). This is harm which
could only be compensable if I had accepted that a
salpingostomy could have been successfully performed (either on the
plaintiff’s
first admission, or at or after 7pm, when the
plaintiff’s pain increased).
Amended Statement of Claim particularised the plaintiff’s marriage
breakdown as being “due to [the plaintiff’s]
conceive”. However, in the written submissions, the breakdown was
described as being caused by the failure of the
plaintiff’s former husband
to support her. I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has demonstrated the
defendant’s negligence
caused her marriage breakdown. Accordingly, I do
not accept that compensation should be awarded with respect to this matter.
Under s 99 of
Wrongs Act,
I may consider earlier decisions of this Court,
or other courts, for the purpose of establishing the appropriate award for
damages. However, the parties were not able to identify any cases that
are comparable to the present, nor have I identified any comparable
will award the plaintiff $100,000 for general damages, of which 90% is
attributed to past 10% is attributable to the future.
psychological treatment
plaintiff claims future psychological treatment as follows:
(i) 52 x Psychological counselling sessions: - $11,700;
(ii) 3 Consultations with a Psychiatrist per year for three years: - $3,150;
(iii) Anti-depressants for 3 years @ $60 per month: - $2,160;
(iv) 4 x GP Consultations per year @ $90 each for 3 years: - $1,080.
Total: $19,090
view of my finding that the plaintiff’s psychiatric illness is in
remission, and my acceptance that her prognosis is good,
I will not allow this
claim in full. However, noting that there is a real prospect of a short-term
re-triggering of her symptoms
in the event of future obstetric and/or
gynaecological complications in the future, I will allow a buffer of $5,000 for
future psychological
economic loss
plaintiff claimed past economic loss of income for two weeks being five days of
recreation leave which she used after the salpingectomy
surgery and a further
five days off work on the anniversary of the surgery. I do not accept the claim
for the plaintiff’s time
off work immediately following the surgery. The
defendant’s negligence did not cause the plaintiff to require a
salpingostomy.
Her condition was such that the performance of a salpingostomy
was inevitable. The plaintiff has not established that she would have
less time off work if the salpingostomy had been performed on 1 August 2019,
rather than as occurred on 2 August 2019. Accordingly,
I will not allow
this claim.
plaintiff also claimed for her time off work on the anniversary of these events.
The plaintiff said that she was crying “inconsolably
at work”. She
said “I took a couple of – I think it was a week after that”.
The plaintiff did not have this
response to her previous ectopic pregnancy, or
to previous miscarriages. I am satisfied that the time that the plaintiff
off work was caused by her trauma related mental illness, rather than
because of the grief of losing the pregnancy and/ or her fertility.
Examination
of the plaintiff’s work records demonstrates the plaintiff only required
three days off work on the anniversary
of the events (Thursday 30 July 2020,
Monday 3 August 2020 and Tuesday 4 August 2020). Her wage (inclusive of
superannuation) was
$352 per day. I will allow damages in the sum of $1,056 for
the loss of those three days’ work. The plaintiff did not claim
on past economic loss.
economic loss
plaintiff claimed a buffer for future economic loss of $50,000 for future
relapses. Even when the plaintiff was suffering from
acute post traumatic stress
disorder on the anniversary of the events, she required only three days of
leave. I will award a more
modest buffer of $1,000.
out of pocket expenses
plaintiff claimed the following past out of pocket expenses:
(a) Fees for two consultations with Dr Felicity Brims ($295 and $100
respectively);
(b) One fee from Ultrasound Care ($460);
(c) Fees for three consultations at Ochre Medical Centre Casey ($90, $73.95 and
$90 respectively); and
(d) One fee from Dr Ahuja ($150).
Brims is an IVF specialist and was seen by the plaintiff to discuss her
fertility options post salpingectomy. The plaintiff acknowledged
that this claim
should not be allowed if her primary claim failed.
of the other past out of pocket expenses likewise relate to the
plaintiff’s post-operative physical symptoms and her fertility
the referral for IVF). These claims must be likewise disallowed as they do not
arise on the basis of the liability which
I have found.
total sum of damages to be awarded will be:
damages: $100,000
Interest on general damages: $11,250
Past economic loss: $1,056
Future economic loss: $1,000
Future psychological treatment: $5,000
Total: $118,306
will hear the parties on costs.
the above reasons, the following order is made:
(1) Judgment is entered for the plaintiff in the sum of $118,306.
I certify that the preceding four hundred and eighty-seven [487] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
her Honour Justice
Date: 31 October 2025
The reference to three
miscarriages appears to be an error. As described above, the plaintiff had
previously suffered two miscarriages,
followed by the first ectopic
Parts of Dr
Lamaro’s report were not pressed by the defendant. I excluded the
remainder of the report, in which Dr Lamaro expressed
opinions concerning the
distress and stress that is experienced by women presenting to emergency
departments with obstetric issues
concerning pregnancy, and the likelihood that
the plaintiff would have been distressed regardless of her location when her
tube ruptured:
Hartfield v Calvary Healthcare CT Ltd (No 3)
[2024] ACTSC 137.
The plaintiff did not press an objection to
Dr Skinner’s opinions as made in response to Dr Lamaro’s
An appeal against the
damages awarded by McWilliam J in this decision was allowed:
Alananzeh v
Zgool Form Pty Ltd
[2025] ACTCA 19.
The appeal against her Honour’s
decision as to liability was dismissed, and the correctness of the principles to
in connection with s 102 of the
questioned.
RTF format (1.43 MB)
Signed PDF/A format