Murphy v The King [2025] ACTCA 10 (4 March 2025)
Murphy v The King [2025] ACTCA 10 (4 March 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Murphy v The King
[2025] ACTCA 10
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Loukas-Karlsson, McWilliam and Taylor JJ
The sentence imposed is backdated by a further 19 days to allow for
unaccounted time spent in custody. Otherwise, appeal dismissed
and orders of
the sentencing judge confirmed.
Catchwords:
– CRIMINAL LAW – appeal against sentence –
sentence involving multiple sexual offences, actual and grievous bodily
and common assault – multiple victims – whether sentence manifestly
excessive – where backdating error
Legislation Cited:
Court Procedure Rules 2006
(ACT), r 5412(2)
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
Family Violence Act
Supreme Court Act 1933
ss 37E(2)(a)
Cases Cited:
Alarcon v R
[2018] NSWCCA 298
Almaoiue v R
[2021] NSWCCA
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37; 249 CLR 571
Director of
Public Prosecutions v England
[1999] VSCA 95
Director of
Public Prosecutions v Padreny
[2024] ACTCA 4
DPP v Murphy (No 2)
[2023] ACTSC 227
[2018] NSWCCA 280
Haoui v Regina
[2008] NSWCCA 209
188 A Crim R 331
Hawker v The Queen
Ibbs v The Queen
[1987] HCA 46
163 CLR 447
[2014] HCA 37
252 CLR 601
[2024] ACTCA
[2016] NSWCCA 255
; 93 NSWLR 205
M C-N (a pseudonym) v
[2023] ACTCA 21
Mulato v Regina
[2006] NSWCCA
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
244 CLR 120
v The Queen
[2024] ACTCA 9
21 ACTLR 122
R v Campbell
[2014] ACTCA 53
297 FLR 359
[2006] NSWCCA 381
; 167 A Crim R 159
[2009] NSWCCA
R v Toumo’ua
[2017] ACTCA 9
12 ACTLR 103
[2020] ACTCA 8
281 A Crim R 273
R v Wilkinson (No 5)
[2009] NSWSC
[2019] NSWCCA 64
Robertson v DPP
[2024] ACTCA
Suksa-Ngacharoen v Regina
[2018] NSWCCA 142
The Queen v De
[1981] HCA 31
147 CLR 383
The Queen v
259 CLR 256
Tracey v The Queen
[2020] ACTCA 51
[1979] HCA 7
143 CLR 458
Vojneski v The Queen
262 A Crim R 370
Waterfall v R
[2019] NSWCCA
[2012] NSWCCA 44
; 2012 A Crim R 460
Texts Cited:
Explanatory Statement,
Crimes Legislation Amendment Bill 2021
Shay Kahu Murphy (Appellant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
Representation:
P Edmonds (Appellant)
K McCann (Respondent)
Canberra Criminal Lawyers (Appellant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
File Number:
ACTCA 34 of 2023
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: Supreme Court of the ACT
Before: Mossop J
Date of Decision: 17 August 2023
Case Title:
DPP v Murphy (No 2)
[2023] ACTSC 227
Offences giving rise to the
10 February 2023, the appellant, Mr Shay Kahu Murphy, was convicted by a jury of
the following offences against two victims, identified
as ‘Ms A’ and
(a) Count 3
(CC2022/1150): negligently causing grievous bodily harm,
contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT), (Ms A);
(b) Count 6
(SCCAN2022/61): recklessly inflicting actual bodily harm,
contrary to
(c) Count 9
(CC2022/1153): sexual intercourse without consent, contrary
(d) Count 10
(SCCAN2022/63): assault occasioning actual bodily harm,
contrary to
(e) Count 12
(CC2021/11054): assault occasioning actual bodily harm,
contrary to
(f) Count 15
(CC2021/11057): sexual intercourse without consent, contrary
(g) Count 17
(SCAN2022/65): sexual intercourse without consent, contrary
(h) Count 18
(SCAN2023/22): common assault, contrary to
, (Ms B); and
(i) Count 19
(SCAN2023/23): common assault, contrary to
the commencement of that trial, the appellant entered a plea of guilty to the
following transfer charge:
(a) CC2021/11052
: damage property, contrary to
12 April 2023, the appellant entered a plea of guilty to three offences
perpetrated against two other victims, ‘Ms C’
(a) Count 1
(SCCAN2022/66): choke, strangle or suffocate, contrary to
(b) CC2021/11195
: common assault, contrary to
, (Ms C); and
(c) Count 2
(CC2023/310): assault occasioning actual bodily harm,
contrary to
15 August 2023, the appellant entered a plea of guilty to the following
‘rolled up’ charge:
(a) CC2021/11194
: damage property, contrary to
primary judge found the following three transfer charges proved on 17 August
(a) CC2021/11049
: common assault, contrary to
(b) CC2021/11050
: common assault, contrary to
, (Ms B); and
(c) CC2021/11058
: common assault, contrary to
Sentence under
17 August 2023, the appellant was sentenced to a total period of imprisonment of
14 years and 2 months, with a non-parole period
of 8 years and 6 months:
v Murphy (No 2)
[2023] ACTSC 227
. The sentence imposed for each
individual offence was as
Maximum penalty
Sentence (months)
Negligently causing grievous bodily harm (Count 3: CC2022/1150)
Recklessly inflicting actual bodily harm (Count 6: SCAN2022/61)
Engage in sexual intercourse without consent (Count 9: CC2022/1153)
Common assault (CC2021/11049)
Common assault (CC2021/11050)
Property damage (CC2021/11052)
Assault occasioning actual bodily harm (Count 10: SCCAN 2022/63)
Assault occasioning actual bodily harm (Count 12: CC2021/11054)
Common assault (Count 18: SCAN2023/22)
Common assault (Count 19: SCAN2023/23)
Engage in sexual intercourse without consent (Count 15: CC2021/11057)
Common assault (CC2021/11058)
Engage in sexual intercourse without consent (Count 17:
SCAN 2022/65)
Choke, strangle or suffocate (Count 1: SCCAN 2022/66)
21 (starting point 24)
Damage property (CC2021/11194)
8 (starting point 9)
Common assault (CC2021/11195)
8 (starting point 9)
Assault occasioning actual bodily harm (Count 2: CC2022/310)
8 (starting point 9)
notice of appeal was filed on 13 September 2023, with an amended notice of
appeal filed on 31 October 2023. At the hearing the
appellant sought leave to
add an additional ground of appeal which was not opposed by the respondent and
the appeal was argued on
that basis. The grounds of the appeal can be
summarised as follows:
(a) the sentences imposed on Count 3 and Count 6 were manifestly excessive;
(b) the primary judge erred in his assessment of the objective seriousness of
Count 3 and Count 6;
(c) the primary judge erred in assessing the objective seriousness of Count 18
and Count 19 by finding these offences as being in
(d) the primary judge erred in treating prior family violence by the appellant
against the victim (Ms B) as an aggravating factor
for Count 18 and Count 19;
(e) the primary judge erred in having regard to an irrelevant consideration for
Count 19, namely the possibility that the victim
(Ms B) had suffered an unproven
injury; and
(f) the primary judge erred in failing to have regard to an additional 19 days
served by the appellant in pre-sentence custody.
Facts on sentence
primary judge sentenced the appellant on the following facts, comprised of
agreed facts and findings he made after the return
of a guilty verdict by the
jury in relation to Counts 3, 6, 9, 10, 12, 15, 17, 18 and 19 as well as
transfer charges CC2021/11049,
CC2021/11050 and CC2021/11058. The appellant
made no challenge to any of the factual findings made by the primary judge.
against Ms A
appellant and Ms A met at their place of employment. Ms A was 16 years old; the
appellant was 20 years old. The appellant had
a girlfriend for the duration of
his relationship with Ms A. Ms A would attend the appellant’s house when
his girlfriend was
not present. He instructed Ms A to lie about her whereabouts
to her family.
Controlling
and aggressive behaviour became a feature of their relationship. On one
occasion at work, the appellant took her phone
and interrogated her about an old
message, believing it was from a male friend when it was in fact from a female
appellant fabricated a story that Ms A had made a complaint to him of being
sexually abused by her brother. She would do what
he told her to do because she
was scared of the consequences if she did not.
Count 3: CC2022/1150 – Negligently causing grievous
bodily harm
the end of 2011, the appellant asked Ms A to give him access to her email
account, resulting in an argument between them. Subsequently,
Ms A observed the
appellant had cut his chest. He told her that he needed her to do something for
him. The appellant told Ms A
that he needed her to take the knife and cut
herself where no one could see.
A felt this was the only way she could make the situation better. She used the
same knife the appellant had used to cut his chest
to cut her thigh, close to
her underwear. The cut began to bleed. The cut left a scar that has since
faded but remains visible.
Count 6: SCAN2022/61 – Recklessly inflicting actual
bodily harm
offender demonstrated controlling behaviour in relation to Ms A’s
attendance at her Year 10 formal in December 2011. In
the days following the
formal, the appellant informed Ms A that she had really hurt him and he
consequently required that she cut
herself using a house key. Ms A initially
refused and the appellant became aggressive when she was unable to cut herself
key. Eventually, the appellant pressed the key into her skin and
quickly dragged it across the top of her arm. This made a cut
which began to
bleed. Ms A still has a scar from the incident.
Count 9: CC2022/1153 – Engage in sexual intercourse
without consent
an occasion between 1 September 2011 and 1 March 2012, Ms A was in the
appellant’s bedroom. The appellant told Ms A to take
off her pants, and
she did. Ms A told the appellant, “I haven’t done anything
before”, and he responded, “I
know”. The appellant removed
his pants, leaving his underwear on. Ms A got onto the bed.
appellant then went to the bathroom. When he returned, his penis was erect and
he had a condom on. Ms A felt overwhelmed and
out of her depth. The appellant
moved towards her and told her to relax and stay calm. The appellant penetrated
Ms A’s vagina
with his penis. The appellant was gentle at first.
appellant told Ms A to stay calm. She began crying and told him that it hurt
too much and she did not want to continue. She
tried to get up but the
appellant pushed her down and moved over the top of her. He pushed his penis
deep inside her vagina and
Ms A felt a sharp pain at the very bottom of her
stomach. The appellant continued to push his penis inside her. It was painful
and Ms A zoned out.
Eventually,
the appellant stopped and walked out of the bedroom. Ms A’s vagina stung
and when she felt it, she saw bright red
blood on her hand.
against Ms B
appellant and Ms B met while they were both working at the Canberra Hospital.
They commenced dating in July 2012 when Ms B was
married in 2016 and had a daughter in 2018. The appellant’s relationship
with Ms B ended in November
evidence disclosed a pattern of behaviour on the part of the appellant
reflecting violence, abuse and manipulation of Ms B. During
the course of the
relationship, the appellant was suspicious of Ms B’s involvement with
other men and would accuse her of having
a sexual relationship with her brother.
He would search through Ms B’s phone. He would go through her underwear
and question
her about any discharge on her underwear. He would call her a
whore and a slut. On occasion, the appellant would cut himself after
and tell Ms B it was her fault.
CC2021/11049 – Common assault
a date in August 2012, Ms B and the appellant were at their residence. Ms B was
lying on her back on their queen-sized bed.
appellant hovered over Ms B in such a way that prevented her from running away.
Ms B felt scared as the appellant was much bigger
than she was. The appellant
punched her upper thigh or thighs four times. Ms B was crying and screaming.
CC2021/11050 – Common assault
in August 2012, Ms B was planning a trip to Adelaide with friends. The
appellant was unhappy about the trip. In the week leading
up to Ms B’s
departure for Adelaide, the two began to argue in the study at their home.
appellant punched Ms B in the middle of her chest, between her breasts with a
balled-up fist. She immediately felt immense pain.
Ms B was gasping for air
and slid down the wall so that she was sitting down.
B was crying. She said it felt as though something was broken. The appellant
told her, “Oh, you’re just winded”.
The argument deescalated
after this.
B continued to experience pain for quite a while after the incident. On 2
September 2012, Ms B attended The Queen Elizabeth Hospital
in Adelaide. There,
she told medical staff, “My boyfriend punched me in the chest”. She
reported pain in the central
chest area, pain on taking a deep breath, on
coughing and on palpitation, as well as feeling tender on her sternal area. A
x-ray showed no fracture. The medical officer’s impression was that
Ms B had a sternal bruise. She was discharged with a
plan to take pain
medication.
Count 10: SCCAN2022/63 – Assault occasioning actual
bodily harm
an occasion between 1 August 2012 and 18 December 2012, Ms B and the appellant
were fighting in the lounge room of their residence.
appellant became aggressive. Ms B ran down the hallway towards the front door.
The appellant caught up to her and pushed her
to the ground so that she was on
appellant balled-up his fists and repeatedly punched Ms B in her upper legs, her
thighs, her abdomen just above her crotch and
her vagina. Both Ms B and the
appellant were crying. The appellant was yelling loudly at Ms B that he hoped
that she would never
have children. Ms B was unable to get away from the
appellant. The appellant punched her at least 20 times. Ms B experienced deep
bruises on the lips of her vagina. She also experienced bruising on her upper
thighs, lower buttocks and the outside of her thighs.
following week, when Ms B and the appellant were planning to travel to the
coast, Ms B dressed herself in shorts. The appellant
told her that she could
not wear them, saying, “You can’t wear those. Look at your
legs”. Ms B got changed.
CC2021/11052 – Property damage
16 October 2012, the appellant took a screwdriver from the kitchen. He placed
Ms B’s mobile phone on the floor and used
the screwdriver to break
Count 12: CC2021/11054 – Assault occasioning actual
bodily harm
November 2012, the appellant and Ms B moved to a house in Rivett. On one
occasion, they were arguing by the doorway.
appellant pushed Ms B to the ground. The appellant then lifted Ms B’s
upper body by her upper arms and, with force, slammed
her back down against the
slate floor. Ms B hit her head hard on the slate tiles. Later, when Ms B
touched her head, she saw blood
on her hand.
Count 18: SCAN2023/22 – Common assault
a date between December 2012 and August 2014, the appellant and Ms B were at
their residence in Rivett. Ms B was on the carpeted
floor, lying on her back.
The appellant was sitting on the lower half of Ms B’s body so that she
could not stand up. The
appellant then covered Ms B’s face with a bath
towel. He poured water from a mixing bowl onto Ms B’s face, causing the
towel to cling to her face and preventing her from being able to breathe. She
was unable to move her head or stand up. Ms B feared
she may die. At one
point, the appellant paused, allowing her to catch her breath before he started
again. Ms B swallowed water
at some points. The appellant continued to pour
water onto Ms B’s face until the bowl was empty.
Count 19: SCAN2023/23– Common assault
a date between December 2012 and August 2014, the appellant and Ms B were in the
bedroom of the Rivett premises. Ms B was lying
on her back on the bed wearing
only her underwear. The appellant straddled her, pressing his forearms into her
neck with force,
so that Ms B was unable to breathe or talk. Ms B felt like she
could not get any air in. She feared for her life.
some point, Ms B became incontinent and defecated. She was able to say,
“something happened”. The words came out
strangely and did not
sound like her normal voice. The appellant released her.
Count 15: CC2021/11057 – Engage in sexual intercourse
without consent
a date between December 2012 and August 2014, Ms B and the appellant were
arguing. The appellant made Ms B stand in the shower
and he turned only the
cold water on. Ms B stood in the shower, shaking, for a few minutes, but felt
she could not leave.
appellant turned the shower off but would not let Ms B dry off. He made her go
to the lounge room and sit in front of a fan.
He was angry and continued to
argue with her.
appellant told Ms B to lie down on the floor. He sat high up on her chest, and
her arms were stuck underneath his body. He grabbed
his penis and forcibly
inserted it into Ms B’s mouth, telling her, “I’m going to piss
in your mouth”. Ms
B tried but was unable to move her head away. The
appellant was unable to urinate so removed his penis from Ms B’s mouth
5 or 10 seconds and released her.
CC2021/11058 – Common assault
a date in December 2013, the appellant and Ms B were having an argument in their
up with him and leave. He
cornered her between the window and the chest of drawers in the room and punched
her five or six times
in her stomach using a fist in an uppercut motion. Ms B
was crying.
Count 17: SCAN2022/65 – Engage in sexual intercourse
without consent
August 2014, the appellant and Ms B engaged in penile-anal intercourse. She was
crying because she was in so much pain. After
he had finished the appellant
told her that it was a real turnoff that she was crying during anal sex.
appellant was reckless as to Ms B’s consent and continued to engage in
anal intercourse despite him being aware of the pain
it was causing her.
against Ms C
appellant and Ms C met while they were both working at the Canberra Hospital.
They were in a relationship between February 2019
and July 2020. Ms C moved in
with the appellant within seven weeks of dating him.
appellant began to exhibit controlling behaviours within the first few months of
the relationship. He would often accuse Ms C
of sleeping around and cheating on
him. The appellant would yell at Ms C, threaten to assault her or other people
and call her derogatory
names. Ms C became increasingly upset and frightened by
his acts of aggression.
several occasions, after the appellant had gone into a rage, Ms C observed him
to cry or engage in self-harm by inflicting superficial
knife wounds to his
Count 1: SCCAN2022/66 – Choke, strangle or
1 September 2019, Ms C picked up the appellant’s daughter from Ms
B’s house. Ms C spent the day with the appellant’s
daughter before
taking her back to Ms B’s parents’ house. There, she met Ms
B’s parents and stayed speaking with
them for about an hour. Ms C left
her mobile phone in her car during this time. The appellant called and texted
her multiple times
while she was inside.
appellant was in the garage feeding the dogs when Ms C returned to their
residence. Ms C parked on the street and walked in through
the open garage
door. The appellant accused Ms C of “being out fucking someone” and
of being “an escort or a prostitute
and being paid for sex”.
some point, the appellant closed the garage roller door.
appellant approached Ms C and stood very close to her so their noses were almost
touching. The appellant loudly screamed in Ms
C’s face that she was a
cunt. Ms C observed the appellant to be aggressive and agitated; his eyes
appeared completely black.
C began to walk towards the door that led into the house. The appellant put
both arms over her shoulders and around her neck,
wrapping his arms tightly
around her neck and pressing hard against the front of her neck and throat. The
appellant stood directly
behind Ms C, his chest pushed firmly against her back.
Ms C tried to scream but was unable to because the appellant’s forearms
were so tight against her throat. She made a gurgling sound instead. Ms C did
not lose consciousness. The appellant threw her
backwards onto the concrete
floor before walking inside.
C eventually went inside and told the appellant she would not stay with someone
who physically hurt her. The appellant was apologetic
at first but then blamed
Ms C for leaving her mobile phone in her car and for not having made him her
following day, Ms C disclosed the incident from the night before to one of her
close friends and to one of the appellant’s
friends. Ms C also disclosed
the incident to her supervisor and a human resources advisor. When she got home
from work, the appellant
was crying hysterically in his daughter’s
bedroom. The appellant kept saying that he was going to lose his daughter. At
point he told Ms C that he knew his conduct was domestic violence.
CC2021/11194 – Rolled up charge of property
24 or 25 February 2020, the appellant wanted Ms C to perform oral sex on him
while he watched pornography on his phone. When Ms
C refused, the appellant got
up and punched a hole in the wardrobe door. He then slammed the door with such
force it broke the latch.
29 or 30 April 2020, the appellant threw a remote control at the wall in the
lounge room causing a hole.
8 May 2020, the appellant and Ms C were at home when he demanded that she tell
him her work colleague’s number of sexual
partners. When Ms C refused,
the appellant slammed the bedroom door into the wall, causing two big
CC2021/11195 – Rolled up charge of common assault
The appellant shoved Ms C four times. Ms C tried
to leave the room and so on
the fourth time he shoved her it was with such force that she fell backwards
onto the bed.
this, Ms C tried to get dressed for work. As she was getting dressed the
appellant snatched her bra out of her hand, however,
he grabbed her breast
instead. Though this did not cause a mark or injure Ms C, it really hurt
night the offender and Ms C were arguing at home. The offender coughed up some
phlegm and spat it straight into Ms C’s
eyes. He had a cold at the time
and Ms C noticed the phlegm was smelly. She was disgusted.
C cried after this occurred and tried to leave the appellant that night. He
talked her into believing it was her fault and that
she should not leave
against Ms D
appellant and Ms D commenced a relationship in July 2021. They both worked at
the Canberra Hospital. The appellant and Ms D
‘on-again-off-again’ relationship until 1 January 2022.
the start of the relationship, small arguments occurred between them. Over
time, the offender became more jealous and distrustful
and would ask to read Ms
D’s phone. Verbal abuse also became prevalent in the
relationship.
Count 2: CC2023/310 – Assault occasioning actual bodily
the morning of 7 November 2021, Ms D and the appellant were at the
appellant’s house. Ms D made a comment about a male,
causing the
appellant to verbally abuse Ms D for half an hour, calling her a whore and a
cunt. The appellant later apologised.
evening, the appellant and Ms D went out for dinner. They drank two beers and a
glass of wine with dinner before returning to
Ms D’s residence. There,
they shared a bottle of champagne. Ms D felt tipsy. They listened to music on
the balcony together.
D received a message on her phone from a male friend in Colombia. The appellant
asked to see the message. On a prior occasion,
the appellant and Ms D had
argued about her leaving kiss emojis on a Facebook comment made by her
ex-husband about her dog. As a
result of this prior incident and the verbal
abuse she had experienced earlier that day, Ms D panicked and went to grab her
She knew the last message she had sent said something about her friend
being gorgeous and that she had used a love heart or kiss
emoji. The appellant
said, “Give me your fucking phone you cunt”.
the appellant had Ms D’s phone, he began to read the message from her
friend, as well as messages in her phone from other
men. The appellant began
yelling, “You’re a stupid cunt whore, low value”. He was
angry and yelling loudly, frightening
D tried to persuade the appellant to read the messages again so she could show
him that they were not what he thought. At some
point, Ms D touched the
appellant and he said, “Get the fuck off me”.
appellant left Ms D’s apartment. She followed him because she wanted to
stop him from ending the relationship. The appellant
continued to call her a
cunt and a whore. As they got to the gate of Ms D’s apartment complex,
the appellant pushed Ms D over.
She was able to break her fall and got back up.
Ms D was yelling, “Please stop”, and tried to persuade the appellant
to read the messages with her.
D and the appellant ended up on Torrens Street in Braddon. The appellant was
walking; Ms D was trying to stop him. Ms D was standing
in front of the
appellant, walking backwards as he advanced. At some point, Ms D put both her
hands on the appellant’s arms.
The appellant pushed her backwards as he
walked. The appellant grabbed Ms D’s shoulders. He threw Ms D off the
and onto the adjacent dirt verge. She fell onto her left hip and hit
her head on something hard on the ground. Ms D did not get
up as she did not
feel well. She was dazed and dizzy, and her hip hurt. The appellant initially
kept walking. He eventually came
back, saying “Get up”. Ms D told
the appellant she was not feeling well. The appellant said, “If you
fucking get up, I’ll call an ambulance”.
appellant then called triple-zero. Ms D could hear him speaking to the
operator, but she asked him to stop because they would
know the paramedics that
attended due to their employment at the Emergency Department at the Canberra
Hospital. She did not want
her workplace to know that her injuries were a
result of the appellant assaulting her. Ms D said, “Cancel the call,
gonna be our paramedics”. The appellant then advised the
operator he no longer required an ambulance and terminated the call.
D told the appellant, “Just fucking go, get away from me”. The
appellant left her. Ms D felt dizzy. After about
10 minutes, she could get up
and was able to walk back to her apartment complex. She did not have her phone
or keys therefore a
neighbour assisted her to re-enter the building.
D’s hip bruised immediately. The bruising got progressively worse and
went black. On 8 November 2021, Ms D spoke to her
friend because she was still
feeling unwell. She described and sent photos of her injuries to her
The Court’s power on
relevant legislative framework governing appeals against a decision of a single
judge of the Supreme Court is found in
Supreme Court Act
Section 37E(2)(a)
establishes jurisdiction and
out the powers of the Court of Appeal in sentence appeals which include
increasing or decreasing the sentence or substituting
a different sentence.
a sentence subject to appeal is the product of the sentencing judge’s
discretion, the Court may only intervene if error is
identified in the original
sentence. As the Court of Appeal explained in
[2014] ACTCA 53
297 FLR 359
On such an appeal, the Court of Appeal will intervene only if it is satisfied
that there has been an error of the type referred to
House v The
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
There must be a specific
error of fact or law, or an implicit error that is discernible because the
sentence is so plainly wrong
(so “manifestly excessive” or
“manifestly inadequate” or “outside the range of available
or “dramatically inappropriate”) as to compel the
conclusion that there has been an error in the exercise of the sentencing
discretion, although no specific error can be identified:
Dinsdale v The
[2000] HCA 54
(2000) 202 CLR 321
per Gaudron and Gummow JJ at [22];
[2001] HCA 64
(2001) 207 CLR 584
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
(2010) 242 CLR 520
) at 58-59.
appellant contended that any one of the errors alleged in grounds (b)-(f) saw
the sentencing discretion miscarry and accordingly
warrant appellate
intervention, resulting in a resentence by this Court:
Kentwell v The Queen
[2014] HCA 37
252 CLR 601.
There is a debate about whether
remains applicable in the context of Territory legislation, which contains
different wording from the statute under consideration
in that case: see
C-N (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2023] ACTCA 21
Director of
Public Prosecutions v Padreny
[2024] ACTCA 4
issue does not arise here because, for the reasons that follow, the appellant
has not established any ground of appeal affecting
the primary judge’s
sentencing discretion and apart from amending the start date of the sentence to
correct a back-dating error,
the appeal should be dismissed.
Ground (a): Manifest
excess (Counts 3 and 6)
appellant submitted that the individual sentences imposed in respect of Count 3
(CC2022/1150), negligently causing grievous bodily
harm, and Count 6
(SCAN2022/61), recklessly inflicting actual bodily harm, were manifestly
excessive. Both offences have a maximum
penalty of a term of imprisonment for
five years. The primary judge imposed a sentence of a term of imprisonment for
12 months in
relation to each count.
with respect to manifest excess
principles in relation to an assessment of whether a sentence is manifestly
excessive have been considered extensively and were
summarised in
[2020] ACTCA 40
The principles in relation to assessing whether a sentence is manifestly
excessive are well established. Appellate intervention
is not justified simply
because an appellate court may have a different view as to the appropriate
sentence than the sentencing judge:
Lowndes v The Queen
[1999] HCA 29
195 CLR 665
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25; 228 CLR 357 at
[28], or where the result arrived at below is markedly different from other
sentences that have been
imposed in other cases:
Wong v The Que
207 CLR 584
Hili v The Queen; Jones v The
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
) at [58]. Rather, the
appellant must demonstrate that the sentence is such that it may be inferred
that there was some misapplication
of principle in the sentencing of the
appellant, even though when and how is not apparent from the statement of the
sentencing judge’s
[58]–[59], [75]–[76].
principles and the approach to an assertion of manifest excess were reaffirmed
by this Court in
Tracey v The Queen
[2020] ACTCA 51
it was explained that consideration of whether a sentence is manifestly
excessive occurs in the context of the maximum penalty,
the standards of
sentencing in respect of the offence, the relative objective seriousness of the
offence and the personal circumstances
of the offender. More recent
restatements of those principles may be found in
Porter v The Queen
[2024] ACTCA 9
21 ACTLR 122
Robertson v DPP
Determination
primary judge found that the first offence (Count 3) was at the low end of
objective seriousness and that the second offence (Count
6) was in the low to
mid-range of objective seriousness. The appellant acknowledged that the
offences involved family violence which
operated to aggravate their objective
seriousness. Nonetheless, the appellant maintained that due to his age at the
time of the
offending, his mental ill-health, his disadvantaged upbringing and
that these were his first offences, the just and appropriate sentence
offence was a term of imprisonment of “no more than six months” of
imprisonment.
the appellant submitted globally in relation to both counts, it is necessary to
record the features of the offending that informed
the objective seriousness of
the offending:
R v Toumo’ua
[2017] ACTCA 9
12 ACTLR 103
. The appellant was found guilty by a jury of the conduct establishing
Count 3, negligently inflicting grievous bodily harm and Count
6, recklessly
inflicting actual bodily harm.
conduct making up Count 3 was as follows:
(i) after an argument about the appellant demanding access to the victim’s
email account, the appellant directed the victim
to “do something for
him” after cutting his own chest;
(ii) the “something” was the victim cutting herself;
(iii) the victim’s will was overborne by the appellant’s direction
because of the dynamics of their relationship;
(iv) as a result of the appellant’s direction, the victim cut into her own
skin on her upper thigh, close to her underwear;
(v) the cut caused a scar which, while faded, remained visible.
conduct making up Count 6 was as follows:
(i) the appellant claimed the victim had “hurt” him and required
that she cut herself with a key;
(ii) the victim refused and the appellant became aggressive;
(iii) the appellant pressed the key across the top of the victim’s arm
“hard and quick” causing a cut; and
(iv) the cut bled and caused a scar.
primary judge observed with respect to Count 3 at [20]:
The offending involved emotional manipulation of a teenage girl in circumstances
where there was an age and power differential between
the two. It did, however,
involve grievous bodily harm at the very lowest end of what could come within
the scope of that concept.
It is at the low end of objective seriousness for
this offence.
primary judge observed with respect to Count 6 at [22]:
This offence involved controlling, manipulative and violent behaviour on the
part of the offender in circumstances where there was
an (sic) significant power
differential between him and Ms A. Although the harm involves a modest example
of actual bodily harm,
the circumstances of the offending lead it to be in the
low to mid-range of objective seriousness for this offence.
appellant’s subjective circumstances were comprehensively recorded by the
primary judge at [80]-[87] and included his history
of disadvantage, the effect
upon him of childhood exposure to domestic violence and the risk of reoffending
that he presented. The
primary judge determined the appellant demonstrated
“limited insight” into his offending and that “protection of
the community must be a very significant factor in sentencing”. A report
from Dr Bollinger to which the primary judge referred,
recorded the appellant as
struggling to “appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct” and as
continuing to “minimise
a large proportion of his behaviour”. There
was no challenge under this ground of appeal to any of the findings made by the
primary judge with respect to the objective seriousness of the offending or the
subjective circumstances of the appellant.
not determinative, the appellant did not point to any comparative sentencing
outcomes in support of this ground of appeal.
The primary judge was provided
with a “large table” of sentences said to be comparable, which
prompted this observation
...[T]he current sentencing practice referred to in s 33(1)(za) of the CS Act is
not significantly informed by sentences imposed
in the range of different cases
that were referred to. More practically useful is the understanding that
current sentencing practice
recognises the significance of family violence
offending, usually perpetrated by men upon women, and the social significance of
that conduct and protecting the community from such conduct.
can be no doubt, by reference to the applicable penalty, that these were
objectively serious offences:
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
244 CLR 120
offending caused pain and scarring to the victim in each case. The appellant
facilitated the offences by asserting the power
and control he wielded over the
younger, less experienced victim. The capacity for the appellant to wield that
level of power and
control was as a direct result of the nature of the
relationship between them, established by the appellant’s conduct prior
the offending.
relationship between the appellant and the victim was characterised by the
appellant employing aggressive and manipulative behaviour
that caused the victim
to fear him and ultimately led to her compliance with his demands. The role of
the appellant in their relationship
was instrumental to understanding the
“nature and circumstances” of the offending as required by
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
appellant’s use of aggression, control and emotional manipulation in the
relationship explained how he was able
to overbear the will of the victim to the
extent that she was compelled to harm herself as occurred in Count 3 and
prepared to allow
the appellant to harm her as occurred in Court 6. The
exploitation of power by the appellant was a factor that elevated the objective
seriousness of the offending.
its nature, grievous bodily harm is “really serious injury”:
Haoui v Regina
[2008] NSWCCA 209
188 A Crim R 331
. The harm in
Count 3 was occasioned to the victim because of the appellant’s conduct,
which the jury found to be negligent,
being a necessary element of the offence.
The state of mind underpinning the offence explains the significant difference
penalty as between Count 3 and the more serious offences of
intentionally or recklessly causing grievous bodily harm which carry
penalties of imprisonment for 25 and 15 years, respectively. The nature of the
injury saw it properly characterised as one
at the lower end of the
“really serious” scale of injury.
actual bodily harm inflicted in Count 6 was done so recklessly and was the
result of the direct application of force to the victim’s
body by the
appellant using a sharp implement. The bodily harm inflicted included bleeding
and a scar.
nature and extent of the injury caused is a factor considered to be significant
in the assessment of objective seriousness, but
it is not the only factor, as
the primary judge recognised: see
R v Campbell
adopting Howie J (with whom Giles JA and
Latham J agreed) in
[2009] NSWCCA 158
Waterfall v R
[2019] NSWCCA 281
gravity of the offending was heightened by the breach of trust it represented
and the power imbalance between the victim and the
appellant cultivated by his
conduct over the course of the relationship. The victim impact statement
recounted the profound and
ongoing effect of the offences upon the victim which
included “overwhelming fear and anxiety, shame, guilt and a constant sense
of vulnerability”. There was a need for the sentences imposed to
recognise the harm occasioned to the victim.
appellant’s lack of insight into the wrongfulness of his conduct was
underscored by the attitude he demonstrated to Dr Bollinger
when referencing his
current relationship as one where he was “able to avoid being
abusive” because his female partner
had “promised” that she
would be faithful to him. Unsurprisingly, the primary judge considered the
appellant’s
approach to his existing relationship as cause for concern as
to his capacity for reform and as further evidence of the compelling
protect the community.
offender’s disadvantaged and dysfunctional childhood which the primary
judge readily acknowledged, went some way toward
explaining the pattern of
behaviour revealed in the offending conduct. The appellant’s exposure to
domestic violence from
a very young age, both as a witness and a subject,
undoubtedly shed light on why he was able to “exercise appropriate
in all areas of his life except his romantic relationships”.
The appellant’s dysfunctional childhood did not just explain
behaviour. It necessitated consideration of the risk he presented into the
future. As the High Court acknowledged in
Bugmy v The Queen
37; 249 CLR 571 at [44] affording an offender “full weight” for a
background of childhood disadvantage will
not have the same influence when
considering each purpose of sentencing. While an offender’s childhood
experience might explain
their resort to offending behaviour, it may also
operate to heighten the need to protect the community. The primary judge
this tension. In this instance, the appellant’s early exposure
to violence perpetrated within his family environment inevitably
influenced a
consideration of his prospects for rehabilitation in light of his own entrenched
use of violence in domestic relationships
and the limited insight he revealed
into his behaviour.
appellant had engaged with one violence prevention course between December 2021
and January 2022. While he was assessed by Dr
Bollinger to be a moderate risk
of reoffending, Dr Bollinger also observed that the appellant displayed a
“pattern of high
levels of violence, verbal, physical and sexual, across
his relationships over the past 15 years”. Added to the appellant’s
limited insight into his offending conduct was his lack of remorse; a factor
which properly influenced the assessment of his prospects
for rehabilitation:
[2006] NSWCCA 381
; 167 A Crim R 159 at 169-170
appellant’s childhood history, in combination with the nature and
significant extent of the offending conduct, as well as
his limited insight, was
a proper foundation to question his capacity for reform without significant
intervention. Accordingly,
protection of the community, as the primary judge
determined, was “a very significant factor”. The findings of the
judge were well-founded when he stated at [105]:
The combination of his denials, his admissions and his attempts to normalise his
abnormal conduct were indicative of someone who
clearly does not accept
responsibility for what he did and reflects poorly on his prospects of
sustainable change in the longer term.
appellant did not come before the Court with a criminal history. Counts 3 and 6
were the offender’s first offences in the
chronology of offending. The
absence of a criminal history provided a basis for a consideration of leniency.
The sentences imposed
do not suggest otherwise. However, a consideration of the
leniency in relation to Counts 3 and 6 could not occur in a vacuum. The
judge was sentencing the appellant for a decade long pattern of offending
against multiple women with whom he was in a relationship.
Clearly Counts 3 and
6 were not aberrations. The appellant and his attitude toward his domestic
partners were the common denominator
in all of the offences. The absence of a
criminal history, while a relevant consideration, did not diminish the
significance of
other considerations and fell to be assessed alongside the
pattern of offending the appellant so clearly demonstrated.
consideration of the objective seriousness of the offences in light of the
maximum penalty, together with the appellant’s
lack of remorse, the need
to recognise the harm to the victim and to protect the community, as well as the
limited prospects for
rehabilitation and absence of remorse, do not reveal the
sentences to be outside of the available range so as to be “plainly
unjust”. The sentences imposed for each count do not speak of any
misapplication of principle and were otherwise well open
to the primary judge.
ground of appeal has not been established.
Ground (b): Error in
assessing objective seriousness (Counts 3 and 6)
the event the Court rejected the claim of manifest excess in appeal ground (a),
in the alternative the appellant contended that
the primary judge erred by
treating the appellant’s “controlling and aggressive
behaviour” prior to the commission
of the offences as an aggravating
factor for Counts 3 and 6.
Ground (d): Double
punishment (Counts 18 and 19)
ground (d) raises a similar complaint. The appellant contended that the primary
judge erred in his assessment of Count 18
as occurring “within a
long-standing context of manipulation violence and control by the
[appellant]” and, further, that
the primary judge was in error to treat
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
as operating to increase the objective
seriousness of Counts 18 and 19.
is convenient to deal with grounds (b) and (d) together.
part of the formulation of these grounds of appeal the appellant necessarily
moved away from the position put squarely on his behalf
before the primary
judge. At the sentencing hearing before the primary judge, counsel for the
appellant conceded that the “family
violence context” of the
offending was a “significant aggravating feature of all of the
offending”. Further it
was accepted before the primary judge that the
offending occurred in a context of the appellant cultivating “unhealthy
relationships”
where he “perpetrated a large amount of abuse outside
the individual offences”. The appellant, through his counsel,
accepted at
the sentencing hearing that it was relevant that the offences occurred “in
the context of otherwise very unhealthy,
abusive relationships”. The
appellant contended that the approach, encouraged upon the primary judge at the
sentencing hearing,
was an error.
the Court of Appeal made plain in
[2024] ACTCA 7
Johnson J (with whom McClelland CJ at CL and Rothman J agree) in
[2012] NSWCCA 44
; 2012 A Crim R 460 at
, a sentence appeal is a
review of the exercise of the sentencing discretion and is not a rehearing of a
plea of mitigation. The
Court of Appeal observing at [45]
“[r]eformulation of the case below is not appropriate unless a miscarriage
of justice is
demonstrated”.
this instance, no miscarriage of justice has been demonstrated. The primary
judge was not wrong to approach the assessment of
objective seriousness as he
to ground (b) dealing with Counts 3 and 6. As will
become clear we do agree that the primary judge applied the appellant’s
“controlling and aggressive” prior to the conduct to aggravate the
objective seriousness of Counts 3 and 6. The primary
judge’s reference to
that prior conduct was necessary to explain how the offending came about. The
primary judge assessed
Counts 3 and 6 as extracted above at [84] and [85] by
reference to the specific conduct that established the offences.
The appellant highlighted the following paragraphs of the sentencing remarks in
support of the allegation of error:
12․ In identifying the objective seriousness of the offences I have taken
care to consider the immediate context in which that
offending has taken place.
I have adopted the approach identified by Johnson J in
R v Wilkinson (No
[2009] NSWSC 432
Care must be taken in considering whether post-offence events may be taken into
account in assessing the objective seriousness of
the crime itself. However,
the circumstances of an offence are not neatly marked out by two lines, one at
the technical beginning
and the other at the technical end of the
: Director of Public Prosecutions v England
[1999] VSCA 95
[1999] 2 VR
. Common sense and
moral sense extend the circumstances of an offence which may be considered for
an assessment of the objective
seriousness of a crime, to events which precede
and follow the technical limits of the crime. In imposing sentence for a crime,
a judge should take into account not only the conduct which actually constitutes
the crime, but also such of the surrounding circumstances
as are directly
related to that crime, and are properly to be regarded as circumstances of
aggravation or mitigation:
Director of Public Prosecutions v
17. Controlling and aggressive behaviour became a feature of the relationship.
On one occasion at work, he took her phone and interrogated
her about an old
message on the phone, thinking it was from a male friend when it was from a
female friend. After that, she felt
obliged to message him constantly or he
would get upset or aggressive.
appellant submitted that the conduct which underpinned the primary judge’s
characterisation of the appellant’s “controlling
and aggressive
behaviour” constituted “discreditable, but lawful conduct”.
Such conduct, the appellant submitted,
could not be treated as an aggravating
factor purely because the label ‘family violence’ might affix to it.
The appellant
further submitted that the primary judge’s application of
R v Wilkinson (No 5)
[2009] NSWSC 432
was misconceived, as it
“applies almost exclusively to cases of murder”.
[17] of the primary judge’s reasons came under the heading
“Offending against Ms A” in the portion of
the sentencing remarks
entitled “Facts and objective seriousness”. Those matters outlined
at [14]-[18] were facts his
Honour found having indicated earlier in his remarks
that Ms A was a compelling witness whose evidence he accepted without
hesitation.
The observations at [14]-[18] set the scene for the specific detail
of Counts 3 and 6 which the primary judge went on to identify
in assessing the
objective seriousness of the conduct.
primary judge recorded that
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
apply to the offences against Ms A. Disapplying
did not result in
those matters referred to by his Honour at paragraphs [14]-[18] being
irrelevant; they clearly fell within the
s 33(1)(a).
context of the offending was a relevant matter for the primary judge to take
into account, pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
Section 33(1)(a)
requires the sentencing court to consider “the nature and
circumstances of the offence”. In the case of Counts 3 and
consideration necessarily included that the offending was facilitated by the
appellant’s controlling and manipulative
behaviour which was a feature of
his relationship with Ms A.
primary judge did not treat the controlling and aggressive behaviour engaged in
by the appellant prior to the commission of Counts
3 and 6 as an aggravating
feature of those offences when the remarks are read in their entirety.
has already been observed, the reference to controlling and aggressive behaviour
prior to the commission of the offences was necessary
to understand the nature
and circumstances of the offending. Both counts were specific examples of the
appellant controlling and
manipulating the victim. The conduct was facilitated
by the appellant’s willingness to exploit the power he had over the victim
by virtue of his preparedness to be controlling and aggressive. The effect of
the control, manipulation and fear was the capacity
for the appellant to engage
in the conduct for Counts 3 and 6 and could only be explained by reference to
the development of the
relationship and the appellant’s role in it,
recorded at paragraphs [14]-[18].
Undoubtedly
the observations of Johnson J in
arose in the
context of sentencing an offender for the offence of murder. While
has not been expressly considered in this jurisdiction, it has been
well accepted in New South Wales that it has application to offences
murder: see for example
[2019] NSWCCA 64
[2018] NSWCCA 298
[2018] NSWCCA 280
Johnson’s observations in
at [61] drew upon
the principles articulated in
Director of Public Prosecutions v England
[1999] VSCA 95
; 2 VR 258. While
similarly considered the offence
of murder and the offender’s subsequent conduct towards the
deceased’s body, the Court
relevantly and more generally, observed at
Long before the
rose above the horizon judges drew on their common sense and
their moral sense, as representing that of the community, in deciding
things about a crime could be said to make it more or less serious. They still
do; nothing in the Act stops them doing this.
Common sense and moral sense,
which are and must ever be the essential foundation of sentencing principles and
practices, unite
in rejecting the notion that "the circumstances of the
offence", for sentencing purposes, are neatly marked out by two lines, one
the technical beginning and the other at the technical end of the crime. What
is premeditation, if not a circumstance of the
offence? Yet by definition it
precedes the crime. What is provocative conduct of the victim, viewed as
palliating the crime, if
not a circumstance of the offence? But again something
cannot provoke unless it precedes. Similarly, it has long been recognised
the consequences of a crime (which by definition follow it) may form part of its
circumstances for sentencing purposes:
[1975] VicRp 16
[1975] V.R. 168
R. v. McCormack
[1981] VicRp 11
[1981] V.R. 104
The courts treat the phrases “circumstances of the offence” and
“surrounding circumstances of the offence”
interchangeable:
R. v. Teremoana
S.A.S.R. 30
R. v. De Simoni
(1981) 147 C.L.R.
per Wilson,
R. v. Newman &
[1997] 1 V.R. 146 at
per Winneke,
P. These and similar phrases do not look to some clearly defined period of time.
R. v. Austin
121 LSJS 181
, King, C.J. (Zelling and Bollen, JJ. concurring) said (at
“It is true that in imposing sentence for a crime, a judge should take
into account not only the conduct which actually constitutes
the crime, but also
such of the surrounding circumstances as are directly related to that crime and
are properly to be regarded as
circumstances of aggravation or circumstances of
mitigation.
Just what surrounding circumstances are properly to be taken into account in a
particular case is a matter of degree.”
is consistent with the approach endorsed in
Suksa-Ngacharoen v Regina
[2018] NSWCCA 142
per Wilson J (with whom Leeming JA and Bellew J
agreed about this point) when it was observed:
It should firstly be observed that the context in which an offence occurs is
relevant to an assessment of its gravity. Crime is
not committed in a vacuum,
to be assessed as divorced from all that has gone before. Particularly when the
offending conduct occurs
in the context of a domestic relationship, where the
victim and offender have interacted over a period of time prior to the
of the offence, the history of the relationship may significantly
inform consideration of the commission of the charged conduct.
relationship has formerly been a happy one, the absence of violence may support
a claim that the offending conduct is out
of character, or that it occurred in
the context of particular stressors such that it can be regarded as an isolated
incident, unlikely
to re-occur. Where there has been violence, a sentencing
court is entitled to consider that history, not by penalising an offender
earlier criminal acts, but by assessing the charged offence in a proper context.
Earlier violence may go to an assessment of
an offender's insight into his or
her crimes, or to consideration of prospects of rehabilitation, for
the appellant acknowledged, this ground relied on an inference being drawn from
the primary judge’s remarks at [12]-[18]
which included acknowledgement of
the appellant’s use of control and manipulation against the victim prior
to Counts 3 and
6, as findings which applied to aggravate those offences.
do not accept that this was the approach taken by the primary judge. By
acknowledging the surrounding circumstances of the offending,
in this case, that
the appellant exerted control and manipulated influence over the victim from
shortly after their relationship
began, his Honour was doing that which
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
demands. A reading of the remarks in their
entirety revealed that the primary judge at [14]-[18] established the necessary
of the relationship between the appellant and Ms A, before then moving
on to assess the actual detail of the conduct for Counts 3
and 6 separately.
considering each offence separately, the primary judge identified the features
of the individual offences which informed his assessment
as to their objective
seriousness. Those features were explained and informed by the overall context
of the offending. The specific
features of the offences referred to by the
primary judge at [19]-[22] of the reasons, did not include reference to conduct
in by the appellant prior to their commission.
primary judge’s reference to the immediate history of the relationship
between the appellant and the victim did not offend
the underlying principle in
The Queen v De Simoni
[1981] HCA 31
147 CLR 383
as expressed by
Gibbs CJ at [8] that “no one should be punished for an offence of
which he has not been convicted”.
The primary judge properly referred to
the context within which the conduct occurred before recording the features of
the offending
that he took into account when assessing the objective seriousness
of each offence. The prior “controlling and aggressive”
conduct was
not applied to aggravate the objective seriousness of the offending. It was
referred to in order that the conduct be
assessed in the proper context in which
it occurred.
said, even if we had been satisfied that the primary judge considered the
“controlling and aggressive” conduct of
the appellant prior to
committing Counts 3 and 6 as a circumstance which elevated the objective
seriousness of the offences, he would
not have been in error to do so.
is explored further dealing with the next ground of appeal, that the conduct
included the exploitation of power that the appellant
had cultivated over the
victim by his ongoing use of controlling and aggressive behaviour,
factor relevant to an assessment of objective seriousness. The primary judge
determined that
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
did not apply to Ms
A. It was submitted that the primary judge may have excluded the offending
against Ms A because the provision
was not in force at the time that the
offending against her occurred. No challenge was made to the approach of the
primary judge
in this respect and it is unnecessary to resolve.
consideration of the next ground of appeal involves the application of
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
, the conduct engaged in by the appellant that
established the power imbalance between him and the victims which facilitated
the offending,
was relevant to an assessment of objective seriousness of the
offending, with or without the application of
(b) has not been established. We turn now to ground (d).
appellant submitted that the primary judge erred when he assessed Count 18 as
occurring “within a long-standing context
of manipulation, violence and
control by the [appellant]”. Further, the primary judge was said to have
improperly applied
(Sentencing) Act
, to increase the objective seriousness of both Counts 18
and 19. The appellant did not submit that
was not at all applicable
to the sentencing task, rather contended that it should not have been applied to
the task of assessing
the objective seriousness of the offences. The submission
may be considered to represent an artificial, compartmental approach to
sentencing task inconsistent with the instinctive synthesis. In any event, the
factors taken into account by the primary judge,
specific to the relationship
between the appellant and the victim and relevant both by virtue of the
requirement to consider
and the requirement to consider the “nature
and circumstances” of the offending, were factors which elevated the
seriousness of the offences.
primary judge stated at [13]:
In relation to the offending against Ms B, Ms C and Ms D, I have also taken into
account that this offending involved family violence
offences and the matters
required to be considered under
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT)(CS Act).
primary judge turned to consider the objective seriousness of Count 18 and found
the following at [42]:
This offending is in the worst category of case for a common assault. It
combines physical force used upon the victim, the use of
a method with
particularly awful overtones for the victim, and extreme fear caused to the
victim by the perception that she might
die. These features existed within a
long-standing context of manipulation violence and control by the offender.
respect to Count 19, the primary judge concluded at [44]:
Once again, this offending is in the worst category of case for a common
assault. The physical violence was directed to the neck
of the victim, occurred
in the context of the long-standing relationship involving family violence and
resulted, either through fear
or instinctive response, the victim defecating.
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
came into effect on 12 August 2021 by
virtue of the
Crimes Legislation Amendment Bill 2021
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
34B Sentencing
violence offences
(1) In deciding how an offender should be sentenced for a family violence
offence, a court must consider the nature of family violence
and the context of
the offending, including the following:
(a) the matters mentioned in the preamble to the
Family Violence Act
(b) whether the offending occurred at the home of the victim, offender or
another person;
(c) whether the offending occurred when a child was present;
(d) if the offence is a serious family violence offence—whether the
offender has 1 or more other convictions for serious family
violence offences.
(2) A court must not reduce the severity of a sentence it would otherwise
have imposed because—
(a) the offence is a family violence offence; or
(b) a family violence order under the
Family Violence Act
or a protection order under the
Domestic Violence and
Protection Orders Act 2008
(repealed) is in force against the offender
in relation to the family violence offence.
(3) In this section:
family violence—
Family Violence Act
, dictionary.
serious family violence offence
means a family violence
offence that is punishable by imprisonment for 5 years or more.
appellant submitted that the primary judge erred by treating the family violence
context of Counts 18 and 19 as increasing the
objective seriousness of those
offences. The appellant submitted that s 34B did not substantially alter the
common law in relation
to sentencing family violence offenders, nor displace the
approach endorsed by the Court of Appeal as set out in
281 A Crim R 273
Court of Appeal in
rejected a “separate sentencing regime”
for family violence offenders, citing that which was confirmed in
that a sentencing court should apply the same sentencing principles to all
stands for the proposition that an offence which meets the
definition of “family violence” is not necessarily made more
objectively serious being so defined. Features particular to an offence, which
may commonly be found in offences committed in the
context of family violence,
are relevant to an assessment of the gravity of the offending. In
the Court of Appeal observed at [51]:
When sentencing a particular offender for a “family violence
offence”, the usual sentencing principles apply. This means
relevant to the particular case and subject to the
principle (
R v De Simoni
(1981) 147 CLR 383)
sentencing court will take into account matters that are frequently associated
with “family violence offences”.
These matters include:
(a) whether the offence forms part of a course of conduct (
s 33(1)(c));
(b) whether and how a weapon was used;
(c) whether the offence was associated with actual or threatened violence;
(d) the impact on victims (
Sentencing Act
s 33(1)(f)); and
(e) whether the offender was in a position of trust or authority
vis-à-vis the victim (
Sentencing Act
s 33(1)(u)), which is
usually—perhaps even “necessarily”—the case in relation
to domestic violence offences:
[2016] HCA 48
However, such factors are not taken into account because the offence can be
labelled a “family violence offence”, but
because they attach to the
particular offending conduct.
approach revealed by the primary judge’s reasons to Counts 18 and 19 was
not inconsistent with
. The primary judge did not, as
the appellant contended, merely label prior conduct engaged in by the appellant
violence” and automatically increase the objective
seriousness of Counts 18 and 19. The primary judge carefully considered
factors particular to each offence which relevantly included the breach of trust
the conduct represented and the exploitation
of power that the conduct
reflected. The exploitation of power arose by virtue of the past conduct
engaged in by the appellant during
their long-standing relationship. These are
factors which operated to increase the objective seriousness of the offending.
was required, the primary judge considered the circumstances disclosed by the
evidence at trial and the agreed facts and applied
those circumstances to the
sentencing task, including to his assessment of the objective seriousness of
each offence.
intention of the
Crimes Legislation Amendment Bill 2021
expressed in the Explanatory Statement was to ensure that a sentencing court had
regard to factors of particular relevance
for a family violence offence. There
may be overlap between the factors included in s 33 and those which require
consideration under
s 34B. Section 34B draws the sentencing court’s
attention to considerations which may extend beyond the specific conduct
underpinning
an offence but nonetheless informs the nature, circumstances and
objective seriousness of it. This is consistent with the approach
Wilkinson (No 5),
England, Suksa-Ngacharoen
34B provides that the family violence context of an offence cannot see a
reduction in the severity of a sentence. The section
also mandates
consideration of several factors but does not dictate how those factors should
be taken into account. This reflects
that the factors set out in s 34B may
be relevant at difference stages and in different ways in any given sentencing
exercise. Some
of the factors in s 34B may be relevant to an assessment of the
objective seriousness of an offence including the presence of a child,
occurrence of an offence in a victim’s home or the use of a weapon. Other
s 34B factors may influence an assessment of
an offender’s prospects of
rehabilitation or the need to give effect to general deterrence. The
significance of s 34B factors
will turn on the individual circumstances of
each case. It is trite to observe that a factor to which s 34B demands
attention can
only be considered if it is known and relevant; if a weapon is not
used by an offender, then that factor need not be considered.
primary judge concluded at [30] that the evidence at trial disclosed “a
pattern of behaviour on the part of the offender
reflecting violence, abuse and
manipulation” of Ms B. This feature of the relationship between the
appellant and the victim
was relevant to an assessment of the objective
seriousness of the offences perpetrated against her. It was a feature of the
relationship
that established the environment within which the appellant could
offend in the way that he did. Not dissimilar to an offender who
outside of a
family violence context, deliberately isolates a victim in order to offend or
persuades a victim of a particular state
of affairs in order to offend.
consideration of prior conduct engaged in by the appellant that was violent,
abusive and manipulative was recognition that it established
the psychological
and physical power imbalance between the appellant and the victim that
facilitated his offending against her.
primary judge properly applied the relevant considerations in s 34B to the
assessment of objective seriousness of Counts 18 and
19. The preamble to the
Family Violence Act
(ACT), a consideration of which s 34B
mandates, recognises that “family violence extends beyond physical
violence and may involve
the exploitation of power imbalances and patterns of
abuse over many years”. This was a particularly relevant consideration.
Only through an understanding of the dynamics of the relationship between the
appellant and the victim, enhanced by the requirement
to consider those matters
in the preamble, could the appellant’s use of power, and the
victim’s susceptibility to it,
be properly understood and assessed.
Counts 18 and 19 were examples of the effect of the power imbalance between the
appellant and
the victim. The power imbalance was cultivated through prior acts
of violence, abuse, control and manipulation, by the appellant
against the
victim. The prior conduct explained the context of the offending and properly
influenced an assessment of the gravity
this way the primary judge was right to apply s 34B when assessing the objective
seriousness of Counts 18 and 19 and right to refer
to Count 18 as occurring
“within a long-standing context of manipulation, violence and control by
the [appellant]” when
considering the objective seriousness of the
approach of the primary judge did not offend the principle of proportionality
that guards an offender against being subject to
a sentence that is increased
beyond what is commensurate to an offence as a protective measure for society:
Veen v The Queen
[1979] HCA 7
143 CLR 458.
Nor did the primary judge
breach the principle in
to which we have already referred. The
primary judge considered the features of the offending, which included the
exploitation of
the power imbalance between the appellant and the victim
established by his ongoing use of controlling and violence behaviour, to
the gravity of the offending as part of the instinctive synthesis. The specific
detail of the “family violence”
context of the offences recorded by
the primary judge at [42] and [44] increased the seriousness of the
appellant’s conduct
for Counts 18 and 19. This is consistent with the
approach endorsed in
There was no “double punishment” of
the appellant. The primary judge was not in error in the way he approached the
of the objective seriousness of Counts 18 and 19.
(d) has not been established.
Ground (c): Finding the
common assault charges within the “worst category” (Counts 18 and
primary judge categorised Counts 18 and 19 as falling within “the worst
case” of offences of common assault. Notwithstanding
that assessment, the
primary judge did not impose the maximum term of imprisonment for Counts 18 or
19, being two years of imprisonment.
In each case a sentence of 18 months was
imposed. The primary judge assessed the seriousness of the offences having
the fact finding required after a finding of guilt by a jury.
is useful to recall that which was observed in
Mulato v Regina
Characterisation of the degree of objective seriousness of an offence is
classically within the role of the sentencing judge in performing
the task of
finding facts and drawing inferences from those facts. This Court is very slow
to determine such matters for itself
or to set aside the judgment made by a
first instance judge exercising a broadly based discretion. The question must
or not the particular characterisation which her Honour gave to the
circumstances of the offence was open to her Honour. In my opinion
it was open,
although I have some hesitation in deciding so and find it to be at the lower
end of the range which could reasonably
be held to be so characterised.
categorisation of an offence as being in the “worst category” has a
particular significance at law:
Ibbs v The Queen
[1987] HCA 46
The Queen v
[2016] HCA 48
259 CLR 256.
the High Court cautioned against categorising an offence as being
“within the worst category”, explaining at [18]-[19]
18. What is meant by an offence falling within the “worst category”
of the offence is that it is an instance of the
offence which is so grave that
it warrants the imposition of the maximum prescribed penalty for that offence.
Both the nature of
the crime and the circumstances of the criminal are
considered in determining whether the case is of the worst type. Once it is
recognised that an offence falls within the “worst category”, it is
beside the point that it may be possible to conceive
of an even worse instance
of the offence. Thus, an offence may be assessed as so grave as to warrant the
maximum prescribed penalty
notwithstanding that it is possible to imagine an
even worse instance of the offence.
19. Where, however, an offence, although a grave instance of the offence, is
not so grave as to warrant the imposition of the maximum
prescribed penalty
– as the offending was agreed to be here – a sentencing judge is
bound to consider where the facts
of the particular offence and offender lie on
the “spectrum” that extends from the least serious instances of the
to the worst category, properly so called. It is potentially confusing
therefore, and likely to lead to error to describe an offence
which does not
warrant the maximum prescribed penalty as being “within the worst
category”. It is a practice which should
be avoided.
recently in
, this Court considered a sentence imposed for an
offence similarly characterised as being in the “worst category”.
the use of such a label was not a specific ground of appeal in
, the Court identified that the primary judge had correctly had
regard to both the “objective and subjective factors”
as part of the
analysis, including the matters contained in
Crimes (Sentencing)
, the previous repeated assaults on the victim and the offender’s
lack of remorse; each factor contributed to the offence falling
“worst category”. In
the primary judge determined
that but for the reduction in the sentence by virtue of the plea of guilty, the
maximum penalty for
the offence would have been imposed.
consistent with the analysis in
made plain that the determination
that an offence is in the “worst category” involves consideration of
factors beyond
the specific conduct constituting the offence.
is consistent with the approach taken in
Vojneski v The Queen
262 A Crim R 370
when the Court considered that an absence of
aggravating features and a reduction in moral culpability meant that the offence
not fall within the “worst category”.
those principles in mind, we return to consider the approach taken by the
primary judge to Counts 18 and 19. For the reasons
that follow we have
determined that the finding was open to the primary judge and indeed was
findings made with respect to each count are extracted above at [128]-[129] and
need not be repeated here.
for the offender at the sentencing hearing conceded that Count 18 was “a
particularly serious, cruel and degrading assault”.
Further, it was
acknowledged at the sentencing hearing that the offending was aggravated by the
breach of trust inherent to the
relationship between the appellant and the
victim, referencing
are two factors to observe about the approach of the primary judge.
the “worst category” assessment was confined to the portion of the
remarks dealing specifically with the objective
seriousness of the offence. The
primary judge had yet to consider the subjective circumstances of the offender.
Secondly, an analysis
of the primary judge’s assessment of the conduct
engaged in by the appellant, should recognise that the offence of common assault
can be established by a wide range of conduct. It need not involve any physical
can include momentary physical
interference or a more protracted application of physical force by an offender.
primary judge was assessing conduct engaged in by the appellant that saw the
victim’s breathing deliberately interfered
with, and not momentarily. The
conduct was deliberate, calculated, dangerous and cruel. On the spectrum of
conduct captured by
the offence of common assault it was conduct in the most
serious category of conduct capable of constituting common assault.
is tolerably clear that the “worst category” finding made by the
primary judge was not made to justify the imposition
of the maximum penalty. It
was a conclusion confined to the objective seriousness of the offending. It was
not the kind of determination
the High Court cautioned against in
extracted above at [146].
conclusion that the conduct engaged in by the appellant objectively fell into
the “worst category” of conduct on the
spectrum of acts that
establish the offence of common assault, was not only open to the primary judge,
it was also accurate. In
the context in which it was made, the conclusion was
tantamount to a determination that the offending was at the “highest
or at the “very upper end” of seriousness and not a
conclusion with the particular significance at law warranting the
imposition of
the maximum penalty. While there have been observations from this Court that
categorising offences by reference to
“low, mid or high range” may
be of little utility in this jurisdiction (
at [24]), a
sentencing judge remains bound to consider where an offence sits on the spectrum
of offending from the least serious
examples to the most serious examples.
Nothing in the approach of the primary judge suggests otherwise and the finding
that the conduct was the most serious kind of conduct.
proposition advanced on the appellant’s behalf on appeal, that the
offending could only have fallen into the “worst
category” if the
victim had been a person properly categorised as legally vulnerable, was not
supported by any authority and
we reject it. While the status of a victim may
well influence such a determination, there is no criteria that must be satisfied
before a sentencing judge could consider an offence to be in the “worst
category” or in the “high range”.
While we have determined
that this was not the kind of conclusion contemplated in
reasoning with respect to conjuring more serious examples of conduct is
at [18]. The possibility that an offence could be made
worse by added features such as a victim with greater vulnerability, is no
to a determination that an offence is nonetheless in the worst category of
conduct or at the highest end of the range of conduct
that can establish the
concluded as he did with respect to the objective seriousness of the offences,
the primary judge was aware of the need to go
on and consider the subjective
circumstances of the appellant. The primary judge was careful to have regard to
the appellant’s
deprived background; a factor that required “full
at [44]. While the primary judge did not make an
express finding as to any reduction in moral culpability, his consideration of
issue is demonstrative of the approach
the primary judge’s remarks are read in their entirety and the sentence
imposed considered, it is readily apparent that
“full weight” in
this instance was a sentence that synthesised the maximum penalty, the finding
that the conduct was
the most serious kind of conduct for the offence of common
assault and the need to have regard to the consequence of the appellant’s
background circumstances. As we have already observed, those circumstances,
while explaining the appellant’s consistent resort
to violence,
necessarily heightened the need to protect the community from his conduct. That
this was the approach taken by the
primary judge can be seen in the following
remarks at [104]:
I accept that some of the entrenched characteristics of the offender’s
behaviour are likely to have been influenced by his
dysfunctional childhood.
Something has led to this emotionally manipulative, controlling and violent
approach to his intimate partners.
It is certainly likely that his poor and
dysfunctional upbringing and early exposure to domestic violence has contributed
The long-term consequences of such exposure to violence and the
absence of appropriate role models are likely to have lifelong consequences
the offender. On the one hand, these matters are subjective circumstances for
which the offender was not responsible and which
assist with understanding his
behaviour. However, on the other hand, recognising the connection between his
formative experiences
and his current behaviour is a factor which indicates that
he is likely to be at risk of further such offending in future and weight
be given to this when regard is had to the need to protect the community.
appellant’s submission that there was a “clear difference in
objective seriousness” as between Counts 18 and
19, not reflected in the
identical sentence imposed on each charge, is without merit.
reality, the facts of each offence revealed little material difference between
the conduct. Both offences saw the appellant assert
physical dominance over the
victim so that she could not escape him. Both offences saw the appellant then
use that physical dominance
to hold the victim in place and directly interfere
with her capacity to draw breath; in Count 18 by pouring water on a towel on her
face and in Count 19 by placing his forearms on her neck. In each case, as has
already been observed, the conduct was deliberate,
cruel and calculated. It
had, what appeared to be the desired effect of frightening the victim and
causing her to fear for her life.
It was conduct that reinforced the
appellant’s physical power over the victim and demonstrated his
preparedness to engage
in extreme acts of violence. It was conduct that
contributed to the ongoing fear that the appellant cultivated in the victim and
secured his psychological and physical power over her.
by reference to “worst category” or “at the very high
end” or “at the very upper end of seriousness”,
the finding
made by the primary judge as to the objective seriousness of the offending was
entirely justified. Against the background
of the “yardstick” of
the maximum penalty, the sentence imposed in each case reflected the seriousness
of the offence,
the subjective circumstances of the offender and a consideration
of the relevant purposes of sentencing.
ground of appeal has not been established.
Ground (e): Irrelevant
consideration
appellant submitted that the primary judge erred by having regard to an
irrelevant consideration in assessing the objective seriousness
of Count 19,
namely that the victim, Ms B, suffered an unproven injury. The appellant
submitted that his Honour was not entitled
to have regard to any injury, or
possibility of injury, the victim suffered when sentencing the appellant for
common assault, citing
that case, Gibbs CJ stated at [8]:
[A] judge, in imposing sentence, is entitled to consider all the conduct of the
accused, including that which would aggravate the
offence, but cannot take into
account circumstances of aggravation which would have warranted a conviction for
a more serious offence.
Court of Appeal in
stated at [9]:
These grounds allege a breach of the principle in
R v De Simoni
147 CLR 383
at 389 [[8]] (
), which requires that an offender be
sentenced only for the offence(s) charged, and not for conduct that could have
been separately
charged: see also
Pearce v The Queen
[1998] HCA 57
Weininger v The Queen
[2003] HCA 14
. Although there has been some suggestion that the principle
only applies to more serious crimes, the principle is not so confined:
[1999] HCA 54
199 CLR 270
ground can be readily dismissed.
primary judge described the offending as follows (at [43]-[44]):
43. While at the Rivett premises there was an occasion where Ms B was on her
back on the bed wearing underwear and nothing else.
The offender, who was
angry, straddled her on the bed and pressed his forearm into her neck. Ms B
could not breathe or talk. She
was trying to suck in breath but could not get
any air in. It felt like her windpipe was blocked. She feared for her life.
became incontinent and defecated. She was able to say “Something
happened”. Although her words came out strangely,
the offender stopped.
She was allowed to get up and leave. This is count 19, an offence of common
assault which the jury found
to be proved.
44. Once again, this offending is in the worst category of case for a common
assault. The physical violence was directed to the
neck of the victim, occurred
in the context of the long-standing relationship involving family violence and
resulted, either through
fear or instinctive response, the victim defecating.
expert evidence adduced by the prosecution during the trial attributed this loss
of control either to fear or anoxia to the brain
(deprivation of oxygen). The
primary judge was entitled to take into account the fact that the victim
defecated as part of the assessment
of the objective seriousness of the offence.
It was relevant, as the primary judge identified, based on two possibilities.
as a reflection of the fear the victim experienced while being assaulted.
Secondly, as an indication of the extent of the assault
in that it resulted in
an interruption of the flow of oxygen to her brain. It is the second
possibility with which the appellant
takes issue. The possibilities were not
mutually exclusive; both could have contributed to the response. That there
were two possible
explanations did not prohibit the primary judge from taking
the consequences into account.
appellant’s argument rests on the primary judge’s reference to an
“instinctive response” being a reference
to anoxia to the brain.
The appellant contended that in relying on this possibility to whatever extent,
the primary judge took into
account an “injury” that was an element
of a more serious charge, an element of which was the establishment of injury.
We do not agree.
fact of the victim defecating was not an “injury”. It was a
physical response to the force used upon her by the appellant.
The primary
judge’s use of “instinctive response” is no more than an
acknowledgement that the action was not within
the victim’s capacity to
control because of the nature and circumstances of the assault. The
“instinctive response”
to which the primary judge referred, was,
like fear, a matter to which regard could properly be had in assessing the
conduct engaged
in by the appellant.
was no error in the primary judge’s approach. The response by the victim
to the assault upon her, brought about by a
lack of oxygen to her brain or
because of fear or a combination of the two, was not an irrelevant consideration
in sentencing for
common assault. The response to the assault was relevant not
because it was an injury, but because it was an indication of the level
duration of the force used. That is not to say that an “injury” can
never be taken into account in assessing the
objective seriousness of a common
assault. An injury occasioned by a common assault may not meet the threshold
for actual bodily
harm but nonetheless may be indicative of the force used by a
perpetrator and/or the discomfort experienced by a victim. The level
used in a common assault is an entirely relevant consideration.
this instance the victim defecating was relevant not because it was an injury
but because it was part of the response she had to
the application of force to
her neck by the appellant. Just as it was relevant that the victim’s
response to the force included
that she could not breath or talk while the force
was being applied; so too was her involuntary defecation. It was a factor that
informed the nature and extent of the common assault perpetrated against her and
accordingly, was a matter that properly informed
the objective seriousness of
the offence.
ground of appeal has not been established.
-sentence time in custody
ground concerns the primary judge’s reasons at [100]:
The offender’s bail was revoked upon the finding of guilt on 10 February
2023. That means he has been in custody for 188 days
(six months and seven
days). It is appropriate to take this period into account by backdating the
sentence until 10 February 2023.
was accepted on appeal that, at the sentencing hearing, the primary judge was
provided with the incorrect number of days that the
appellant had served by way
of pre-sentence custody referable to the offending. As at the date of sentence,
the appellant had in
fact been held in custody for 207 days (an additional 19
63(2) of the
Sentencing) Act
obliges a sentencing judge to
take into account “any period during which the offender has already been
held in custody in relation
to the offence”. Although his Honour was not
expressly bound to account for the full extent of such period in the backdating
of the sentence, it is clear from the primary judge’s reasons that when
his Honour referred to taking “this period”
into account, his Honour
intended to give effect to the considerations in s 63 in a way that treated
every day of the time spent
in custody as time served on the sentence his Honour
was imposing.
misinformation led the primary judge to impose a period of imprisonment that did
not account for the full period of pre-sentence
custody. That factual mistake
was conceded, which meant that there was no formal application to adduce further
evidence proving
Court has the power under
Supreme Court Act
to amend the
order to reflect the additional time spent in custody, by backdating the
sentence to commence 19 days earlier than the
commencement date specified by the
primary judge. The respondent submitted that this is what should occur here.
the appellant advanced an argument that a “full resentence” was
required, because the error was of a kind that
involved the exercise of a
sentencing discretion. The argument that this Court was required to consider
the sentence afresh relied
on the following principle articulated in
at [42] (emphasis added, citations omitted):
When a judge acts upon wrong principle, allows extraneous or irrelevant matters
to guide or affect the determination, mistakes the
facts or does not take into
account some material consideration, the Court of Criminal Appeal
assess whether and to what degree the error influenced the outcome. The
discretion in such a case has miscarried and it
is the duty of the Court of
Criminal Appeal to exercise the discretion afresh
taking into account the
purposes of sentencing and the factors that the Sentencing
Act, and any other Act or rule of law, require
or permit. As sentencing is
a discretionary judgment that does not yield a single correct result, it follows
that a range of sentences
in a given case may be said to be "warranted in law".
A sentence that happens to be within the range but that has been imposed as
result of a legally flawed determination is not "warranted in law" unless, in
the exercise of its independent discretion, the
Court of Criminal Appeal
determines that it is the appropriate sentence for the offender and the offence.
was dealing with differently worded appellate legislation. Importantly
though, the plurality in
went on to say later in the same
This is not to say that all errors in the sentencing of offenders vitiate the
exercise of the sentencer's discretion. By way of
example, s 44(1) of
Sentencing Act
requires the court when sentencing an
offender to imprisonment to first set the non-parole period and then set the
balance of the
term. Prior to 1 February 2003, a court was required to first
set the term of the sentence and then specify the non-parole period.
which sentences an offender to imprisonment after 1 February 2003 by first
setting the term of the sentence commits legal
error. Without more, the error
does not affect the exercise of the sentencer's discretion.
distinction between an error that affects the exercise of the sentencing
discretion and one that does not was similarly made
; 93 NSWLR 205, where Bathurst CJ (with whom Beazley P and Schmidt J
agreed) rejected the proposition that a “discrete error”
result in an appellate Court adjusting the sentence to take account of it,
concluding at [68] (emphasis added):
It seems to me that
if there is an error which affects the exercise of the
sentencing discretion
, the section requires the court to form its own view
of the appropriate sentence, although, as pointed out
at [43], not necessarily to resentence.
CJ went on to maintain that some errors could be addressed by precise correction
without the need for the sentencing discretion
to be re-exercised at [72]
(emphasis added):
That is not to say that there will not be occasions when, notwithstanding error,
it is not necessary to re-exercise the sentencing
discretion. It will not be
necessary where,
for example, an arithmetical error occurred in the
calculation of the commencement and end date of the sentence
or the date of
the expiration of a non-parole period arrived at in the proper exercise of
discretion or, for example, an error in
the calculation of the effect of a
discount for a plea or assistance to authorities, where the extent of the
discount to be allowed
was reached in accordance with proper principles.
Subsequently
Almaoiue v R
[2021] NSWCCA 274
, there was a mistake by the sentencing
judge as to when the offender in that case was taken into custody. That
resulted in an error
in the fixing of a commencement date for a sentence two
weeks earlier. It was held at [25] that such a mistake did not engage a
resentencing”.
same error is what occurred in the present case. Contrary to the submission of
the appellant, an error (arithmetical or otherwise)
which can be addressed by
giving effect to the sentencing judge’s clear intention when imposing the
sentence is not an error
that affects the exercise of the sentencing discretion.
It does not require any assessment by an appellate court of whether and to
degree the error influenced the outcome, or how the relevant error can be
addressed. Here, the discretion had already been
exercised in a particular
manner, that being to backdate the sentence by the number of days the appellant
had been held in custody
referable to the offending. It was simply that the
commencement date of the sentence was backdated by the wrong number of
Accordingly,
whether the broad power provided by
Supreme Court Act
amend in the order involves that application of the
principle or
not is immaterial in this case, because the answer is the same, namely that the
start date of the sentence may be adjusted
to fix the error without
re-exercising the discretion.
appellant has failed to establish any ground of appeal. Accordingly, the appeal
should be dismissed.
these reasons, the Court makes the following orders:
(1) Pursuant to r 5412(2) of the
Court Procedure Rules 2006
(ACT), leave
is granted to further amend the Amended Notice of Appeal to include ground
(2) The sentences imposed are amended as follows:
(a) On the charge of negligently inflicting grievous
bodily harm (CC2022/1150) the offender is sentenced to 12 months’
imprisonment,
beginning on 22 January 2023 and ending on 21 January 2024.
(b) On the charge of recklessly inflicting actual bodily harm (SCAN2022/61) the
offender is sentenced to 12 months’ imprisonment,
beginning on 21 April
2023 and ending on 20 April 2024.
(c) On the charge of engaging in sexual intercourse without consent
(CC2022/1153) the offender is sentenced to 27 months’ imprisonment,
beginning on 22 July 2023 and ending on 21 October 2025.
(d) On the charge of common assault (CC2021/11049) the offender is sentenced to
4 months’ imprisonment beginning on 22 October
2025 and ending on 21
February 2026.
(e) On the charge of common assault (CC2021/11050) the offender is sentenced to
5 months’ imprisonment beginning on 22 October
2025 and ending on 21 March
(f) On the charge of cause damage to property (CC2021/11052) the offender is
sentenced to 2 months’ imprisonment beginning
on 22 March 2026 and ending
on 21 May 2026.
(g) On the charge of assault occasioning actual bodily harm (SCCAN2022/63) the
offender is sentenced to 30 months’ imprisonment
beginning on 21 April
2026 and ending on 20 October 2028.
(h) On the charge of assault occasioning actual bodily harm (CC2021/11054) the
offender is sentenced to 6 months’ imprisonment
beginning on 21 June 2028
and ending on 20 December 2028.
(i) On the charge of common assault (SCAN2023/22) the offender is sentenced to
18 months’ imprisonment beginning on 22 December
2027 and ending on 21
(j) On the charge of common assault (SCAN2023/23) the offender is sentenced to
18 months’ imprisonment beginning on 21 September
2028 and ending on 20
March 2030.
(k) On the charge of engaging in sexual intercourse without consent
(CC2021/11057) the offender is sentenced to 36 months’
imprisonment
beginning on 22 March 2029 and ending on 21 March 2032.
(l) On the charge of common assault (CC2021/11058) the offender is sentenced to
9 months’ imprisonment beginning on 21 September
2031 and ending on 20
(m) On the charge of engaging in sexual intercourse without consent
(SCAN2022/65) the offender is sentenced to 36 months’ imprisonment
beginning on 21 June 2031 and ending on 20 June 2034.
(n) On the charge of choke, strangle or suffocate (SCCAN2022/66) the offender is
sentenced to 21 months’ imprisonment, beginning
on 19 February 2034 and
ending on 18 November 2035.
(o) On the charge of causing damage to property (CC2021/11194) the offender is
sentenced to 8 months’ imprisonment beginning
on 21 September 2035 and
ending on 20 May 2036.
(p) On the charge of common assault (CC2021/11195) the offender is sentenced to
8 months’ imprisonment beginning on 21 November
2035 and ending on 20 July
(q) On the charge of assault occasioning actual bodily harm (CC2022/310) the
offender is sentenced to 8 months’ imprisonment
beginning on 22 July 2036
and ending on 21 March 2037.
(r) The non-parole period commenced on 22 January 2023 and ends on 21 July 2031.
(3) The appeal is otherwise dismissed.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and eighty-eight [188] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Associate: O Ferguson
Date: 3 March 2025
RTF format (586 KB)
Signed PDF/A format