Newberry v Mallitt [2008] ACTRTT 17 (26 September 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: NEWBERRY V MALLITT [2008] ACTRTT (17)
Notice of date of termination
Bond Application – deductions from bond
Request for payment of water consumption after termination of
LEGISLATION:
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
Sections: 31; 36.
Prescribed terms: 42; 46
Tribunal: J. Lennard,
Date: 26 September 2008
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT
332 of 2008
RE: Wayne NEWBERRY
AND: Justin & Michelle MALLITT
Tribunal : J. Lennard,
Date : 24 June 2008
the Lessor Wayne Newberry is substituted as Applicant.
the Office of Rental Bonds is directed to release the
balance of the bond
to the Tenants, Justine Mallitt and Michelle Mallitt forthwith.
..................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT
332 of 2008
RE: Wayne NEWBERRY
AND: Justin MALLITT & Michelle MALLITT
REASONS FOR DECISION
J Lennard, Member
Re: Premises at 11 Domain Street Palmerston, ACT 2913.
Background facts
parties entered into a residential tenancy agreement in relation to the premises
for a fixed term of 24 months commencing 6 July
parties agreed to end the tenancy and the tenants gave 3 weeks notice by email
that the tenancy would end on 24 March 2008. This
notice was in response to an
request by email from the tenants which stated:
...you are free to leave the
tenancy early, giving the usual 3 weeks notice
The tenant claimed the whole of the bond of $1440.00, but the lessor disputed
an amount of $790.85. The lessor was represented by
Ms Fiona Wall of
Taylor’s Real Estate, Ms Sandra Alonso WRLC.
The lessor’s claim was for $590 for water consumption and $200.85 for loss
lessor had paid water consumption charges for the entire tenancy and only
instructed his agent to make a claim against the tenant
after the tenancy had
terminated. The Residential Tenancies Tribunal takes the view that as 25% of ACT
lessors pay the cost of their
tenants’ water consumption and factor this
into the calculation of rent, a tenant who has not been asked to pay this cost
the tenancy is entitled to assume that no demand will be made after the
termination of the tenancy. The lessor is estopped from making
the demand. In
any event the claim for water consumption charges is not an allowable deduction
from the bond under
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
March 2008 was Easter Monday and the lessor
claimed rent until the following day, asserting that the tenancy did not
terminate until
the keys were returned.
read with clause 84 provide
that the parties may agree in writing to terminate the tenancy, and where the
tenant gives notice of
an intention to vacate and vacates in accordance with the
notice, the tenancy ends on the date the tenant vacates the premises. Thus
lessor has no sustainable claim for loss of rent.
The Residential Tenancies Tribunal notes that is a common misconception
among real estate agents and lessors that a tenancy cannot
terminate until the
tenant has returned all keys to the premises. When a tenant fails to return
keys, the lessor has a claim for
compensation for any loss resulting from the
breach of the agreement, but cannot argue that the tenancy agreement remains in
merely on the basis of retention of keys by the tenant.
The Residential Tenancies Tribunal also notes that Ms Alonso stated that
it was common practice for agents to make claims against
the bond for items such
as water consumption, even though
sets out a limited number of claims that a
lessor can make in relation to the bond. The proper action for the lessor is the
an application to the Residential Tenancies Tribunal for compensation for
breach of the tenancy agreement. It is not acceptable that
the tenant should be
held to ransom in relation to the bond: without deciding the issue it would
appear to the Residential Tenancies
Tribunal that a tenant would be able to make
a competent claim for costs in relation to an improper claim upon bond
JANN LENNARD
MEMBER 25 SEPTEMBER 2008.
RTF format (44.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format