Mitchell v Australian Capital Territory [2018] ACTSCFC 1 (12 October 2018)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Benjamin Mitchell v Australian Capital Territory
[2018] ACTSCFC 1
Hearing Date:
Penfold, Burns and Wigney JJ
Catchwords:
– Applicable legislation –
Road Transport
(Third Party Insurance) Act 2008
(ACT) – Republication 12
PERSONAL INJURY – Motor Vehicle Accident – relevance of the
terms of s 97 of the Act to determining the correct interpretation
of s 141 of
Road Transport (Third Party Insurance) Act 2008
(ACT) – whether
a respondent to a motor accident claim can deny liability prior to the
commencement of court proceedings and
still make a mandatory final offer to
settle a claim in a sum greater than $0
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION – objects of the Act – legislative
scheme – encourage the speedy resolution of personal
injury claims arising
from motor vehicle accidents – whether a respondent is entitled to make a
mandatory final offer without
making some admission of liability –
“denying liability altogether” – whether there was a basis for
the appellant
to give the respondent a compliance notice under s 158 of the Act
Legislation Cited:
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
(ACT) ch 14
Legislation Act 2001
Motor Accidents Compensation Act
Motor Accident Insurance Act 1994
(repealed),
Road Transport (Third Party Insurance) Act 2008
(ACT) ss 5A, 76, 84, 85, 88, 90, 96, 97, 99, 100, 101, 104, 105, 127, 136,
140, 141, 143, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 155, 156, 158,
159, 161, 162, 269; ch 4;
pts 4.8, 4.9, 4.9A, 4.9B, 4.10, 4.10A
Road Transport (Third Party
Insurance) Regulation 2008
(ACT) regs 27, 28, 30
Injuries Proceedings Act 2002
Supreme Court Act 1933
Cases Cited:
Insurance Australia Ltd v Albrecht
[2015] ACTSC 68
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
(Northern Territory)
[2009] HCA 41
Barker v Gifford and
[2005] ACTSC 55
192 FLR 347
Benjamin Mitchell v Australian
Capital Territory
[2015] ACTMC 1
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37
249 CLR 571
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
Australia Limited v Albrecht
[2015] ACTSC 68
Project Blue Sky v ABA
[1998] HCA 28
194 CLR 355
Smalley v Motor Accident Authority of New
South Wales
[2013] NSWCA 318
85 NSWLR 580
Steen v Senton
Theodorelos v Nexus Products Pty Ltd
[2009] ACTSC 149
Texts Cited:
Explanatory Statement,
Road Transport (Third-Party Insurance) Bill 2007
The Australian Concise Oxford Dictionary
(Oxford University Press,
Benjamin Mitchell (Appellant)
Australian Capital Territory (Respondent)
Representation:
Mr N Hutley with Mr S Hausfeld (Appellant)
Dr K Rewell SC with Mr D Crowe (Respondent)
Maliganis Edwards Johnson (Appellant)
ACT Government Solicitor (Respondent)
File Number:
SCA 56 of 2015
Decision under appeal:
Court/Tribunal: Magistrates Court
Before: Magistrate Morrison
Date of Decision: 23 June 2015
Case Title: Benjamin Mitchell v Australian Capital Territory
[2015] ACTMC 1
Introduction
1. This is an appeal from a decision of the Magistrates Court
that was referred to a Full Court under
Supreme Court Act 1933
2. It concerns the interpretation of a provision of the Road Transport
(Third Party Insurance) Act 2008 (ACT) (the 2008 Act). Among
other things, that
Act sets up a scheme for dealing with personal injuries claims arising out of
motor vehicle accidents. The scheme
provides that court proceedings to enforce
such claims may not be commenced until there have been extensive, structured,
between people claiming damages for such injuries (claimants) and
those responsible for compensating injured people under third party
arrangements (generally, insurers or the Nominal Defendant, referred to as
respondents).
3. The provision in question in this case (s 141 of the 2008
Act) relates to one of the last steps in those structured exchanges,
which usually involves the exchange of mandatory final offers (MFOs) if the
matter has not resolved at a compulsory conference.
Applicable legislation
4. As explained by Mossop AssJ in Insurance Australia Limited v
[2015] ACTSC 68 (Albrecht)
, the version of the 2008 Act
applicable to motor accident claims arising from motor accidents before 1
January 2013 is the Act as
in force immediately before then, which is set out in
Republication 12. There have been minor amendments to the Act since then, but
none apparently applicable or relevant to this case.
5. The appellant, Mr Mitchell, claims that on 23 October 2009
he suffered injuries while travelling as a passenger on an ACTION bus.
ACTION bus service is run by the ACT government, making the ACT (the respondent
in this appeal) the appropriate defendant in
Mr Mitchell’s negligence
action. To avoid confusion between the parties to this appeal and the claimants
and respondents referred
to in the 2008 Act, I shall refer to the parties to
this appeal as Mr Mitchell and the ACT.
6. On 26 November 2009 solicitors for
Mr Mitchell made a claim on his behalf against the ACT, alleging that he
suffered his injuries
due to the negligence of the bus driver.
parties exchanged various documents and letters in the next 14 months;
importantly, on 31 May 2010, the ACT wrote to Mr Mitchell’s
denying liability for the purposes of s 97(1)(b) of the 2008 Act. No claim of
contributory negligence was made under
s 97(1)(b)(ii). It is agreed between
the parties that this was a denial of liability under s 97(1)(b)(i), and
that the ACT has not
sought to resile from this denial at any point.
8. Little or nothing happened in the matter for most of the 21-month period
from January 2011 until October 2012.
9. In October 2012, shortly before the
expiry of the relevant limitation period, Mr Mitchell’s solicitors
commenced a proceeding
against the respondent in the ACT Magistrates Court,
claiming damages under the 2008 Act. Before the commencement of that proceeding,
the parties had not participated in a compulsory conference in accordance with s
136 of that Act, and nor had they taken steps under
s 141 of that Act.
10. No issue is taken in this matter about the fact that, despite s 145 of
the 2008 Act, proceedings were commenced before there had
been a conference or
action under s 141 (see Albrecht at [24] – [38] for a discussion of
this approach). In October 2012 Mr
Mitchell consented to a stay of the
Magistrates Court proceedings to enable the parties to participate in a
compulsory conference
and to take steps under s 141.
11. Little progress
was made in 2013, but in the course of 2014 each party obtained two medical
12. The compulsory conference took place on 11 March 2015, but
the claim was not settled at the conference.
13. At the conclusion of the
conference on 11 March, and relying on s 141(2) of the 2008 Act, Mr
Mitchell’s solicitor gave the
ACT’s solicitor an MFO of $45,000 plus
costs. Over the next few days, Mr Mitchell’s solicitors conveyed to the
view that because it denied liability in relation to the claim, the ACT
was not entitled to serve an MFO and was only entitled, and
was required, to
serve a mandatory final notice (MFN) under s 141(3) of the 2008 Act.
14. Despite this, on 16 March 2015, the ACT served what was described as a
mandatory final offer of $25,000 on the appellant. No
issue is taken in this
matter about the fact that the ACT’s offer was not served “at the
end of the compulsory conference”
(s 143(1)(b) of the 2008
15. The ACT filed its defence on 26 March 2015; it denied that Mr
Mitchell suffered the specific injuries alleged, or that any such
injuries were
caused by negligence on the part of the bus driver, and further asserted
contributory negligence on Mr Mitchell’s
part. However, the ACT did admit
that if it was established that it had breached the duty of care owed to the
appellant, that breach
of duty caused the appellant’s injury, loss and
damage. The defence was served by letter dated 31 March 2015.
2 April 2015 Mr Mitchell’s solicitor wrote to the ACT requiring it to
provide an MFN within 7 days.
17. On 22 April 2015 Mr Mitchell’s
solicitors filed an application in the Magistrates Court seeking judgment in his
favour under
pt 4.10 of the 2008 Act, because the ACT had failed to comply with
its obligation under s 141(3) of the 2008 Act to provide an MFN
to Mr Mitchell
following the compulsory conference.
Magistrates Court proceedings
18. Mr Mitchell’s application was heard by Magistrate
Morrison on 5 May 2015. His Honour dismissed the application on 23 June
(Benjamin Mitchell v Australian Capital Territory
[2015] ACTMC 1)
, ruling in
essence that s 141(3) of the 2008 Act only requires a defendant to provide a
final notice when the defendant declines
to make any offer of settlement.
19. By a notice of appeal dated 29 June 2015 the appellant appealed to the
Supreme Court from Magistrate Morrison’s decision.
On 19 October 2015,
that appeal was referred for hearing by a Full Bench.
Notice of appeal
20. The notice of appeal sets out 15 “appeal
grounds”, of which 13 are complaints about the decision given in the
Magistrates
Court, as follows:
The learned Magistrate at first instance (“
in concluding that a settlement offer other than a Mandatory Final Offer
”) or a Mandatory Final Notice
”) would undermine arrangements in the Act about costs
disclosure and/or undermine the Act’s encouragement of settlement
see particularly paragraph 64 of His Honour’s reasons for decision
c) Further, His Honour erred by failing to provide adequate reasons for his
conclusions referred to in ground b) above.
d) His Honour erred in rejecting the Plaintiff’s/Appellant’s
submissions as to the interpretation of “
denying liability
” by reference to s97 of the Act: see paragraphs 32 and 35
e) His Honour erred in concluding that specific costs consequences cannot be
described as unconscionable because they are a product
of the express design of
the scheme of the Act: see particularly paragraph 65
[sic] question begging to consider the express design of the scheme of the Act
prior to determining the correct interpretation
of the Act.
f) Further, the unconscionability issue submitted on before His Honour was that
it would be unconscionable for a Respondent to be
able to both deny liability
(thus forcing either withdrawal of a claim or a trial) and simultaneously being
able to engage the advantageous
costs consequences of s.155 of the Act by making
a non-zero dollar MFO. His Honour erred by failing to address this
submission.
g) His Honour erred in not providing adequate reasons for his concluding that
neither the ordinary meaning of the words of the Act
nor references to
legislative purpose justify the Plaintiff’s/Appellant’s submissions:
see particularly paragraphs 42
h) His Honour erred in not providing adequate reasons for his concluding that
reference in s.141(3) of the Act to a Respondent who
denies liability
” is a reference to a Respondent who “declines to make
any offer of settlement”: see particularly paragraph 68
i) His Honour erred in concluding that reference in s141(3) of the Act to a
Respondent who “
denies liability altogether
” is a reference
to a Respondent who “declines to make any offer of
settlement”:
Act precludes a Respondent from declining to make an offer of settlement:
s.141(2); see also s.140(1)(b) & s.97(1)(d) of the
Honour’s interpretation gives no meaning to and takes no account of the
mandatory nature of “
” in s.141(3) of the Act.
Honour’s interpretation of s.141(3) renders it nugatory or without any
work to do. His Honour’s interpretation amounts
to interpreting s.141(3),
including the effects pf s.141(4), to mean that if a party makes no offer they
must offer nothing. That
renders s141(3) of the Act all but
tautological.
j) His Honour erred in not accepting that by simply and
totally denying liability, without qualification, in its solicitor’s
letter of 31 May 2010 and in its filed
, the Respondent had denied
liability altogether.
k) His Honour erred in failing to give sufficient weight to the ordinary or
usual meaning of the word “altogether” in
the context of the phrase
denies liability altogether
l) His Honour erred in accepting the Respondent’s interpretation and the
implication His Honour sets out in paragraph 12
that a Respondent
may deny liability and then retain the choice or discretion after the compulsory
conference whether to make an
MFO or an MFN.
m) Further, His Honour erred in not adequately addressing the specific costs
consequences of his interpretation of s.141(3) of the
[Act], despite his general
allusion to such matters in paragraph 6
. For instance, His
Honour’s interpretation allows a Respondent to abuse the costs provisions
by forcing a Plaintiff to court
(by denying liability) but denying them costs
through nevertheless being able to utilise the costs provisions of s.155 by
a non-zero dollar MFO.
n) His Honour erred in failing to address the specific orders sought in the
Plaintiff’s/Appellant’s application.
21. Before this Court, some of the grounds, including in
particular grounds c), g), h) and n), were not pressed.
Nature of the appeal
22. This is an appeal by way of rehearing, described by
Refshauge J in Theodorelos v Nexus Products Pty Ltd
[2009] ACTSC 149
by way of rehearing is also one where the appeal court must determine whether
the decision of the body from which the appeal
is taken is wrong, by that body
falling into error of law, making a finding of fact that is clearly wrong or
exercising a discretion
on a wrong principle or in a way that is clearly
Ordinarily, however, facts found based on the
assessment of witnesses will not lightly be overturned.
appeal court usually has power to receive further evidence, though this is
ordinarily subject to some restrictions.
The appeal court may
also draw inferences itself from primary facts found by the body from which the
appeal is taken.
The decision, however, is not restricted to
making the decision that should have been made by the body from which the appeal
but in determining it the appeal court must have regard to the
circumstances which exist at the time of the appeal and by making
decision on these circumstances.
23. In the current case, the central issue is a legal one,
being whether the Magistrate erred in his interpretation of s 141 of the
Act, and the effective ground of appeal is that his Honour did so err.
24. The interpretation of legislation in the current context does not
involve a discretionary decision, and determining whether the
interpretation
adopted by the Magistrate is right or wrong is not conveniently undertaken by
considering a series of appeal grounds
alleging errors at various points in the
Magistrate’s consideration of the question. This is especially the case
in relation
to errors framed in terms of the sufficiency of the weight or
adequacy of the consideration given by his Honour to particular matters,
errors said to consist of rejecting particular submissions, which would
generally not provide appeal grounds even against decisions
involving the
exercise of discretions; see, for instance, Gageler J’s explanation, in
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37
249 CLR 571
– [53], of the
“categories of appellate intervention” in relation to a
discretionary decision of the kind dealt
with in House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
55 CLR 499.
25. Accordingly, I have considered and reached a conclusion about
how the disputed legislative provisions should be interpreted. In
explaining the
basis on which I reached that conclusion, I address the specified grounds of
appeal only to the extent necessary for
such explanation.
The argument
26. The argument that was made before the Magistrate on behalf
of Mr Mitchell was as follows:
(a) Section
141 applied because the claim was not settled at the compulsory conference.
(b) Mr Mitchell and the ACT both made written offers of settlement. Mr
Mitchell’s MFO amounted to $45,000. The ACT’s
offer specified
payments totalling $25,000.
(c) Because the ACT “denied liability
altogether”, it was neither required nor permitted to make an MFO under s
of the 2008 Act, and was instead required to give an MFN (s 141(3)),
which is taken to be an MFO of $0 (s 141(4)).
(d) The ACT, having failed to comply with the requirement to give an MFN, also
failed to comply with a “compliance notice”
given by Mr Mitchell on
2 April 2015 in reliance on s 158 of the 2008 Act.
(e) The conditions specified in s 159(1) of the 2008 Act were therefore
satisfied, and Mr Mitchell accordingly sought judgment in
his favour as provided
for in s 159(2)(b) of that Act.
(f) The Magistrate should, under s 161(1) of the 2008 Act, subject to
considering s 161(2), have made the order sought.
(g) Although the ACT’s offer is said by Mr Mitchell to have been
ineffective as an MFO, Mr Mitchell says it nevertheless falls
within the words
of s 162(2)(a) of the 2008 Act as the ACT’s “last written
(h) The amount of damages awarded should, under s 162(2), have been half the
total sum of the offers made by Mr Mitchell and by the
ACT after the compulsory
conference failed to resolve the matter.
(i) That award of damages also has costs consequences in Mr Mitchell’s
27. Many of the steps in this argument are not in dispute.
What is initially in dispute between the parties is the appellant’s
as set out in step [
] above, that is:
Because the ACT “denied liability
altogether”, it was neither required nor permitted to make an MFO under s
the 2008 Act, and was instead required to give an MFN (s 141(3)),
which is taken to be an MFO of $0 (s 141(4)).
28. Mr Mitchell’s proposition depends on a particular
interpretation of s 141(3). The Magistrate rejected that interpretation,
the ACT disputes it on the appeal. The interpretation of that provision is the
first matter for determination on this appeal.
29. Depending on the
Court’s conclusions about s 141, there may then be a question whether the
Court could or should exercise
the discretion under s 161 to enter judgment for
Mr Mitchell and, if that discretion is to be exercised, a further question about
the quantum of damages payable under that judgment. Alternatively, any question
whether and to what effect the discretion under
s 161 could or should be
exercised could be remitted to the Magistrates Court for determination.
Approach to statutory interpretation
30. In Project Blue Sky v ABA
[1998] HCA 28
194 CLR 355
Blue Sky) the plurality in the High Court (McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and
Hayne JJ) said at [69] – [71]:
Conflicting
statutory provisions should be reconciled so far as is possible
primary object of statutory construction is to construe the relevant provision
so that it is consistent with the language and
purpose of all the provisions of
the statute. The meaning of the provision must be determined "by reference to
the language of the
instrument viewed as a whole". In
Commissioner for
Railways (NSW) v Agalianos
, Dixon CJ pointed out that "the context, the
general purpose and policy of a provision and its consistency and fairness are
guides to its meaning than the logic with which it is constructed". Thus,
the process of construction must always begin by examining
the context of the
provision that is being construed.
legislative instrument must be construed on the prima facie basis that its
provisions are intended to give effect to harmonious
goals. Where conflict
appears to arise from the language of particular provisions, the conflict must
be alleviated, so far as possible,
by adjusting the meaning of the competing
provisions to achieve that result which will best give effect to the purpose and
of those provisions while maintaining the unity of all the statutory
provisions. Reconciling conflicting provisions will often require
the court "to
determine which is the leading provision and which the subordinate provision,
and which must give way to the other".
Only by determining the hierarchy of the
provisions will it be possible in many cases to give each provision the meaning
gives effect to its purpose and language while maintaining the unity
of the statutory scheme.
Furthermore,
a court construing a statutory provision must strive to give meaning to every
word of the provision. In
The Commonwealth v Baume
Griffith CJ cited
to support the proposition that it was "a known rule in the
interpretation of Statutes that such a sense is to be made upon the whole
that no clause, sentence, or word shall prove superfluous, void, or
insignificant, if by any other construction they may all be
made useful and
pertinent".
(citations omitted)
31. Other relevant comments were made in Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty
Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue (Northern Territory)
[2009] HCA 41
CLR 27 (Alcan)
by Hayne, Heydon, Crennan and Kiefel JJ, who
This Court has stated on many
occasions that the task of statutory construction must begin with a
consideration of the text itself.
Historical considerations and extrinsic
materials cannot be relied on to displace the clear meaning of the text. The
language which
has actually been employed in the text of legislation is the
surest guide to legislative intention. The meaning of the text may require
consideration of the context, which includes the general purpose and policy of a
provision, in particular the mischief it is seeking
(citations omitted)
32. In Alcan, French CJ noted at [4]:
The starting point in
consideration of the first question is the ordinary and grammatical sense of the
statutory words to be interpreted
having regard to their context and the
legislative purpose. That proposition accords with the approach to construction
characterised
by Gaudron J in
Corporate Affairs Commission (NSW) v Yuill
as: "dictated by elementary considerations of fairness, for, after all, those
who are subject to the law's commands are entitled
to conduct themselves on the
basis that those commands have meaning and effect according to ordinary grammar
and usage." In so saying,
it must be accepted that context and legislative
purpose will cast light upon the sense in which the words of the statute are to
be read. Context is here used in a wide sense referable, inter alia, to the
existing state of the law and the mischief which the
statute was intended to
(citations omitted)
33. Finally, I note that in Project Blue Sky, Brennan CJ said
at [13] that:
the interests of persons
concerned in the litigation and the assumptions made in the rival submissions
cannot divert the Court from
its duty to construe the statute. "Judges are more
than mere selectors between rival views", said Lord Wilberforce in
Sydney Mitchell & Co
, "they are entitled to and do think for
themselves".
(citations omitted)
34. In this case each party has, not surprisingly, made
submissions aimed at establishing an interpretation that best suits its current
position; those submissions have not necessarily promoted an objective
consideration of the legislation that stands to be construed.
The task has not
been aided by some apparent misunderstandings or misdescriptions of a
party’s position that have been relied
on by the other party in
submissions. To a considerable extent I have had to think for myself, and in the
end have not adopted the
entirety of either party’s submissions.
Section 141 in context
35. Although s 141 is the provision directly raised by the
first part of this appeal, ss 97 and 155 of the 2008 Act are significant
interpretation of s 141; various other provisions of that Act, in particular ss
84, 96 and 269, may be relevant to that question.
Sections 97, 141 and 155 were
relevantly as follows:
to try to resolve motor accident claim
(1) A respondent must,
not later than 6 months after the day the respondent receives, or is taken
to have received, a complying notice
of claim for a motor accident
(a) take any reasonable steps necessary to find out about the motor accident
for the motor accident claim; and
(b) tell the claimant, in writing—
(i) whether liability is admitted or denied; and
(ii) if contributory negligence is claimed—the degree of the
contributory negligence expressed as a percentage; and
the claimant—
(i) made an offer of settlement in the notice of claim—tell the claimant
whether the respondent accepts or rejects the offer;
(ii) did not make an offer of settlement in the notice of claim—invite
the claimant to make a written offer of settlement;
a fair and reasonable estimate of the damages to which the claimant would be
entitled in a proceeding for the motor accident
claim against the respondent;
(e) either—
(i) make a written offer, or counteroffer, of settlement to the claimant
setting out in detail the basis on which the offer, or
counteroffer, is made;
(ii) settle the motor accident claim by accepting an offer made by the
(2) An offer, or counteroffer, of settlement must be
accompanied by a copy of medical reports, assessments of cognitive, functional
or vocational capacity and all other material, including documents relevant to
assessing economic loss, in the offerer’s possession
or control that may
(3) A respondent or claimant to whom a written offer, or counteroffer, of
settlement is made must, unless a response to the offer
is to be made under
subsection (1) (c), respond in writing to the offer not later than
3 months after the day the respondent or claimant
receives the offer,
indicating acceptance or rejection of the offer.
(4) An admission of liability by a respondent under this section is not
binding on the respondent—
(a) in relation to another claim; and
(b) at all if it later appears the admission was induced by fraud.
A respondent may be obliged to make early payments for an
injured person’s medical expenses whether or not liability is admitted
the motor accident claim (see ch 3).
If a respondent admits liability for a motor accident claim,
the respondent may be obliged to pay for the injured person’s medical
expenses and rehabilitation services (see pt 4.6).
final offers
(1) This section applies if, for a motor accident
(a) ...; or
(b) the motor accident claim is not settled at the compulsory conference.
(2) The claimant and the respondent for the motor accident claim must
exchange written final offers (each of which is a
mandatory final offers
(3) However, if a respondent denies liability altogether, the respondent
must give the claimant a written notice of denial (a
mandatory final
(4) If the respondent gives the claimant a mandatory final notice, for this
Act, the respondent is taken to have given the claimant
a mandatory final offer
Costs—small
awards of damages—generally
(1) This section applies if a
court awards $50 000 or less in damages in a proceeding (other than an appellate
proceeding) based on
a motor accident claim.
does not include damages for non-economic loss
(see s (5)).
(2) If the court awards $30 000 or less in damages, the court must apply the
following principles:
(a) if the amount awarded is less than the claimant’s mandatory final
offer but more than the respondent’s mandatory
final offer, no costs are
to be awarded;
(b) if the amount awarded is equal to, or more than, the claimant’s
mandatory final offer, costs must be awarded to the claimant
prescribed by regulation as from the date on which the proceeding began (but no
award is to be made for costs up to that
(c) if the amount awarded is equal to, or less than, the respondent’s
mandatory final offer, costs must be awarded to the respondent
as prescribed by
regulation.
(3) If the court awards more than $30 000 but not more than $50 000 in
damages, the court must apply the following principles:
(a) if the amount awarded is less than the claimant’s mandatory final
offer but more than the respondent’s mandatory
final offer, costs must be
awarded to the claimant in accordance with the
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act
, chapter 14, up to the maximum amount prescribed by regulation or, if
no amount is prescribed, $2 500;
(b) if the amount awarded is equal to, or more than, the claimant’s
mandatory final offer, costs must be awarded to the claimant
as follows:
(i) costs up to the date on which the proceeding began must be awarded in
accordance with the
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
, chapter 14, up to the
maximum amount prescribed by regulation or, if no amount is prescribed, $2
(ii) costs on or after the date on which the proceeding began must be
awarded on an indemnity basis;
(c) if the amount awarded is equal to, or less than, the respondent’s
mandatory final offer, costs must be awarded as follows:
(i) costs up to the date on which the proceeding began must be awarded to
the claimant in accordance with the
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
14, up to the maximum amount prescribed by regulation or, if no amount is
prescribed, $2 500;
(ii) costs on or after the date on which the proceeding began must be
awarded to the respondent in accordance with the
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act
, chapter 14.
(4) This section is subject to
section 156.
(5) In this section:
does not include damages for pain and suffering.
36. In summary,
requires a respondent to a motor accident
claim, within 6 months after receiving a complying notification of that claim,
various steps intended to facilitate resolution of that claim, and in
particular to tell the claimant whether it admits or denies
liability; that
advice may be accompanied by a claim of contributory negligence, but there is no
suggestion that any other details
of the respondent’s attitude to the
claim are required at that point.
Section 155
, in general terms, provides
costs consequences in cases that have not resolved during the pre-trial
processes but in which the claimant,
having taken the claim to court, obtains an
award of up to $50,000. In such a case, a respondent who has made a very low MFO
is unlikely
to be the beneficiary of a costs order, and may have significant
costs awarded against it.
Conclusion: what does
38. For the reasons set out below, I am satisfied:
a respondent who “denies liability altogether” is a respondent who,
as required by s 97(1) of the 2008 Act, has
told the claimant in writing that
liability is denied (s 97(1)(b)(i)) and has not told the claimant in
writing that contributory
negligence is claimed (s 97(1)(b)(ii); and
(b) that if a respondent denies liability altogether, then, if and when s 141
becomes applicable as set out in s 141(1), s 141(3)
means that the
respondent is not permitted to give an MFO under s 141(2), but must give an
MFN under s 141(3), which is in turn taken
to be an MFO of $0 (s
39. Given the matters raised in the course of argument, I note
that I am also satisfied:
(a) that whether a respondent “denies liability
altogether” depends on what the respondent has told the claimant under
97(1)(b), and does not depend on what might at any point emerge in a defence
filed by the respondents in answer to a statement
of claim; and
(b) that there is no basis in the 2008 Act for interpreting references in either
of ss 97 and 141 to admitting or denying liability
as references to
admitting or denying:
(i) negligence;
(ii) a breach
of a duty of care;
(iii) responsibility
for any particular injuries suffered by the claimant; or
(iv) any other
particular aspect of the claimant’s claim.
Reasons for conclusions
40. Both parties made submissions based on textual analysis,
including some comparisons with other legislation, and on the underlying
purposes or objects of the 2008 Act. Those submissions, and relevant appeal
grounds, are addressed as appropriate in the discussion
The Magistrate’s approach
41. In his judgment, the Magistrate said:
Hausefeld’s [sic] submission is in these terms –
denying liability altogether may be a reference to a simple denial under section
97(1)(b)(i) as opposed to a reduction
in liability under section 97(1)(b)(ii) in
which the respondent’s/defendant’s liability is reduced because of
contributory
negligence by the claimant/plaintiff
I understand the submission, it points to the difference between on the one hand
a bare denial of liability and on the other hand
an admission of breach of duty
of care accompanied by a claim of contributory negligence – with the
suggestion that the use
of the composite expression “denies liability
altogether” captures only the former.
42. Curiously given his comments at [34] (see [
] below), his Honour appears at [33] to
have assumed that the "reduction in liability” described by counsel must
involve “an
admission of breach of duty of care accompanied by a claim of
contributory negligence”, rather than a denial and a claim of
contributory
negligence (as to the availability of which, see the discussion at [
] below). I note that in the
current case, the advice required by s 97(1)(b) and given on behalf of the
ACT in the letter mentioned
referred to that provision and went on:
I am instructed to deny
liability on behalf of the respondent in respect of [the alleged incident
43. It seems likely that notifications under s 97(1)(b) that
include a claim of contributory negligence generally also use the exact
the provision rather than relying on other concepts such as breach of duty. I
am not persuaded that re-framing the references
to denials of liability in s 97
as references to admissions (or even denials) of breach of duty was a useful
step in his Honour’s
attempt to interpret the various references to
denials of liability (see my further comments at [
44. His Honour concluded, in
effect, that a respondent who “denies liability altogether” is
simply a respondent who “declines
to make any offer of settlement”;
at [68] he said:
end result my conclusion is that the proper construction of section 141(3) is
that pressed for by the respondent – that
is that the reference to a
respondent which “denies liability altogether” is intended to mean a
respondent which declines
to make any offer of settlement. It is only where no
offer of settlement is forthcoming that a respondent is then obliged to give
mandatory final notice, and will be taken to have made a mandatory final offer
45. That is, his Honour has read the reference to a respondent
who “denies liability altogether” as shorthand for (or
a definition
of) respondents who, irrespective of how they have conducted themselves to that
point, including under s 97, choose,
when s 141 becomes relevant, to give
mandatory final notices instead of making settlement offers. This interpretation
of s 141(3)
renders the provision as, in effect, reading:
No respondent is required to
give a mandatory final notice, but any respondent [or perhaps, “any
respondent who denies liability
in any way”] may give a claimant a written
notice of denial (a
mandatory final notice
) and a respondent who
does so is a
respondent who denies liability
46. There are various problems with his Honour’s
conclusion, but the most obvious ones as a matter of interpretation are:
(a) that in concluding that anyone
give a mandatory final notice, his Honour gives no
significance to the word “must” in s 141(3);
(b) that there is no apparent legislative purpose or rationale for using the
expression “respondent who denies liability altogether”
as a phrase
to describe a respondent who has given a mandatory final notice; the phrase is
not used anywhere else in the 2008 Act,
so has no function as a defined term,
and is neither shorter, simpler nor more easily comprehended than the concept
which, in the
Magistrate’s view, it seeks to describe (that is, a
“respondent who has given a mandatory final notice”); and
(c) that if s 141(3) has the meaning determined by his Honour, then both it and
s 141(4) have no purpose at all: there is nothing
in subs 141(2) which
would, in the absence of s 141(3), prevent a respondent making an MFO of $0
anyway (and if there were any uncertainty
provision stating that an MFO could be for $0 would not look like ss 141(3) and
47. That is, as noted on behalf of Mr Mitchell, the
interpretation adopted by his Honour renders s 141(3) nugatory or tautological
(or perhaps both).
48. An alternative reading of s 141(2) is that the
reference to a respondent who “denies liability altogether” defines
the class of respondents to whom the provision applies and who are therefore
subject to the obligation (identified by the use of
“must”) to give
a mandatory final notice rather than a mandatory final offer. This reading not
only accords far better
with the structure and words of the provision than does
his Honour’s reading, but it gives the provision some work to do:
specifically,
a respondent who denies liability altogether (thus rendering it
likely that the matter will go to trial) is forced to commit itself
to the costs
consequences of that approach (at [
above) by making an offer of $0.
49. This reading, however, in treating the
reference to respondents who deny liability “altogether” as defining
of s 141(3) rather than simply giving an after-the-fact title to
respondents who choose to operate under that provision, does raise
the question
of the meaning to be given to denying liability “altogether”.
Need to give meaning to “altogether”
50. I agree with the parties (and with the High Court in
Project Blue Sky) that it is necessary to look for a construction of the
provisions concerned that gives some meaning to “altogether” in
51. Counsel for Mr Mitchell said that the reference in s
141(3) to denying liability “altogether” implies that there is
under the legislation for something that could be regarded as a partial denial
of liability.
52. Counsel for the ACT, however, argued that the expression
“denies liability altogether” in s 141(3) of the 2008 Act
be construed differently from the expression “liability is denied”
in s 97(1). Any other approach, counsel said,
would render the word
“altogether” superfluous, offending the principle that “a word
used purposively by the legislature”
is not to be treated as meaningless.
53. In particular, counsel for the ACT submitted that the construction of s
141(3) of the 2008 Act for which Mr Mitchell contends
would have precisely the
effect of rendering “altogether” superfluous (although this
submission may have responded not
to Mr Mitchell’s submissions made on the
appeal but to those made in the Magistrates Court). However, I reject any
submission,
if such was intended, that “altogether” is rendered
superfluous by a conclusion:
the legislation seems to contemplate two forms of denial of liability; and
(b) that a denial under s 97(1)(b), if it includes a claim of contributory
negligence, is not a denial “altogether”.
54. That is, the denials of liability mentioned in ss 97 and
141 fall into two categories – the denials described in s 141(3)
subset of the denials available under s 97(1)(b); they are not the only denials
available under s 97(1)(b). Counsel for the
ACT is correct that the two
expressions (“denies” and “denies altogether”) must be
given different meanings
in order to give meaning to “altogether”,
but not correct in suggesting that the two different meanings are or must be
distinct and unrelated and with no overlapping content.
55. Section 97 does
not provide for something involving a more forceful denial than the
“bare” denial under s 97(1)(b)(i)
– but it does provide for
something less than an unqualified denial, being a qualified denial of the kind
permitted by s 97(1)(b)(ii).
Once the two forms of denial are identified as
qualified and unqualified, an unqualified denial can readily be described as a
“altogether”, in contrast to a qualified denial.
note that, in the Magistrates Court, Mr Mitchell’s counsel referred to a
“simple” denial under s 97(1)(b)(i)
of the 2008 Act, but the
Magistrate referred to this as a “bare” denial rather than, as I
prefer, an “unqualified”
denial. This may have influenced his
Honour’s conclusion: mention of a “bare” denial suggests that
the alternative
is a more substantial denial, whereas the alternative to an
“unqualified” denial is clearly a less substantial denial,
qualified denial. However, the expression “bare denial”, although
used to describe the strongest denial available
under s 97, is not obviously an
appropriate alternative description of a “denial
altogether”.
57. This interpretation of “altogether” as
identifying an unqualified denial under s 97(1)(b) fits neatly into my
description
] above of the work
done by s 141(3) as I read it. The claim of contributory negligence suggests
that there may still be room for
a compromise of the claimant’s claim, and
may therefore justify giving the respondent one more opportunity to make a real
(that is, an offer of a sum of money) before the matter proceeds to
58. For those reasons, I consider that a respondent who has denied
liability under s 97(1)(b)(i) and has not claimed contributory
under s 97(1)(b)(ii) is a respondent who “denies liability
altogether” for the purposes of s 141(3).
Significance of details of respondent’s
59. Much argument before us, both oral and written, focussed on
the various bases on which a respondent might deny liability, and
implications of different kinds of denials for the operation of the provisions
concerned. I am not persuaded that this focus
was useful.
Relationship between attitude to liability and claims of
contributory negligence
60. Discussion in the Magistrates Court proceedings and before
this Court revealed a degree of uncertainty about the correct relationship
between a respondent’s attitude to liability and a respondent’s
claim of contributory negligence.
61. As drafted, s 97(1)(b) appears to
contemplate not only an unqualified admission and an unqualified denial of
liability (s 97(1)(b)(i))
but also the options of a denial accompanied by a
claim of contributory negligence and an admission accompanied by a claim of
contributory
negligence (s 97(1)(b)(ii)). The opportunity, or requirement,
provided in s 97(1)(b)(ii) to identify any claim of contributory negligence
is not restricted to only one of the cases described in s 97(1)(b)(i);
rather, the addition of a claim of contributory negligence
is on the face of the
provision available whether it is associated with an admission or a denial of
62. This may reflect the fact that a claim of contributory
negligence may have a different significance in different cases: when coupled
with an admission, the claim may be aimed at reducing the quantum of the
respondent’s admitted liability, but when coupled
with a denial of
liability, the claim may be an attempt to preserve a second line of defence in
case the denial of liability is unsuccessful.
Given these two possibilities,
there is no obvious reason why s 97(1)(b) should not, as its structure
suggests, be read as permitting
claims of contributory negligence to be made
whether liability is denied or admitted.
Contributory negligence claim implies denial of
63. In Barker v Gifford and Anor
[2005] ACTSC 55
192 FLR 347
, Harper M said at [10]:
note in passing that it would have been open to [the original NRMA claims
officer] to admit breach of duty of care rather than liability.
An admission in
such terms is frequently made by NRMA, and it is reasonably clear that claims
officers understand the distinction.
An admission of breach of duty of care is
not inconsistent with an allegation that the other party was guilty of some
contributory negligence. An admission of liability is inconsistent
with any such allegation.
64. It is worth pointing out that the 2008 Act did not exist
when Barker was decided. That Act made quite significant changes to the
dealing with motor vehicle accident claims; among other things, it deals with
admissions and denials of liability, not admissions
or denials of breach of duty
65. Harper M’s comments were referred to by the Magistrate
in his judgment at [34], in which he said:
distinction between admitting breach of duty of care and admitting liability is
referred to by his Honour Master Harper in
Barker v Gifford and Anor
[2005] ACTSC 55
His Honour there made
the observation that, as a matter of legal principle, an admission of liability
is inconsistent with an assertion
of contributory negligence. In doing so his
Honour is giving a precise and technically correct meaning to the expressions to
66. The proposition set out by Harper M and adopted by
Magistrate Morrison was that an admission of liability is as a matter of legal
principle inconsistent with an allegation of contributory negligence.
Contributory negligence claim implies admission of
67. The ACT on the other hand, while conceding that the
language and structure of s 97(1)(b) permit a respondent to admit liability
claim contributory negligence, rejected as incongruous the possibility of a
denial of liability with a contributory negligence
claim. The ACT said at [41]
of its written submissions:
for the purposes of s.97, the respondent to a claim seeks only to put
contributory negligence in issue, then “liability”
” subject to a reduction of the claimant’s
damages for contributory negligence,
“denied” [s
97(1)(b)(i)], and the degree of contributory negligence claimed by the
respondent is stated as a percentage
in the response to the claim
[s.97(1)(b)(ii)].
(emphasis in original)
68. The ACT’s submission has some logic, given that as a
matter of language (if not of “legal principle”) a
respondent’s
reference to “contributory” negligence by a
claimant seems to imply that the claimant was not the only negligent participant
in the motor accident, and that the respondent might be liable to the claimant
to an extent.
69. We were referred to Smalley v Motor Accident Authority of
New South Wales
[2013] NSWCA 318
85 NSWLR 580
, which dealt with the
Accidents Compensation Act 1999
(NSW). That Act (the NSW Act) sets up a very
different scheme dealing with claims arising out of motor accidents, but
contains some
provisions not unlike provisions of the 2008 Act. In that case,
the NSW Court of Appeal seemed to assume that a claim of contributory
would commonly be made in conjunction with an admission of liability (Leeming
JA, with whom Meagher and Barrett JJA agreed,
Contributory negligence claim may accompany admission or denial
of liability
70. Having regard to the apparent confusion in the relevant law
(or at least among the lawyers involved in this matter), I do not
ACT’s submission that the only options under s 97(1)(b) are to deny, to
admit, or to admit and claim contributory
negligence. The words and structure of
the provision contemplate a fourth option (denial with a claim of contributory
negligence),
and it seems that “as a matter of legal principle”,
this option is as legitimate as the option of admission and a contributory
negligence claim.
71. Once it is accepted that a denial of liability may be
made under s 97(1)(b) with or without a claim of contributory negligence,
there are two forms of denial available under s 97(1)(b), and scope for
identifying one of them as a denial of liability “altogether”
– or, perhaps more accurately, for identifying one of them (the denial
with a contributory negligence claim) as not a denial
of liability
“altogether”.
72. This in turn permits s 141(3) to be read as
referring to a denial with no mention of contributory negligence, while a denial
a claim of contributory negligence does not exclude a respondent from
making an MFO, or from the costs benefits that may come with
Nature of denials of liability
73. Mr Mitchell made the following problematic
submissions:
a partial denial of liability would be constituted by confining the acceptance
of liability to liability for particular injuries;
(b) that a denial of one or more of the elements of liability (as the ACT did in
its pleaded defence), by denying breach of duty
and the specific injury or
damage caused, while conceding causation, would amount to “[denying]
liability altogether”.
74. The ACT argued that a respondent who has denied liability
does not necessarily deny that the claimant has suffered harm, only
respondent has been negligent, and that a respondent who denies negligence is
not required to admit or deny harm to the
claimant. The ACT also said that
these propositions are “completely consistent” with the defence in
this case. These
propositions may be correct, but they do not seem to
75. Mr Mitchell’s submissions are problematic, and the
ACT’s propositions do not seem to matter, for reasons set out below.
also not clear that the distinction drawn by Harper M between denying
liability and denying breach of duty of care has any
significance in the context
of the provisions of the 2008 Act dealing with processes before court
proceedings are instituted.
Timing issues
76. First, under s 97 of the 2008 Act, the initial indication
of the respondent’s position requires an admission or denial of
not an admission or denial of breach of duty or of negligence, or any other kind
of admission or denial in relation to
any other element of a respondent’s
77. Both parties seem to refer to versions of “denial”
that would emerge only in the pleadings. However, in the normal
events, and even in this case, the obligations under s 97 and 141 of the
2008 Act have arisen before a defence is filed.
78. Section 84 precludes the
commencement of a “court proceeding” in relation to a motor accident
before a notice of claim
is given to the respondent under Pt 4.2 of the 2008
Act, and s 96 prevents the claimant proceeding with action until a complying
notice of claim (defined in s 76 of the 2008 Act) has been given. Accordingly,
since a denial “altogether” needs to
be recognisable at the point
when s 141 applies, the meaning to be given to the reference in s 141(3) to
denying liability “altogether”
cannot depend on the details, and any
qualifications, of the defence that may emerge when pleadings are exchanged
(including qualifications
of the kind described in the defence mentioned at [
79. Secondly, there is no
basis in the legislation to assume that any explanation of a denial will or
should be included in the s
97(1)(b) advice. Neither s 97 nor s 141
contemplates a detailed exposition of which parts of the claimant’s claim
are disputed,
conceded or not denied. Section 97 requires an admission, a
denial or a qualified admission or denial (qualified, that is, by a
reference to
contributory negligence).
80. I accept the ACT’s submission that s 97
does not require, or contemplate, any detailed dissection of the denial or the
and adopt counsel’s description of s 97 as “a blunt
instrument for a specific purpose”. A choice of one of the
available under s 97(1)(b) is enough to underpin the series of exchanges,
discussions, negotiations and other actions required
or permitted by the
subsequent parts of Ch 4 of the 2008 Act, up to and including Pt 4.8 dealing
with mandatory final offers.
81. I note in this context that the roughly
equivalent New South Wales provision (s 81 of the NSW Act) requires notice of
the insurer admits or denies liability (at s 81(1)), but refers at s
81(2) to an insurer admitting liability “for only part
82. The 2008 Act, however, does not refer to any qualification
of the s 97 admission or denial except by reference to contributory
negligence. The fact that s 97(1) does not apparently preclude the respondent
providing an explanation of the admission or denial
required does not help Mr
Mitchell’s argument, or render the ACT’s argument useful. As already
noted, a denial “altogether”
needs to be recognisable at the point
when s 141 applies, so the meaning to be given to the reference in s 141(3) to
denying liability
“altogether” cannot depend on a detailed
explanation of the respondent’s position that might, but need not, be
included with the s 97(1)(b) advice.
83. The interpretation of legislative
provisions must involve consideration of the provisions in the context of the
legislation more
broadly. However, that consideration does not in my view
require the provisions to be interpreted having regard to questions of
provisions might operate in particular factual circumstances:
would not have existed if other parts of the legislation had been complied with;
(b) where parties have taken it upon themselves to go beyond the requirements of
the legislation.
Legislative purposes
84. The approach set out in ss 97 and 141 to the relevant
stages of the negotiation process may be surprising when compared with earlier
approaches to resolving motor vehicle claims through litigation, but the
provisions seem to be aimed at producing a speedy progress
through the
pre-litigation processes, without too much detail needing to be pursued. The use
of the “blunt instrument”
constituted by s 97 may be a fundamental
aspect of the scheme aimed at simplifying and speeding up the processes
generally and, especially,
aimed at avoiding an unnecessarily sophisticated
approach to the fine details of a dispute in cases in which, realistically,
is little scope for argument.
85. I note also that even where there
has been a denial of liability in some form under s 97(1)(b), the other
provisions of s 97 require
the respondent:
estimate the claimant’s damages, make a settlement offer or counter-offer
to the claimant or accept the claimant’s
(b) if the respondent makes an offer, to provide all relevant medical reports,
assessments and other relevant material (including
documents relating to
economic loss) to the claimant.
86. That is, even a respondent who, for s 141 purposes, denies
liability “altogether” is required to engage in a process
exchanging information, narrowing the issues and, ideally, settling the matter.
It seems likely that by the time the processes
begun by s 97 are finished, a
large proportion of claims will have been settled, and only the relatively
difficult matters will reach
the s 141 point. At that point, the following
arrangements, which are consistent with my interpretation of s 141(3), would
to make sense:
(a) that in general, remaining respondents are obliged
to make an MFO, and to make it a realistic offer, to avoid:
(v) first, the
risks of paying more than the claimant would have been willing to accept; and
(vi) secondly,
the risks of offering substantially less than a properly advised claimant would
be willing to accept, such that litigation
becomes almost inevitable and there
is a good chance that a court will make a higher award and adverse cost
consequences will follow;
(b) that those respondents who deny liability “altogether”, and who
have not managed to resolve the matter before the
end of the compulsory
conference, are obliged to confirm that position in a context in which, again,
there are clear costs consequences
if their obduracy is not found by a court to
be justified.
87. The ACT’s argument that the objects of the 2008 Act
would be furthered by allowing the respondent one last chance, after
compulsory conference, to compromise the matter may overlook the benefits of
pushing the respondent to settle before the MFO
stage rather than allowing the
matter to slide into a situation in which litigation becomes the only real
option for the claimant.
In the current case, for instance, the offer the ACT
ultimately tried to make after the compulsory conference might have been made
somewhat earlier if the ACT had realised the risk that the only offer it could
make after that conference was one with potentially
significant negative costs
implications.
The words of s 141
88. The appellant made the following submissions about the text
of ss 97 and 141 of the 2008 Act:
contrary to the findings of the Magistrate at [67], an admission of liability
ought to be read as a pre-requisite to the
making of a settlement offer under
s 141(2) of that Act. Section 141 stipulates a number of conditions as to
when and how a mandatory
final offer may be made, and is to be contrasted with
s 97 of the 2008 Act, which permits a respondent to make settlement offers
in a broader range of circumstances.
(b) That a respondent retains no discretion as to whether to make a mandatory
final offer pursuant to s 141(2) or provide a mandatory
final notice pursuant to
s 141(3). The contrary interpretation of s 141 apparently embraced by the
Magistrate takes no account of
the presence of the word “must” in s
141(3) of the 2008 Act.
89. The ACT argued:
Mr Mitchell contended before the Magistrate that a respondent to a claim is
required to admit breach of duty as a precondition
for an entitlement to make an
(b) that if this is what s 141 means, it would say so.
90. I agree with Mr Mitchell’s propositions to the effect
that s 141 is more restrictive than s 97 about the circumstances in
relevant offers may be made, and that the use of the word “must” in
s 141(3) cannot be ignored in interpreting
the provision.
91. I note again
that s 97(1) refers to liability, not breach of duty; for reasons set out at [
] above, if Mr Mitchell did make any
contention in the form described at [
] above, I reject it.
92. However, I
also note Mr Mitchell’s submission that the Magistrate mi-stated his
position as being that the respondent must
admit breach of duty before an MFO
can be made, whereas his real (or current) position is that “some
liability” must
be admitted. As already indicated, I share the view that
moving away from the concept of admitting or denying liability and referring
instead to aspects of liability such as breach of duty is not helpful in
determining a meaning for the provisions concerned. I have
in fact gone beyond
Mr Mitchell’s submissions in concluding that a denial of liability with a
claim of contributory negligence
does not amount to a denial of liability
“altogether”.
93. If my interpretation of s 141 at [
] above is correct, then what is required
for an entitlement to make an MFO is any written advice under s 97(1)(b) that
does not constitute
a denial “altogether” – that is,
admission of liability, whether qualified or unqualified; or
(b) a denial of liability qualified by a claim of contributory
negligence.
94. That is exactly what s 141 does say, when it provides for
an MFO to be made by any respondent except one who denies liability
“altogether”.
Comparisons with Queensland legislation
Source of “altogether”
95. As the then Treasurer noted, when the Bill that became the
2008 Act was introduced into the Legislative Assembly, Ch 3 of the
“derived from equivalent Queensland provisions, coupled with provisions
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
[to provide] a new structure for dealing
with CTP insurance claims”. The “equivalent Queensland
provisions” appear
to be provisions included in either or both of the
Motor Accident Insurance Act 1994
(Qld) (the Queensland Act) and the
Injuries Proceedings Act 2002
(Qld) as in force before the ACT Bill was
introduced in 2007.
96. Chapter 3 of the Bill contained clause 89, which
became s 97 of the 2008 Act, and also clause 135, which became s 141 of the 2008
97. The Queensland Act contained s 51C, part of which appears to have
been the model for s 141; it was in 2007 relevantly as follows:
Parties to exchange mandatory final offers if claim not settled at compulsory
(1) If a motor vehicle accident claim is not settled at the compulsory
conference, each party must (unless the court has dispensed
obligation) exchange written final offers—
(a) at the conference; or
(b) if the conference has been dispensed with—within 14 days after the
date of the agreement or order dispensing with the conference.
(2) A written final offer required under subsection (1) is called a
mandatory final
(3) A mandatory final offer for $50000 or less is to be exclusive of
(5) Even though an insurer denies liability altogether, the insurer must
nevertheless make a mandatory final offer but, in that event,
the offer is to be
expressed as an offer of $nil.
(9) The court must not read the mandatory final offers until it has decided
(10) However, the court must (where relevant) have regard to the mandatory
final offers in making a decision about costs.
98. A comparison with the equivalent Queensland provision
raises some difficult questions for the interpretation of s 141 of the 2008
It is apparent that subs 141(3) and (4) of the 2008 Act are intended to have at
least a superficially similar effect to s 51C(5)
of the Queensland Act, and in
particular it seems clear that the Queensland origins of s 141 explain the use
of “altogether”.
However, it is not so clear that the ACT version
of the Queensland provisions has the same meaning as the Queensland
provisions.
99. Section 141(2) requires MFOs to be given by the parties if
the matter is not resolved at the compulsory conference. Section 141(3)
out an exception to that provision if a respondent “denies liability
altogether”. That is, the respondent’s
denial of liability
“altogether” is the condition for excluding the respondent from s
141(2) and subjecting the respondent
to a separate requirement to give an MFN.
100. By s 141(4), the MFN is taken to be an MFO for $0: this means that, if
an award of damages is made by a court, the costs provisions
in s 155 will be
applied as if the respondent had made the lowest possible MFO, which in turn
means that the respondent may suffer
adverse costs consequences of some
101. Section 51C(5) of the Queensland Act, however, is framed
differently, although it reaches the same end point. Respondents who
“deny liability altogether” are not excluded from the MFO
provisions. Rather, the provision refers to such respondents,
and uses language
that emphasises that despite their particular characteristic of “denial
altogether”, they remain subject
to the MFO requirement: even though they
deny liability, and even though they deny it altogether, they must nevertheless
MFO, and that MFO must be of $nil. On one reading, the denial of
liability is not the condition for the application of a separate
provisions, but is simply a characteristic of a category of respondents for whom
the application of the MFO requirement may
need to be confirmed more
emphatically.
102. However, despite the use of words that seem to emphasise
that respondents who deny liability “altogether” remain
class required to make MFOs, those respondents are in fact subject to a
different requirement from other members of the
class, to the extent that they
are obliged to make MFOs of $nil.
103. With one possible exception, the
different drafting approaches taken in the ACT and Queensland do not seem to
have any significance
in the current case. The Queensland provision, like the
ACT one, by the use of “must”, clearly articulates the imposition
an obligation on respondents who deny liability “altogether” and
therefore raises the need to identify such respondents
by explaining the meaning
to be given to “altogether”. The question arising in this case
(whether the respondent was
required to give an MFN) would also have arisen in
Queensland, although it would have been framed as whether the respondent was
to give an MFO of $nil. It does not seem, however, that there is any
104. The exception mentioned above is that the Project Blue Sky
obligation to give meaning to “every word in the provision”
relation to the Queensland provision be satisfied by concluding that
“altogether” in that provision simply contributes
to the emphatic
form of the provision also shown by the use of “even though”
(instead of “although” or simply
“where”), and
“nevertheless” (which provides emphasis but is otherwise
unnecessary). In the ACT provision,
“altogether” cannot be explained
in the same way, and accordingly the court in this case must find a meaning for
altogether” that is different from
105. Finally in this context I note that even if I were
satisfied that the ACT provision was, when drafted and put before the
legislature,
intended to mean the same as the Queensland provision, it would not
be appropriate to adopt, simply for that reason, whatever meaning
been given to the provision in Queensland. First, my obligation is to interpret
s 141(3) in context, that being the Act
in which it sits and if necessary the
ACT statute book more generally, as well as matters external to the legislation
such as policy
considerations. Whether the drafter intended to produce a
provision that might mean something different from the Queensland provision,
whether he or she was simply succumbing to “the passion to alter someone
else's draft" (apparently, and perhaps apocryphally,
described by HG Wells as a
passion equalled by no other passion in the world), is irrelevant: what matters
is what the provision
now means in the ACT legislation.
106. In this respect
the Queensland legislation does not seem to help in the interpretation of s 141
of the 2008 Act.
Reference to “extent to which liability is
107. The Magistrate referred to the form of s 269 as suggesting
“a lack of technical precision” in the 2008 Act, saying:
269 of the Act also makes reference to admission or denial of liability. The
section imposes a reporting obligation on insurers,
requiring them to provide
certain information to the Compulsory Third Party regulator established by the
example following the section notes that, in accordance with the section, an
insurer may be required to provide “
information about whether liability
was admitted by the insurer, when liability was admitted or denied and, if
liability was admitted,
the extent to which liability was
reference in the example to the extent of [sic] to which liability was admitted
is curious. Section 101 of the Act makes reference
“liability” and “quantum” making it unlikely that use of
the words “the extent to which liability
[was] admitted” is intended
as some reference to some level of admitted quantum – something which is
probably unlikely
in any event.
is possible that the example is intended to deal with claims where there are
multiple insured respondents and some agreement is
reached between them as to
the shares of liability for a claim, although such an interpretation again seems
unlikely in the absence
of any mention elsewhere in a section dealing with
mandated disclosure to the regulator of any reference to other
respondents.
108. An examination of legislative history may provide an
explanation for the reference, in the example in s 269, to the extent to
liability is admitted.
109. As already noted at [
] above, the ACT provisions owe much to
the equivalent Queensland legislation as in force before 2008. Section 269 of
the 2008 Act,
which is relevantly in identical terms to s 88 of the Queensland
Act, is as follows:
269 Information to be
provided by licensed insurers
(1) A licensed insurer must give the CTP regulator—
(a) periodic returns, as prescribed by regulation, containing the information
prescribed by regulation; and
(b) information about claims against the insurer that is prescribed by
regulation, or that the CTP regulator requires by written notice
to the insurer;
(c) other information that is relevant to the administration of this Act that
is prescribed by regulation, or that the CTP regulator
requires by written
notice to the insurer.
An insurer may be required to provide—
(a) details of motor accident claims against the insurer, and the dates when
notice of the claims were received by the insurer; and
(b) information about the claimants; and
(c) information about whether liability was admitted by the insurer, when
liability was admitted or denied and, if liability was admitted,
the extent to
which liability was admitted; and
(d) information about the rehabilitation services made available to the
claimant and the extent to which the rehabilitation services
were used by the
claimant; and
(e) information about the costs of the insurer on claims, and how the costs
are made up.
An example is part of the Act, is not exhaustive and may extend,
but does not limit, the meaning of the provision in which it appears
Legislation Act
110. The original form of the Queensland Act (as in force in
1994) contained:
(a) s 39(5), which barred court proceedings for damages
based on a motor vehicle accident claim unless, after notice is given to the
insurer, the insurer has denied liability or “has admitted liability but
only in part and the claimant has given the insurer
written notice that the
extent of liability is disputed”; and
(b) s 88(2), which permitted the Motor Accident Insurance Commission to require
a licensed insurer to provide “information
admitted by the insurer, when liability was admitted or denied and, if liability
was admitted, the extent
to which liability was admitted”.
111. The Queensland Act was amended a number of times after
1994, but the last amendments before the 2008 Act was enacted took effect
2003. By that time:
(a) s 39(5) had been replaced with a provision (s
41(1)(b)) more similar to s 97 of the 2008 Act, which required an insurer to
written notice whether liability is admitted or denied and “if
contributory negligence is claimed—the degree of the contributory
negligence expressed as a percentage”; but
(b) the description of the information required by s 88 remained in its original
112. That is, in relation to denials or admissions of
liability, the link in the Queensland Act between the information required of
insurers responding to particular claims and the information required of
insurers providing general information to the regulator
113. When the 2008 Act was enacted, it contained:
(a) s 97(1)(b), which was
relevantly in the same terms as s 41(1)(b) of the Queensland Act; and
(b) s 269(1), which said that an insurer could be required to provide to the CTP
regulator information about liability described
in the same form as in s 88 of
the Queensland Act.
114. That is, the relevant provisions of the 2008 Act reflected
the 2003 form of equivalent provisions of the Queensland Act. The
difference in
expression in the current versions of ss 97 and 269 of the 2008 Act seems to be
directly attributable to the divergence
that had emerged by 2003 between the two
equivalent provisions of the Queensland Act.
115. It is possible that the
language diverged in the Queensland Act, and was adopted in that divergent form
in the 2008 Act, because,
as a matter of policy, what a claimant needs to be
told by a respondent in order to further negotiations on an individual claim may
be different from the statistics that a regulator needs to receive about an
insurer’s operations.
116. Whether or not the differences in expression
within the 2008 Act can fairly be said to indicate “a lack of technical
may not matter, but once the history of the two provisions is
recognised, it is in my view neither necessary nor appropriate to treat
words of s 269 as carrying any particular implications for the proper reading of
the significantly different words of s 97.
Purpose and policy
117. Both parties noted that the purpose and policy behind the
legislation ought to influence its interpretation, and made brief submissions
Costs consequences of MFOs
118. Before referring to specific arguments, it is useful to
summarise the costs consequences of MFOs, as provided by s 155 in relation
“small claims”, those in which a court ultimately awards an amount
of no more than $50,000 in damages other than for
pain and suffering (now called
non-economic loss).
119. Section 155 as relevantly in force deals separately
with cases of awards up to $30,000, and those above $30,000 but not more
120. There are several cases in which the level of the
respondent’s MFO may be relevant to the costs outcome.
121. An MFO of
$0 would necessarily exclude the respondent from the opportunity to have certain
costs paid by the claimant where the
award is less than the respondent’s
MFO (under s 155(2)(c) where the award is no more than $30,000, and under
s 155(3)(c)(ii)
where the award is greater than $30,000).
122. On the
other hand, an MFO of $0 would be adequate to excuse the respondent from paying
any of the claimant’s costs if the
claimant’s award is no more than
$30,000, and is less than the claimant’s MFO (s 155(2)(a)).
doubt the costs opportunities that the respondent loses as a result of the
imposition of a statutory MFO of $0 may in some
cases have a substantial value.
On the other hand, it is apparent from the above summary that some of those
costs opportunities
would only arise from the making of an MFO that was
relatively high (at least in the context of an award of no more than $50,000).
For instance, the chance under s 155(3)(c)(ii) of having costs paid by the
claimant from the commencement of court proceedings would
only arise if the
respondent made an MFO of more than $30,000, and there is always the chance that
such an offer would be accepted,
such that there would be no operation for s
Objects and purposes of the 2008 Act
124. The submissions made by the parties relied on the objects
specified within the 2008 Act, and did not refer to any other material.
5A of that Act is as follows:
The main objects of this Act are—
(a) to continue and improve the system of compulsory third-party insurance,
and the scheme of statutory insurance for uninsured and
unidentified vehicles,
operating in the ACT; and
(b) to promote competition in setting premiums for compulsory third-party
insurance policies; and
(c) to keep the costs of insurance at an affordable level; and
(d) to provide for the licensing and supervision of insurers providing
insurance under policies of compulsory third-party insurance;
(e) to encourage the speedy resolution of personal injury claims resulting
from motor accidents; and
(f) to promote and encourage, as far as practicable, the rehabilitation of
people who sustain personal injury because of motor accidents;
(g) to establish and keep a register of motor accident claims to help the
administration of the statutory insurance scheme and the
detection of fraud;
(h) to promote measures directed at eliminating or reducing causes of motor
accidents and mitigating their results.
125. Counsel for Mr Mitchell pointed to ss 5A(c) and (e) in
particular, and said that these objects are to be pursued, among other
by encouraging respondents to admit liability rather than going to trial on that
question. In oral submissions counsel for
Mr Mitchell explained that the aim of
encouraging people to resolve claims as quickly as possible, and to reduce
costs, would be
promoted by a regime under which a respondent who is not willing
to admit liability in any form or to any extent is to have no recourse
costs advantages that may flow from engaging in the mandatory final offer
126. Counsel for the ACT said that the objects set out in s 5A(c)
and (e) would be furthered by leaving it open to respondents to
settle claims
for relatively small amounts even where they do not accept liability and where,
given the nature of the injuries, they
would not admit liability as part of such
a settlement. Counsel for the ACT said in written submissions:
adopt the Appellant’s construction would be to frustrate the purpose of
the compulsory conference and the exchange of MFOs.
It would encourage a
claimant to ignore any offer of settlement made by a respondent, if such offer
is deprived of the force of a
MFO, by removing the potential adverse
consequences as to costs a MFO carries.
127. Counsel for the ACT also noted that s 5A(f) of the 2008
Act, which refers to the purpose of promoting rehabilitation, is furthered
bringing forward the respondent’s responsibility to fund rehabilitation
once liability is admitted (ss 97 and 127(1)(a)).
This is another indication
that the 2008 Act seeks to encourage respondents to admit
128. Each party has identified a more or less rational policy
argument explaining how, in its view, its preferred interpretation of
would further one or more of the objects of the 2008 Act set out in s 5A.
However, I can see no basis in those objects for
choosing between the
propositions put by the parties about the significance of a particular operation
of the more specific provisions
that are in issue in this appeal. The objects of
the 2008 Act are too general, and the asserted impacts of the various
interpretations
are too speculative, to provide any basis on which I could
conclude that one particular interpretation “would best achieve
purpose of” the legislation as required by
Legislation Act
129. However, I note:
response to Mr Mitchell’s submission at [
] above – that there may be some
substance to his argument if that argument assumes that a qualified denial of
liability can
be seen as a limited admission of liability; otherwise, concluding
that a respondent who under
advises a qualified denial is not willing
“to admit liability in any form or to any extent”, and is therefore
to be excluded from the MFO process, would not satisfy the obligation
to give meaning to “altogether” in
(b) in response to the ACT’s submission at [
(i) that the
legislative scheme does not
respondents, at any stage (including
at the compulsory conference), settling claims for relatively small amounts even
are not willing to accept liability;
(ii) that at
some point there should be real consequences for a respondent who unreasonably
maintains an outright denial of liability;
(iii) that the
compulsory conference would be an appropriate last opportunity for the
respondent to be able to negotiate from a position
of denial without any
consequences; and
(iv) that a
claimant at a compulsory conference may in fact be more focussed on any offer of
settlement made by a respondent who maintains
a denial of liability if it is
clear that this will be the last realistic offer under the legislation, and that
the next required
offer will be $0 (if the matter is not settled at the
compulsory conference, the claimant’s choices are to abandon the claim,
to run a court proceeding, and even the costs opportunities provided to the
claimant by a $0 MFO may provide little compensation
for that risk);
(c) in response to the ACT’s submission at [
] above – that s 127(1)(b) permits
rehabilitation funding by agreement between the parties even if the respondent
does not admit
liability, so that a respondent who is not willing to admit
liability may nevertheless agree to fund rehabilitation (presumably in
interests of minimising the award made to an ultimately successful claimant):
that is, the promotion of rehabilitation is not
entirely dependent on pushing
respondents to early admissions of liability.
Conclusion: what was the ACT’s obligation?
130. On the basis of the conclusions set out at [
] above about the meaning of s 141 of the
2008 Act, and the contents of the letter sent to Mr Mitchell on 31 May 2010 (at
] above), I further conclude:
the ACT had under s 97 of the 2008 Act taken a step that is properly described
as denying liability “altogether”;
(b) that it was therefore obliged under s 141(3) of that Act to give an MFN
rather than to make an MFO, which MFN would have been
treated as an MFO of
131. These conclusions mean that it is necessary to consider
how to deal with the application made by Mr Mitchell in the Magistrates
Application for judgment by Mr Mitchell
132. Mr Mitchell’s application in the Magistrates Court
relied on the following propositions:
the ACT was required to give an MFN under s 141(3) of the 2008 Act after the
motor accident claim did not resolve at the
compulsory conference;
(b) that the ACT had failed to comply with a compliance notice under s 158 of
the 2008 Act, set out in a letter from Mr Mitchell’s
solicitors, requiring
the ACT to give an MFN within 7 days;
(c) that Mr Mitchell was therefore entitled under s 159 of the 2008 Act to apply
for an order for judgment in his favour; and
(d) that under s 161 of the 2008 Act the court should make such an order.
133. Because the Magistrate concluded that the 2008 Act did not
require the ACT to give an MFN, the remaining elements of Mr Mitchell’s
claim were not considered in the Magistrates Court. My conclusion that the ACT
was required to give an MFN requires the remaining
parts of Mr Mitchell’s
claim also to be determined, either by this Court or after being remitted to the
Magistrates Court.
The provisions
134. Sections 158, 159 and 161 are found in Pt 4.10 of the 2008
Act, and are relevantly as follows:
Notice time limit not complied with
(1) This section applies if—
(a) for a motor accident claim—
(i) the respondent has given the claimant a mandatory final notice under
section 141; or
(ii) the court has dispensed with the obligation to exchange mandatory final
offers under section 142; or
(iii) the time for exchanging mandatory final offers under section 143 has
closed; and
(b) a party (the
claim fails to do something required to be done within a time limit for doing
the thing under this Act.
(3) Another party to the claim (the
enforcing party
the late party a notice (the
compliance notice
) requiring the late
party to do the required thing not later than 7 days after the day the late
party receives the compliance notice.
159 Thing not done within 7-day period—claimant as enforcing
(1) This section applies if—
(a) an enforcing party has given a late party a compliance notice; and
(b) the late party does not do the required thing within the 7-day period in
the notice; and
(c) the enforcing party is the claimant to the motor accident claim (the
relevant notice claim
) to which the notice relates.
(2) The enforcing party may, not later than 14 days after the day the 7-day
period ends, apply to the court for an order—
(a) if the claimant has not started a proceeding based on the relevant notice
claim—giving the claimant leave to begin the proceeding;
(b) giving judgment in the proceeding in favour of the claimant against the
respondent.
161 Thing not done within 7-day period—court may make orders
(1) On application for judgment under section 159 or section 160, the court
may make the orders sought.
(2) In considering the application, the court must not make an order against
the late party if the party establishes that the party
had a reasonable excuse
for failing to do the required thing within the 7-day period.
135. In short, the conditions for the exercise of the power
sought by Mr Mitchell are that, after the time for exchanging MFOs has
(a) a party fails to do something required under the
2008 Act within the time limit specified in that Act;
(b) a compliance notice is given by the other party; and
(c) the first party fails to comply with that notice within the 7-day period
specified in the compliance notice.
Events after compulsory conference
136. Mr Mitchell’s MFO was made on the day of, and at the
end of, the compulsory conference on 11 March 2015.
137. On 13 March and
again on 15 March, Mr Mitchell’s solicitor wrote to the ACT seeking an
138. On 16 March, the ACT served an MFO on Mr Mitchell.
March, Mr Mitchell’s solicitor wrote to the ACT asserting that the
ACT’s service of an MFO contravened s 141(3).
Other communications were
exchanged, and then on 2 April 2015 Mr Mitchell’s solicitor wrote to
the ACT, by letter described
as constituting a compliance notice pursuant to s
158 of the 2008 Act, requiring the ACT to provide an MFN within 7 days. The
did not purport to set out the circumstances said to justify the giving
of a compliance notice under s 158.
140. The ACT did not provide a notice as
required, and on 22 April 2015 an application was made on behalf of Mr Mitchell
in the Magistrates
Court, in reliance on s 159 of the 2008 Act, seeking judgment
under Pt 4.10 of the 2008 Act, specifically s 161.
Submissions
141. Mr Mitchell relies on s 158(1)(a)(iii), the purported
compliance notice given by his solicitor on 2 April 2015, and the ACT’s
failure to comply with that notice by giving an MFN within the period specified
in the notice. It is by no means clear, however,
that s 158 applies at all in
Did s 158 apply?
142. The ACT submitted that there “is no time limit
specified in s.141 or elsewhere for the exchange of MFOs or the provision
MFN”. This submission appears to be correct: the requirement in s
143(1)(b) (that if a claim is not settled at the compulsory
conference, MFOs are
to be exchanged “at the end of the conference”) does not set a
period, or limited time, within which
the exchange must take place but a point
at which it must take place.
143. Furthermore, s 158(1) sets out the
conditions for the application of s 158(3), the provision permitting the giving
of a compliance
notice. Section 158(1)(a) describes three cases in which the MFO
process is no longer current (because it has been completed or dispensed
or because the period within which it was to happen has concluded), in each case
saying that the event described “has”
taken place. The provision is
not said to apply in any case in which there is still scope for making an MFO.
144. Section 158(1)(b) sets out the second condition for the application of
s 158(3), being that a party fails (rather than “has
“to do something required to be done within a time limit for doing the
thing under this Act”.
145. The difference in the tenses used in ss
158(1)(a) and (b) suggest that the failures referred to in s 158(1)(b) are
failures occurring
after the events identified in s 158(1)(a) (including
the end of the MFO process).
146. Part 4.8 of the 2008 Act deals with
mandatory final offers, and the last section in that Part (s 145) states that a
may not begin a court proceeding if an MFO remains open. That is, the
end of the MFO process is the point at which a court proceeding
commenced. This was recognised by Mossop AssJ in Albrecht at [24]; the fact
that, despite the effect of the 2008 Act, the
case before his Honour was one in
which court proceedings had been commenced before an MFO was accepted does not
alter the approach
to be taken, in interpreting the legislation, to its words
and more particularly to its structure.
147. Part 4.9 deals with court
proceedings. The first four sections (ss 146 to 149) set time limits for
beginning the proceeding:
those limits are set by reference to whether there has
been a compulsory conference and, if so, by reference to the end of the
conference. The rest of Part 4.9 (as well as Parts 4.9A and 9B
added since the end of 2012), set out a range of procedural requirements
court proceeding. Part 4.10, headed “Judgment for noncompliance with time
limits”, comes at the end of the provisions
dealing with court proceedings
as such and before parts dealing with specific issues arising from court
proceedings such as, for
instance, the financial liabilities of the nominal
defendant (Part 4.10A).
148. It is also relevant that breaches of time
limits set in earlier provisions of the 2008 Act have separate enforcement
independent of s 158 (see for instance ss 99 and 100).
submissions made in the Magistrates Court, the ACT referred to the part of the
Explanatory Statement for the
Road Transport (Third-Party Insurance) Bill 2007
dealing with the provisions that became Part 4.10 of the 2008 Act. The
Statement relevantly refers to the part “providing
a trigger for the court
to provide judgment and order costs against a party who has not complied with a
time limit in the Act”,
and noting: “This is to stop either side
from unduly delaying proceedings”.
150. The ACT’s submissions
emphasised the reference in that Statement to a party “who has not
complied with a time limit
in the Act”, which is of limited assistance in
interpreting s 158 since it simply recites the words of the section itself.
significant in my view is the reference in the Statement to preventing undue
delay in “proceedings”. Until s 145
of the 2008 Act, which marks the
end of the preliminary negotiating processes and the start of court proceedings,
the matter in issue
is described as a “motor accident claim”. From
s 146, references are to court proceedings, including sometimes to
proceedings
“based on” motor accident claims.
151. The reference
in the Statement to “proceedings” rather than “claims”
also supports the interpretation
of s 158 as applying to failures to comply with
time limits set in relation to court proceedings, not time limits more
152. The language, the grammatical structure, and the location of
s 158, as well as the contents of the Explanatory Statement, all
indicate that a
relevant failure to comply with a legislated time limit is one that happens
after the end of the MFO process, not
one that has already happened as at the
end of the period for exchanging MFOs. I am satisfied that s 158, and the
rest of Pt 4.10,
relate to non-compliance with requirements in connection with
the court proceedings that may be commenced after the end of the MFO
153. If it is correct to read s 158 as applying only to requirements that
have a clear “time limit”, and only to failures
(relating to the
initiation and other aspects of court proceedings) after the end of the MFO
process, then s 158 is not available
to enforce an exchange of MFOs (or deemed
MFOs) that has not taken place as required by s 141.
Reasonable excuse?
154. The ACT’s central submission in relation to whether
the Court should exercise its discretion under s 161 of the 2008 Act
judgment in favour of Mr Mitchell was:
the ACT’s failure to give an MFN, and the attempt to make an MFO instead,
reflected a misunderstanding of the operation
of s 141 (a misunderstanding which
turned out to be shared by the Magistrate); and
(b) that the Court should accept that misunderstanding as a reasonable excuse
under s 161 for the ACT’s failure, and should
decline to give judgment
under that section in reliance on that failure.
Conclusions
155. For the reasons set out at [
] above, I am not persuaded that s 158
applies to a failure to make an MFO or to give an MFN, and for that reason I am
not inclined
to make the order under s 161 sought by Mr Mitchell.
156. However, although I have also concluded that s 141 was misinterpreted
by the ACT (and the Magistrate), that was not an easy conclusion
to reach or to
explain, and accordingly, if it had been relevant, I would have been somewhat
inclined to accept the submissions made
on behalf of the ACT that there was a
reasonable excuse in this case for its failure to give an MFN when asked to do
so (although
those submissions could usefully have been supplemented by evidence
that the failure to give an MFN did in fact resulted from a misunderstanding
the ACT’s solicitors).
Other matters – references to MFOs
157. I note in passing that s 141(4), which provides that an
MFN given to a claimant is taken to be an MFO of $0, is effective to
ensure that
provisions operating after an MFN is given apply to the MFN as if it were an MFO
of $0. However, it is not clear that
the provisions creating obligations in
relation to, and before, the giving of MFOs are effective to create equivalent
obligations
where what is required to be given is an MFN (for instance,
references to exchanges of MFOs, such as in ss 143 and 158, do not clearly
to “exchanges” of documents one of which is an MFO and the other of
which must be an MFN when it is given; only
after that is it taken to be an
Findings and orders
158. For the reasons set out above, I have concluded:
in s 141(3) of the 2008 Act, the reference to a respondent who “denies
liability altogether” is a reference to
a respondent to a motor accident
claim who has denied liability under s 97(1)(b)(i) and made no accompanying
claim of contributory
negligence under s 97(1)(b)(ii);
(d) that s 158 of the 2008 Act applies to failures to comply with time limits
set in that Act that apply to things to be done after
the end of the compulsory
conference and mandatory final offers processes, and cannot be used to require a
party to make an MFO or
to give an MFN; and
(e) that there is no basis on which an order could be made under s 161 of the
2008 Act giving judgment in Mr Mitchell’s favour.
Costs order in Magistrates Court
159. The Magistrate, in dismissing Mr Mitchell’s
application, ordered that the costs of his application be reserved unless the
parties wished to be heard otherwise.
160. Mr Mitchell appealed against that
order, and sought instead an order that the ACT pay his costs at first instance
party-party basis up to the day the complying claim was received by
[the ACT], namely on about 27 November 2009, and thereafter on
an indemnity
161. In the appeal, the ACT sought an order that Mr Mitchell
pay its costs of the application before the Magistrate.
162. Neither party
made submissions in the appeal in support of its claim in respect of the costs
of the Magistrates Court proceedings.
163. In order to avoid the problem that
arose in Steen v Senton
[2017] ACTCA 5
(see [42] – [45] in particular),
the entry of judgment in this appeal may need to be deferred to give the parties
an opportunity
to make submissions about the costs of the Magistrates Court
proceedings in the light of the decision of this Court on Mr Mitchell’s
appeal against the refusal of the application.
certify that the preceding one-hundred-and-sixty-three [
] numbered paragraphs are a true copy of
the Reasons for Judgment of her Honour Justice Penfold.
Date: 12 October 2018
164. I have had the benefit of reading the
reasons prepared by Penfold J in draft form and these reasons are intended to be
the light of her Honour’s reasons. I gratefully adopt her
Honour’s description of the background of this matter, the
nature of the
present appeal, the general principles of statutory construction set out by her
Honour, and her Honour’s recitation
of the submissions made by the
parties. I regret, however, that I am unable to agree with her Honour’s
interpretation of s
141 of the Road Transport (Third Party Insurance) Act 2008
(ACT) (the Act) and, as a consequence, with her proposed orders. The significant
point of difference between the approach taken by Penfold J and my approach lies
in the relevance of the terms of s 97 of the Act
to determining the correct
interpretation of s 141.
165. The issue is beguilingly simple: can a
respondent to a motor accident claim deny liability prior to the commencement of
proceedings and still make a mandatory final offer to settle a claim in a
sum greater than $0? To answer this question it is necessary
to consider the
objects of the Act, and the legislative scheme found in the Act to achieve those
166. I agree with Penfold J that the relevant version of the Act for
present purposes is Reprint 12 of the Act: see Insurance Australia
[2015] ACTSC 68
per Mossop M at [21]. Among the “Objects and
important concepts” for the Act, as provided in s 5A, is the object of
encouraging
the speedy resolution of personal injury claims resulting from motor
accidents: s 5A(e). Section 5A sets out other objects, including
the object of
keeping the costs of insurance at an affordable level: s 5A(c). The various
objects of the Act will not always pull
in the same direction. The Act is
intended to operate against a backdrop of an existing judicial system, and in
particular an existing
system of litigation for resolving claims for damages
arising from motor accidents. Relevant for present purposes, the Act prescribes
certain procedures that are to be complied with before a claim for damages
arising from a motor accident may be litigated in the
courts. The object of
these procedures is to encourage early resolution of motor accident
167. It is convenient to begin with Chapter 4 of the Act, titled
“Motor accident claims”. Section 84(1) provides that
claimant for a motor accident claim brings a court proceeding based on the
claim, the claimant must give the respondent
written notice of the claim. A
respondent to a motor accident claim will almost inevitably be an insurer. The
notice must contain
prescribed information, authorise the respondent to access
records and information relevant to the claim, and be accompanied by prescribed
documents: s 84(2). The time for the giving of the notice is prescribed by
s 85 although notice can be given later than the prescribed
time if there is a
reasonable excuse for the delay. The Act then provides a process for a
respondent to confirm that it is an appropriate
respondent for the claim, to
dispute that fact, or to seek further information from the claimant relevant to
that decision: s 88.
A respondent that confirms that it is the appropriate
respondent, or one where the claimant maintains their assertion that the
is the appropriate respondent despite the respondent’s denial,
must give the claimant notice in writing that it either accepts
that the notice
of claim is one that complies with the provisions of the Act or identifying the
alleged noncompliance: ss 76 and
90(2). A claimant cannot proceed with a
motor accident claim unless they have given the respondent a complying notice of
168. From the above it is apparent that the Act is intended
to encourage the speedy resolution of personal injury claims arising from
vehicle accidents. To achieve that purpose, the Act provides for a process to
determine the appropriate respondent, and for
early notification of claims to
respondents. It also provides for the provision of information by a claimant to
the respondent about
the claim, and for the claimant to authorise the respondent
to obtain access to records or documents as prescribed by regulation.
this is anticipated to occur before the commencement of court proceedings and in
the absence of formal pleadings. The provisions
of Part 4.2 of the Act which I
have considered to this point are essentially directed towards providing
information to the respondent
concerning a motor accident claim. This clearly
serves the purpose of enabling a respondent to investigate claims at an early
and, where appropriate, attempt to resolve them.
169. In addition, Part
4.3 of the Act provides for exchange of information and documents “to put
the parties for a motor accident
claim in a position where they have enough
information to assess liability and quantum for the motor accident claim”:
A claimant has an obligation to give a respondent specified documents and
information no later than one month after giving the respondent
a complying
notice of claim: s 104. A respondent must provide specified documents and
information to a claimant within one month
of receiving a complying notice of
claim: s 105.
170. It is in this context that s 97 of the Act must be
considered. The section provides:
Respondent to try to resolve motor accident claim
(1) A respondent must, not later than 6 months after the day the respondent
receives, or is taken to have received, a complying notice
of claim for a motor
accident claim—
(a) take any reasonable steps necessary to find out about the motor accident
for the motor accident claim; and
(b) tell the claimant, in writing—
(i) whether liability is admitted or denied; and
(ii) if contributory negligence is claimed—the degree of the contributory
negligence expressed as a percentage; and
(i) made an offer of settlement in the notice of claim—tell the claimant
whether the respondent accepts or rejects the offer;
(ii) did not make an offer of settlement in the notice of claim—invite
the claimant to make a written offer of settlement;
a fair and reasonable estimate of the damages to which the claimant would be
entitled in a proceeding for the motor accident
claim against the respondent;
(e) either—
(i) make a written offer, or counteroffer, of settlement to the claimant
setting out in detail the basis on which the offer, or
counteroffer, is made; or
(ii) settle
the motor accident claim by accepting an offer made by the
(2) An offer, or counteroffer, of settlement
must be accompanied by a copy of medical reports, assessments of cognitive,
or vocational capacity and all other material, including documents
relevant to assessing economic loss, in the offerer’s possession
control that may help the person to whom the offer is made make a proper
assessment of the offer.
(3) A respondent or claimant to whom a written offer, or counteroffer, of
settlement is made must, unless a response to the offer
is to be made under
subsection (1) (c), respond in writing to the offer not later than 3 months
after the day the respondent or claimant
receives the offer, indicating
acceptance or rejection of the offer.
(4) An admission of liability by a respondent under this section is not
binding on the respondent—
(a) in relation to another claim; and
(b) at all if it later appears the admission was induced by fraud.
A respondent may be obliged to make early payments for an
injured person’s medical expenses whether or not liability is admitted
the motor accident claim (see ch 3).
If a respondent admits liability for a motor accident claim,
the respondent may be obliged to pay for the injured person’s
expenses and rehabilitation services (see pt 4.6).
171. The purpose of s 97 is clearly expressed in the heading to
the section: it compels a respondent to try to resolve a motor accident
At the point in time where s 97 would be expected to operate there are no court
proceedings and therefore no formal pleadings.
The intention in s 97(1)(b) is to
oblige the respondent to provide to the claimant information relevant to the
claimant framing any
offer of settlement to the respondent, or in considering
the offer of settlement made by the respondent. In considering whether to
the offer of settlement made by a respondent, it is obviously relevant and
important for a claimant to know whether the respondent
is admitting liability
or is alleging contributory negligence. Any determination whether to accept or
reject an offer of settlement
involves weighing uncertain factors, or risks. The
intention of s 97(1)(b) is to provide the claimant at an early time with
information
relevant to assessing those risks.
172. An admission of
liability made pursuant to s 97(1)(b)(i) is binding on the respondent
thereafter, except in relation to “another
claim” or if the
admission was induced by fraud: s 97(4). Such an admission may also oblige
the respondent to pay the claimant’s
medical expenses: see Part 4.6
generally. While the Act endeavours to ensure that respondents are provided with
sufficient information
to accept liability before s 97 is engaged, there will be
many cases where the respondent will not be in a position to formally admit
liability before having to comply with s 97. It is not without significance that
s 97 does not preclude a respondent from denying
liability and at the same time
making an offer of settlement; indeed, the provision appears to mandate the
respondent making an offer
of settlement irrespective of whether liability is
admitted or denied. There is nothing in the Act which binds a respondent
to a denial of liability communicated pursuant to s 97(1)(b)(i). This
is because different considerations apply to a change from
a denial of liability
to an admission of liability as opposed to the opposite situation. A claimant
who has been informed pursuant
to s 97(1)(b)(i) that liability is admitted has a
right to assess the offer of settlement made by the respondent on that basis.
Considerations
of fairness would often militate against a respondent being given
leave to withdraw such an admission at a later time.
173. Before a claimant
for a motor accident claim brings a court proceeding based on the claim, the
parties must attend a compulsory
conference: s 136. The obligation to attend a
compulsory conference is in addition to, and logically postdates, the
obligations imposed
on a respondent by s 97. Each participant at a compulsory
conference must attend the conference and actively take part in an attempt
settle the claim: s 140. What is remarkable is that up to the point in time
where s 97 applies, the Act provides time limits for
the parties to comply with
the various obligations imposed by the Act. There is, however, no time limit as
such imposed by the Act
for the holding of a compulsory conference, albeit that
either party can call the conference if more than 6 months have passed since
respondent received the notice of claim.
174. Where a claim is not settled at
the compulsory conference, s 141 applies. This section provides:
Mandatory final offers
(1) This section applies if, for a motor accident claim—
(a) the compulsory conference has been dispensed with under section 137
(Compulsory conference may be dispensed with); or
(b) the motor accident claim is not settled at the compulsory conference.
(2) The claimant and the respondent for the motor accident claim must
exchange written final offers (each of which is a
mandatory final
(3) However, if a respondent denies liability altogether, the respondent must
give the claimant a written notice of denial (a
mandatory final
(4) If the respondent gives the claimant a mandatory final notice,
for this Act, the respondent is taken to have given the claimant
a mandatory
final offer of $0.
(5) A mandatory final offer must identify how much of the offer is for pain
and suffering.
If a form is approved under s 276 for a mandatory final offer
or a mandatory final notice, the form must be used.
A mandatory final offer for $50 000 or less must be exclusive
of any amount for costs (see s 144 (1)).
175. The issue that arises in the present proceedings is
whether a respondent is entitled to make a mandatory final offer without
some admission of liability, or whether such a respondent is one who
“denies liability altogether” and consequently
must give a mandatory
final notice. The consequence of giving a mandatory final notice is that the
respondent is taken to have given
the claimant a mandatory final offer of $0.
The practical importance of the question is purely one relating to costs. It is
appropriate to briefly consider the approach taken by the Act to the
entitlement of claimants to costs insofar as the entitlement
is affected by the
operation of s 141.
176. The Act makes special provision for entitlement to
costs in “small claims”, being claims of $50,000.00 or less. It
treats differently claims of or below $30,000.00. A mandatory final offer for
$50,000.00 or less must be exclusive of costs:
s 144(1). If a mandatory final
offer is for $50,000.00 or less, but for more than $30,000.00 and is accepted,
costs must be worked
out and paid as prescribed by regulation: s 144(2).
Regulation 27 of the Road Transport (Third Party Insurance) Regulation 2008
(the Regulation) prescribes that costs (including disbursements) in such
cases must not exceed $5,000.00. If a mandatory final offer
is for $30,000.00 or
less and is accepted, costs are not to be paid. Subsequently, s 144 of the Act
has been amended, but not in
such a way as to affect the present exercise of
determining the proper interpretation of s 141.The scheme of s 144, as it stood
the relevant time, which governed entitlement to costs where a mandatory
final offer for $50,000.00 or less was accepted, is therefore
tolerably clear;
costs for small claims, being claims of $50,000.00 or less, are heavily
regulated. The apparent rationale for this
is to encourage claimants with less
serious injuries, as measured by the level of damages, to resolve their claim as
quickly and
cheaply as possible. The unavailability of costs also operates as an
incentive to insurers to pitch their offer at a level likely
to resolve the
177. What s 144 reveals is that the legislature has placed a premium
on early resolution of small claims, even to the extent of requiring
to bear their own costs in many cases. In some circumstances the
claimant’s entitlement to costs is capped, and is
not fixed according to
the amount actually expended by the claimant in preparing the claim. The section
operates as an incentive
to claimants to resolve small claims, and as a penalty
to those claimants expending significant amounts by way of costs and
disbursements
in preparing a small claim.
178. The next relevant cost
provision is s 155, which applies where a court awards $50,000.00 or less in
damages in proceedings based
on a motor accident claim. For the purposes of
s 155, “damages” does not include damages for pain and
suffering: s 155(5).
It is apparent that the provisions of s 155 may only
apply where damages are awarded by a court, which of course can only occur where
the claim has not resolved by the giving of mandatory final offers as prescribed
179. If the court awards $30,000.00 or less in damages, and the
amount awarded is less than the claimant’s mandatory final offer
than the respondent’s mandatory final offer, the claimant is not entitled
to costs (s 155(2)(a)). At first blush this
appears counterintuitive, or even
unfair. It clearly, however, is intended to remove any incentive for a claimant
with a small claim
to litigate their claim. The necessity for such a claimant to
pay their own costs of the proceedings operates both as an incentive
claimant to settle the claim, and as a penalty to a claimant who does not settle
such a claim. If the amount awarded by the
court is equal to or more than the
claimant’s mandatory final offer, costs must be awarded to the claimant as
prescribed by
regulation from the date on which the proceedings began, but no
award of costs is to be made for costs up to that date: s 155(2)(b).
28 of the Regulation provides that where the amount awarded by the court exceeds
the amount of the respondent’s
mandatory final offer by at least 15 per
cent, the claimant is entitled to costs on a party and party basis, but capped
at $10,000.00.
In any other case the claimant is not entitled to costs. In order
to obtain an award for costs under s 155(2)(b), therefore, it is
not enough to
be awarded damages exceeding the respondent’s mandatory final offer
– the damages awarded must exceed the
respondent’s mandatory final
offer by at least 15 per cent. This again demonstrates the premium
that the legislature has placed
on early resolution of small claims. A claimant
must approach the resolution of such a claim in the knowledge that a
“reasonable
offer” on the part of the respondent to settle the claim
is to be refused at the claimant’s peril. The claimant may pursue
greater sum if he or she chooses, but not at the respondent’s cost unless
he or she achieves an award of damages at least
15 per cent more than the
respondent’s mandatory final offer. The 15 per cent differential required
by the Regulation before
costs may be awarded is effectively a statutory
determination of unreasonableness. In the operation of s 155(2)(b) we again see
operation both an incentive to resolve small claims, and a penalty for
unreasonably failing to do so.
180. If a court awards more than $30,000.00
but not more than $50,000.00 in damages the provisions of s 155(3) apply. If the
awarded is less than the claimant’s mandatory final offer but
greater than the respondent’s mandatory final offer, costs
must be awarded
to the claimant in accordance with the
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
(ACT) (Civil
Law (Wrongs) Act), Chapter 14, but presently capped at the sum of $2,500.00: s
155(3)(a). If the amount awarded is equal
to or more than the claimant’s
mandatory final offer, costs must be awarded to the claimant for the period up
to the date of
commencement of the proceedings in accordance with the
(Wrongs) Act
, Chapter 14, and thereafter on an indemnity basis:
s 155(3)(b).
Regulation 30 of the Regulation provides that if the amount of the court order
is at least 15 per cent more than the respondent’s
mandatory final offer,
the maximum costs that can be awarded up to the date on which proceedings began
is $15,000.00, otherwise costs
for that component are capped at $2,500.00. If
the amount awarded to the claimant is equal to or less than the
respondent’s
mandatory final offer, costs must be awarded to the claimant
up to the date of commencement of the proceedings in accordance with
Law (Wrongs) Act
, but presently capped at $2,500, and thereafter must be awarded
to the respondent in accordance with the
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act
, Chapter 14
(uncapped). Here again we see the legislature providing an incentive to
claimants to resolve small claims, and a penalty
for failing to do
181. Exceptions to the provisions of
are found in
unnecessary to consider those in detail, but it is worth observing that
prohibits a court from awarding costs to a party related to investigations or
the gathering of evidence after the end of the compulsory
conference, unless the
award of damages is affected by factors that were not reasonably foreseeable at
the time of the exchange of
mandatory final offers. This is a clear indication
that the legislature intended to encourage both claimants and respondents to
their cases prepared by the time they participate in a compulsory
conference.
182. From the above, I conclude:
of the primary objects of the Act is to encourage parties to settle motor
accident claims without resorting to litigation;
(g) the first point at which an attempt must be made to resolve a claim is
dictated by s 97, and must be no later than six months
after the respondent
receives a complying notice of claim;
(h) at that point it is not expected that the parties will have completed all
the investigations or preparations necessary to conduct
court proceedings;
(i) for the purpose of informing a claimant so as to enable the claimant to
accept or reject an offer made by the respondent, the
respondent must tell the
claimant whether liability is admitted or denied, and whether contributory
negligence is claimed;
(j) a respondent is obliged by s 97 to make an offer to settle the claim, even
if liability is denied. Such an offer could be for
a nominal amount, but an
offer must nevertheless be made;
(k) between the date of the process mandated by s 97 and the compulsory
conference the parties are expected to have undertaken all
investigations and
preparations necessary to conduct court proceedings;
(l) the object of the compulsory conference is to resolve the claim without the
need for court proceedings. It may be anticipated
that the information available
to the parties will, however, be significantly greater at this point than when
the first attempt at
resolution under s 97 was made;
(m) an examination of the scheme of the Act regarding the entitlement to costs
for parties at various stages of this statutory process
reveals that the
legislature has within the Act consistently adopted a process of providing
incentives to settle claims, and penalties
where a claimant unreasonably
declines an offer, which are mandatory and set out in the legislation; and
(n) the act differentiates between small claims (mandatory final offers of
$50,000.00 or less and damages awards of $50,000.00 or
less) with regard to a
claimant’s entitlement to costs. Significant penalties apply where
claimants refuse a “reasonable”
mandatory final offer, even in some
cases where they receive more than the offer by way of an award of damages.
183. The interpretation of s 141 urged by the appellant in
these proceedings, and before the Magistrate, seeks to give meaning to
and the reference therein to a respondent who “denies liability
altogether”, by reference to s 97 of the Act.
In my opinion this is an
error. The legislative purpose behind s 97, and in particular s 97(1)(b), is not
to restrict the ability
of a respondent in thereafter taking a flexible approach
to resolving motor accident claims and having the benefit of the incentives
claimants to resolve claims provided by the Act. The purpose of requiring the
respondent to inform a claimant whether liability
is admitted or denied, and
whether contributory negligence is alleged, is to provide the claimant with
information against which
he or she may assess the offer of settlement. It would
be entirely contrary to a principle object of the Act to lock-in a respondent
effectively having to make no offer to settle the claim at a compulsory
conference because the respondent does not admit liability
and has not claimed
contributory negligence for the purposes of s 97. The events which are governed
by ss 97 and 141 are divorced
in time, perhaps to a significant degree; the
matrix of information available to the parties may be expected to differ between
two events. Other than the fact that s 97 refers to the issue of liability,
there is no logical reason to base the interpretation
of s 141(3) on s 97(1)(b).
In my opinion, there is simply no warrant or need to do so.
184. It is very
common for a respondent to be in a position prior to the taking of evidence in
court proceedings where it cannot know
with any certainty whether it is liable,
or may believe tentatively that it may not be liable. In practice, the issue of
may not become clear until the end of the claimant’s case. One
example of where this may occur is where there are no witnesses
to the relevant
events other than the plaintiff; many others may be hypothesised. Such a
respondent may nevertheless recognise the
risk that it will be found to be
liable and will be willing to make an offer of settlement in recognition of that
risk notwithstanding
its unwillingness to formally admit liability. It is well
to remember that respondents in motor accident claims are performing a
quasi-public function; all owners of registered motor vehicles must have third
party insurance under the Act, and failure by respondents
to exercise due
diligence in the conduct of claims will affect not only the respondent’s
profits, but also the cost of insurance
to the public. It is worth remembering
that one of the main objects of the Act as expressed in s 5A is “to keep
the costs of
insurance at an affordable level”. To require a respondent to
either admit liability where liability is not clear, or alternatively
preclude a respondent from giving a mandatory final offer with the certain costs
incentives that attach to the making of such
an offer serves neither the purpose
of early resolution of claims nor that of maintaining the affordability of third
party insurance.
185. The giving of a mandatory final offer is important
because it is the final step in the statutory process prescribed by the Act
resolution of claims before court proceedings are commenced. The resolution of a
claim either at the compulsory conference or
by acceptance of a mandatory final
offer is not likely to turn upon whether liability has been admitted or denied,
or whether contributory
negligence is alleged. For the reasons I have given with
respect to s 97, information about the respondent’s attitude to liability
is not irrelevant to the approach taken by a claimant to the compulsory
conference or to accepting a mandatory final offer, but the
importance of that
information should not be overstated; after all, a claimant who has been told
that liability is denied and that
contributory negligence is alleged is in
practice no better informed so as to make a decision whether to accept an offer
than a claimant
who is simply informed that liability is denied. The factors
most likely to influence the decision of a claimant whether to accept
mandatory final offer are the size of the offer, the likelihood of receiving an
award of damages greater than the offer, and the
risks inherent in refusing the
186. As I have observed, a prudent respondent will often approach a
compulsory conference willing to make an offer of settlement but
not willing to
admit liability. If such a respondent is restricted to giving a mandatory final
notice, effectively a mandatory final
offer of $0, the claimant will not be at
risk of any of the costs orders mandated by s 155 of the Act. This will
significantly dilute
the effectiveness of those costs provisions in encouraging
early resolution of claims, and will lead to greater costs being incurred
respondents. Such outcomes are entirely inconsistent with the objects of the
Act, and with the scheme of the Act which consistently
provides incentives for
claimants to resolve claims, particularly small claims, at an early time, and
also provides penalties for
claimants who unreasonably refuse a reasonable offer
of settlement.
187. In working out the meaning of s 141, the provisions of
the Act must be read as a whole:
Legislation Act 2001
In the above I have attempted to demonstrate that the interpretation of
urged by the appellant is inconsistent with the objects of the Act and the
legislative scheme. It is still necessary, however, to
confront the text of s
188. If the legislature had not included subsections (3) and (4) in s
141, it would be arguable that a respondent would not be entitled
mandatory final offer of $0, as it would be arguable that this would not
constitute an offer as contemplated by the section.
The legislature has taken a
different approach to mandatory final offers under s 141 to that which it takes
to offers under s 97.
A respondent has no obligation to make even a nominal
offer under s 141. A respondent approaching a compulsory conference, or making
mandatory offer, may have a state of mind (corporate or otherwise) that it will
not admit liability, but it acknowledges there
is a risk that it will be found
to be liable. Such a respondent may well be prepared to make an offer of
settlement. On the other
hand, the respondent may suspect fraud or for some
other reason be unwilling to make any offer of settlement at all. The first such
respondent may be said to be denying liability, but not altogether in the sense
of “completely” or “totally”
denying liability: see The
Australian Concise Oxford Dictionary (Oxford University Press, 4th ed, 2008),
definition of “altogether”.
The second of these posited respondents
may truly be said to be denying liability altogether. What s 141 addresses,
therefore, is
the state of mind of the respondent, and acts so as to allow a
respondent to make no offer at all.
189. I do not perceive any difficulty in
adopting this interpretation to be presented by the use of the word
subsections (2) and (3) of s 141. A respondent who denies
liability altogether must give a mandatory final notice to the claimant.
doing so the respondent complies with s 141(3). By giving the mandatory final
notice the respondent is deemed to have given a
mandatory final offer, thus
complying with s 141(2).
190. I do not derive any assistance in interpreting
s 141 by consideration of s 51C of the Motor Accidents Insurance Act 1994 (Qld).
191. It is not necessary, in my opinion, to finally determine whether the
Act contemplates a respondent being entitled to deny liability
and at the same
time allege contributory negligence for the purposes of s 97, although as the
provisions of s 97(1)(b) are directed
to ensuring that a claimant is fully
informed there is a strong argument that it does.
192. If it be correct that
a denial of liability with an allegation of contributory negligence is something
less than a denial of
liability “altogether” for the purposes of s
141(3), respondents could easily avoid the obligation to give a mandatory
notice by the simple expedient of denying liability and alleging 100 per cent
contributory negligence. This would allow the
respondent to give a mandatory
final offer, thereby preserving the availability of any cost penalty provisions,
without conceding
anything useful to the resolution of the claim concerning
liability. This would effectively make ss 141(3) and (4) irrelevant.
was submitted by the appellant that his interpretation of s 141 would advance
the object of encouraging early resolution of
claims by penalising respondents
for unreasonable failure to admit liability. This submission is logical, but in
my view unpersuasive.
Such an interpretation may advance the object of early
resolution of claims, but would frequently operate contrary to the object
maintaining the cost of insurance of affordable levels. By contrast,
interpreting s 141 as I have suggested satisfies both of
194. The respondent was entitled to give the appellant a mandatory
final offer. As such, there was no basis for the appellant to give
respondent a compliance notice under s 158 of the Act. The Magistrate was
therefore correct to refuse the appellant’s application
for judgment. The
present appeal should therefore be dismissed with costs.
195. To the extent
that either party invited this Court to review the question of costs of the
proceedings in the Magistrates Court,
the Court should decline the invitation.
The Magistrate reserved the question of costs and left it up to the parties to
matter for the issue to be ventilated at a later time should the
parties wish to do so. This was a sensible approach. The parties
may relist the
matter before the Magistrate if they wish to do so.
196. The appropriate
orders are:
appeal dismissed;
(b) the appellant is to pay the respondent’s costs of the appeal as
I certify that the preceding thirty-three [33] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of his Honour Justice
Date: 12 October 2018
197. I have read the separate reasons to be published by
Penfold J and Burns J. I agree with Burns J that the appeal should be dismissed
with costs for the reasons given by his Honour.
198. Like Burns J, I am
unable to agree with the construction of the relevant provisions of the Road
Transport (Third Party Insurance)
Act 2008 (ACT) that was advocated by the
appellant and accepted by Penfold J.
199. While the text of s 141 of the
Act is rather clumsy, if not obscure, when read in context and in light of the
apparent purpose
and objects of the relevant statutory scheme, the preferable
construction of that section is that a respondent is only taken to deny
liability “absolutely” for the purposes of s 141(3) if they are
unwilling to make a mandatory final offer to the claimant
pursuant to s 141(2)
in an amount of greater than $0, and as a result have given, or are required to
give, the claimant a written
notice of denial pursuant to s 141(4). It
follows that a respondent who has done no more than communicate a denial of
to the claimant, either pursuant to s 97(1)(b)(i) of the Act or
otherwise, may nonetheless give the claimant a mandatory final offer
amount of greater than $0 pursuant to s 141(2) of the Act. Likewise, a
respondent may give a claimant a mandatory final offer
without admitting, or
being taken to admit, liability to the claimant, either in whole or in part.
200. In those circumstances, the Magistrate was correct to refuse the
appellant’s application for judgment. The respondent
had given the
appellant a mandatory final offer in compliance with s 141(2). There was
accordingly no proper basis for the appellant’s
compliance notice pursuant
to s 158 of the Act.
certify that the preceding four [4] numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Judgment of his Honour Justice Wigney.
Date: 12 October 2018
RTF format (619 KB)
Signed PDF/A format