Calvary Health Care ACT Ltd v Australian Capital Territory (No 2) [2023] ACTSCFC 2 (14 September 2023)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Calvary Health Care ACT Ltd v Australian Capital Territory (No 2)
[2023] ACTSCFC 2
Hearing Date:
Decided on written submissions
Decision Date:
McCallum CJ, Mossop and Baker JJ
plaintiff has leave pursuant to r 1160(2) to discontinue so much of the
proceedings as were not determined by the orders made
by the Court on
9 June 2023.
to r 1163(2) the plaintiff is to pay the defendant’s costs up to
28 June 2023 and there is no order as to costs of
the proceedings
after that date.
Catchwords:
– Challenge to the
Health Infrastructure
Enabling Act 2023
(ACT) and the
Health Infrastructure Enabling Regulation
(ACT) – challenge to the validity of Act dismissed –
Regulation amended following dismissal of challenge to Act –
amendments to
Regulation address some of the plaintiff’s arguments – where
plaintiff asserts that passing of Regulation
constitutes a costs event and that
each party should bear its own costs as a result – proceedings would have
been brought by
plaintiff even if amended regulation had been in force at
commencement – plaintiff to pay costs of the defendant up until the
of Regulation and parties to bear own costs thereafter
Legislation Cited:
Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), rr 1160,
Health Infrastructure Enabling Act 2023
Infrastructure Enabling Regulation 2023
Health Infrastructure Enabling Amendment Regulation 2023 (No 1)
Cases Cited:
Calvary Health Care ACT Ltd v Australian Capital Territory
Calvary Health Care ACT Limited (Plaintiff)
Australian Capital Territory (Defendant)
Representation:
D Williams SC with B Kaplan (Plaintiff)
P Garrisson SC with H Younan SC and M T Sherman (Defendant)
Thomson Geer (Plaintiff)
ACT Government Solicitor (Defendant)
File Number:
SC 225 of 2023
Introduction
Health Care ACT Limited (Calvary) challenged the validity of the
Infrastructure Enabling Act 2023
(ACT) (the Act) and the
Infrastructure Enabling Regulation 2023
(ACT) (Regulation). The proceedings
were heard on 7 June 2023 and on 9 June 2023 the Court made orders
dismissing the application
for a declaration that the Act was invalid and
dismissing an application for an injunction restraining the
Australian Capital Territory
from taking over the operation of the hospital
pursuant to the Act. Reasons for those orders were given on 23 June 2023:
Calvary Health Care ACT Ltd v Australian Capital Territory
[2023] ACTSCFC
June 2023, amendments were made to the terms of the Regulation by the
Infrastructure Enabling Amendment Regulation 2023 (No 1)
(Amendment Regulation). On 7 July 2023, Calvary informed the Court that it
did not wish to proceed with the balance of the proceedings
which challenged the
validity of the Regulation and would discontinue the proceedings. On that day
McCallum CJ directed the parties
to file written submissions in respect of
costs, with the issue of costs to be dealt with by the Full Court on the papers.
Honour’s orders it was noted that “the plaintiff does not
seek to prosecute the balance of proceedings”, but no
order was made as to
discontinuance on that day. Her Honour noted that the discontinuance of the
proceedings and the question of
costs would be dealt with together. The parties
have now provided written submissions in relation to costs.
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) provides that a
plaintiff may discontinue a proceeding at any time before “the court sets
a hearing date for the proceeding”.
Rule 1160(2)
provides that a plaintiff
may discontinue a proceeding at any other time “only with the
court’s leave or the agreement
of the other active parties”. There
is no doubt in the present circumstances that, in the absence of any agreement
by the Territory,
Calvary requires leave to discontinue.
provides that if a party discontinues with the Court’s leave
“the court may make the order for costs it considers
appropriate”.
Submissions
5․ Calvary’s
position is that the amendment to the Regulation provides a basis for departing
from the usual order as to
submitted that the amendment of the Regulations was a supervening event for the
proceedings. It submitted that the
terms of the amendments made were responsive
to comments made by the Court during the hearing on 7 June 2023 and that had
those amendments
not been made it was very likely that ss 10, 11, 17 and
the Regulation would have been held to be invalid and that, as a consequence,
the whole of the Regulation would have been invalid.
It submitted that for the
purposes of the application of the rule that costs follow the event, there were
in fact two “events”.
The first was in relation to the Act, where
the Territory achieved a substantial success. The second was in relation to the
Regulation,
where Calvary achieved substantial success. In those circumstances
Calvary submitted that each side should bear its own costs of
the proceedings.
It therefore submitted that Calvary should be granted leave pursuant to
r 1160(2) and that the Court should order,
pursuant to r 1163(2), that
each side bear its own costs.
Territory submitted that costs should follow the event. It submitted that
Calvary was wholly unsuccessful in its challenge
to the Act and would
discontinue any remaining challenge to the Regulation. It submitted that the
judgment of the Full Court resolved
the dispute between the parties in the
Territory’s favour by reference to the Act. The Territory submitted that
this was not
a proper case in which to attempt any apportionment of costs. It
made submissions directed to the details of the amendments made
to ss 9A, 10,
and 33A of the Regulation, suggesting that they did not alter the
legislative scheme and were mostly matters of clarification.
Full Court made its decision in the context of an application by Calvary for
urgent relief restraining the takeover by
the territory of Calvary Hospital. The
proceedings were commenced on 31 May 2023 and, on 2 June 2023, McCallum CJ
ordered that the
matter be determined by a Full Court. The urgency arose because
the takeover of the hospital was scheduled to occur on 3 July 2023.
circumstances, it was necessary to determine whether the Act, or the Act in
combination with the Regulation, fell outside
the power of the Legislative
Assembly because it amounted to an “acquisition of property otherwise than
on just terms”
as referred to in
Australian Capital
Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
(Cth). On that issue Calvary was not
successful. The validity of the Act was upheld.
balance of the proceedings challenged the validity of the whole Regulation or,
alternatively, specific provisions of
the Regulation. The challenge was built
upon the proposition, ultimately rejected by the Court, that the Act itself
failed to provide
just terms for the acquisitions. However, there were also
independent grounds upon which the Regulation was challenged. Those challenges
were directed to the process provided for resolution of disputes about the
compensation to be payable and the considerations which
might affect valuations
as part of that process.
10․ Following
the decision of the Court on 9 June 2023 and the reasons given on
23 June 2023, the plaintiff still had some reasonably
arguable claims
of invalidity of some of the challenged provisions of the Regulations. It is
neither necessary nor appropriate to
attempt to assess, in any detail, the
merits of those claims simply for the purposes of determining the question of
the Amendment Regulation was responsive to some of the issues concerning the
drafting of the Regulation raised during
the course of the proceedings was made
clear by the Explanatory Statement for the Amendment Regulation which provided:
Regulation has been made in response to tentative concerns expressed
in the Supreme Court proceeding.”
is not a case in which it could be said that the proceedings would not have been
brought had the amendments made by
the Amendment Regulation been in place at the
time when the Regulation first came into effect. Nor is it a case where
legislation
by a party has been enacted to deprive a litigant of its cause of
action in pending proceedings. Rather, it is a case in which, after
has determined the principal issue between the parties, some subsidiary
arguments which remained available to the plaintiff
have been addressed by the
amendments to the Regulation.
it is recognised that the proceedings would have been brought in any event and
that the challenge to the Regulation
was subsidiary to the challenge to the Act,
the case cannot be characterised as one involving two “events”, one
which the Territory was successful and one upon which Calvary would have
been successful.
view the appropriate outcome is one that:
(a) recognises the failure by the plaintiff to succeed in its challenge to the
validity of the Act which was designed to prevent
the acquisition of the
hospital proceeding; and
(b) recognises that the plaintiff’s challenge to the Regulation has been
conducted reasonably and that it now seeks to discontinue
that part of the
proceedings without a determination of its contentions, at least in part because
of the Amendment Regulation.
outcome can be achieved by ordering that the plaintiff pay the defendant’s
costs up until the date of the Amendment
Regulation and ordering that there be
no order as to costs after that date.
orders of the Court are:
plaintiff has leave pursuant to r 1160(2) to discontinue so much of the
proceedings as were not determined by the orders made
by the Court on
9 June 2023.
to r 1163(2) the plaintiff is to pay the defendant’s costs up to
28 June 2023 and there is no order as to costs of
the proceedings
after that date.
I certify that the preceding sixteen [16] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Court
RTF format (181 KB)
Signed PDF/A format