Giulia Jones and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate [2021] ACTOFOI 5 (19 May 2021)
Jones and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
(19 May 2021)
and reasons
for decision of ACT Ombudsman, Michael Manthorpe PSM
Application Number
AFOI-RR/21/10001
Decision Reference
[2021] ACTOFOI 5
Giulia Jones MLA
Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
Decision Date
Freedom of Information Act 2016
(ACT) – deciding access
– whether disclosure of information is contrary to the public interest
– cabinet information
Freedom of Information Act 2016
the decision of the Chief Minister, Treasury and
Economic Development Directorate (
Background of Ombudsman review
11 November 2020, the applicant applied to the respondent for access
the final copies of the incoming minister briefs following the
2020 ACT Election. This request includes, but is not limited to, briefs
for potential Liberal ministers.
9 December 2020, CMTEDD advised the applicant that it had identified 100
documents as falling within the scope of the access application.
The respondent
gave the applicant access to two documents in full, 50 documents in part
and refused access to 48 documents in full.
In making its decision, CMTEDD
stated that the documents contain information that would, on balance, be
contrary to the public interest
to disclose under Schedule 1, 1.6 of the FOI Act
or under the test set out in section 17 of the FOI Act.
5 January 2021, the applicant sought Ombudsman review of the respondent’s
decision under s 73 of the FOI Act.
14 April 2021, I provided my preliminary views about the respondent’s
decision to the parties in a draft consideration.
22 April 2021, the applicant advised they would not be making any further
submissions in response to my draft consideration.
23 April 2021, the respondent advised they accepted my draft consideration and
would not be making any further submissions.
Information at issue
their request for review, the applicant provides:
I am seeking a
review of the decision to redact documents 51 and 52, which contain information
the campaign. I am seeking a review of
this decision because I believe [the decision maker] erred in finding that these
required a near full redaction.
I do not believe that the redactions of documents 51 and 52, containing
information about election commitments made during the election
campaign, are
necessary. These election commitments are public commitments made by candidates
and their parties during their election
Accordingly,
the information at issue in this Ombudsman review is the information that was
withheld from disclosure in documents 51
and 52 by virtue of CMTEDD’s
issue to be decided in this Ombudsman review is whether giving the applicant
access to the information at issue would be contrary
to the public
making my decision, I had regard to:
applicant’s access application and review application
respondent’s decision
the FOI Act, in
particular Schedule 1, s 1.6(1)(a)
relevant case
law, including
Parnell & Dreyfus and Attorney-General’s
Stanway and Queensland Police
respondent’s FOI processing file relating to the access application
an unedited copy
of the information at issue.
Relevant law
7 of the FOI Act provides every person with an enforceable right of access to
government information. This right is subject
to other provisions of the FOI
Act, including grounds on which access may be refused.
to the public interest information is defined in s 16 of the FOI Act
information—
is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under schedule 1;
disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest under
the test set out in section 17.
35(1)(c) of the FOI Act provides that an access application may be decided by
refusing to give access to the information sought
because the information being
sought is contrary to the public interest information.
50 of the FOI Act applies if an access application is made for government
information in a record containing contrary to the
public interest information
and it is practicable to give access to a copy of the record from which contrary
to the public interest
information has been deleted.
72 of the FOI Act provides that the person seeking to prevent disclosure of
government information has the onus of establishing
the information is contrary
to the public interest information.
1 of the FOI Act sets out categories of information that are taken to be
contrary to the public interest to disclose.
The contentions of the parties
its decision notice, the respondent said:
Documents 51 and 52
contain information about election commitments made during the election
campaign... In reviewing these documents,
I consider they contain information
which is contrary to the public interest under Schedule 1, section 1.6 of the
Act as this information
was provided with the intention it would be presented to
Cabinet. Section 1.6 of Schedule 1 of the Act allows material prepared for
consideration by Cabinet a later date to be withheld from release.
While commitments made during the election are publicly available, documents
51 and 52 contain additional information about each commitment
including costs,
risks, budget and implementation options which is not publicly known. Release of
this information would therefore
impact the deliberative functions of
their application for Ombudsman review, the applicant said:
costs, risks, budget and implementation options are discussed at length within
parties’ policy submissions that have
been submitted to CMTEDD under the
Election Commitments Costings Act 2012
. The public, which voted on these
election commitments, has a right to know whether the briefs contain information
which challenge,
question or confirm the policy costs, risks, budget and
implementation options contained within these publicly committed proposals.
I do not believe these documents should be prevented from release... unless
there has been substantive Cabinet debate or deliberation
on these briefs that
would prevent release, rather than these briefs merely being marked as intended
for Cabinet. If documents 51
and 52 have not been subject to substantive Cabinet
debate or deliberation, then they ought to be released on public interest
submissions are discussed in more detail below.
Considerations
carefully considered an unedited copy of the information at issue together with
the information provided by the applicant and respondent.
Information that is taken to be contrary to the public interest
to disclose under Schedule 1
respondent found that the information sought is contrary to the public interest
information to disclose under Schedule 1 of the
applicant contends the information at issue is not contrary to the public
interest information and should be disclosed on public
interest grounds.
Information
mentioned in Schedule 1 is taken to be contrary to the public interest to
disclose unless the information identifies corruption
or the commission of an
offence by a public official or that the scope of a law enforcement
investigation has exceeded the limits
imposed by law.
reviewed the information at issue, and I am satisfied it does not fall under the
exceptions outlined in Schedule 1. The information
at issue does not identify
corruption, an offence, or misuse of power in a law enforcement investigation.
As a result, provisions
of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act may be relevant to the
information at issue. I will now proceed to consider whether the information
issue is contrary to the public interest information to disclose under Schedule
1 of the FOI Act.
Cabinet information
information is defined in Schedule 1, s 1.6 of the FOI Act as:
Information –
(a) that has been submitted, or that a Minister proposes to submit, to
Cabinet for its consideration and that was brought into existence
purpose; or
(b) that is an official record of Cabinet; or
(c) that is a copy of, or part of, or contains an extract from, information
mentioned in (a) or (b); or
(d) the disclosure of which would reveal any deliberation of Cabinet (other
than through the official publication of a Cabinet decision).
Documents 51 and 52 are comprised of information about
electoral commitments including projected costs, risks, potential budget and
implementation options which is not publicly known and were prepared as a
bureaucratic assessment of the election commitments and
provided as advice for
the consideration of Cabinet at a later date.
a more detailed submission on each election promise is likely to be developed
for consideration by Cabinet, the information
contained in documents 51 and 52
are a precis of the key issues that will be included in each submission. It is
therefore possible
that Cabinet could consider an issue based purely on the
information contained in these documents. The key issue I must consider
case is whether the relevant intention (that the documents be submitted to
Cabinet), existed at the time the documents were
notes the documents were prepared on a Cabinet-in-Confidence template,
indicating at the time of creation it was intended that
the information would
form part of Cabinet deliberations.
their application for Ombudsman review, the applicant submitted:
note that in his decision, (decision maker) stated that these briefs have been
prepared “with the intention it would be presented
to Cabinet” and
therefore decided not to grant access. I do not believe these documents should
be prevented from release for
this reason unless there has been substantive
cabinet debate or deliberation on these briefs that would prevent release,
rather than
these briefs merely being marked as intended for Cabinet. If
documents 51 and 52 have not been subject to substantive cabinet debate
deliberation, then they ought to be released on public interest grounds.
applicant contends that unless there has been a substantive Cabinet debate or
deliberation on the documents, disclosure should
not be restricted under the
Cabinet exemption. I note that marking documents as ‘Cabinet’ is not
a determinative factor.
In this case, however, having reviewed a copy of the
documents at issue, I consider the substantive nature of the material
demonstrates
a forthcoming consideration by Cabinet.
refer to the wording of s 1.6(1)(1)(a) which states ‘or that a minister
proposes to submit, to Cabinet for its consideration
was brought
into existence for that purpose
’ (emphasis added). Whether the
intention was for the information to be submitted to Cabinet is a question of
fact to be determined
by the decision-maker. I considered CMTEDD’s
submissions, including that there was a reasonable possibility Cabinet would
considered the specific information in the documents.
Stanway and Queensland Police
the Assistant
Information Commissioner, held that whilst the relevant intention would normally
need to be that of the Minister, where
there is an agency process for preparing
information for a Minister to submit for Cabinet consideration, information
prepared in
accordance with that process will have been brought into existence
for the purpose of Cabinet consideration.
In my view, the documents
in this matter were prepared using such an agency process and were brought into
existence for the purpose
of consideration by Cabinet.
Accordingly,
I do not accept the applicant’s contention that the documents should be
released on the basis there was no substantive
deliberation by Cabinet of the
that end, I consider the documents are Cabinet documents for the purposes of
Schedule 1,
s 1.6 of the FOI Act.
1, s 1.6(2) states the exemption for Cabinet Information does not apply to
purely factual information. The respondent states:
In the case of
Parnell & Dreyfus and Attorney-General's
the Australian
Information Commissioner stated that the term ‘purely factual
material’ does not extend to factual material
that is an integral part of
the deliberative content and purpose of a document, or is embedded in or
intertwined with the deliberative
content in such a manner that it is
impractical to separate it from the other content. The decision maker considered
that the purely
factual information within the (sic) documents 51 and 52 was an
integral part of the deliberative content and the documents would
be robbed of
their essential meaning without incorporation of this material.
agree with the respondent, insofar as the purely factual material within the
documents is an integral part of the deliberative material
and the value of the
documents would be severely hindered without it. Furthermore, as identified in
Parnell & Dreyfus and Attorney-General’s
the factual material within the documents is so
intertwined with any remaining material that it would be impractical to
As such, I do not consider any factual material to itself be exempt
from the Cabinet exemption under Schedule 1, s 1.6(2) of the
no exception applies, my view is that the information at issue is exempt from
disclosure under Schedule 1, 1.6(a) of the FOI Act.
20 January 2021, CMTEDD submitted that disclosure of the information at issue
would also be contrary to the public interest as
disclosure would prejudice the
deliberative process of government (s 2.2 xvi) of the FOI Act.
I have already determined the information is Cabinet information for the
purposes of Schedule 1, s 1.6(1)(a) of the FOI Act, I
am not required to
consider whether any Schedule 2 factors apply.
of the FOI Act, I
the respondent’s
decision to refuse access to the information at issue under
the FOI Act.
Michael Manthorpe PSM
ACT Ombudsman
[2014] AICmr
[2017] QICmr
[2017] QICmr 22
[2014] AICmr 71.
RTF format (878 KB)
Signed PDF/A format