APPLICANT OR 3 of 2025 v COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY OF THE ACT (Occupational Discipline) [2025] ACAT 67 (30 September 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
APPLICANT OR 3 of 2025 v COUNCIL OF
THE LAW SOCIETY OF THE ACT (Occupational Discipline)
[2025] ACAT 67
Catchwords: OCCUPATIONAL DISCIPLINE – LEGAL PRACTITIONERS
– where applicant solicitor failed to comply with costs disclosure
obligations – where respondent decided to take summary
action against the
applicant including by reprimanding her and imposing a fine of $1,500 - role of
tribunal on an appeal under
section 416
Legal Profession Act 2006
- whether complaint made against solicitor was an abuse of process –
whether there was an unreasonable delay on the part of
the respondent in
investigating and taking action and, if so, whether the complaint should be
dismissed – whether the solicitor’s
failure to comply with her costs
disclosure obligations was within the scope of the complaint –
identification of the correct
or preferable decision – whether fine
imposed on applicant should be increased
Legislation cited:
Family Law Act 1975
Legal Profession Act 2006
Subordinate
Legislation cited:
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth), r 12.06
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
, r 4.1.1, 4.1.3, 7.1
Cases cited
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner
M1 (Occupational Discipline)
[2015] ACAT 78
Herron v McGregor
(1986) 6 NSWLR 246
Jago v District Court of NSW
(1989) 168 CLR 23
[1989] HCA 46
Legal Practitioner 201823 (Eunice Ryan) v Council of the Law Society of the
Australian Capital Territory
[2019] ACAT 97
Legal Practitioner 202021 v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
Legal Practitioner “M” v Council of the Law Society of the
Australian Capital Territory
[2015] ACTSC 312
NAIS v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCAFC 1
NAIS v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
(2005) 228 CLR 470
; [2005] HCA 77
Williams v Spautz
(1992) 174 CLR 509
[1992] HCA 34
Presidential Member J Lucy
Senior Member E Morrison
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) OR 3/2025
APPLICANT OR 3/2025
COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY OF THE
Presidential Member J Lucy
Senior Member E Morrison
The Tribunal orders that:
respondent’s decision to publicly reprimand the applicant is
matter is listed for a hearing on 7 October 2025 at 10am for one hour, for the
parties to make submissions about:
(a) the form of the orders the Tribunal should make;
(b) whether the interim non-publication and anonymisation orders made in this
matter should be continued, in the form of final orders,
or revoked.
......................................
Presidential Member J
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
applicant, a solicitor, appealed from a decision of the Council of the Law
Society (the
Law Society
), made after it investigated a complaint about
the applicant, to take summary action against her under the
Legal Profession
) in respect of a failure to comply with her costs
disclosure obligations. The Law Society decided to publicly reprimand her, to
a fine of $1,500 and to require her to compete a course in costs
disclosure.
applicant contended that the complaint was an abuse of process and that the Law
Society had erred in various ways, including by
relying on irrelevant matters
and by making the decision after an unreasonable delay. She said that,
accordingly, the complaint should
be dismissed. The Law Society, on the other
hand, submitted that the fine should be increased to $10,000.
consider that our role on an appeal under the Act is to conduct a merits review
of the Law Society’s decision and not to
determine whether the Law Society
made legal errors. For the reasons which follow, we are of the view that the
decision made by the
Law Society is both correct and preferable.
applicant was admitted as a barrister and a solicitor in the Australian Capital
Territory in 1998. In 2001, she became the principal
of a law practice (the
Law Practice
early July 2021, a woman (the
) became a client of the Law
Practice. The Law Practice thereafter acted for her in proceedings in the
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia brought by her estranged husband,
seeking orders for a division of property pursuant to the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth). At or about the same time, the applicant had an initial meeting with
the Client during which she gave advice to the following
“If your matter goes to a final hearing, you can
expect costs of $50,000 depending what issues come up and how long the matter
listed for hearing
July 2021 and June 2023, the applicant was the solicitor at the Law Practice
with carriage of the Client’s matter. The
applicant corresponded with the
Client by email and by phone during that period.
23 July 2021, the applicant filed documents with the court on behalf of the
10 August 2021, the Client signed a Costs Disclosure and Notification of Client
Rights and a Costs Agreement
Relevantly, clause 2.2 of
the costs agreement stated:
2.2 Estimate of Costs
2.2 It is not reasonably practicable to provide an accurate estimate of
the total legal costs. However, our hourly rate is $390.00
plus 10% GST so the
time taken to finalise your matter will directly impact on your total legal
9 February 2022, the applicant represented the Client at a mediation. On or
costs notice prepared for
the purpose of rule 12.06 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Rules
). Among other
things, the notice provided an estimate of approximately $50,000 for total
anticipated costs and disbursements if the
matter did not resolve at
2 September 2022, the applicant gave the Client a Certificate of
The certificate recorded
costs incurred to date to be $19,000, estimated a two-day hearing, and provided
an estimate of legal costs
and disbursements for the remainder of the
proceedings to be $20,000 (costs) and $15,000 (disbursements). The Client signed
and returned
the certificate to the Law Practice.
14 October 2022, the applicant sent a letter to the Client advising that her
hourly rate had increased, and provided an amended
costs agreement with the
increased rate. The Client did not sign the amended costs agreement but
continued to provide instructions
to the Law Practice.
18 October 2022, counsel engaged by the applicant for the Client’s
proceedings (
) provided a written Costs Disclosure and Costs
Agreement to the Law Practice, and issued Counsel’s first invoice for the
On 21 October 2022,
the applicant sent both documents to the
23 November 2022, the Client’s matter was listed for a three-day hearing
commencing on 30 January 2023.
27 January 2023, the applicant sent the Client a second Costs Notice pursuant to
rule 12.06 of the Family Law Rules.
The notice set out the Client’s actual costs up to and including mediation
(being legal costs of $17,350 and Counsel fees of
$1,650), and an estimate of
further costs up to an including the final hearing (being legal costs of
$33,000, Counsel fees of $22,000,
and expert valuer fees of $2,177.50).
30 January 2023, the Client’s property proceedings were finalised with
consent orders.
31 January 2023, Counsel issued a final invoice for the sum of
30 April 2023, the Client paid the full sum of Counsel fees.
29 May 2023, the Client complained about the applicant to the Law Society by
lodging a Complaints Form (the
5 June 2023, the applicant sent the Client a final invoice and an itemised
The outstanding balance
was recorded as $33,220 (being legal costs of $33,000 and disbursements of
$220). The applicant offered to
reduce the invoice by $5,000 if the Client paid
within seven days.
6 June 2023, the Client emailed the applicant asking for an extension of the
seven-day deadline for the
The Client did not
query the invoice or advise the applicant she had lodged a complaint with the
Law Society about a week earlier.
The complaint
making her complaint, the Client ticked the following boxes on the complaint
making this complaint, I am hoping
☒ resolve my dispute about fees
☒ improve the service provided by the solicitor
☒ receive financial compensation
relevant period of the conduct complained of was described as follows:
did the conduct occur?
From 2022 to
Client provided details of the complaint, as follows:
I have been
liaising with [the applicant] to help me with my property settlement matter in
Family court and I believe that she is
overcharging me. We did a final order by
consent on 31 January 2023. However, [the applicant] and her barrister charged
me full court
fees for a three day hearing although we never had that hearing.
Altogether I have paid them about $43,000 in costs and she still
wants another
$35,000 or more from me.
I had spoken to her and emailed her my concerns but she always shouts and
screams at me and stressed me on the phone etc which I find
unprofessional and intimidating. She knows that I am also a solo single mum with
three children and I struggle with costs;
yet she threatens me and says she will
not help me anymore. This has bene going on since the middle of last
In 2021 to 2023, the court cases have been delayed due to the absences of
my ex husband and there were long durations between zoom
directions hearings.,
She said she has been charging me by year like I have to pay her salary as I get
my salary per year. I have
also done the majority of the administrative work for
her as she says that she will charge me less in the end, however this is not
She has not been clear from the beginning on what her final estimated charges
could be but she sends me the bill after about
one and a half years. She bills
me by the minute/hour according to her costs agreement but the minutes and hours
are determined by
her. I however believe that this payment of $43,000 is more
than enough to cover all the costs but she wants probably up to 100k
unable to pay her anymore.
My ex-husband has not been complying with the orders and I have decided to
proceed on my own with the family courts and put in an
application for my own
contravention order. She is not harassing me and calling me fervently again at
all odd hours when I am at
work and hassling me and screams at me. She says that
if I earn money at work she also needs to earn her money. But my salary is
$500 an hour and I am a casual employee at a school. Hence I do not earn much
but she expects me to take loans out of my mortgage
to pay her...
Areas of Concern are:
in communication and withholding documents from me about correspondence from the
court and the other party.
not do what the client (me) asks for but goes on a tangent to do what she feels
is right and forcing me to adhere to her methods
by shouting and raising voice
and other verbal intimidation.
Unprofessional
behaviour with regards to communication with me the client
different and polite when I bring a third party along but excessively rude and
derogatory when it is just me.
difficult to contact and does not get back to me as soon as possible, many times
taking days to respond and ignoring my emails.
last minute work on my case due to her poor time management and overloading on
cases hence the work goes into weekends and so
she overcharges for
advice and acting superior to client (me) hence using that to increase hours and
collect fees hourly.
charging of fees based on fabricated hours of work
advantage of single solo mother, who is a casually paid
teacher/employee.
19 June 2023, the Law Society sent a letter to the applicant giving notice of
the complaint and enclosing a copy of the Complaint
Relevantly, the letter
stated that:
The purpose of this letter is to provide you with a
copy of the complaint and to provide you with the opportunity to respond. This
letter also provides information about the complaints process, and support
available from the Society’s Members’ Adviser
The complaint
The Society has made a preliminary decision to further assess and
investigate the following elements of the complaint:
charging of legal costs
and discourteous conduct
Your response
The Professional Standards Committee of the Society requests that you
respond to each of the elements of the complaint which the Society
has indicated
it intends to further investigate (as listed above).
It would be helpful for the Professional Standards Committee if your
response includes a brief history of the matter and other relevant
information. You should then address specific complaints.
In addition, please ensure that your response addresses the following
specific matters:
(a) The complaint alleges that despite there being no final hearing, which
was scheduled for 3 days, [the Client] was charged for
three days of hearings.
Please comment.
(b) [The Client] alleges that in attempting on a number of occasions to
discuss your fees, you screamed and shouted at her, which
cause her great
distress. Please comment.
17 July 2023, the applicant provided a written response to the Law
20 July 2023, the Law Society sent a letter to the applicant advising the
complaint would be considered by the Professional Standards
Committee and the
Law Society will “keep you advised of its
10 August 2023, the Law Society sent a letter to the applicant advising the
complaint had been referred to the Law Society’s
solicitors, Thomson
11 August 2023, Thomson Geer sent a letter to the applicant containing a
detailed list of requested information and
This included whether
the applicant had given the Client a cost disclosure statement before 14 October
2022, whether the applicant
had advised the Client about Counsel’s
cancellation fees if her matter settled, and for copies of relevant tax
invoices, the
trust account statement and correspondence or documents in which
the applicant discussed costs with the Client. The letter did not
information or documents relating to general communications or relationship
matters between the applicant and the Client.
8 September 2023, the applicant provided a written response to Thomson Geer,
with multiple documents
4 September 2024, Thomson Geer sent a letter to the applicant giving an update
on the status of the Law Society’s investigation,
providing particulars of
the allegations under consideration and asking the applicant to make any final
response to the complaint
by 18 September
letter relevantly stated:
We are instructed that having regard to
all the facts and circumstances presently known to it, Council does not propose
to consider
whether the conduct amounts to professional misconduct. You should,
however, address whether the Council can be satisfied that you
are generally
competent and diligent having regard to the three previous complaints upheld
against you. We will address these complaints
1.2 Allegations
We are instructed that the Council will consider the following two
allegations:
(a) You failed to provide [the Client] with an estimate of the total legal
costs of her matter or a range of estimates of the total
legal costs of her
matter and an explanation of the major variables that will affect the working
out of the costs in writing before
or as soon as practicable after your practice
was retained in [the Client’s] matter (as required under section 271(1) of
Act) in breach of section 269(1)(d) of the Act.
(b) You failed to:
(i) act in the best interests of [the Client] in breach of rule 4.1.1 of the
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
(ii) deliver legal services competently and diligently in breach of Rule
4.1.3; and/or
(iii) provide clear and timely advice to [the Client] to assist her to
understand relevant legal issues n dot make informed choices
breach of Rule 7.1
by failing to provide any advice to [the Client] to the effect that
[Counsel’s] costs agreement allowed her to charge:
(iv) $5,000 per day of hearing, mediation or arbitration if the matter was
settled or de-listed several or less days before any such
(v) $3,750 per day of hearing, mediation or arbitration if the matter was
settled or de-listed more than seven but not more than 14
days before any such
We note that by letter dated 29 May 2023 the Council sought your response
to the following two allegations:
(a) overcharging; and
(b) rude and discourteous conduct.
We are instructed that the Council does not require any further response
to these allegations.
letter also provided a list of material and documents to be considered by the
Law Society in making its decision. In particular,
the letter advised the Law
Society would consider a decision of the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal
) and two reasons statements provided by the Law Society in relation
to unrelated complaints made by three previous clients against
25 October 2024, the applicant sent a letter to Thomson Geer setting out a final
response to its letter and the
18 December 2024, Thomson Geer sent a letter to the applicant advising the
outcome of the investigation.
The letter advised the Law Society had decided to summarily deal with the
complaint pursuant to subsection 413(2) of the Act by imposing
the following
(a) a public reprimand;
(b) a fine of $1,500 payable within 28 days of you being notified of the
decision; and
(c) a direction for you to undertake stated further legal education, being a
course in cost disclosure, within 6 months of the date
of you being notified of
the decision and to provide evidence of completion to the ACT Law Society.
Statement of Reasons was attached to the
and described the
complaint as follows:
letter dated 4 September 2022 TG advised [the applicant] that the Council would
consider the following grounds of complaint. In
(a) whether [the applicant] breached
section 269(1)(d)
Profession Act 2006
) by failing to provide [the Client] with
an estimate of the total legal costs of her matter or a range of estimates for
legal costs of her matter and an explanation of the major variables
that would affect the working out of the costs in writing before
or as soon as
practicable after her practice was retained in [the Client’s] matter;
(b) whether [the applicant] breached rules 4.1.1, 4.1.3 and/or rule 7.1 of
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
failing to provide any advice to [the Client] to the effect that the costs
agreement of counsel retained in relation to [the
Client’s] matter allowed
counsel to charge a cancellation
Law Society referred to a list of material it considered in making its decision,
which included the applicant’s responses
to it and to Thomson Geer, as
well as the ACAT decision and reasons statements from the three previous
complaints made against the
relation to the two allegations it had investigated, the Law Society
determined:
(a) The applicant had failed to give the Client a written estimate of the total
legal costs of her matter before, or as soon as practicable
after, the Law
Practice was retained as required by section 271(d) of the Act, which was a
breach of section 269(1)(d) of the
(b) The applicant ought to have provided advice to the Client to the effect that
Counsel’s costs agreement allowed her to charge
a cancellation fee and
that in not doing so, the applicant breached rules 4.1.1, 4.1.3 and rule 7.1 of
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
deciding what action to take pursuant to section 410 of the Act, the Law Society
determined that:
(a) In relation to the failure to comply with costs disclosure obligations,
there was a reasonable likelihood the tribunal would
find the applicant guilty
of unsatisfactory professional misconduct (but not professional
misconduct);
(b) In relation to failing to advise of Counsel’s cancellation fees, there
was no reasonable likelihood the tribunal would
find the applicant guilty of
unsatisfactory professional misconduct or professional
misconduct;
(c) The conduct warranting a disciplinary response therefore related only to the
failure to comply with costs disclosure
obligations;
(d) It was not in the public interest to dismiss the
(e) On balance, the Law Society was satisfied the applicant was generally
competent and diligent;
(f) Accordingly, the Law Society could adequately deal with the complaint by
exercising its summary powers under section 413 of the
the end of the Statement of Reasons, the Law Society advised it was unable to
resolve the costs dispute between the applicant and
the Client and notified the
parties they could apply for a costs assessment under Division 3.2.7 of the
The applicant’s appeal
14 January 2025, the applicant filed an appeal with the tribunal from the Law
Society’s decision, pursuant to section 416
of the Act. There is no
dispute that the applicant is entitled, as the Australian legal practitioner the
subject of the complaint,
to appeal to the tribunal from the respondent’s
decision to take action under section 413 of the
applicant identified her reasons for applying for review, on the application
form, as follows:
decision made by the Council of the Law Society denied the Applicant procedural
fairness in that it:
(a) Was made in circumstances where the "complaint" as defined in Chapter 4
Legal Profession Act 2006
constituted an abuse of process;
(b) Relied upon irrelevant matters, being;
(i) Conduct beyond the scope of the "complaint";
(ii) The conduct recorded in the decision Council of the Law Society of the
ACT v Legal Practitioner M1 (Occupational Discipline)
[2015] ACAT 78
conduct taking place in 2011;
(c) Does not take into account relevant matters, being that the "complaint"
constituted an abuse of process; and
(d) Was made after unreasonable delay by the decision maker.
decision made by the Council of the Law Society was infected by jurisdictional
error in that it:
(a) Was made in circumstances where the "complaint"; as defined in chapter 4
Legal Profession Act 2006
constituted an abuse of process;
(b) Purported to impose penalties for conduct beyond the scope of the
"complaint"; and
(c) Was made after unreasonable delay.
applicant sought the following orders:
the decision made by the Council of the Law Society of the ACT be set
the complaint be dismissed.
the Respondent pay the Applicant's costs.
13 March 2025, the Tribunal made an interim order that the applicant was only to
be referred to by a pseudonym, and an interim
order prohibiting the publication
of information or particulars that might enable the applicant to be identified
or that would reveal
her identity.
Evidence and hearing of the appeal
Tribunal held a hearing of the applicant’s appeal on 23 May 2025. Both
parties were represented by counsel.
applicant relied upon a witness statement, made by herself, and a witness
statement made by a clerk of the firm. We will not refer
to him by name, as that
might reveal the applicant’s identity, but will refer to him instead as
the Clerk. The Law Society
relied upon an affidavit of Greg Williams, the
Regulatory Service Manager of the Law Society. Mr Williams was not available for
cross-examination,
due to personal
applicant was cross examined at the hearing.
Nature of the appeal
was some difference of opinion between the parties, at least initially, as to
the nature of an appeal under section 416 of the
Act. However, at the hearing,
the applicant’s counsel conceded that the appeal was probably in the form
of a merits review,
and that the Tribunal was bound by the decision in
Practitioner “M” v Council of the Law Society of the Australian
Capital Territory
[2015] ACTSC 312
Legal Practitioner
concession was properly made.
Legal Practitioner “M”
, Refshauge ACJ considered the nature
of an appeal to ACAT from a disciplinary decision of the respondent under
section 416
Legal Profession Act 2006
Although described as an
Legal Profession Act
), it is, in reality, an
administrative review of the decision of the Council of the Law Society as I
explained in Appellants v The
Law Society of the ACT
[2011] ACTSC 133
(2011) 252 FLR 209
–[111]. The powers of the ACAT are enlarged beyond those of the
Council and are set out in
Legal Profession Act
: Appellants v The
Law Society of the ACT at 229; [119]–[122]
An issue arose as to the nature of the proceedings
before the ACAT. It was, of course, an administrative review of the decision of
the Council.
Acting Chief Justice commented that “[o]rdinarily, the function of merits
review by a tribunal such as the ACAT is to determine
what is the ‘correct
or preferable’
and appeared to
consider that that was its function when hearing an “appeal” under
Legal Profession Act 2006
regard to relevant authorities, Refshauge ACJ concluded (in relation to the
nature of an appeal under the
Legal Profession Act
The balance of authority seems to
favour a wide role for the ACAT in hearing the appeal from the Council of the
Law Society. As noted,
the precise label given to the process is not always
that is more closely identified with the notion of a hearing de novo; that is,
it revisits the application without regard to error
and may receive not only the
evidence before the Council but additional evidence (perhaps with some
limitation) where, as I now address,
the onus of proof remains on the Council to
prove the conduct the subject of the complaint and that it is
unprofessional.
are bound by his Honour’s decision and have followed it.
note also that, in
Legal Practitioner 201823 (Eunice Ryan) v Council of The
Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
[2019] ACAT 97
Presidential Member McCarthy observed:
A proceeding under section
416 of the Act, despite its description as an “appeal”, is an
administrative review of a decision
of the Council made under section 413 of the
Act. The Tribunal is required to consider the matter de novo, or afresh. It
‘stands in the shoes’ of the Council and decides the
matter on the evidence before it, which may include evidence not
before the Council. (footnotes omitted)
agree with those observations.
Legal framework
purposes of the Act are set out in section 6 of the Act. Section 6
6 Purposes of Act
The purposes of this Act are as follows:
(a) to provide for the regulation of legal practice in the ACT in the
interests of the administration of justice and for the protection
of consumers
of the services of the legal profession and the public generally;
(b) to facilitate the regulation of legal practice on a national basis
across State and Territory borders.
4 of the Act, entitled “Complaints and discipline,” deals with
complaints about, and discipline of, Australian
legal practitioners. Section 384
of the Act provides for the purposes of Chapter 4. It
384 Purposes—ch 4
The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
(a) to provide a nationally consistent scheme for the discipline of the
legal profession in the ACT, in the interests of the administration
and for the protection of consumers of the services of the legal profession and
the public generally;
(b) to promote and enforce the professional standards, competence and
honesty of the legal profession;
(c) to provide a means of redress for complaints about lawyers;
(d) to enable people who are not lawyers to participate in complaints and
disciplinary processes involving lawyers.
4 of the Act applies to an Australian legal practitioner in relation to conduct
to which the chapter applies.
The conduct to which Chapter 4 applies is the subject of sections 391 and 392 of
the Act and includes conduct happening in the
to sections 393(1) and 394(2) of the Act, a complaint may be made under Chapter
4 to a council about conduct to which that
chapter applies. The term
“council” means the bar council or law society
394 of the Act provides for the making of complaints, as
394 Making of complaints
(1) A complaint may be made about conduct to which this chapter applies
by anyone, including a council.
(2) A complaint must be made to the relevant council.
(3) A complaint must be in writing.
(4) A complaint must—
(a) identify the complainant; and
(b) if possible, identify the person about whom the complaint is made;
(c) describe the alleged conduct the subject of the complaint.
(5) A council may refer a complaint to the other council, unless it deals
with the complaint itself.
relevant council for a person about whom a complaint is made must give written
notice to the person of the making of a complaint
specified circumstances, including that the council considers that that would
prejudice the investigation
The notice must tell
the person about the nature of the complaint and the person’s right to
make submissions to the council,
unless the council has told the person that the
council has dismissed or intends to dismiss the
person about whom the complaint was made may make submissions to the council
within a specified time and the council must consider
council may summarily dismiss a complaint in certain circumstances, including if
it is vexatious, misconceived, frivolous or lacking
the complaint has been dismissed or another exception applies, a council must
investigate each complaint properly made to
Upon completion of the
investigation, a council has three paths open to it. Section 410(1) of the Act
410 Decision of council after
investigation
(1) After finishing an investigation of a complaint against a person, the
relevant council must—
(a) dismiss the complaint under section 412; or
(b) take action under section 413 (Summary conclusion of complaint procedure
by fine etc); or
(c) make an application to the ACAT under part 4.7.
412 confers upon a council the power to dismiss a complaint, after finishing an
investigation, if satisfied that:
(a) there is no reasonable likelihood that the practitioner will be found
guilty by the ACAT of either unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional
misconduct; or
(b) it is in the public interest to dismiss the complaint.
413 provides for a council to conclude a complaint with orders against a
practitioner, in certain circumstances. It relevantly
(1) This section applies if the relevant council for an Australian legal
practitioner—
(a) completes an investigation of a complaint against the practitioner;
(b) is satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood that the practitioner
will be found guilty by the ACAT of unsatisfactory professional
conduct (but not
professional misconduct); and
(c) is satisfied that the practitioner is generally competent and diligent;
(d) is satisfied that the unsatisfactory professional conduct can be
adequately dealt with under this section.
(2) The relevant council may do all or any of the following:
(a) caution the Australian legal practitioner;
(b) publicly reprimand the Australian legal practitioner or, if there are
special circumstances, privately reprimand the practitioner;
(c) make a compensation order under part 4.8 if the complainant requested a
compensation order in relation to the complaint;
(d) direct the practitioner to do all or any of the following:
(i) stop accepting, for a stated time, instructions in relation to stated
(ii) stop employing a stated person in the practitioner’s
(iii) undertake stated further legal education;
(iv) seek advice in relation to the management of the practitioner’s
practice from a stated person;
(e) impose a fine on the practitioner of a stated amount.
(3) The maximum amount that can be imposed by way of fine is $1,500.
416 provides for the making of appeals to ACAT including from a decision to take
action against a practitioner under section
413. Pursuant to section 416(3), the
ACAT may make any order it considers appropriate on the appeal.
Applicant’s case
applicant has identified a number of grounds of appeal, being alleged errors of
law made by the Law Society. As the tribunal is
conducting an appeal in the
nature of a merits review, it is not necessary for an applicant (or appellant)
to identify error. The
tribunal’s task is to consider all the material
before it and make the correct or preferable decision, on the basis of that
identification of error on the part of the Law Society may be of utility insofar
as it could assist the Tribunal to avoid making
the same error. However, it is
important that the Tribunal keeps firmly in mind its statutory task, and is not
diverted into engaging
in a different task by the applicant’s articulation
of grounds of appeal (that is, the Tribunal should not approach the appeal
it were conducting a judicial review of the Law Society’s
Ground 1: Procedural fairness
1 is that the applicant was denied procedural fairness by the Law Society when
making its decision. This is said to have occurred
in four ways, which we will
refer to as sub-grounds. The sub-grounds are, in summary, that the complaint
constituted an abuse of
process; that the Law Society relied upon irrelevant
matters; that the Law Society failed to take into account relevant matters;
that the decision was made after an unreasonable delay. It may be doubted
whether all of these sub-grounds are properly characterised
as aspects of the
rules of procedural fairness but, as that has not been determinative in this
matter, it is not necessary to say
anything further about that.
Law Society was bound by the rules of procedural fairness when investigating the
complaint. As the applicant points
subsection 417(1) of the
Act provides that the rules of procedural fairness, to the extent that they are
not inconsistent with the
Act, apply in relation to the investigation of
complaints and the procedures of the councils under Chapter 4 of the Act.
as the Tribunal is effectively conducting a merits review of the Law
Society’s decision made under section 413 of the Act,
any denial of
procedural fairness by the Law Society could generally be cured in the Tribunal
proceedings by the Tribunal providing
the applicant with a reasonable
opportunity to be heard.
Relevant and irrelevant considerations or matters
of the sub-grounds are, broadly, that the Law Society had regard to irrelevant
matters (being conduct beyond the scope of the
complaint and conduct occurring
in 2011) and failed to have regard to relevant matters (being that the complaint
constituted an abuse
of process).
formulation of these sub-grounds is problematic. In judicial review, the grounds
of failure to have regard to relevant considerations,
and of having regard to
irrelevant considerations, are stand-alone grounds, rather than aspects of
procedural fairness. The questions
of whether the considerations are relevant
(in the sense of mandatory) or irrelevant (in the sense of prohibited) are to be
by construing the statutory provision in question. If these were
judicial review proceedings, the issues would be whether section
413 of the Act,
properly construed, prohibits the Law Society from having regard to conduct
which was not the subject of the complaint
and requires the Law Society to have
regard to the question of whether the complaint constitutes an abuse of
determining an appeal under section 416 of the Act from a decision under section
413, the relevant questions for the Tribunal
are whether, standing in the Law
Society’s shoes:
(a) it is inclined to have regard to conduct which was not the subject of the
complaint and, if so, whether it is entitled to do
(b) it is required to consider whether the complaint constitutes an abuse of
process and, if it is not required to do so, whether
this is something it wishes
to consider.
Tribunal is also obliged to provide the parties with procedural fairness, which
generally requires it to consider the parties’
submissions. That requires
it, in this case, to consider whether the complaint constituted an abuse of
process because that is a
matter raised by the applicant, even if that is not a
mandatory consideration under the Act. We have done that below.
Unreasonable delay
of the applicant’s sub-grounds is that the Law Society’s decision is
vitiated by unreasonable delay. There is scope
for argument as to whether this
alleged error, if established, could be cured by a further hearing in the
tribunal proceedings, or
whether it would be more appropriate to make an order
dismissing the complaint.
applicant claims that the Law Society took no action to advance the
investigation of the complaint for 361 days between September
2023 and September
2024. She contends that decision being made after excessive post-hearing delay
amounts to jurisdictional error,
relying upon
NAIS v Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCAFC 1
(2004) 134 FCR 85
more relevant judgments for the Tribunal to consider are the majority judgments
in the High Court’s decision in
NAIS v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
(2005) 228 CLR 470
; [2005] HCA 77
). In that case, the Refugee Review Tribunal (
made a decision to affirm the Minister’s decision to refuse to grant
protection visas to the three appellants. The Tribunal
had held two oral
hearings, about three and a half years apart. The decision was made on the basis
of findings about the appellants’
demeanour, about four and a half years
after the tribunal member had first observed them give evidence in the first
hearing. The
High Court found, by majority, that the appellants were denied a
fair hearing due to the delay, constituting a denial of procedural
circumstance that the applicants’ demeanour was relevant to the
RRT’s decision was critical to the High Court’s
conclusion that the
delay was unfair.
CJ described the delay on the part of the RRT as
“inordinate.”
Honour observed that “[t]he circumstances in which delay, of itself, will
vitiate proceedings, or a decision, are rare.”
The Chief Justice also
noted that “[t]he context in which delay occurs will affect any legal
consequences that may
His Honour found
that there was a denial of procedural fairness on the basis that that “[a]
procedure that depends significantly
upon the Tribunal's assessment of
individuals may become an unfair procedure if, by reason of some default on
the part of the Tribunal,
there is a real and substantial risk that the
Tribunal's capacity to make such an assessment is
and Heydon JJ also found that the applicants had been denied procedural
fairness, in the circumstances, because the Tribunal’s
ability to assess
the evidence was impaired. Their Honours
opinion it is not possible to say that the Tribunal's decision, depending so
much as it did, on the credibility of the appellants
who gave oral evidence, was
made fairly. Their application for review was lodged on 5 June 1997. The
decision was delivered more
than five and a half years later, on 14 January
2003, and after two sessions of intervening oral evidence separated by a period
merely had to weigh up oral evidence against written evidence.
It had to weigh
up oral evidence given on one occasion with oral evidence given three and a half
years later, as well as the further
written material that had come to hand. That
is not an exercise that can satisfactorily and fairly be carried out over widely
serial proceedings.
J also placed emphasis on the circumstance that the appellants’ claim was
rejected because they “were not believed.”
His Honour expressed the
view that insofar as the RRT’s conclusions of fact “rested upon
assessments of the credibility
of the appellants, in the circumstances of such
gross delay, they were
is a very different case. The Law Society’s process did not involve
assessment of oral evidence. The delay was much less
prolonged and could not
properly be described as extreme or inordinate. The Law Society has provided the
Tribunal with some explanations
as to why it took as long as it did to make a
decision. Even if we were not to accept those explanations, however, we do not
the delay would vitiate the Law Society’s decision, primarily
because the delay did not affect any assessment it had to make
of the material
applicant has pointed out that, under section 417(2) of the Act, a council must
deal with complaints as efficiently and quickly
practicable.
It is not our role
to determine whether or not the Law Society has done so in this case.
even if we were of the view that the delay by the Law Society in making its
decision constituted a denial of procedural fairness,
the applicant has not
demonstrated how that delay would make our decision procedurally unfair. We are
not persuaded that the delay
is so unfair and oppressive to the applicant as to
justify a dismissal of the
these reasons, we do not accept that the time taken by the Law Society to make
its decision has any bearing, or any significant
bearing, on our consideration
of what is the correct or preferable decision.
Abuse of process
applicant alleges that the complainant’s intention in filing the complaint
was not to ventilate some legitimate grievance
but was rather “to escape
from paying fees which had been properly incurred on her
instructions.”
that the complainant’s attempt to use the statutory complaint process for
the improper purpose of escaping her lawfully
incurred debt constituted an abuse
of process.
In support of her
submission that the institution of proceedings for an improper purpose is an
abuse of process, the applicant relies
Jago v District Court of NSW
(1989) 168 CLR 23
[1989] HCA 46
Williams v Spautz
(1992) 174 CLR
509; [1992] HCA 34.
applicant submits that the Law Society:
is required to make an
assessment of whether ACAT is likely to make a finding that the conduct
complained of amounts to unsatisfactory
professional conduct, or professional
misconduct. Where a complaint amounts to an abuse of process, any proceeding
brought to seek
a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct would be struck out. Accordingly, the mechanism for the
Respondent to
deal with a complaint which constitutes an abuse of process is to dismiss it
under section 412. That is what should
have happened
do not consider that the concept of an abuse of process applies to the making of
a complaint under the Act. Courts have an inherent
stay any process which is an abuse of the process of the
However, the making of a
disciplinary complaint under the Act is subject to different principles.
person may make a complaint under the Act, and a “complaint that is
properly made must be dealt with in accordance with”
For a complaint to be
“properly made,” it must be about conduct to which Chapter 4
That includes conduct
of an Australian legal practitioner occurring in the
relevant council may dismiss a complaint in certain circumstances, including if
the complaint is vexatious, misconceived, frivolous
or lacking in substance or
if the conduct complained about has been the subject of a previous complaint
that has been dismissed.
legislature’s approach is not to require a council to consider whether a
complaint is an abuse of process, but rather to
give the council discretionary
powers to dismiss complaints in certain circumstances. Those circumstances might
overlap, to some
extent, with matters which would constitute an abuse of process
in court proceedings. However, the legal principles are conceptually
construing provisions of Chapter 4 of the Act, it is relevant to consider the
purpose of that Chapter, and of the Act generally.
As the Court of Appeal
(Mossop, Baker and Taylor JJ) observed in
Legal Practitioner v Law Society of
[2024] ACTCA 17
63․ One of the
two express objects of the LP Act is “to provide for the regulation of
legal practice in the ACT in the
interests of the administration of justice and
for the protection of consumers of the services of the legal profession and the
generally”: s 6(a). That object is largely repeated in relation to
complaints and discipline in s 384(a). The other objects
in s 384 emphasise
professional honesty and competence, having a scheme for complaints and allowing
people who are not lawyers to
participate in that scheme.
64․ The scheme of Ch 4 is to empower relevant councils to take
disciplinary action against lawyers arising from complaints made
in relation to
their conduct. There is nothing in the purpose of the Act or the text of Ch 4
which indicates any particular but unstated
solicitude for the interests of
lawyers who are the subject of complaints.
construction of the Act which required a council to have regard to whether the
complaint was an abuse of process, and to dismiss
any complaint brought for an
improper purpose,
further the purposes of the Act generally or the purposes of Chapter 4 in
particular. If the complaint raised a serious
issue about a legal
practitioner’s honesty or competence, for example, there would be a public
interest in the council investigating
it, irrespective of the purpose for which
the complaint was brought. That might explain why a council has a discretion to
a vexatious complaint but is not required to do
The complaint may be made
vexatiously, but nevertheless identify a serious conduct issue.
have considered whether the basis on which the applicant contends that the
complaint was an abuse of process is relevant to the
decision we are required to
make on the merits.
applicant’s contention is that the Client did not intend to ventilate a
legitimate grievance, but rather wanted to escape
paying fees which had been
properly incurred on her
instructions.
In support of this
contention, the applicant submits:
(a) The Client made the allegation of overcharging before seeing the final
(b) The complainant’s email to the applicant (provided with the
complaint), saying that the applicant’s and Counsel’s
fees should be
“cut into a third of the cost” because they “were outside
court for one day or less,” instead
of the listed three hearing days, was
“an extraordinary attempt to escape from the clear provisions of the costs
agreement”;
(c) The Client stated in her complaint that she would like financial
compensation but did not explain any basis for
(d) The Client stated in the complaint that the applicant “wants probably
up to 100k and I am unable to pay her anymore”
but the allegation that the
applicant wanted $100,000 was
consider, contrary to the applicant’s submission, that, as far as can be
discerned from the documentary material, the Client
intended to ventilate a
legitimate grievance, or at least a grievance which appeared to her to be
legitimate. She made the complaint
settled, at which time she had still not received an invoice for the costs of
the applicant’s
professional time. Her view that the hearing costs should
be cut to a third, because the estimate of $22,000 to counsel and $33,000
applicant was based on three days hearing, is not unreasonable. We understand
that the applicant did, in fact, only charge
for one day of hearing. The
complainant’s apparent lack of understanding of the costs agreement, as a
lay person, is not surprising.
The Client stated in the complaint that she was
“a solo single mum with three children” and a causal employee at a
who “struggle[d] with costs.” The $43,000 she had already
paid was likely a very large amount for her, irrespective of
whether those
charges were objectively reasonable. She said she had had to get a loan to
obtain that amount of money. The Client
plainly anticipated that the applicant
would be charging her “another $35,000 or more,” probably because of
the applicant’s
estimate in January 2023 that the further
solicitor’s costs would be $33,000 and that the valuer’s fees would
be $2,177.50.
The complainant’s guess that the total amount of costs would
be about $100,000 might have reflected a perception that legal
fees tend to
exceed solicitors’ estimates.
considering whether the grievance was legitimate, it is also important to note
that the complaint was not just about costs. It
was also that the applicant
“always shouts and screams at me and stresses me on the phone.” The
Law Society apparently
found that this aspect of the complaint was without
merit. However, the Law Society did not take any steps to investigate this,
than asking the applicant for her response. There is nothing before us
which indicates that there was no reasonable basis for the
allegation.
any event, even if the complaint was made solely or partly for the purpose of
the Client avoiding paying fees, we do not see that
as a reason not to consider
the complaint on its merits. It concerns the conduct of an Australian legal
practitioner in the ACT and
makes allegations which are relevant to the question
of whether the applicant engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct.
the Law Society submitted,
Chapter 4 of the Act is not confined to addressing grievances or complaints but
serves broader purposes. Where a complaint brings
to a council’s attention
the conduct of a practitioner which appears to have breached professional
standards, it is generally
obliged to investigate
That is consistent with the
protective objects of the legislative regime.
Ground 2: Jurisdictional error
2 is that the Law Society’s decision was infected by jurisdictional error
in three ways. Those ways are, in summary,
that it was made in circumstances
where the complaint constituted an abuse of process; that it purported to impose
penalties for
conduct beyond the scope of the complaint; and that it was made
after an unreasonable delay. As the applicant
acknowledges,
the particulars of
this ground overlap with those of the first ground.
Tribunal’s statutory task, when determining an appeal brought under
section 416 of the Act, is not to consider whether the
Law Society made a
applicant sought judicial review of
the Law Society’s decision. As
explained above, the Tribunal’s task is to decide what is the correct or
preferable decision.
Mr Crispin, for the applicant, submitted that if we were to
deal with the appeal as a merits review, we should take the applicant’s
“criticisms of the way the society approached [the decision] as
submissions about what the tribunal should not do in making
have dealt with the applicant’s allegations of abuse of process and
unreasonable delay above. The remaining issue raised
in Ground 2 is whether the
Law Society purported to impose penalties for conduct beyond the scope of the
complaint. The question
of whether the Law Society made this alleged error is
relevant only insofar as we need to avoid making any similar error, if an error
is established.
first limb of the applicant’s argument is that the Law Society relied upon
her conduct as recorded in a 2015 decision of
ACAT, being conduct which occurred
in 2011. She submits that conduct findings in 2011 cannot rationally influence a
decision to take
action under section 413 made at the close of
Law Society’s statement of reasons demonstrates that it considered the
2015 decision for the limited purpose of considering
whether the applicant
“is generally competent and diligent” for the purposes of section
413(1)(c) of the Act. It found,
“having regard to the time that has passed
since the conduct the subject of” the ACAT decision, that the applicant
generally competent and
In other words,
notwithstanding the adverse findings about the applicant’s conduct in
2011, the Law Society made a positive
finding about her, being that she is
generally competent and diligent.
Law Society’s consideration of the conduct findings in 2011 does not
disclose any error. The applicant’s counsel,
Mr Crispin, stated at the
hearing that if the consideration of earlier conduct was confined to the
assessment of whether the applicant
is generally competent and diligent, he did
not have an issue with
have not taken into account the earlier ACAT decision about the
applicant’s conduct in 2011 in deciding “to impose
penalties,”
as Mr Crispin put it, for reasons set out
second limb of the applicant’s argument is related to the subject matter
of the complaint itself. Whilst the applicant accepted
the complaint is “a
classical allegation of overcharging, coupled with some assertions of
rudeness”, she submitted the
complaint is not properly characterised as
being “that [the Client’s] costs agreement was not explained, nor is
complaint that she did not receive an estimate until September
The applicant
argued that if that the Law Society “discovers” matters outside the
scope of a complaint which it considers
require action, those matters should be
actioned using a different pathway in the
the reasons below, we consider the Client’s complaint did include the
applicant’s failure to provide a written costs
estimate at the beginning
of the matter and, accordingly, we do not need to consider this further.
What is the correct or preferable decision?
follows that we need to determine what is the correct or preferable decision in
the circumstances of this case.
Law Society made a decision to take action under section 413(2) of the Act. We
need to be satisfied of the matters set out in
section 413(1)(b) to (d) before
deciding whether it is open to us, as a matter of law, to make or affirm an
order under section 413(2)
of the Act. If so, we need to decide which order is,
or orders are, preferable in the circumstances. As the Tribunal has power to
“make any order it considers appropriate on
the appeal,”
also open to us to dismiss the complaint under section 412 (and possibly also
under section 399) or direct the Law Society
to make an application to
if the relevant statutory
criteria are satisfied.
Scope of the complaint
complaint raises a number of matters. One is overcharging. It is not in
contention that that aspect of the complaint should be
dismissed. The Law
Society has not referred the matter for a costs
assessment.
However, there is
nothing in the complaint itself which raises a reasonable basis for considering
that the applicant overcharged
the Client and the material does not raise any
concerns that this was the case.
complaint also raises allegations that the applicant was rude and that she
screamed and shouted on the telephone and threatened
the Client. The complaint
refers to “verbal intimidation.” As mentioned above, the Tribunal
has not been provided with
any investigatory material of the Law Society which
demonstrates the basis on which it decided that this aspect of the complaint
without substance. Mr Moujalli, for the Law Society, indicated at the hearing
that this aspect of the complaint was dismissed
on the basis of the
applicant’s response to the
The Law Society does
not now suggest that this aspect of the complaint should be upheld and there is
nothing before us, other than
the complaint itself, which would provide a basis
for upholding these allegations.
allegation made in the complaint is that the applicant:
been clear from the beginning on what her final estimated charges could be but
she sends me the bill after about one and a
half years.
aspect of the complaint is that the applicant has not provided the Client with a
costs estimate, or a final costs estimate, at
the beginning of the matter. This
is not the focus of the complaint but it is an important part of it. It informs
the other aspects
of the complaint concerning the amount of the bills the Client
had been given, or that she anticipated she would be given.
applicant, when giving evidence, accepted that this allegation was part of the
complaint. The respondent’s counsel, Mr Moujalli,
had the following
exchange with her at the hearing:
MR MOUJALLI: ... you saw that
[the Client] had said in her complaint that you were not clear from the
beginning on what your final
estimated charges could be. So you've told me, when
you prepared your response, you were aware that that was one thing she was
complaining
[THE APPLICANT]: That's correct.
the presiding member pointed that sentence of the complaint out to the
applicant’s counsel, Mr Crispin, at the hearing,
was a very curious thing for [the Client] to say, because it's common ground
that she knew what her future costs were going to
be at the mediation in
February of 2022. So, to the extent to which [the Client] is taken to be saying
that she never knew what her
legal costs were going to be, she is not being
queried further about this, he said:
She doesn’t say she
wasn’t clear until X date. She’s attempting to portray an ongoing
ambiguity at a time when that’s
just not true.
do not attribute to the Client’s words the same meaning the
applicant’s counsel appears to give them. The complaint
that the applicant
“has not been clear from the beginning on what her final estimated charges
could be” is consistent
with the circumstance that the applicant provided
the Client with a costs notice at a mediation in February 2022. Not being clear
“from the beginning” does not necessarily mean that there has been a
lack of clarity about costs until the very end.
It may simply mean that there
was a lack of clarity at the beginning (and for a significant amount of time
after that).
applicant contends that any conduct prior to 2022 was not within the scope of
the complaint, because the Client wrote, in response
to the question “When
did the conduct occur?”, “From 2022 to date.” The printed
words on the complaint form,
following this question, indicate that the question
on the form is asked for the purpose of deciding whether the complaint is out
If the conduct you are complaining about occurred more than
three years ago, your complaint cannot be dealt with unless the Council
ACT Law Society determines that:
and fair to deal with the complaint having regard to the delay and the reasons
for the delay; or
The complaint
involves an allegation of professional misconduct and it is in the public
interest to deal with the complaint.
do not consider that the Client’s identification of the conduct as
occurring from 2022 to date, on the complaint form, strictly
limits the scope of
the complaint to that period, when the complaint as a whole is considered. The
complaint that the applicant “has
not been clear from the beginning on
what her final estimated charges could be” is plainly intended to refer to
“the beginning” of the matter, in 2021. Construed fairly,
the complaint includes this earlier conduct.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal, standing in the Law Society’s shoes, is entitled to make a
decision about how to deal with this aspect
of the Client’s complaint, and
is not required to confine itself to the period from January 2022 onwards.
Client’s complaint extends to a range of other matters, such as poor time
management, not getting back to the Client as
soon as possible, ignoring emails
and withholding documents from the Client. We do not have any material before us
which supports
those aspects of the complaint and it was not suggested by either
party that we should make findings about those aspects.
note that the Law Society considered in its statement of reasons dated 17
December 2024 that the applicant should have, but did
not, advise the Client
that Counsel’s costs agreement allowed her to charge a cancellation fee,
and that she had breached various
Conduct Rules in doing so, notwithstanding the
fact that Counsel’s fees were ultimately
Again, there is limited
material before us in relation to this aspect of the complaint. In its statement
of reasons, the Law Society
recognised that the Client had been provided with a
copy of Counsel’s costs agreement, which was “only” two pages
long and that the Client had the opportunity to raise any questions or concerns
It decided, however,
that there was no reasonable likelihood the applicant would be found guilty by
ACAT of unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct in
respect of this matter, within section 412(1)(a) of the Act, so decided not to
take any action
in respect of it.
Law Society did not invite the Tribunal to consider whether the
applicant’s failure to advise the Client about Counsel’s
agreement could give rise to disciplinary action, either considered in isolation
or considered together with the failure to
comply with her costs disclosure
obligations. Nor did it make any submissions about any aspect of the complaint
other than the costs
disclosure aspect. Both parties appeared to consider that
the only issue before the Tribunal concerned the applicant’s failure
provide the Client with the required costs disclosure.
would be procedurally unfair for the Tribunal to make any adverse findings
against the applicant in respect of the aspects of the
Complaint which were not
the subject of submissions by the Law Society and we have not done so. There is
a question, however, as
to whether our task on an appeal is to consider the
entire complaint giving rise to disciplinary action, and to review the Law
decision in relation to that complaint as a whole, or whether
our role is more limited.
application before us is an application for a merits review of the Law
Society’s decision to “take action under s
413 in relation to
practitioner.”
view, we are confined to considering the matter which gave rise to the Law
Society’s decision to take action and the
other aspects of the complaint
which were implicitly dismissed by the Law Society are not before us. On another
view, our role is
to decide what the correct or preferable decision on the basis
of all of the material which was before the Law Society and on the
basis of the
complaint considered as a whole.
would have been desirable for the Law Society to provide the Tribunal with all
of the material before it and to identify that it
had done so, so that the
Tribunal could consider what course it was entitled to take and what course was
most appropriate. As that
did not occur, we have proceeded to consider only the
costs disclosure allegations which formed the basis for disciplinary
Findings as to costs disclosure
is no dispute that the applicant failed to comply with her obligation under
section 269 of the Act to make a costs disclosure
to the Client. She was obliged
to disclose “an estimate of the total legal costs, if reasonably
practicable or, if it is not
reasonably practicable to estimate the total legal
costs, a range of estimates of the total legal costs and an explanation of the
major variables that will affect the working out of the
applicant sent the client a proposed costs agreement and costs disclosure
statement on 29 July 2021, she did not provide
an estimate of the total legal
costs or a range of estimates of such costs at that time.
applicant’s law practice was obliged to make this disclosure “in
writing before, or as soon as practicable after,
the law practice is retained in
the matter.”
find that it was practicable for the applicant to provide an estimate of total
legal costs, or a range of estimates of the total
legal costs and an explanation
of the major variables that would affect the working out of the costs, shortly
after she was retained
in the Client’s matter, and in any event by 29 July
2021. Whilst we accept that the applicant was busy around this time attending
the Client’s matters, and that the Client’s “case was very
complicated to start off
applicant’s first priority should have been to attend to her statutory
obligations. She had provided the Client an oral
estimate of total costs of
$50,000, on her own evidence, and we are not persuaded that she could not have
put that estimate in writing
around that time, or otherwise identified a range
of estimates of the total legal costs in writing with the required
explanation.
applicant accepted that, between July 2021 and February 2022, she knew that
section 269 of the Act required her to disclose to
a client an estimate of total
legal costs if reasonably practicable, or if not reasonably practicable to
estimate the total legal
costs, and to disclose a range of estimates of total
legal costs and an explanation of the major variables that will affect the
out of the costs.
also accepted that she knew this had to be done in writing, before or as soon as
practicable after she was
she may have made oral costs disclosures, as she states, this is not what the
Act requires.
was a factual issue as to whether the applicant had provided the Client with a
Family Court costs notice at a mediation in February
2022. The evidence of the
Clerk, employed at the relevant time as a clerk in the applicant’s firm,
is that he prepared a costs
notice for the Client on the applicant’s
directions. His evidence was that the estimate of costs, if the matter proceeded
a final hearing, was $50,000 plus Counsel’s fees. He gave evidence that
he had since been able to locate the costs notice in
hard copy or on the
applicant also gave evidence that the Clerk prepared the costs notice, on her
directions, and that, on the day of the mediation,
being 9 February 2022, she
handed a copy of the costs notice to the
Her evidence is that she
has been unable to locate a copy of the costs notice on her computer system or
to locate a hard copy on
applicant accepted, when under cross-examination, that she had not referred in
her response to the Law Society to the costs notice
given to the Client in
February 2022. She explained that she had not referred to it because it was
“a Family Court costs notice,
as opposed to a costs disclosure, costs
agreement.”
accept the evidence of the applicant and the Clerk that the applicant gave the
Client a written costs notice at the mediation of
9 February 2022. The Clerk was
not required for cross examination. It is unlikely that the Family Court would
have held the mediation
without the costs notice, as Mr Crispin
Further, after the
applicant gave her evidence, the Law Society indicated through its counsel that
it did not dispute that the applicant
had given the Client the costs
What action should the Tribunal take?
relevant conduct, then, is the applicant’s failure to provide the Client
with a written costs disclosure, in accordance
with the Act, between July 2021
and February 2022. The circumstance that the applicant breached her obligations
under 269 of the
Act does not appear to be
We find that she did
fail to comply with her obligations under section 269(1)(d) in this period.
are not satisfied that “there is no reasonable likelihood that the
practitioner will be found guilty by the ACAT of ... unsatisfactory
professional
conduct” within section 412(1)(a) of the Act, such that we could dismiss
the complaint. The Tribunal has found,
in other proceedings, that the failure to
provide a costs disclosure in accordance with the Act constituted unsatisfactory
professional
Taking that
decision into account, as well as the mandatory nature of the obligation to
comply with sections 269 and 271 of the Act,
and the importance of the costs
disclosure provisions of the Act to the solicitor-client relationship, we find
that there is a reasonable
likelihood that the applicant would be found guilty
by the ACAT (differently constituted) of unsatisfactory professional conduct,
but not professional misconduct, within section 413(1)(b) of the Act.
is no dispute that the Law Society completed the investigation into the
complaint, within section 413(1)(a). We are also satisfied,
having regard to the
Law Society’s
concession,
applicant is generally competent and diligent, within section 413(1)(c) of the
Act. We are satisfied that the applicant’s
unsatisfactory professional
conduct can be dealt with adequately under section 413, within section
413(1)(d). Accordingly, we have
power to consider whether to make orders under
section 413(2) of the Act and what orders to make.
Law Society submitted that the Tribunal should confirm its decision as the
correct or preferable decision, save that the fine
the applicant is to pay
should be increased to
It put the applicant
on notice that it would be seeking such an order by letter dated 11 March 2025.
In that letter, the Law Society
stated that it sought “a higher fine to
compensate the Council for the fees it will incur in relation to this
The Law Society relied upon the decision in
Legal Practitioner
201823 (Eunice Ryan) v Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital
[2019] ACAT 97
in support of its contention that the
Tribunal has power to make such an order. At the hearing, Mr Moujalli explained
that section
416(4) provides that the Tribunal may make an order mentioned in
section 425(3) to (5), and that section 425(5)(a), read with section
permits the Tribunal to make an order that a practitioner pay a fine of up to
applicant submitted, in her written submissions in reply and at the hearing,
that to use the power to impose a fine to compensate
the Law Society for its
costs would be to use the power for an improper
The applicant
pointed out that the Act does not give the Tribunal power, when considering an
appeal under section 416, to make a
costs order.
Moujalli conceded at the hearing that the applicant’s point was valid and
that there should not be a higher fine to compensate
the respondent for its
costs liability. We agree. However, he submitted that there should be a higher
fine so that the decision of
the tribunal serves a deterrent effect to the
profession generally, to emphasise the importance of compliance with the
costs disclosure provisions of the
Mr Moujalli also
submitted that a higher fine was appropriate because this was not the first time
that the applicant had failed to
comply with costs disclosure under the
and because the
applicant did not indicate any insight or contrition in relation to her
are not satisfied that the applicant should be ordered to pay a higher fine. The
legislature has indicated that the deterrence,
by way of a fine, is to be
limited to $1,500 when the Law Society makes a summary decision. Whilst it is
open to the Tribunal to
order a higher fine on appeal, no good reason has been
demonstrated to do so in this case. The applicant did not show much contrition
at the hearing, but nor had she done so at the time the Law Society imposed its
fine of $1,500. The applicant did show some limited
insight, in that she
indicated that she now understands that she contravened the relevant costs
disclosure provisions. Whilst the
applicant failed to comply with the costs
disclosure provisions of the Act on a previous occasion, in 2011, a fine has
been imposed by the Law Society in relation to that failure and it is
increase the fine, the Law Society’s concession that the applicant is
generally competent and diligent, which it did
not ask us to disturb.
order the applicant to pay a higher fine would have the likely effect, in the
circumstances of this case, of deterring practitioners
from appealing to the
Tribunal under section 416 against a fine. That is not a desirable outcome.
our view that we would not impose a higher fine if we had power to do so, we do
not need to consider the applicant’s submission
that the Tribunal does not
have power to do so, because (the applicant submits) the orders in section 427
are predicated upon a finding
of unsatisfactory professional conduct having been
our view, the respondent’s decisions to publicly reprimand the applicant,
to order her to pay a fine of $1500 and to undertake
a course in costs
disclosure within 6 months, are the correct and preferable decisions. Those
orders serve the purpose of both specific
and general deterrence in relation to
non-compliance with the costs disclosure provisions in the Act. They also
promote and enforce
the professional standards and competence of
practitioners, by requiring the applicant to complete training in a relevant
Form of Orders
Law Society’s decision under section 413 of the Act requires the applicant
to pay money and undertake the course within
a period referable to the Law
Society’s decision. Orders may need to be made varying those directions
such that the time for
compliance commences at the date of the Tribunal’s
decision. We will invite the parties to make submissions at a short hearing
to the appropriate form of orders.
parties indicated that they may wish to be heard as to whether the interim
non-publication and anonymisation orders, made by the
Tribunal, should be
continued. We have made orders to allow submissions to be made on that issue at
the further hearing.
The Tribunal orders that:
respondent’s decision to publicly reprimand the applicant is
matter is listed for a hearing on 7 October 2025 at 10am for one hour, for the
parties to make submissions about:
(a) the form of the orders the Tribunal should make;
(b) whether the interim non-publication and anonymisation orders made in this
matter should be continued, in the form of final orders,
or revoked.
......................................
Presidential Member J Lucy
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr T Crispin
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Ray Swift Moutrage and Associates
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr D Moujalli
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Thomson Geer
Applicant’s Witness
Statement dated 2 April 2025 at [7]
Exhibit MM1 211-218
Applicant’s Witness
Statement dated 2 April 2025 at [28]-[29]. A copy of the notice was not
available to the Tribunal, however,
the respondent did not dispute the notice
was given and it contained the cost estimate as described.
Exhibit MM1 pages 2-3
Exhibit MM1 pages 73-75,
Exhibit MM1 page 76
Exhibit MM1 page 18
Exhibit MM1 page 78
Exhibit MM1 pages 7-35
Exhibit MM1 pages 81-104
Exhibit MM1 page 166
Exhibit MM1 pages 31-32
Exhibit-MM1 pages 4-6
Exhibit MM1 pages 45-177
Exhibit MM1 pages
Exhibit MM1 pages
Exhibit MM1 pages
Exhibit MM1 pages
Exhibit MM1 pages
Exhibit MM1 pages
Exhibit MM1 page 513-524
Act, s 416(1); Table 416,
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 4, lines 25-33
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 58, line 47 to page 60, line 4
Legal Practitioner
Legal Practitioner
Legal Practitioner
Act, s 390(1)
Act, s 391(1)
Act, Dictionary
Act, s 397(1) and (4)
Act, s 397(3)(a) and (d)
Act, ss 398(1) and (3)
Act, s 399(1)(b)
Act, s 406(1) and (2)
Applicant’s written
submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [62]
Applicant’s written
submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [60]-[61]
Applicant’s written
submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [60]
Herron v McGregor
(1986) 6 NSWLR 246
Applicant’s written
submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [57]
Applicant’s written
submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [57]
Applicant’s written
submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [52], [58]
Applicant’s written
submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [59]
Jago v District Court of
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR 23
[1989] HCA 46
Williams v Spautz
[1992] HCA 34
174 CLR 509
[1992] HCA 34
Act, s 393(3)
Act, s 393(1)
Act, s 390(1), 391(1)
Act, s 399(1)(b) and (d)
See Applicant’s
written submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [59]
Act, s 399(1)(b)
Applicant’s written
submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [57]
Applicant’s written
submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [53]
Applicant’s written
submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [54]
Applicant’s written
submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [55]
Applicant’s written
submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [56]
See respondent’s
submissions dated 16 May 2025 at [4.5]-[4.6]
Applicant’s written
submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [31]
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 60, lines 18-21
Applicant’s written
submissions filed on 7 May 2025 at [16]
Law Society’s
statement of reasons provided pursuant to section 415(d) of the Act, for the
decision made on 2 December 2024,
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 60, lines 37 to 45
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 61, line 23
Applicant’s written
submissions, dated 7 May 2025, para 48
Applicant’s written
submissions, dated 7 May 2025, para 50
Act, s 416(3)
Act, s 410(1);
Practitioner 202021 v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2021] ACAT 74
See Act, s 409(1)
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 78, lines 16-17
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 49, lines 37 to 41
At [77]-[78]
Act, s 416, Table 416, item
Act, s 269(1)(d)
Act, s 271(1)
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 23, line 42
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 19, lines 21 to 29
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 19, line 46 to page 20, line 10
The Clerk’s Statement,
filed on 3 April 2025, at [5] to [6]
Applicant’s statement,
filed on 3 April 2025, at [28]-[29]
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 26, line 33 to page 27, line 10
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 58, lines 14-18
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 58, line 20
See Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 78 at lines 35-37
Council of the Law
Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner M1
(Mona Moutrage)
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 79 at lines 46-47
Respondent’s
submissions dated 16 May 2025 at [8.12]
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 84, lines 14 to 40
Applicant’s written
submissions in reply dated 20 May 2025 at [21]-[23] and Transcript dated
23 May 2025, page 63, lines 19-28
and page 64, lines 3-5
Transcript dated 23 May 2025, page 83, lines 44 to
47 and page 85, lines 11 to 13
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 85, lines 17 to 19
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 86, lines 4 to 6
Transcript dated 23 May
2025, page 87, lines 24 to 31
RTF format (412 KB)
Signed PDF/A format