Police v James Chesworth [2024] ACTMC 32 (29 November 2024)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Police v James Chesworth
[2024] ACTMC 32
Hearing Date:
Special Magistrate Urbas
See [82] – [84]
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
- Obtaining financial advantage by deception –
Forgery – Using a false document
Legislation Cited:
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT) ss 18, 20, 22, 38, 56, 57, 300, 305, 332,
343, 346, 347
Crimes Act 1900
Legislation Act 2001
Cases Cited:
Brott v The Queen
[1992] HCA 5
(1992) 173 CLR 426
Kennison v Daire
[1986] HCA 4
(1986) 160 CLR 129
[1959] HCA 70
Ansari v R, Ansari v R
[2007] NSWCCA 204
[2008] NSWCCA 175
Taylor v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 162
Fisher v Bennett
[1987] ACTSC 27
(1987) 85 FLR 469
[2014] ACTSC 47
Re London and Globe Finance Corporation
[1903] UKLawRpCh 47
(1903) 1 Ch 728
[1982] EWCA Crim 2
[1982] QB 1053
[1998] HCA 7
(1998) 192 CLR 493
R v Baxter and Brading
DPP v Booth
[2018] ACTCA 8
Walden v Hensler
; (1987) 163 CLR
R v Hobart Magalu
(1974) PNGLR 188
[2001] NSWCCA 208
; (2001) A Crim R 310
Macleod v The Queen
[2003] HCA 24
(2003) 214 CLR 230
Roberts v Western Australia
(2005) 29 WAR 445
Woolmington v DPP
[1935] AC 462
[2010] ACTSC 98
Liberato v R
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
[2019] HCA 48
(2019) 268 CLR 57
Finau v The Queen
[2021] ACTCA
R v Markuleski
[2001] NSWCCA 290
; (2001) 52 NSWLR 82
v The Queen
[1960] HCA 15
(1960) 102 CLR 353
Texts Cited:
Australian Government, Attorney-General’s Department (March 2002),
Commonwealth Criminal Code: Guide for Practitioners
Simon Cocks (Informant)
James Chesworth (Defendant)
Representation:
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Robert Candelori (Defendant)
File Number:
CC 11831 of 2024
CC 11832 of 2024
CC 11833 of 2024
SPECIAL MAGISTRATE URBAS
Defendant appeared before the Court charged with three offences:
CC2024/1831:
Obtaining financial advantage by deception, contrary to
Criminal Code
CC2024/1832:
Forgery, contrary to
Criminal Code 2002
CC2024/1833:
Using a false document,
Criminal Code 2002
offence carries a maximum penalty of 10 years’ imprisonment and/or 1000
penalty units, though an election for summary jurisdiction
brings the maximum
for each offence to imprisonment for 5 years and/or $15,000 fine:
is convenient to analyse the offences in temporal order. The Prosecution’s
case is that the Defendant first made a false
document by affixing his former
wife’s electronic signature to a bank withdrawal form, without her
consent, thus committing
a forgery. Then, secondly, he presented that form to
the Australian and New Zealand (ANZ) Bank to withdraw funds from their jointly
self-managed superannuation fund, constituting a use of the false document.
These offences were allegedly committed on 17 July 2023.
Finally, by obtaining
and using those funds to pay for a life insurance policy, he obtained financial
advantage by deception, allegedly
on 21 July 2023.
Defendant denies that he acted dishonestly and raises a claim of right defence:
Criminal Code 2002
, s 38. However, there is some doubt as to which
offence this defence may apply.
common law, forgery consists in the
“making (of) an instrument which
purports to be that which it is not"
or in making a
“document which not only tells a lie, but tells a lie about
Brott v The Queen
[1992] HCA 5
(1992) 173 CLR 426
per Brennan J at [2],
Deane J at [3], Toohey and Gaudron JJ at [8] – [12]; McHugh J at [4]
– [12]. McHugh J observed
In the paradigm case
of forgery, the offence consists in signing another person's name, real or
fictitious, to an instrument with
intent to defraud.
it is not forgery to use another’s signature with that person’s
consent or authority:
Brott v The Queen
, Brennan J at [5], citing older
authorities.
approach is reflected in the terms used in Part 3.6 the
Criminal Code
is defined in s 343 to include
“anything on which there are figures, marks, numbers, perforations,
symbols or anything else that can be responded to by a computer,
electronic device”
‘false document’
in s 344 to include a document purporting:
(a) to have
been made in the form in which it is made by a person who did not make it in
that form; or
(b) to have been made in the form in which it is made on the
authority of a person who did not authorise its making in that form;
concept of inducing the acceptance of a document as genuine is elaborated in s
345 to include conduct
“causing a computer, machine or electronic
device to respond to the document as if it were genuine”
Kennison v Daire
[1986] HCA 4
(1986) 160 CLR 129.
elements of the forgery offence charged under
Criminal Code 2002
are as follow:
made a false document (physical element);
intended to make a false document (default fault element);
intended to use the false document to dishonestly induce another person to
accept it as genuine and because that other person
accepts it as genuine, to
dishonestly obtain a gain (specified fault element of ulterior
intention).
s 18 of the
Criminal Code 2002
‘intention’
relation to conduct, circumstance and result, the non-Code term
‘ulterior intention’
is used to refer to a fault element
which does not correspond to any particular physical element but is stipulated
by the statute
to apply to the entire
distinguishing feature of ulterior intentions is the requirement of proof of
intention to achieve an objective which is not a physical element of
any offence
. The objective, whether or not achieved, is neither a result nor
a circumstance specified in any offence and it is quite distinct
conduct which it accompanies.
this instance, the ulterior intention is both as to dishonestly inducing another
person to accept the false document as genuine
and as to thereby dishonestly
obtaining a gain. The embedded terms
‘dishonest’
are defined for
Chapter 3 of the Code in s 300, which provides a test for dishonesty having
regard to the standards of ordinary people.
Dishonesty for an offence under that
Chapter is a matter for the trier of fact, according to s
Using a false document
offence of using a false document derives from the common law crime of
“forge and utter”
which can apply to the use of forged bank
withdrawal forms to draw funds:
[1959] HCA 70
(1959) 108 CLR
elements of the offence charged under
Criminal Code 2002
, s 347 are as
used a document (physical element);
intended to use the document (default fault element);
document was false (physical element);
knew the document was false (specified fault element)
intended to use the false document to dishonestly induce another person to
accept it as genuine and because that other person
accepts it as genuine, to
dishonestly obtain a gain (specified fault element of ulterior
intention).
of a document
“involves the idea of actual deployment by the person
charged or by his or her agent or a fellow participant”
[2008] NSWCCA 175
, per Spigelman CJ at [36].
provisions of Part 3.6, including the definitions of
‘false document’
‘inducing a person to accept a document
as genuine’
also apply to this offence, as well as the definitions in
s 300. Dishonesty is a matter for the trier of fact, according to s
Obtaining financial advantage by deception
offence is a statutory form of the crime generically referred to as
“fraud”. The elements of the offence charged
Criminal Code
, s 332 are as follow:
obtained a financial advantage (physical element);
intended to obtain a financial advantage (default fault element);
financial advantage was obtained from someone else (physical element);
was reckless as to whether the financial advantage was obtained from someone
else (default fault element);
financial advantage was obtained by deception (physical element);
was reckless as to whether the financial advantage was obtained by deception
(default fault element);
obtaining by deception was dishonest (specified fault element).
offence occurs in Part 3.3, for which
‘deception’
in s 325 as including an intentional or reckless deception, whether by words or
conduct, including conduct
“causing a computer, machine or electronic
device to respond to the document as if it were genuine”
‘financial advantage’
being defined for other parts of the
Code including its Dictionary, there is no definition of the term specifically
for Part 3.3 and
thus for the s 332 offence.
Taylor v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 162
(2019) 59 VR 163
, the words of
Miles CJ in
Fisher v Bennett
[1987] ACTSC 27
(1987) 85 FLR 469
were cited with approval:
I do not think that it is necessary to
resort to dictionary definitions of the word ‘financial’ or the word
‘advantage’.
I think that it is inescapable that an advantage
involves a particular situation which is more beneficial to the person concerned
than another relevant situation with which it is compared. A financial
advantage involves a situation which from the financial aspect
beneficial than another situation. When one speaks of obtaining a financial
advantage by deception, there is imported in
my view the notion of
improving a financial situation by means of that deception.
that case, Miles CJ was unable to conclude that any financial benefit had
accrued to the appellant who had given a valueless cheque
to a creditor seeking
payment of a debt, observing that as the debt remained he was “unable to
see how the retention of the
continuing benefit on the facts of the case
constitutes a financial advantage in any proper sense of that term” (at
to deception, apart from the s 325 elaboration, the essence of the term’s
meaning is inducing someone else
“to believe that a thing is true which
is false, and which the person practising that deceit knows or believes to be
R v Oettinger
[2014] ACTSC 47
, per Murrell CJ at [70]
Re London and Globe Finance Corporation Ltd
[1903] UKLawRpCh 47
(1903) 1 Ch
at 732, Buckley J.
fault elements of intention and recklessness are as defined in
Criminal Code
, ss 18 and 20, with s 22 providing the default where a fault element is
not provided for a physical element. Intending to obtain
a result, such a
financial advantage, means being aware that the result will happen in the
ordinary course of events: s 18(2). Recklessness
as to circumstance or result
entails a person’s awareness of a substantial risk that the circumstance
or result will exist
and, in the circumstances known to the person,
unjustifiability of taking the risk: s 20(1) and
test for dishonesty is in two parts, following the analysis in
[1982] EWCA Crim 2
[1982] QB 1053
, with the definition in
Criminal Code 2002
, s 300 being as
"dishonest"
(a) dishonest according to the standards of ordinary
people; and
(b) known by the defendant to be dishonest according
to the standards of ordinary people.
[1998] HCA 7
(1998) 192 CLR 493
, a case involving charges of
conspiracy to defraud the Commonwealth, Toohey and Gaudron JJ stated at [18]
(note omitted):
In a case in which it is necessary for a jury to
decide whether an act is dishonest, the proper course is for the trial judge to
the knowledge, belief or intent which is said to render that act
dishonest and to instruct the jury to decide whether the accused
knowledge, belief or intent and, if so, to determine whether, on that account,
the act was dishonest. Necessarily, the test
to be applied in deciding whether
the act done is properly characterised as dishonest will differ depending on
whether the question
is whether it was dishonest according to ordinary notions
or dishonest in some special sense. If the question is whether the act
dishonest according to ordinary notions, it is sufficient that the jury be
instructed that that is to be decided by the standards
of ordinary, decent
people. However, if "dishonest" is used in some special sense in legislation
creating an offence, it will ordinarily
be necessary for the jury to be told
what is or, perhaps, more usually, what is not meant by that
word. Certainly, it will be necessary
for the jury to be instructed as to
that special meaning if there is an issue whether the act in question is
properly characterised
as dishonest.
that case, a majority held that the particular offence charged entailed
dishonesty relating to both the means agreed upon to effect
the fraud against
the Commonwealth and also the aim of bringing about a situation prejudicing the
legal rights or interests of others.
If this was explained to a jury, then a
further general direction about dishonesty would be “superfluous”
(per Toohey
and Gaudron JJ at [33]) but as the trial judge had given such a
direction in terms that were unduly favourable to the appellant,
there was no
miscarriage of justice (per Toohey and Gaudron JJ at [35] and per McHugh J at
[91]) and the appeal was dismissed.
R v Baxter and Brading
[2012] ACTSC 82
, Penfold J at [92] carefully
distinguished dishonesty under the
Criminal Code 2002
from other bases on
which the community might disapprove of an action taken, in that case forcible
entry to recover property asserted
to belong to the
Defining the outer limits of the concept of
“dishonesty” is difficult, and it is a question on which
“ordinary people”
could in my view reasonably differ. The concept
has an important role in the definition of various offences, and there are real
in blurring the boundaries intended to be created by the use of such
specific concepts – as already noted, “dishonesty”
merely a synonym for “unacceptable” or “criminal”. It is
not enough that a court concludes (as I have
in this case) that a person has
engaged in conduct that ordinary people would find unacceptable. Such a
conclusion does not oblige,
or enable, the court to give an unnatural or
extended meaning to a concept such as “dishonesty” in order to
finding that the unacceptable conduct constitutes the offence that
happens to have been charged in the particular case. Conduct that
unacceptable not because it is dishonest in the normal sense of the word but
because it involves other objectionable elements
(for instance, a reliance on
threats or implied threats) is the subject of other prohibitions ...
Honour was unable to be satisfied that there was the required dishonesty (at
Claim of right
common law defence of claim of right may extend to offences such as forging and
Walden v Hensler
[1987] HCA 54
(1987) 163 CLR 561
per Gaudron
J at [6] citing
R v Hobart Magalu
(1974) PNGLR 188; or to robbery:
[2001] NSWCCA 208
; (2001) A Crim R 310. However, the statutory
formulation in
Criminal Code 2002
, s 38 is narrower due to the
restriction in subsection (1) that it apples to
“an offence that has a
physical element relating to property”
. The subsection then provides
that a person is not criminally responsible for such an offence
(a) when carrying out
the conduct required for the offence, the person is under a mistaken
belief about a proprietary or possessory
(b) the existence of the right would negate a fault element for
any physical element of the offence.
form of the claim of right defence is thus a subspecies of the mistake defence,
restricted to mistake as to a proprietary or
possessory right, where the
hypothetical existence of the right would negate a fault element, typically a
fault element of dishonesty,
for a physical element.
(2) then goes on to provide a complementary claim of right defence
any other offence arising necessarily out of the exercise of a proprietary or
possessory right that the person mistakenly
believes to exist”
has been described as
“a true claim of right defence, which goes beyond
mere negation of fault elements, in offences which involve neither force nor
violation of property
However, its
scope is restricted by the requirement that the offence alleged has been one
“arising necessarily out of the exercise of [the right]”
which will not excuse acts of dishonesty chosen under the pretext of vindicating
one’s rights:
“Deception is a tactic one may choose in pursuit of
one’s rights; however it is no way necessary to their
is defined somewhat unhelpfully in the Dictionary to the Code as including
electricity, gas, water, wild animals and body
organs, but there is a signpost
reference also to the definition in the Dictionary to the
Legislation Act
, which provides:
means any legal or
equitable estate or interest (whether present or future, vested or contingent,
or tangible or intangible) in real
or personal property of any
description (including money), and includes a thing in action.
thing in action
intangible personal property right recognised and protected by the
law. Examples include debts, money held in a bank, shares,
rights under a trust,
conceded by the Defendant’s legal representative during the hearing, it is
difficult to see how either the forgery offence
or the use of false document
offence has a physical element relating to property, and therefore the
claim of right defence is not available for those two offences:
[2018] ACTCA 8
– [61], citing
[1987] HCA 54
(1987) 163 CLR 561
[2003] HCA 24
(2003) 214 CLR 230
, at [39] – [49]. However,
variant may be available, and will need to be considered.
contrast, the obtaining of a financial advantage offence does present as having
a physical element relating to property, particularly
in a case such as the
present where it is alleged that the Defendant obtained access to funds in a
superannuation account through
deception. The
form of the claim of right
defence may then need to be considered for this offence, particularly to the
extent that any mistake as
to proprietary or possessory right might negate
dishonesty.
this defence is found in
Criminal Code 2002
, Part 2.3 (Circumstances in
which there is no criminal responsibility), the Defendant has an evidential
burden in relation to the
matter, which is the burden of presenting or pointing
to evidence that suggests a reasonable possibility that the matter exists or
does not exist, per s 58(2) and (7). The Prosecution then has the legal burden
of disproving the defence, to the standard of beyond
reasonable doubt, per s
56(2), s 57(1).
an evidential burden is discharged in relation to a claim of right, the
Prosecution must then prove beyond reasonable doubt
that there was no genuine
belief that, if true, would negate liability for the offence charged:
v Western Australia
[2005] WASCA 37
(2005) 29 WAR 445
per Templeman J at
[32]. In the terms used by the
Criminal Code 2002
, s 38(1), this
translates as proving beyond reasonable doubt that either the Defendant had no
mistaken belief about a proprietary
or possessory right or that the existence of
such a right would not negate a fault element for any physical
element of the offence,
in particular, dishonesty.
above case illustrates a further interesting aspect of claim of right in
relation to forgery. Noting that the offence under the
Western Australian
Criminal Code has as its first element the intent to defraud, coupled with
either forging or uttering, Templeman
J observed at [28]:
that a person accused of forging who had no intention to defraud, could not be
guilty of that offence. It would therefore
be otiose to raise the defence of
honest claim of right to the property acquired by the accused person. However,
if the evidence
disclosed that the accused might have had an honest belief in
his or her entitlement to the relevant property, it would be necessary
jury to consider whether the prosecution had satisfied it beyond reasonable
doubt that the accused had any intention to defraud.
position under the
Criminal Code 2002
is similar. If the evidence does
not establish to the criminal standard that the Defendant intended to use a
false document to dishonestly
induce another person to accept it as genuine and
because that other person accepts it as genuine, to dishonestly obtain a gain,
then neither the forgery offence in s 346 or the use offence in s 347 can be
made out, notwithstanding that a claim of right argument
may also be raised.
This will remain the case even if the s 38(2) defence is available although the
s 38(1) defence is not.
on the other hand, the evidence does establish the statutory fault element, then
s 38(2) at least falls to be considered.
Defendant’s former wife gave evidence. Although identified by her married
name in the documents tendered, she had a different
surname at the time of
giving her evidence during the proceedings, and it is in my view appropriate and
not disrespectful to refer
to her simply as the Complainant, particularly given
that it is her electronic signature that, on the Prosecution’s case, was
used without her consent by her former husband to withdraw funds from a
self-managed superannuation fund (SMSF) and thereby to dishonestly
financial advantage from her.
Complainant said that she and the Defendant had been married in 2011, had
thereafter shared finances including a number of bank
accounts, and that she had
been the primary income earner for most of the time until their separation in
2022, while he had been
mainly in charge of managing their finances including
the SMSF, of which both were trustees and beneficiaries. She said she had not
really been aware whether the two of them had individual accounts within the
fund but knew that her employment superannuation was
paid into the fund, mainly
related to her employment in the public service. A joint ANZ account was used
for SMSF transactions.
the relationship broke down in mid-2022, she began to remove the Defendant from
her cards as a secondary card holder, and placed
restrictions on how any funds
could be accessed. Over the next year, and by mid-2023, she controlled her own
salary in a sole account
and was responsible for her own spending. The
restrictions were also put in place for the ANZ account.
17 May 2023, the couple had divorced and signed Family Court of Australia
consent orders dealing with the division of assets and
property, including
winding up the SMSF and restraining them both from dealing with the funds
therein other than to give effect to
the consent orders (Exhibit 1a: Sealed copy
of consent orders; Exhibit 1b: signed copy of consent orders).
August 2022, an interim Family Violence Order (FVO) was obtained by the
Complainant, a condition of which was to prohibit contact
between them except
through their lawyers. After this time, the Complainant said that she was no
longer putting funds into the SMSF
and had reverted to using her employer super
fund. However, each continued to have access as co-trustees.
Complainant said that she accessed the ANZ account through an application on her
mobile phone, allowing her to see any transactions.
The funds in this account
came from her super as well as some shares. She gave evidence of having imposed
restrictions on this account,
requiring that the bank obtained both her and the
Defendant’s signature on any withdrawal request as well as confirm the
instructions
through phone calls to both. Her evidence was that the bank
followed the signature requirement but not, or not always, the phone
confirmation backup. This arrangement lasted from September 2022 into mid-2023,
the time of the alleged offences.
described the process as follows in an email chain sent to the Informant
(Exhibit 2):
I fill out the withdrawal form and send to my family
lawyer who then passes onto James’ lawyer to complete and progress to ANZ
to process (including a phone call to both parties to confirm the withdrawal is
mutually agreed prior to processing the form).
email chain also includes an example of her communications with the bank dated 1
February 2023 confirming her agreement as one
of the trustees of the SMSF to
lift the restriction on the ANZ account to allow payment to be made for a
compliance fee, after which
payment she instructed that the restriction was to
be reinstated. An earlier email chain documents similar instructions being given
by her to the bank to allow payment of an ATO instalment amount on 20 October
2022, again with the instruction to reinstate the restriction
after payment
(Exhibit 3).
Complainant said that there were annually renewed life insurance policies
covering herself and the Defendant with premiums directly
debited from the ANZ
account linked to the SMSF, but that after the withdrawal restriction was
imposed, she was not expecting any
such payment to be made in 2023 as she had
told that it would simply lapse on non-payment, and assumed that this
would apply also to the Defendant’s life insurance policy.
22 July 2023, she noticed an unauthorised transaction on her ANZ mobile phone
application dated 21 July 2022 with a description
WDL OTHER NOMINATED A/C
[series of numbers] LIFE INSURANCE REIMBURSEMEN (sic) in the sum of -$5,243.37.
A screenshot was tendered
(Exhibit 4). She immediately alerted the ANZ bank. She
said that she recognised the numbers in the description as being those of
Defendant’s Westpac account.
this occurred on a Saturday, she was only able to leave a recorded phone message
with the ANZ bank customer support line but sent
an email and followed up with a
phone call on the following Monday. The email was tendered with a date of 23
July 2023 at 12:22 AM
AEST stating that there had been a withdrawal from her
account and paid to the Defendant’s account, which she had not approved
part of the restriction arrangements requiring two signatures for any withdrawal
(Exhibit 5). When she was able to speak to ANZ
bank staff, they advised that
they had received a completed and signed withdrawal form, which bore both her
and the Defendant’s
signatures, but she was insistent that she had not
signed the form or put her electronic signature on it. A copy of the withdrawal
form, which is dated 17 July 2023, was tendered (Exhibit 6).
document instructs the ANZ bank to debit the “ATF Chesworth
Superfund” with BSB and account number provided, and
to credit a different
account with a different BSB with $5243.37 with a reference stating “Life
Insurance Reimbursemant”
(sic). Signatures of the Defendant and the
Complainant appear underneath their respective names, hers with a faint line
what appears to be a hand-written signature. Both signatures bear the
date of 17 July 2023.
Complainant said that she had not spoken to the Defendant or his lawyers on 17
July 2023, had not signed the withdrawal document
at all, had never seen it
before being sent it by the bank, and that the Defendant had never sent it to
her, signed or unsigned.
She stated that she never gave the Defendant permission
to use her electronic signature.
cross-examination, the Complainant maintained that she never gave the Defendant
authority to use her electronic signature on documents,
including those related
to the SMSF even prior to their separation. She agreed that it had been her
unilateral decision to discontinue
her life insurance policy and had not
consulted him as a co-director of the SMSF. She resisted the suggestion that
there were two
separate accounts within the fund corresponding to each of them
as members of the SMSF, saying that she assumed it was one joint
pool of funds.
She said that when she imposed the restriction requiring both signatures it was
because she was afraid that he would
take her money, and that she had
contributed far more to the fund than he had. She did accept that she was the
sole beneficiary of
the Defendant’s life insurance policy. In
re-examination, the Complainant confirmed that she understood the SMSF be one
forensic document examiner gave evidence. Dr Tracey Kajer stated that she had
compared the signature of the Complainant on the ANZ
withdrawal form with her
signatures on several other documents, most notably the Family Court consent
orders that had been signed
by both parties. The finding was that there was a
complete match between the signatures on the withdrawal and consent forms, using
an overlay process described in the expert’s report which was tendered,
with the faint line under the Complainant’s signature
on the withdrawal
form explicable as the result of a
“copy and paste”
as an artefact introduced during the copying (Exhibit 7).
Informant, Constable Simon Cocks, gave evidence. He said that he met with the
Complainant after she contacted ACT Policing and
that he requested documents
from ANZ with her authority and obtained a transaction report for the withdrawal
of $5,243.37 on 21 July
2023 (Exhibit 8). On September 2024, a search warrant
was executed at the Defendant’s then temporary residence at the Adobe
Hotel, where he provided police with his ACT licence, his mobile phone and
laptop computer and told them the passwords for these
devices. Excerpts of the
body-worn camera (BWC) footage taken by the officer during this interaction were
played and tendered (Exhibit
9), in which the Defendant stated that his ex-wife
had been sent and signed the withdrawal, he had permission to withdraw funds,
and was not aware of any relevant document being on his laptop. The Informant
then gave evidence and was cross-examined as to the
further inquiries
Defendant gave evidence. He confirmed that he and the Complainant had married in
2011, had set up the SMSF in 2012 and that he
mainly managed the finances, which
included paying bills, investment strategy and purchasing shares. Any SMSF
documents needed to
be executed by both parties. He said that at times she
signed documents, but at other times she provided him with her electronic
signature, which he then applied with her knowledge over an 11-year period.
August 2022, following the relationship breakdown, he was excluded from their
jointly owned home and was left without income
as he had run his business from
that property. From that time until July 2023, he lived in his car or was in
hospital with severe
depressive illness. He confirmed that consent orders were
signed in May 2023 after mediation, and that the couple had life insurance
policies through the SMSF which were paid annually by direct debit, his being
more expensive due to his medical issues, but the Complainant
beneficiary of his policy in the event of his death. He was declined disability
cover by the insurer, with a higher premium
imposed on the death cover. He said
that he was not aware of the restrictions imposed by her on the ANZ account
until notified by
their accountant and was not aware of any process resulting in
the cancellation of direct debits. He was not receiving correspondence
living in his car.
Defendant was shown a document which he recognised as a OnePath life insurance
policy renewal notice stating that his life cover
of $1,575,000 would be renewed
with an automatic deduction from his nominated account of the annual premium of
$5,243.37 on 30 April
2023 (Exhibit D1). The final page details a 200% medical
loading, which the Defendant explained effectively doubled his premium compared
to his wife’s similar life insurance policy. He said that he did not
receive this renewal notice as he had no access to his
mail at that time. In any
case, there had been no discussion with the Complainant about cancelling either
life insurance policy and
he assumed the renewal would occur as in the past,
“business as usual”
for the SMSF.
the mediation, he learned that his life insurance policy had not been renewed
and phoned OnePath to be told that the direct
debit had been cancelled. He
explained that on the same day, being 25 May 2023, he paid for the policy with
his Mastercard, on the
assurance by OnePath that although the policy had lapsed
it would be reinstated on payment of the overdue premium to the policy
underwriter,
Zurich Australia Ltd. A Mastercard statement for May/June 2023 in
his name shows a payment made on that date of $5,243.37 with his
credit limit
exceeded by the end of the statement period (Exhibit D2). The Defendant
explained that he was concerned he would be
uninsurable if the policy lapsed due
to his ill health, and he had no income and was living on his credit cards. He
said that he
asked his lawyers to contact the Complainant to ask why the renewal
through the direct debit facility had been cancelled, but received
no reply. It
was around this time that he was residing at the Adobe Hotel, when the police
came to speak to him.
that he created the ANZ account withdrawal request
for $5,243.37 by typing in
the BSB and account details, crediting his Westpac account, stating the purpose
of the payment was for
life insurance reimbursement, and he printed and signed a
hard copy of the document. He then attempted to get the Complainant’s
signature by making a request through his lawyers, but there was no reply, and
in his difficult circumstances with his credit cards
, he applied her electronic signature as he had done in the past
on SMSF documentation as
“business as usual”
. He said that he
did not recall where he obtained the signature, but accepted that it could have
been from the consent orders as
the forensic document examiner had
she filed a complaint about the withdrawal and through her lawyers demanded it
be repaid, he said he agreed to do so from the
proceeds of a house sale, which
occurred later.
email trail from the SMSF auditors states that in order to avoid additional
compliance costs there had to be clear documentation
showing how the $5,243.37
payment was an SMSF expense and this was provided (Exhibit D3).
Defendant said in his evidence that although there was only one ANZ bank account
connected to the SMSF, within the fund itself
there were separate accumulation
accounts for himself and the Complainant reflecting their respective
contributions. Taken to the
prepared by Halletts Financial Services Group Pty Ltd, the Defendant identified
statement in his name, showing an accumulation account and a closing
balance at 30 June 2024 of slightly over $21,000. The next page
has a member
statement for the Complainant with a closing balance at 30 June 2024 of over
$334,000 (Exhibit D4).
statements for the previous financial year were also provided (Exhibit D5). The
Defendant explained that the large difference
in the amounts in the two
accumulation funds was due in part to his medical expenses and ATO approved
withdrawals from his separate
fund. Significantly, he pointed to an insurance
premium payment of $6,977.40 in his statement for 2023-2024 while there was no
payment showing from the Complainant’s statement. He said this was
because she had discontinued her life insurance policy while
he had renewed his,
and also explained that there was no such payment recorded for 2022-2023 as he
had paid that premium using personal
funds. He said that he had since been
repaid the $5,243.37 disbursement he had made in July 2023 from the proceeds of
the house sale.
He produced a screenshot from his phone showing a direct credit
of $5,243.37 paid by Bedfords Legal Chesworth into the ANZ account
September 2023 (Exhibit D6).
he was asked about what he told the police during the search warrant execution,
and said that he had been woken up and was
hazy, but admitted that he had not
been completely honest in claiming that the Complainant had in fact signed the
ANZ withdrawal
his cross-examination, the Defendant was pressed on his evasive answers to the
police about what documents would be on his laptop
and accepted that he had not
been as correct as the police would have liked. He repeated that he had just
woken up and thought that
they were referring to paper documents rather than
ones that might be stored electronically. As to his dealings with the SMSF he
maintained that he had a fiduciary duty under the law to continue to operate the
fund as a trustee, including still having permission
to use her signature as in
the past. He maintained that he had tried to contact the Complainant several
times through his lawyers
but without reply, in order to have the restriction
lifted so that he could pay for his life insurance. However, he did agree that
he had not sought her permission to apply her electronic signature.
initially denying it, he then accepted that he had been aware of the
restrictions on the ANZ account from late 2022 or early
2023. He agreed that he
took the funds out of this account some two months after he had paid for his
insurance personally as reimbursement,
a deliberate choice. He did not accept
that the funds in the SMSF were pooled despite some documentation suggesting
this, as the
two members still had separate accumulation funds which were
attributed specifically in the accounting and auditing documents. He
accept that he was not allowed to take funds out to pay for his life insurance
and said that he later agreed to repay the
and was then shown an email between the lawyers stating that he agreed to make
that repayment from the sale of a house. This was
tendered by the Prosecutor
(Exhibit 10).
Defendant acknowledged that he had created the withdrawal document on which he
had put the Complainant’s electronic signature,
but maintained that he did
not believe he needed her consent for that transaction. He denied that he had
obtained a financial advantage
as the funds were owed to him as a reimbursement:
“It’s not a financial advantage if a debt is owed to me.
It’s an equal, balanced transaction”
(Transcript p.145). He
disagreed that he had been dishonest.
re-examination, he authenticated an email trail with his lawyers on 13 June 2024
in which he had responded to a claim by the Complainant
that the SMSF insurance
policies had lapsed with information that his insurance policy
lapsed and was paid for via credit card (and due to be refunded by the
Superfund)”
and asked that she be advised of this event (Exhibit D7).
Further audit documents were also tendered (Exhibits D8 and D9). This closed
Defence case.
Consideration
must give myself the following directions in considering the evidence in this
proceeding:
Prosecution bears the onus of proof in relation to each element of an offence
and the standard of proof is beyond reasonable doubt,
and if there is any
reasonable doubt about an element of an offence there must be a verdict of not
guilty for that offence:
Criminal Code 2002
, ss 56, 57;
Woolmington v
[1935] AC 462;
finder of fact in this proceeding, I also observe:
R v Mulcahy
must bring an open and unbiased mind to the evidence; I must view that material
coldly, clinically and dispassionately, and I must
not let emotion enter into
the decision-making process, because both the Prosecution and the Defendant are
entitled to a verdict
free of partiality, prejudice, favour or ill will.
must determine whether each of the witnesses is an honest and reliable witness;
and whether the witness has an accurate memory of
the event about which the
witness has given evidence.
must determine the relevant facts according to the evidentiary material,
considered logically and rationally, without acting capriciously
irrationally.
use common sense, my individual experience and wisdom, in doing so.
not required by any rule of law, logic or common sense to accept a witness
wholly or to reject a witness wholly; I can accept
everything that a witness has
said if I consider all of it worthy of acceptance, or I can reject everything
that a witness has said
if I consider none of it worthy of acceptance, or I can
accept that part of what a witness said that I consider worthy of acceptance
reject the rest of what that witness said as I consider it unworthy of
acceptance.
to the Defendant having given sworn evidence, I note that he was not required to
do so, but by giving evidence he becomes a witness
whose evidence is not any
better or any worse than the evidence of other witnesses in his trial simply
because he is the Defendant,
and his evidence falls to be considered in the same
way as the evidence of the other witnesses in his trial falls to be considered;
and by giving evidence he did not assume any burden or obligation to prove
anything in his trial.
accept the Defendant’s evidence, or find it to be possibly true, I must
find him not guilty; but even if I reject the Defendant’s
evidence or
version of events, I must put it to one side and assess whether the
Prosecution’s evidence establishes guilt beyond
reasonable doubt:
Liberato v R
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
Da Silva v R
[2019] HCA 48
(2019) 268 CLR 57
Finau v The Queen
[2021] ACTCA 17.
Defence also suggested a direction as there are three charges, so that
non-acceptance of the Complainant’s evidence on one
charge might be taken
into account in relation to other charges:
R v Markuleski
[2001] NSWCCA
; (2001) 52 NSWLR 82.
found the Complainant’s evidence to be generally honest and credible and
not much embellished though she was understandably
unimpressed by the discovery
that her ex-husband had used her digital signature without her permission and
withdrawn a sum of $5,243.37
from their joint SMSF to reimburse his payment of a
life insurance policy that she wanted nothing to do with following the
separation.
However, her knowledge of the operation of the SMSF and the
possibility that the two had separate accumulation funds within it was
and she at one point said that she now knows that this is how the funds were
attributed (Transcript p.61).
also found the Defendant’s evidence to be generally credible, though there
was evasiveness in his answers to the police that
were recorded on the
Informant’s BWC, and his evidence in Court was more forthcoming in some
respects. In particular, he acknowledged
that he had created the withdrawal
document including adding the Complainant’s electronic signature
(Transcript p.144). He
also accepted that he sent the form to the bank for the
purpose of obtaining what he believed was a reimbursement owed to him but
disputed that this was a financial advantage as a debt was owed to him,
describing it as
“an equal, balanced transaction”
(p.145). He
did not agree that he acted dishonestly in doing so (p.147).
a person coming before the Court without a criminal history, the Defendant is
entitled to have his good character considered as
a factor in assessing whether
he committed any offences:
Attwood v The Queen
[1960] HCA 15
However, it is also to be remembered that people do commit crimes for
the first time, including financial crimes.
completeness, I add that the evidence of the forensic document examiner and the
police officer was credible and professionally
presented, though as the origins
of the Complainant’s electronic signature on the withdrawal form were no
longer in dispute
by the end of the case, the expert opinion will not have as
much importance in my consideration as it might otherwise. Arguably,
some expert
opinion on the financial details of the SMSF would have been helpful.
turn now to whether the elements of each offence have been established as
CC2024/1831
Obtaining financial advantage by
deception, contrary to
Criminal Code 2002
obtained a financial advantage (physical element);
pressed in her closing address on what the financial advantage was that the
Defendant had obtained, the Prosecutor characterised
reimbursed that sum of money which he otherwise would not have been entitled to
be reimbursed until the winding up of
(Transcript
to Miles CJ in
Fisher v Bennett
[1987] ACTSC 27
[1987] ACTSC 27
(1987) 85 FLR 469
, I have difficulty in understanding how the Defendant’s payment of
the sum of $5,243.37 from his own funds in the SMSF to his
Westpac account
“constitutes a financial advantage in any proper sense of that
Prosecutor suggested that the SMSF funds were jointly owned property, but the
charge under consideration is not one of appropriating
property, as in a theft,
Criminal Code 2002
, s 305(1) might apply to joint owners;
accepting at least as a reasonable possibility that the Defendant’s view
of the SMSF allocations was correct, and it
was not contradicted by any expert
or ultimately even by the Complainant, and was indeed somewhat supported by the
documentary evidence
(Exhibits D1 – D5), all he did was to transfer an
amount of $5,243.37 from his own funds in the SMSF to his Westpac account;
my common sense and using the somewhat vernacular, when he chose to renew his
life insurance policy he was
“out of pocket”
by that amount,
which was then a credit card debt, but when he reimbursed himself he was neither
the richer nor the poorer for it,
he gained no financial advantage by doing so
and was still
“out of pocket”
by that exact same amount, a
situation he described in his evidence as an
“equal, balanced
transaction”
he did so using undoubtedly deceptive and dishonest means, which I return to
below, and in contravention of a restriction on
the account associated with the
SMSF, does not convert this into a financial advantage as none
intended to obtain a financial advantage (default fault element);
the Defendant’s explanation of his motivations as at least reasonably
possibly true, he was not intending to obtain a
financial advantage through his
actions, as opposed to no doubt obviating some future financial problem on
account of having
“maxed out”
his credit cards and needing to
pay them down;
intended to move money from one account into another, and intended to do so by
using deceptive and dishonest means, but not intending
to obtain financial
advantage thereby.
financial advantage was obtained from someone else (physical
Prosecutor suggested that the someone else could be a corporation, such as the
bank itself or the SMSF:
Legislation Act 2001
that will not assist as the charge particularises the financial advantage as
having been obtained from the Complainant, not
from anyone else;
was uncontested, and was supported by the documentary evidence, that the
Defendant had more than $5,243.37 in the SMSF, so no loss
the SMSF also contained funds attributable to her as the holder of an individual
accumulation account does not mean that the
funds were in any legal sense joint
property, and again, the charge is dishonestly obtaining financial advantage
from another rather
than appropriating another’s property;
Prosecution
cases submitted in closing included one dealing with a constructive trust, but
no such argument was developed:
West v Mead
[2003] NSWSC 161
not accept it as having been proved that there was any financial advantage
obtained from the Complainant.
was reckless as to whether the financial advantage was obtained from someone
else (default fault element);
not established that the Defendant was subjectively aware of a substantial risk
that a financial advantage would be obtained
from someone else, and that it was
unjustifiable in the circumstances known to him to take that
financial advantage was obtained by deception (physical element);
accept that there was a deception used, by creating the withdrawal form with a
false signature and presenting it to the bank
as having been signed by both
parties, but as there was no financial advantage obtained thereby, it cannot be
accepted that any financial
advantage was obtained by deception.
was reckless as to whether the financial advantage was obtained by deception
(default fault element);
the deception was, on the evidence, intentionally engaged in, it is not
established that the Defendant was subjectively aware
of a substantial risk that
a financial advantage would be obtained by that deception, and that it was
unjustifiable in the circumstances
known to him to take that risk.
Unjustifiability
of using the deceptive means does not equate to unjustifiability of taking the
risk that these means would result
in a financial advantage.
obtaining of financial advantage by deception was dishonest (specified fault
use of deception to facilitate the transaction would, in my assessment, be
regarded by ordinary members of the community as dishonest
according to their
standards, and this was likely known to the Defendant as a financially literate
member of the community, but that
is not the test to be applied;
‘dishonestly’
in the offence qualifies the
obtaining by deception from another person of a financial advantage, and as none
was obtained in this
case, this qualifier has no proper subject of operation on
the facts. I am unable to conclude that there was a dishonest obtaining
financial advantage.
the elements of this offence have not been established beyond reasonable doubt,
I must dismiss the charge.
is no need to consider the claim of right defence in relation to this
next offence is CC2024/1832: Forgery, contrary to
Criminal Code 2002
made a false document (physical element);
ANZ withdrawal form created by the Defendant, on his own evidence, is a false
document in the sense that it bears the signature
of a person who did not sign
it and who did not consent to its being placed on the document;
a false document according to the statutory definition: s 344(1)(a), (b);
“document which not only tells a lie, but tells a lie about
Brott v The Queen
[1992] HCA 5
(1992) 173 CLR 426.
intended to make a false document (default fault element);
evidence of the Defendant establishes that he intentionally made this false
document, by downloading and signing it, and then
applying the
Complainant’s signature to it;
intended to use the false document to dishonestly induce another person to
accept it as genuine and because that other person
accepts it as genuine, to
dishonestly obtain a gain (specified fault element of ulterior
intention).
element of ulterior intention comprises two distinct dishonest intentions, the
first being to dishonestly induce another person
to accept it as genuine;
Defendant, on his evidence, used and intended to use the false document to draw
funds from the SMSF by presenting it to the ANZ
bank is undoubtedly a legal
for the purposes
of this offence, and even if the withdrawal was processed to any extent by
automated means, inducing a person includes
‘causing a computer,
machine or electronic device to respond to the document as if it were
bank would only process the withdrawal if it accepted the document as genuine,
that is, as having been signed by both the Defendant
and Complainant;
means inducing someone else
“to believe that a thing is true which is
false, and which the person practising that deceit knows or believes to be
R v Oettinger
[2014] ACTSC 47.
engaging in this deception, on my assessment, he intended to dishonestly induce
another person to accept the document as genuine,
where dishonesty is again
assessed by reference to the standards of ordinary people and known by the
Defendant to be dishonest according
to those standards;
second element of ulterior intention is the intention to dishonestly obtain a
gain, where
is defined in s 300 for all of
Chapter 3 as:
(a) a gain in property,
whether temporary or permanent; or
(b) a gain by way of the supply of services;
and includes keeping what one has;
I am not satisfied that the Defendant through his deceptive use of the false
document obtained any financial advantage or
a gain in property, and although
this was not quite how the Prosecution closed on this element, I am satisfied on
the evidence that
the Defendant did intend to obtain a gain by way of the supply
of services, namely the processing by the ANZ bank of the withdrawal
$5,243.37 from the SMSF account and into his Westpac account;
also satisfied that he intended to do dishonestly, where dishonesty is again
assessed by reference to the standards of ordinary
people and known by the
Defendant to be dishonest according to those standards;
the dishonesty element in this offence occurs embedded within an ulterior
intention element, this would not appear to require
a special meaning of
dishonesty to be adopted which would depart from the explicit use of the term in
the offence provision and the
definition of dishonesty in s 300; cf.
[1998] HCA 7
(1998) 192 CLR 493
on the premise that he was lawfully entitled to draw on his own funds to pay off
his credit card debt, that he did so by deception
in the form of applying a
false electronic signature to the withdrawal form amounts to intending to
dishonestly obtain the supply
of services, and this includes keeping what one
already has.
find that all of the elements of this offence are proved beyond reasonable
doubt, subject to considering the defence of claim of
right below.
third offence is CC2024/1833
Using a false document,
Criminal Code
used a document (physical element);
Defendant used the withdrawal form he had created by sending it to the ANZ bank
in order to withdraw the amount of $5,243.37 from
the SMSF account, where using
a document means “
actual deployment by the person charged or by his or
her agent or a fellow participant”
[2008] NSWCCA
intended to use the document (default fault element);
the Defendant’s evidence, he both created and used the withdrawal form as
an intentional act, seeking to reimburse himself
for his life insurance
document was false (physical element);
withdrawal form bearing a false signature of the Complainant was a false
document, as explained above: s 344(1)(a), (b);
knew the document was false (specified fault element);
the Defendant intentionally made this document, including by applying the
Complainant’s electronic signature to it,
he knew the document to be
of a circumstance means being aware that it exists: s 19;
intended to use the false document to dishonestly induce another person to
accept it as genuine and because that other person
accepts it as genuine, to
dishonestly obtain a gain (specified fault element of ulterior
intention);
for the forgery offence, this comprises two elements of intention, the first
being to dishonestly induce another person to accept
it as genuine;
for the forgery offence, this element is satisfied;
second element of ulterior intention is the intention to dishonestly obtain a
gain, which is also satisfied as set out for the
forgery offence.
on the premise that he was lawfully entitled to draw on his own funds to pay off
his credit card debt, that he did so by deception
in the form of using a
withdrawal form on which he had applied a false signature amounts to intending
to dishonestly obtain the supply
of services, which is a gain, and this includes
keeping what one already has;
find that all of the elements of this offence are proved beyond reasonable
doubt, subject to considering the defence of claim of
parties made submissions on the basis that the s 38 claim of right defence
applies only to
“an offence that has a physical element relating to
, which would include the offence of obtaining a financial
gain by deception, but this is only true of the s 38(1) form of the defence.
I have concluded that that offence has not been proved beyond reasonable doubt,
there is no further need to consider whether the
Defendant’s claim of
right would negate a fault element.
for the other two offences which I have found on the evidence to be established
beyond reasonable doubt, the alternative
form of claim of right in s 38(2) falls
for consideration. The question then is whether either was an
arising necessarily out of the exercise of a proprietary or possessory right
that the person mistakenly believes to
Complainant gave evidence that she gave no permission to the Defendant to use
her electronic signature. The Defendant gave evidence
to the effect that he
considered he had some form of ongoing permission, based on past habits while
the couple were married, to use
her signature in SMSF dealings, thus arguably
discharging an evidentiary burden in relation to the claim of right defence: s
Prosecution must then disprove the claim of right beyond reasonable doubt;
assessment, there is no reasonable doubt about the matter. The Defendant may
have thought himself entitled to reimbursement
of his expense incurred by
renewing his life insurance policy, which benefitted the Complainant rather than
him in the event of his
death, but neither the forgery nor the use of a false
document offence can be said to arise necessarily from his mistaken belief
such entitlement or an ongoing permission to use his former wife’s
signature in SMSF dealings.
the Prosecutor said in her closing submission, there were other options
available even if he was facing financial hardship and
finding communications
with the Complainant through two sets of lawyers difficult and frustrating.
While going some way to explain
why he took the course that he did, it cannot be
accepted to any extent that this course arose
“necessarily out of the
existence of a proprietary or possessory right”
that he thought he
had. This was not any form of
“business as usual”
he claimed in his evidence. This may have been his perception, but it was not
the objective reality.
therefore conclude that the claim of right defence does not negate liability.
Nor do I consider that the Defendant’s good
character prevents me from
reaching this conclusion.
Defendant is found not guilty of the first offence, CC2024/1831: Obtaining
financial advantage by deception, contrary to
Criminal Code 2002
I dismiss that charge.
Defendant is found guilty of the second offence, CC2024/1832: Forgery, contrary
Criminal Code 2002
Defendant is found guilty of the third offence, CC2024/1833: Using a false
Criminal Code 2002
I certify that the preceding eighty-four [84] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Decision of his Honour Special
Associate: Lucy Skeldon
Date: 16/01/2025
Australian Government,
Attorney-General’s Department (March 2002), prepared by Ian
Leader-Elliott,
Commonwealth
Criminal Code: Guide for Practitioners
, 5.2 Intention, cited by Simpson J in
the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal in
Ansari v R, Ansari v R
[2007] NSWCCA
Government, Attorney-General’s Department (March 2002), prepared by Ian
Leader-Elliott,
Commonwealth
Criminal Code: Guide for Practitioners
, 9.5 Claim of
Op cit. 9.5D, Claim of
right provides a defence of indeterminate scope to offences which do not involve
property or the use of force
against a person.
RTF format (274 KB)
Signed PDF/A format