BI and Canberra Health Services [2021] ACTOFOI 10 (21 September 2021)
Canberra Health Services
(21 September
Decision and reasons for decision of Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
Symone Andersen
Application Number
AFOI-RR/21/10021
Decision Reference
[2021] ACTOFOI 10
Canberra Health Services
Decision Date
Freedom of Information Act 2016
(ACT) – deciding access
– refusing to deal with application – dealing with the application
would require an unreasonable
and substantial diversion of the
respondent’s resources
1. I am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman for the purposes of
Freedom of Information Act 2016
of the FOI Act, I
the decision of
Canberra Health Services (
) dated 25 June 2021 and
my decision that the access application does not constitute an unreasonable and
substantial diversion of CHS’ resources for
the purposes of s 43(1)(a) of
the FOI Act.
3. On 30 March 2021, the applicant made an access application to CHS under
the FOI Act.
4. On 25 June 2021, CHS’ Information Officer decided, under s 43(1)(a)
of the FOI Act, to refuse to deal with the access application
because dealing
with it would require an unreasonable and substantial diversion of CHS’
5. On 16 July 2021, the applicant applied for Ombudsman review of CHS’
decision under s 73 of the FOI Act.
Relevant law
6. Every person has a right of access to government
information.
However, the
respondent to an access application may refuse to deal with the application if
dealing with it would require an unreasonable
and substantial diversion of
Meaning of unreasonable and substantial
diversion of resources
7. Section 44 of the FOI Act elucidates the meaning of an ‘unreasonable
and substantial diversion of resources.’ It provides:
For section 43(1)(a), dealing with an access application would require an
unreasonable and substantial diversion of the respondent’s
resources only
(a) the resources required to identify, locate, collate and examine any
information held by the respondent, including the resources
required in
obtaining the views of relevant third parties under section 38, would
substantially inhibit the ability of the respondent
to exercise its functions;
(b) the extent to which the public interest would be advanced by giving
access to the information does not justify the use of the
required resources.
Requirement to consult with the applicant before refusing to deal with an
application
8. Section 46 of the FOI Act sets out the steps a respondent must take before
refusing to deal with an application under, among other
sections, s 43(1)(a). It
is set out below:
(1) Before refusing to deal with an access application... the respondent
(a) tell the applicant, in writing, of—
(i) the intention to refuse to deal with the application; and
(ii) the ground for refusal; and
(iii) the period for consultation on the proposed refusal (the
consultation period
(b) give the applicant—
(i) a reasonable opportunity to consult with the respondent and to provide
any additional information relevant to the application
during the consultation
period; and
(ii) any information that may assist the applicant make an application in a
form that would remove the ground for refusal.
(2) After any consultation with the respondent, the applicant may give the
respondent an amended application.
Other relevant provisions
9. The FOI Act contains a clear statement that:
It is the intention of the Legislative Assembly that this Act be administered
with a pro-disclosure bias and discretions given under
it be exercised as far as
possible in favour of disclosing government
information.
Background of Ombudsman review
10. CHS received the original access application on 30 March 2021. The
original application was worded as:
Can you provide
a list of all health committees that have a consumer or community representative
and are chaired by a member of the
senior Executive please as at
1 Feb 2021.
Can you provide
the name of the representative and role on the committee, and include the
selection process used in engaging that
representative. If applicable, can you
provide the organisation that the representative belongs to and any payments
made for the
representation. Can you disclose the level of funding provided to
the individual or to the organisation. Eg whether the person is
a volunteer
or if a person is an employee of an organisation, then the level of funding
provided by the ACT government in the 2020
and 2021 financial year.
Can you also
provide any other organisations that are represented on those committees that
are external to the Health Directorate,
This information
is in the public interest so the public knows “who is representing”
us. The Community Representatives
should be known to the Canberra
community. Otherwise how can I reach them.
I think this
information should be publicly listed on a public website and regularly updated
without having FOI request.
11. On 20 May 2021, CHS wrote to the applicant to propose a narrowing of the
scope of the access application to:
Providing a schedule of committees chaired by an Executive member (EGM/ED or
higher) of the Directorate with a community representation
and the Terms of
Reference for each of those committees.
12. On 24 May 2021, the applicant proposed the scope instead be narrowed in
the following terms:
I would like the FOI request to include the core of the request, which is
that the Territory
provide the identity of community representative (entity
or individual) on the committees, and the selection method used in engaging
representative
[italics in original].
I believe the provision of “selection method” or delegate
decision or nominations/directions from the minister’s
office for the 20
positions should be available.
The “letters of appointment” of each community representative on
the 20 committees should also be made public...
... I have requested “selection method” in place of the original
“selection process”... to clarify that all
the process documentation
is not necessary.
13. On 1 June 2021, CHS’ Information Officer signed a letter addressed
to the applicant to notify him of her intention to refuse
to deal with his
access application (
the notice of intention
). The notice of intention was
sent to the applicant via email on 7 June 2021. The consultation period CHS
gave the applicant was
10 working days, expiring at the close of business on
22 June 2021.
14. On 15 June 2021, the applicant wrote to CHS by email. The applicant
attempted to amend the access application in this letter,
I seek that you consider the amended request rather than the original
request. The amended request is for the provision of:
The name of the community representative, and the selection method used in
engaging the representative on committees chaired by Health
Senior Executives.
15. The applicant then provided some clarification on terms. Relevantly:
If a committee has 3 or more community representatives, then it will be
sufficient to provide the name of the committee and the number
of community
representatives.
I have added the last sentence to address the concern raised in your [notice
of intention to refuse to deal with the application]
that there may be multiple
community representatives on a committee, and this will contribute to the
resources required to respond
to the request.
To ensure there is no misunderstanding, I do not seek all the details of the
selection process, simply the delegate’s decision
‘selection method’ was used in the appointment. Typical selection
methods could be an open process (whereby
members of the public could apply for
the appointment), or if there was a ministerial nomination or a direct approach
to an individual.
16. Having amended his request, the applicant commented:
I believe that there are multiple ways of responding to the request which
does not require extensive resources. I have proposed that
the release [sic] the
letters of appointment of the community representatives on the Executive
committees could be a useful approach
and I can modify the request to be
specific in this regard, if this would assist you.
17. On 25 August 2021, I provided my preliminary view to the parties in my
draft consideration. My preliminary view was that the application
constitute an unreasonable and substantial diversion of resources.
18. On 26 August 2021, the applicant wrote to me agreeing with the view set
out in my draft consideration.
19. On 3 September 2021, CHS wrote to me accepting the view set out in my
draft consideration and declining to make any further submissions.
20. Accordingly, my final decision is consistent with my preliminary view and
the reasons for it are set out below.
Relevant considerations
Evidence obtained through consultation with the applicant was not given
due consideration
21. The applicant’s response to the notice of intention amended his
application, contended that the amended application would
alleviate the problems
raised in the notice of intention and offered to modify the request further
‘if this would assist’.
22. By requiring consultation, the FOI Act clearly requires that information
provided during consultation be considered by the decision-maker.
This would be
consistent with the well‑established principle in Australian
administrative law requiring a decision-maker to
turn ‘proper, genuine and
realistic consideration to the merits’ of a
23. On 25 June 2021, CHS’ Information Officer decided to refuse to
deal with the application. The decision notice said:
It is my decision that the public interest would not be served by the
substantial expenditure of resources required to continue processing
24. The decision notice acknowledged that the notice of intention was sent
and consultation invited. However, it made no reference
whatsoever to the
applicant’s response. According to s 46(2), this response provided an
amended application, so CHS was required
to consider the application in its
amended form rather than the original application.
25. I am not satisfied that CHS’ Information Officer gave proper,
genuine and realistic consideration to the application in
its amended form, the
applicant’s submissions about how the amended application would be less
resource-intensive to process,
or the applicant’s offer to re-engage to
narrow the application further if it would assist CHS.
The decision notice was defective
26. Section 55 of the FOI Act sets out the contents required in a decision
notice for a decision to refuse to deal with an application.
The requirements
For a decision to refuse to deal with an application, the decision notice
must include a statement of the following:
(a) the ground under s 43(1) for the refusal;
(b) the findings on any material questions of fact referring to the evidence
or other material on which the findings were based...
27. While the decision notice fulfilled the first requirement by stating the
ground for refusal. In my view it did not, however, fulfill
the second as it
does not adequately explain the findings on the material questions of fact which
are whether:
the application
causes a diversion of resources
the diversion of
resources is unreasonable
the diversion of
resources is substantial
28. The decision notice contains the finding that these circumstances exist.
However, it does not refer to any evidence or other material
on which the
findings were based. Not only does the decision notice apparently fail to have
regard to the applicant’s response
during the consultation period, but it
does not refer to any evidence or material relied on to quantitatively or
qualitatively assess
the resources that would be needed to deal with the
application. Nor does it explain the impact dealing with the application would
have on CHS and whether this impact would be disproportionate to the advancement
of the public interest that would result from disclosing
the information.
29. In my view, the decision notice did not comply with s 55 and was
therefore defective.
Do CHS’ submissions show that the decision was, in substance, the
correct and preferable decision?
30. When I notified CHS of this review I invited submissions in support of
the original decision. CHS provided copies of correspondence
exchanged with the
applicant during the consultation period.
31. I considered this documentation to determine whether, on the merits, the
decision should be confirmed notwithstanding the defective
decision notice and
lack of compliance with s 46.
32. The documentation shows that CHS made efforts to engage with the
applicant prior to the Information Officer issuing the notice
of intention. The
fact that CHS engaged with the applicant at this time does not, in my view,
rectify the defective decision notice
or the issues I have raised regarding
compliance with s 46.
33. CHS provided submissions which confirmed that no steps had been taken to
identify, locate or examine information it may hold within
the scope of the
request. Rather, CHS reiterated the view that the consultation necessary to deal
with the application would be extensive,
an assessment which I have already said
I consider to be uncertain if not inaccurate.
34. CHS also submitted that responses
‘received included a request for further information... which then
differed substantially
at each conversation and/or communication’. For the
purposes of my decision, it is sufficient to say that changes to the request
to be expected when an applicant is invited to make an amended application.
35. CHS’ decision notice was defective according to the requirements of
s 55 of the FOI Act. The decision notice contained a
finding that dealing with
the application would require an unreasonable and substantial diversion of
resources with no reference
to any evidence or material relied on.
36. Moreover, the decision appears to have been made without first observing
the required consideration under s 46 to the applicant’s
correspondence of
15 June 2021. This correspondence both modified the application and had to be
considered on its merits for the
decision-maker to comply with the requirements
37. Accordingly, I am satisfied that CHS’ decision was not the correct
and preferable decision. My decision is to
set aside and substitute
CHS’ decision under s 82(2)(c). The application does not constitute an
unreasonable and substantial diversion of resources.
Symone Andersen
Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
September 2021
Section 7(1) of the FOI
Section 43(1)(a) of the
Section 9 of the FOI
Carrascalao v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCAFC 107
(24 July 2017) at
RTF format (837 KB)
Signed PDF/A format