THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY (REPRESENTED BY THE COMMUNITY SERVICES DIRECTORATE) V COMPLAINANT DT232023 (Appeal) [2025] ACAT 65 (29 September 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
(REPRESENTED BY THE COMMUNITY SERVICES DIRECTORATE) V COMPLAINANT DT232023
[2025] ACAT 65
AA 62/2024 (DT 23/2023)
DISCRIMINATION
– Original decisions (liability
and damages) failed properly to distinguish between the relevant statutory
regimes regarding
"discrimination", on the one hand (as alleged), and on the
other, the regime regarding matters of employment; no consideration of
Appellant's evidence provided to the Tribunal, which (objectively considered)
made a number of findings in the Respondent's favour
unsupportable; no weighing
of the evidence at the original hearing; contrary to statutory regime under the
Human Rights Commission Act
Discrimination Act
onus placed on the Appellant; in damages decision, procedural unfairness in
determining issues without giving parties an
opportunity to be heard; because of
multiple flaws in the liability judgment, it must be set aside, and
axiomatically, the damages
decision likewise set aside in part because of its
dependence upon the liability decision
Legislation cited:
Australian Capital Territory Civil and
Administrative Act 2008
Discrimination Act 1991
Subordinate
Legislation cited:
Fair Work Act 2009
Human Rights Commission Act
Cases cited:
Complainant DT232023 v The Australian Capital
Territory represented by the Community Services Directorate (Discrimination)
[2024] ACAT 17
Complainant DT232023 v The Australian Capital Territory represented by the
Community Services Directorate (Discrimination)
[2024] ACAT 89
Complainant DT292023 v The Canberra Institute of Technology
(Discrimination)
[2024] ACAT 42
Discrimination Act 1991
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Georgiou v Spencer (No.2)
[2011] FCA 22
Giusida Pty Ltd v Commissioner for ACT Revenue
[2016] ACTSC 275
Grace Worldwide (Australia) Pty Ltd v Steve Alves
[2017] NSWSC 1296
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
264 CLR 541
New South Wales v Avery
[2006] HCA 14
(2006) 230 CLR 174
Pye v Registrar, Domestic Animals Act 2000 (Appeal)
[2022] ACAT
Richardson v Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 82
(2014) 223 FCR
Shammas v Canberra Institute of Technology
[2012] ACAT 24
Soulemezis v Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
Taylor v August and Pemberton Pty Ltd
[2023] FCA 1313
The Owners – Units Plan no 1475 v Davidson & anor (Appeal)
[2022] ACAT 10
Turnbull v New South Wales Medical Board
[1978] 2 NSWLR 281
Victorian Stevedoring & General Contracting Co Pty ltd v Dignan
[1931] HCA 34
(1931) 46 CLR 73
Wainohu v New South Wales
(2011) 243 CLR 181
Watts v Australian Postal Corporation
[2014] FCA 370
(2014) 222 FCR 220
Workpac Pty Ltd v Rossato
(2021) 271 CLR 456
Wotton v Queensland (No.5)
[2016] FCA 1457
(2016) 352 ALR 146
Texts/Papers cited:
J Riley, P O’Grady & C Sappideen,
Macken’s Law of Employment
Edition), (Sydney:
Lawbook Co. 2022)
Stewart’s Guide to Employment Law
Edition), (Sydney: The Federation Press, 2018)
A Stewart, A Forsyth & Anors,
Creighton & Stewart’s Labour
Edition, (Sydney: The Federation Press, 2025)
Acting Presidential Member Dr W J Neville
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) AA 62/2024
THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY (REPRESENTED BY THE
COMMUNITY SERVICES DIRECTORATE)
COMPLAINANT DT232023
APPEAL TRIBUNAL:
Acting Presidential Member Dr W J Neville
The Tribunal orders that:
orders of the original tribunal for DT 23/2023 dated 13 February 2024 are set
orders of the original tribunal DT 23/2023 dated 26 November 2024 are set
primary application be dismissed.
......................................
Acting Presidential Member Dr W J Neville
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
basic concepts from (a) the High Court of Australia, and (b) gleaned from
standard texts on employment law, are important reminders
in the reasons that
New South Wales v Amery
, the joint reasons of Gummow, Hayne and
Crennan JJ confirmed the importance in every matter where there is alleged
discrimination
to pay close attention to the statutes in question and the regime
they establish.
It follows that
equally close attention must be paid to the facts that are to be considered in
relation to those statutes.
standard texts on employment law are careful to highlight the distinctions
between anti-discrimination statutes, on the
one hand, and protection from
unlawful discrimination (and wrongful dismissal) under the
Fair Work Act 2009
), on the other. These same texts highlight that these
two statutory regimes (anti-discrimination and “
differ in the nature of the constraints imposed on employers, where or upon whom
the onus of proof rests, and in the enforcement
regime available in relation to
each of them.
Put another way, they
are different regulatory regimes which have their own jurisprudence.
to speak generally but considered later in these reasons, there can also be the
temptation or risk, for example, to utilise
long-time principles from the law of
torts, such as regarding the assessment of damages, rather than from the
jurisprudence in the
distinct and discrete fields relating to
anti-discrimination and Fair Work.
explained in the reasons that follow, these important distinctions are
unfortunately and regularly not apparent in the decisions
under consideration
here. Indeed, in a number of respects identified in detail below, the liability
decision significantly proceeds
on the basis of the Application being run, and
that it should be treated, as a wrongful dismissal action. The current matter
not require, and should have no reference to, the FW Act under which
“fairness” (referred to generally in [34] of the
liability reasons
under appeal), is a factor, but which does not feature in discrimination
jurisprudence.
consequence of the errors in the liability judgment noted by the Appellant, and
other matters identified in these reasons, the
damages decision, in many
respects understandably, adopted the misconceived and factually unsupported
findings in the liability judgment.
As well, the decision relating to damages
impermissibly made further findings in relation to liability, for which there
was neither
evidence, nor was it part of the function of the Tribunal at first
instance dealing with damages alone. There were also procedural
fairness issues
in relation to findings being made in the damages decision in circumstances
where neither party was given the opportunity
to make submissions on them.
Details follow.
the Appellant appeals against Orders made in two decisions of this Tribunal,
already generally referred to, one in relation
to liability, and the other
relating to damages.
cornerstone of the determination of the appeal is the proper construction of
Discrimination Act 1991
can be accepted that if the liability decision is set aside, axiomatically the
damages decision cannot stand.
the reasons that follow, because I largely agree with the errors of law and
those relating to errors of fact identified by the
Appellant, plus other matters
identified by the Appeal Tribunal, the appeal against the liability decision
must be allowed. In consequence,
the damages decision cannot stand. Although
formally unnecessary to consider the damages decision, at the end of these
reasons there
are a number of grounds of appeal regarding the second decision
relating to damages that warrant brief discussion, and which, on
terms, would sustain the appeal against that decision also.
proceeding, it is important to acknowledge, as learned Senior Counsel for the
Appellant (Ms Eastman SC) did at the outset of
the hearing of the appeal, the
difficult position in which the Respondent finds herself in the light of the
Appeal Tribunal’s
decision. The Respondent was a self-represented litigant
during the original hearing regarding liability. She was represented by
Legal Aid Office for the hearing regarding damages. At the appeal hearing, she
was represented by Counsel, funded and instructed
by the Legal Aid Office.
as something of a preliminary matter, and noted in the damages judgment at [24],
the Respondent to this Appeal took action in
mid-2024 in this Tribunal against a
prospective employer, the Canberra Institute of Technology (
whom she had obtained a contract of employment upon her earlier resigning from
the Appellant.
That employment did
not proceed. That matter was heard by the same Member of the Tribunal who
presided over the liability hearing
here under appeal. It concerned similar
matters, and similar sections of the Act that require consideration here. The
Tribunal there
found against the same Complainant/Respondent in the current
proceeding. That decision was not appealed.
proceeding to consider the appeal itself, some matters of procedure, and the
legislative framework for the appeal, should be
Appeal – matters of procedure, nomenclature and other statutory
Australian Capital Territory Civil and Administrative Act 2008
the ACAT Act
) provides as follows regarding the general procedural
options and powers of the Appeal Tribunal (emphasis added):
(1) An appeal tribunal may, as the tribunal considers appropriate, deal with
(a) as a new application; or
(b) as a review of all or part of the original decision on the application by
the tribunal.
(2) An appeal tribunal—
(a) has all the powers and duties of the tribunal that made the order
appealed from; and
(b) may draw inferences of fact; and
(c) may, if leave is granted, receive further evidence about questions of
fact, either orally in a hearing, by written statement or
in another way;
(d) may make an order confirming, amending, setting aside or replacing the
order of the tribunal appealed from
(e) may make any other order it considers appropriate.
is evident, s.82(1) records the two options available to the Tribunal regarding
the nature of the hearing of the appeal (new Application
or re-hearing), while
sub-section (2) outlines the courses available to the Appeal Tribunal consequent
upon the findings made. Respectfully,
the infelicitous if not opaque wording of
sub-section (1) relevantly clouds, rather than illuminates, what the nature of
the hearing
is and what that hearing of the appeal entails. In a helpful and
important decision regarding appeals from this Tribunal, similar
comments were
made, and instruction given by, Refshauge J in
Giusida Pty Ltd v Commissioner
for ACT Revenue
– [38], his Honour said (emphasis added):
Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2011] ACTSC 207
(2011) 257 FLR 118
, I had this to say about s 82 of the ACT Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act:
drafters have, for reasons to which I am not privy, decided not to use terms
that have relatively clear meanings, such as ‘hearing
de novo’ and
‘rehearing’. These terms have received considerable judicial
interpretation and, though the precise
boundaries of their meaning may not be
exact, are tolerably well understood. See Theodorelos v Nexus Projects Pty
[2009] ACTSC 149
(at [67] to [78]).
seems to me that the appeal in s 82(a) is what is usually called a
‘hearing de novo’ and that the appeal in s 82(b)
is what is usually
called a ‘rehearing’
see no reason to resile from or change my view about the proper meaning of
s 82 of the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
expressed. Indeed, careful thought and a consideration of the purpose and
meaning of an internal appeal strengthens my view
that a wider and generous
power is intended and not one which restricts original decisions from proper
while error needs to be shown before the ACAT on appeal will set aside the
original decision on the application from which the
appeal is taken, it is not
required that the error be “manifest”, “obvious” or
other than an error discernible
by a proper assessment of the evidence and the
the sake of convenience if not completeness, I simply note that, notwithstanding
his Honour’s well-known care and attention
to authority, he did not refer
to at least one High Court authority, and others relating to
“appeals.” For example, in
Turnbull v New South Wales Medical
, two members of the Court of Appeal (Moffitt P and Glass JA),
separately commented on the different features, and often disparate
appeals. Glass JA in particular noted that there are six different kinds of
appeal, whereas Moffitt P outlined what he
saw as the primary differences in
appeal, namely those that involved a re-hearing or those that focussed upon
errors in the judgment
Honour said:
Questions as to whether the appeal is in the nature
of a re-hearing or whether it is a strict appeal, directed merely to whether
is error in the decision given upon the evidence or material before the
body appealed from, are directed to the former, namely the
procedural nature of
the appeal...
to High Court and other authority, an appeal by way of strict appeal consists
only or solely of the scrutiny of the decision
below, having regard to the law
and facts as they were at the time of the
In a strict appeal, it is
not a re-hearing of the issues but rather an examination of the correctness of
the initial tribunal’s
decision, and conversely, an examination for errors
or material irregularities. On the other hand, at a re-hearing, among other
new evidence can be adduced, and the matter is determined on the facts
and law as at the time of the re-hearing. These basal principles
relation to Courts. As for the situation regarding Tribunals and the legislation
that dictates the conduct of appeals, it
is pre-eminently dependent upon the
terms of the legislation in question, as noted by Refshauge J in
From what follows, it will be immediately seen that there is some dissonance, or
at least a range of possibilities or options, between
the authorities.
to the authorities mentioned, I suggest that there are three types of appeals,
relevantly described as: (a) strict appeals,
which look only at alleged errors
of fact and/or law (see the High Court in
, and the NSW Court of
); (b) a hearing
, where the hearing,
according to name and to practice, requires the hearing to be undertaken anew or
afresh (ACT Supreme Court in
and this Tribunal in
; and (c) a re-hearing, which examines the decision below in
relation to errors of fact and/or law, and which also permits, with leave,
use of any additional evidence (
addition to what has already been said, for example, in
Pye v Registrar,
Domestic Animals Act 2000 (Appeal)
, the Appeal Tribunal stated, at [17]
principles to be applied when determining which form of appeal is appropriate
were considered by Presidential Member Daniel
Mansour v Dangar
deciding the correct approach to take, the appeal tribunal is required by the
ACAT Act to adopt a procedure which is as simple,
quick, inexpensive and
informal as is consistent with achieving justice, and the requirements of
procedural fairness.
Other than containing these overarching requirements, the legislation does not
dictate how the choice between a new hearing or a
rehearing is to be made. It is
nonetheless an important procedural distinction, which may have substantive
consequences.
a new hearing, established principles dictate that the hearing starts
. Evidence may be given again, and additional evidence may be
given. The appeal tribunal’s view on any question of fact or law
determinative of the issue. Any discretion to be exercised by the original
tribunal is exercised anew by the appeal tribunal.
for a rehearing, the appeal tribunal relies upon the evidence given
to the original tribunal, supplemented by any additional evidence
parties are given leave to adduce. The appeal tribunal’s findings on
questions of law are determinative. The appeal
tribunal will not lightly
substitute its own findings of fact for the original tribunal’s primary
findings of fact, but may
be less constrained in relation to drawing inferences
. The appeal tribunal should not interfere with a discretionary
decision unless satisfied that there has been an error in the exercise
discretion.
current purposes, I proceed on the basis that the current matter is a re-hearing
(as per the comments in
), and in conformity
with comments by the High Court in
...an appeal by way
of strict appeal consists of the scrutiny of the decision at first instance,
having regard to the law and facts
as they were at the time of the hearing. In a
strict appeal, it is not a case where there is a re-hearing of the issues but
an examination of the initial tribunal’s decision for errors or
irregularities.
my view, the nomenclature and principles in
, the Appeal
Tribunal’s decision in
, and the High Court in
are congruent (albeit in different ways) with the task of the Tribunal here
pursuant to s.82(1)(b) of the ACAT Act to undertake
a “review of [either]
all or part of the original decision ...” That is the enterprise
undertaken in these reasons.
than set out the Grounds of Appeal as they are found in the Application for
Appeal (filed 23 December 2024), for ease of reference,
and in accordance with
Directions made by the Tribunal on 29 January 2025, on 12 February 2025, the
Appellant filed a more precisely
drawn document entitled
“Appellant’s List of Errors of Facts and Law”. That document
set out the legal and factual
errors asserted by the Appellant. It was as
Appellant’s List of Errors of Facts and
This list has been compiled in accordance with Order 2(b) of Temporary
Presidential Member Orlov made on 29 January 2025, requiring
the Appellant to
provide a list of errors of fact, errors of law or discretionary errors that
were material to the decisions of:
Complainant
DT232023 v The Australian Capital Territory Represented by the Community
Services Directorate (Discrimination)
[2024] ACAT 17
Complainant
DT232023 v The Australian Capital Territory Represented by the Community
Services Directorate (Discrimination)
[2024] ACAT 89
(1) In relation to errors of law:
Tribunal erred when it found the Appellant bore the onus of establishing that
the Respondent’s criminal record was not irrelevant
within the meaning of
subsection 7(1)(k)
Discrimination Act 1991
Tribunal erred when it failed to require the Respondent to establish they had a
relevant protected attribute within the meaning
subsection 7(1)(k)
Discrimination Act 1991
1 Complainant DT232023 v The Australian Capital Territory Represented by
the Community Services Directorate (Discrimination)
[2024] ACAT 17
Tribunal erred when it found the previous disclosure of a criminal record by the
Respondent was a relevant consideration or sufficient
to discharge the
Respondent’s onus that they had an irrelevant criminal
the test for
discrimination
Discrimination Act 1991
in the following ways:
(i) By failing to apply or consider any elements of the test for
discrimination in
Discrimination Act 1991
(ii) By failing to consider or make any findings about the
“circumstances of the situation in which the discrimination arises”,
the duties of the position or the information to which the Respondent had access
to through the Appellant’s systems.
by failing to apply an objective test when identifying the factors and
circumstances to determine if the Respondent had the
attribute of an
‘irrelevant criminal record’ by:
(i) Imposing an obligation on the Appellant to consider all the circumstances
surrounding the Respondent’s employment, extending
to a past life,
previous employment, past work performance, personal conduct and personal
circumstances.
(ii) Failing to consider or assess the nature, duties and circumstances of
the Respondent’s duties and responsibilities in her
employment.
(iii) Importing an obligation to consult with the Respondent.
Tribunal failed to apply the proper test and assessment of
‘detriment’ for the purpose of
subsection 10(2)(d)
Discrimination Act 1991
(2) In relation to errors of fact:
Tribunal erred in finding that Ms Drejer-White, as the decision-maker,
“immediately leapt into punitive action against the
[Respondent]”
Tribunal erred in finding that the reason for the decision not to offer
employment was the Appellant’s “ill-considered
conclusion...based on
mere knowledge of the existence of a criminal record itself, with no other
information or context”
3 Ibid, [46].
4 Complainant DT232023 v The Australian Capital Territory Represented by
the Community Services Directorate (Discrimination)
[2024] ACAT 17
5 Ibid,[50] and [56].
6 Ibid, [47].[48],[54] and [56].
7 Ibid, [28], [52], [53] and [54].
8 Ibid, [47].
9 Ibid, [55].
(3) In relation to errors of law:
Tribunal misconstrued the meaning of ‘loss of enjoyment’ for the
purposes of section 53E(2)(c) and (3) of the Human
Rights Commission
Tribunal denied the Appellant procedural fairness by determining the
‘causation argument’ without providing the parties
the opportunity
to make submissions:
On what the Tribunal considered to be an injury ‘compounded or
overtaken by subsequent events’
The finding that ‘there has been ample opportunity by the
respondent to get it right’
Tribunal misconstrued subsections 53E(2)(c) and (3) of the Human Rights
Commission Act by applying ‘tort cases’, including
how compensation
is assessed for intentional torts
Tribunal misconstrued subsection 53E(2)(c) and (3) of the Human Rights
Commission Act by taking inflation into account for the
purpose of considering
or using previous ‘decided cases’ to determine quantum, particularly
when there is no evidence
or submissions before the Tribunal concerning
‘inflation’ or its relevance to the assessment required in this
tribunal applied an incorrect approach to the concepts of
‘causation’ and ‘chain of
causation’.
Tribunal misconstrued subsection 53E(2)(c) and (3) of the Human Rights
Commission Act by engaging in a comparative approach to
assess damages,
particularly when the ‘comparable tort cases’ were not
Tribunal incorrectly determined damages for ‘loss of employability’
as general damages calling it a ‘buffer’
relevant head of damages is with respect to a loss of earning capacity and
economic loss
Tribunal erred in making an award for damages after finding the “precise
loss is imponderable”
, thereby proceeding on a
speculative
10 Complainant DT232023 v The Australian Capital
Territory Represented by the Community Services Directorate (Discrimination)
[2024] ACAT 89
11 Ibid, [83]-[88].
12 Ibid, [95].
13 Complainant DT232023 v The Australian Capital
Territory Represented by the Community Services Directorate (Discrimination)
[2024] ACAT 89
14 Ibid, [93], [103] and [104].
15 Ibid, [83] and [107].
16 Ibid, [98], [103], [104] and [106].
17 Ibid, [110].
18 Ibid, [110] – [118], [122] –
19 Ibid, [109].
basis devoid of a proper consideration of the actual loss by reference to
the evidence before the Tribunal
Factual background & related matters
follows now is the factual background as asserted by the parties to the Appeal
and which, by and large, refer to various parts
of the liability reasons, as
well as some anomalous and irreconcilable parts of the reasons regarding certain
is little or no dispute between the parties regarding the basic facts of the
matter. They are helpfully summarised, with reference
to paragraphs of the two
decisions under appeal, in the Appellant’s Outline of Submissions, filed
28 February 2025, at pars.2-18.
The Respondent’s “factual
background”, at pars.4-14 of her submissions filed 11 April 2025,
supplement the Appellant’s
factual background. Unsurprisingly, they take a
slightly different route and emphasis. I set out the paragraphs mentioned from
sets of submissions. The Appellant’s pars.2-18, were as follows:
13 February 2024, the Tribunal (Senior Member Drake) published the Liability
decision. The Tribunal found the Territory:
discriminated against the complainant by acting to the detriment of the
complainant on the basis of an irrelevant criminal record
by determining that
she could no longer have access to the respondent's systems, could no longer
continue to perform her duties and
would not be offered an extension to her
fixed term contract in contravention of
Discrimination Act
26 November 2024, the Tribunal (Senior Member Meagher SC) published the Damages
decision. The Tribunal ordered the Territory to
compensate Complainant DT232023
in the sum of $265,372.87. The order for payment was stayed for 28 days. The
stay has continued (see
order 1, dated 29 January 2025).
79(3) of the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
provides that a party to the original application may, by application, appeal
the decision to the tribunal on a question of fact
23 December 2024, the Territory lodged an appeal with respect to both the
Liability decision and Damages decision. With respect
to the Liability decision,
there are five questions of law and for the damages decision, there are eight
questions of law.
29 January 2025, the Temporary Presidential Member directed the Territory to
file a list of errors of fact and law (Order 2(b)).
This document was filed on
12 February 2025.
on 29 January 2025, the Temporary Presidential Member directed this appeal
hearing will proceed as a review of the original
decisions (Order 7). The
Territory must show the Tribunal erred in fact or law and the errors materially
affected the result.
These submissions address the Tribunal’s
errors and why the Liability decision and Damages decisions should be set aside.
Appeal Tribunal should set aside the Tribunal’s Liability decision and
then dismiss the respondent’s complaint. It
follows if the complaint is
dismissed, the Damages decision must also be set aside
if the Appeal Tribunal funds the Tribunal’s Liability decision stands, it
should set aside the damages decision, and either
substitute its own assessment
of compensation under s53E(2)(c), or remit the question of compensation to a
differently-constituted
Overview of the circumstances giving rise to Complainant
DT232023’s claim
the outset, the Appeal Tribunal should be aware that the Liability decision and
the Damages decision both make findings with respect
to factual background. The
Senior Member conducting the damages hearing did not adopt the Liability
decision and made additional
findings, not confined to matters specific to the
assessment of compensation, which he was aware was his only
4 November 2021, Complainant DT232023 commenced employment with the Community
Services Directorate (
) as an executive assistant.
employed on a series of temporary contracts. The relevant temporary contract
expired on 31 May 2023.
some time prior to 30 March 2023, Complainant DT232023 applied for a new
permanent position with the Canberra Institute of Technology.
On 30 March 2023,
she found out she was successful.
Complainant DT232023 wanted to
commence employment with a new employer on 26 April 2023. Ms Perkins (CSD) and
Complainant DT232023
agreed that her last day of employment would in effect be
Friday, 21 April 2023 (after Ms Perkins agreed for the applicant to take
‘flex day’ on Monday, 24 April 2023).
11 April 2023, CSD received a letter from the ACT Integrity Commission providing
information from ACT Policing about Complainant
DT232023’s criminal
convictions for ‘violence, dishonesty and drug related offences including
a very serious drug offence’.
ACAT Act, s82(1).
Damages decision [7]
Liability decision [16]; Damages decision [11]
5 Damages decision [11]
Liability decision [19];Damages decision [13]
7 Damages decision [13]
8 Liability decision [20] – [22]
12 April 2023, CSD informed Complainant DT232023 she would be placed on
‘other paid leave’ until 31 May 2023.
She was not
required to work during that period. Her employment would not be
17 April 2023, Complainant DT232023 made a complaint to the ACT Human Rights
Commission (
17 May 2023, the Commission wrote to CSD notifying it of Complainant
DT232023’s complaint. The Commission asked CSD to respond
to the complaint
and 12 questions.
6 June 2023, CSD responded to the Commission. In summary, CSD informed the
Commission that Complainant DT232023 had not been terminated
and it denied the
allegations of discrimination.
30 June 2023, the Commission informed CSD that it was closing Complainant
DT232023’s complaint. Complainant DT232023 requested
the Commission refer
the complaint to the Tribunal.
13 July 2023, the Tribunal advised the parties that the Commission had referred
Complainant DT232023’s complaint to the Tribunal
for hearing and
determination, pursuant to
Human Rights Commission Act 2005
27 November 2023, Complainant DT232023’s complaint was listed for hearing.
Complainant DT232023 appeared for herself. She
provided documents to the
She did not cross-examine any witnesses. CSD also
provided documents. It did not cross-examine Complainant
Respondent’s submissions regarding the relevant factual background were as
the Liability decision, Senior Member Drake summarised the factual background
commencing at [12]. Senior Member Meagher SC also
set out a number of background
facts, commencing at Damages decision [9]. Relevantly, those facts
(a) The respondent's parents suffered from drug addiction. She was neglected
and abused throughout her
9 Liability decision [23]; Damages decision [18],[22]
10 Liability decision [23]; Damages decision [18],[22]
11 Damages decision [23]
12 Liability Decision [7]
13 Liability Decision [9] and [10]
(b) The respondent spent a significant portion of her youth in an abusive
romantic relationship, causing her to develop post-traumatic
stress disorder
with anxiety and depression.
(c) The respondent is a single mother with two young daughters.
(d) The respondent sought employment from the appellant's temporary
employment register on 22 February 2021.
(e) The respondent notified the appellant of her criminal record in her
application and there was no suggestion that her disclosure
was anything but
(f) On 4 March 2021 the respondent's temporary employment was brought to an
end by the appellant because of her criminal record.
(g) The respondent made a complaint to the Human Rights Commission and
subsequently resolved that complaint at a conciliation conference
by agreement
with the appellant's head of human resources, Craig Rose.
(h) That agreement was recorded in writing. The respondent's evidence before
the Tribunal was that prior to that agreement being entered,
she explained her
criminal record to Mr Rose, and that the effect of the agreement was when she
completed the new starter pack she
disclosed her criminal record by writing that
Mr Rose was aware of the criminal history and if there were any concerns then he
(i) The respondent was ultimately employed by the appellant on 4 November
(j) In her subsequent employment with the appellant, the respondent had
access to the appellant's systems as required, performed satisfactorily
not been subject to any allegations of misconduct.
(k) The respondent's employment was conducted on rolling contracts.
is submitted here that although the respondent's employment was governed by a
number of short term contracts, the work that she
performed was in just two
positions - the first being position number P53733 for the period from 4
November 2021 until 21 August
2022 and secondly position number P36580 from 22
August 2022 with a formal expiration date of 31 May 2023.2 Thus, notwithstanding
the work was performed on consecutive rolling contracts, each was renewed and
there was no break in employment in the period of 17
months from November 2021
until April 2023.
March 2023, the respondent sought a permanent position at the Canberra Institute
of Technology ("CIT'). She was offered employment
in that position on 30 March
2023, with a start date of 26 April 2023.
or about 7 April 2023, ACT Police executed a search warrant at the respondent's
being carried out by
the ACT Integrity Commission. The searches conducted during the execution of the
warrant were not in respect
of the respondent, but someone she had been
on 7 April 2023, a police officer wrote to the ACT Integrity Commission and
informed them that during the search of the respondent's
computer had been identified. The police officer expressed to the Integrity
Commission concerns that the
respondent may be in government employment, being a
concern "as to any (trusted) employment she may hold". The police officer goes
on to request that the Integrity
Commission advise who at the ACT
government "considers employment suitability and the truthfulness in job
applications". It is not
clear why the police officer made the request for that
information, and there is no evidence if it was provided. The evidence is
the respondent had at all times made truthful disclosures and, as has been set
out above, the nature of her record had been
considered by Mr Rose on behalf of
the appellant during the HRC Conciliation in 2021. Nevertheless, neither the
police nor the Integrity
Commission knew that, so the Integrity Commission took
up the issue directly with the appellant.
11 April 2023, the Chief Executive of the Integrity Commission wrote to
Catherine Rule, the appellant's Director-General. The Integrity
Commission's
letter described the concerns set out in the letter from the police to the
Integrity Commission, including the concern
pre-employment documents.
same day, the Integrity Commission's letter made its way to Magdalena
Dreyer­White. Mr Rose was on leave. The following day,
without notice or
consultation with the respondent, Ms Dreyer-White removed the respondent's
access to the appellant's systems, removed
her from active work, placed her on
paid leave until the end of her contract and advised her that her temporary
contract would not
be renewed. Each of those actions was taken as a direct
result of the information received from the Integrity Commission.
respondent had, by 12 April 2023, advised the appellant that she intended to
leave her position to take up the position with CIT.
19 April 20235, the respondent wrote to Graeme Henderson on behalf of the
appellant and described that she had not been the subject
of any concern as to
criminal or unlawful conduct leading to the execution of the warrant, that she
had been truthful in disclosing
her criminal record prior to her employment. The
respondent also described her discussions with Craig Rose during the HRC
conciliation
and the agreement she had reached with the appellant in 2021 as to
the procedure to be adopted by her for ongoing disclosure of her
record. The
respondent went on in that email to describe to the appellant a number of
aspects of her life. The respondent concluded
the email by referring to the
episode she was enduring as a "negative experience".
Immediately
following the events described above, the respondent's PTSD was triggered,
causing her to cry uncontrollably, ruminate
on the past, suffer panic
23 May 2023 the CIT offer of employment was withdrawn, also because of the
respondent's criminal record.
V. Some matters of fact - annotated
follows is the consideration of some parts of the evidence that were formally
before the Tribunal below but which, without explanation,
were not otherwise
referred to or considered in the reasons (other than in a list at [9]). In my
view, this unconsidered evidence
of the Respondent is critical. It was a serious
procedural and evidentiary omission not to have considered it. Further, had
been consideration of it, a significant number of statements if not
findings of the Tribunal below would not, and certainly could
not, have been
following factual matters are taken from various witness statements on behalf of
the Respondent, notably by Ms Drejer-White and
Ms Perkins, which are pointedly
at odds with various findings and comments by the Tribunal at first instance.
This is also in circumstances
where no witness for either party, including the
Applicant herself, was cross
It is one thing for
witnesses not to be cross examined. In many respects, this was understandable
here. It is quite another for evidence
on behalf of one party not to have been,
on the face of the reasons, considered at all. In this regard, I recall
principles of long-standing
regarding the importance in decision-making to
ensure that the reasons disclose a considered
weighing of the evidence of
both parties
, which leads to findings regarding why one set of evidence is
preferred and accepted over contrary or conflicting evidence, and the
“findings” that flow from such reasons, in the light of the relevant
principles of law.
at [13] and [28] of the liability judgment, and in turn at [7] of the damages
reasons, there are conflicting contentions regarding
the ending of the
Applicant’s employment with the Appellant. The two conflicting and
irreconcilable contentions in the liability
judgment are as follows (emphasis
[13] ...the Applicant’s temporary contract was
brought to an end by the Respondent
after its consideration of her criminal
The Applicant had resigned her role
[with the Appellant] to
take up her position offered by the CIT.
[7] of the damages decision, it was recorded that “the Applicant ended the
job [with the Appellant] by her resignation.”
This statement rather begs
the question (which was never addressed in either decision below) how one could
or should be awarded any
compensation simply for resigning their temporary
employment that was, in any event, to come to an end in the very near
on which account is correct regarding the ending of the Applicant’s
employment with the Appellant, potentially if
not plainly different consequences
necessarily follow.
at [43] – [51], the reasons discuss what Ms Drejer-White did or did not do
regarding the information she received
from the ACT Integrity Commission in
relation to the Applicant.
need not set out those paragraphs from the primary decision in full. It is
sufficient to note the following points from them (emphasis
(a) At [43], the reasons record the Integrity Commission providing information
of the Applicant’s criminal record to the Appellant.
The Tribunal stated:
“The concerns of the police regarding non-disclosure, conveyed by the
Integrity Commission, were not warranted.”
The precise concerns of the
Commission were not set out in the reasons. There was no examination and
weighing of the Commission’s
concerns as spelt out in the two letters of 7
and 11 April 2023 from the Commission but instead a simple and blunt rejection
Indeed, the concerns of the Commission set out in the letter were not
set out in the reasons.
(b) At [44], the Tribunal rejected the submission by the Appellant regarding the
“weight” to be given to the information
provided by the Commission.
There was no reason given for the “rejection” of the submission.
(c) At [45] – [51], the Tribunal outlined the response of Ms Drejer-White
to the Applicant in the light of the information
she received from the
Commission, and contrasted it unfavourably with the interaction of Mr Rose (from
HR at CSD) with the Applicant
in the context of a conciliation process he was
engaged in. Whereas the Tribunal referred to Mr Rose behaving “in a proper
] when reaching his conclusion as to the relevance of the
complainant’s criminal record” (what constituted a “proper
manner” and how it related to any decision-making, were not explained),
the Tribunal said (at [47]) that upon receiving the
information from the
Integrity Commission Ms Drejer-White (emphasis added) “
immediately
leapt into punitive action against the
complainant
Tribunal said further that upon receiving the letter she “
immediately
the complainant from all active employment, and determined that
she would not be employed on an extension of her temporary contract.”
Tribunal recorded that the Appellant did not speak with the Applicant or to Mr
Rose; it concluded that Ms Drejer-White’s
action (emphasis added)
a quintessential knee-jerk reaction
.” This is briefly
expanded upon in [48], where the Tribunal stated that “Ms Drejer-White
made this decision with no background
information
whatsoever...”
Respectfully, the evidence provided by Ms Drejer-White and Ms Perkins (discussed
below), which was not canvassed in the reasons,
does not support these
conclusions, or the pejorative assertions highlighted.
(d) At [50] – [51], the Tribunal commented on the purported duty or onus
on the Appellant employer properly to consider the
Applicant’s criminal
record. The issue of “onus” is discussed separately below. The
authorities canvassed in these
reasons confirm that the relevant onus is firstly
upon the Applicant, and only after certain matters are established does any onus
shift to the Respondent.
referring to, or considering any relevant authorities and statutory provisions
on this and related matters, the Tribunal deprived
itself of proper reference to
guiding principle.
note the following in relation to the evidence that was before the Tribunal but
not, on the face of the reasons, referred to or
otherwise considered by it.
Drejer-White provided two statements: (a) a witness statement to the Tribunal
for the hearing, dated 23 November 2023; and (b)
an earlier letter to respond to
specific questions from the
Discrimination Commissioner
, dated 6 June
The statement and the
letter of Ms Drejer-White are basically consistent. Summarised, the detailed
witness statement provided the
following information and comment from Ms
Drejer-White, who at the relevant time was the Executive Branch Manager, People
& Culture Branch, Community Services Directorate (CSD):
(a) The Integrity Commission’s letters were received on or about 11 April
2023 first by Ms Borwick (Ms Drejer-White’s
supervisor), who was the
Executive Group Manager – Corporate Services. Ms Borwick provided it to
Ms Drejer-White. Following
brief discussion, she advised Ms Borwick that nothing
should be done regarding the letter and its contents until more information
obtained. Par.7 of the witness statement confirmed that (i) the letter conveyed
to her that the matter was “very serious”;
(ii) the letter conveyed
the Commission’s concern that it did not think that a person with the
Applicant’s history “should
have access to the Directorate’s
systems...”. This letter led Ms Drejer-White to consider the
Applicant’s criminal
history of which she was, at that time, unaware. She
said that she was struck by how many convictions there were and the
period of time they covered.”
(b) In contrast to the Tribunal’s comment, if not finding (at [48]) that
Ms Drejer-White’s decision regarding the Applicant
was “with no
background information whatsoever”, pars.8-14 detail the inquiries Ms
Drejer-White made in the light of
the Commission’s letter regarding the
Applicant. These included asking the Employee Relations Team to check
information regarding
the Applicant. Her point of contact here was Mr Henderson.
On or around this time, Ms Drejer-White learnt that the Applicant had
“notice of her resignation to take up a permanent role elsewhere.”
Ms Drejer-White confirmed that she was advised
by Ms Perkins (whose evidence is
discussed shortly) that the Applicant had “already negotiated an earlier
end date, being 25
April 2024.”
(c) Pars.15-25 outline Ms Drejer-White’s assessment of the
Applicant’s situation. At the outset, she noted that her “particular
concern” was the level of access to “confidential and sensitive
information that she had.” She outlined at a little
length (pars.16-19)
the general duties of an executive assistant. Ms Drejer-White said that she was
concerned about the access to
information regarding vulnerable individuals and
risk the Applicant posed, in the light of the access to the information
identified, whereby someone could exploit the Applicant’s
access to such
information. This was in the context where one of the Applicant’s
convictions was for drug-related offences,
which “showed involvement and
co-operation with others.”
(d) I need not canvass other matters set out in these paragraphs because they
repeat, to some degree, what had been said earlier,
save that (it seemed) that
attempts to contact Mr Rose (who conciliated earlier matters) were unsuccessful
because he was initially
on leave around this time and later, had left the
Directorate.
(e) Ms Drejer-White said that, had she been aware of the Applicant’s
criminal history, she would have made inquiries with her
and made a risk
assessment regarding the inherent requirements of the job as an Executive
Assistant. Clearly, the Applicant’s
significant criminal record was a
relevant factor and consideration for her now that she was aware of it.
(f) Next followed Ms Drejer-White’s evidence (pars.26-31) regarding her
decision to suspend the Applicant’s ICT access
and to place her on leave.
She firstly said that the fact that the information regarding the
Applicant’s criminal history,
and the expression of the Integrity
Commission’s concern about her employment and having access to the
Directorate’s
systems, indicated to Ms Drejer-White the seriousness of the
situation and the possible risks involved. She said that, in her view,
duty to protect or to safeguard sensitive information held by the Directorate.
As a result of forming this view, she suspended
the Applicant from access to the
ICT systems. In turn, this meant that the Applicant could not perform her
duties. She was then placed
on “miscellaneous paid leave.” Ms
Drejer-White said that because the Applicant was finishing up with the
Directorate
in a relatively short time, she did not want the Applicant to be
financially disadvantaged and therefore she was content for her
to be on paid
leave for the remainder of her time.
(g) Importantly, Ms Drejer-White confirmed that she discussed her
“decision” regarding the Applicant with her supervisor,
Ms Borwick,
who agreed with the course that was undertaken. She said that her recollection
was that she did not discuss the matter
with anyone else because she did not
know how widely she could canvass the information provided by the Integrity
Commission.
(h) It will be recalled that, at [47] of the Tribunal’s reasons, among
other things it was stated that the decisions of Ms
Drejer-White regarding the
Applicant were taken “all without speaking to the Complainant.”
Further, at [23] of the reasons,
the Tribunal stated: “she [the Applicant]
was not provided with the information provided by the Integrity
Commission.”
Contrary to these declamations, each of these assertions by
the Tribunal are incorrect on the bases that, at pars.32-39 in her unconsidered
witness statement, Ms Drejer-White confirmed that she had a discussion with the
Applicant on 12 April 2023. She discussed with the
Applicant the letter from the
Integrity Commission, and that in consequence of its contents and the concerns
expressed in it, she
would be placed on “other paid leave” until the
expiration of her employment. She said that during this phone call she
discuss the detail of the Commission’s letter because she was not sure if
she could do so. Further, again contrary
to the assertions in the
Tribunal’s reasons, some little time after the discussion between the
Applicant and Ms Drejer-White,
and after checking with the Commission, she
provided the Applicant with a redacted copy of the
She said that the
discussion with the Applicant focussed mainly on the latter’s inquiries
confirmed that at the end of her
employment, she would be paid out all of her wages and entitlements.
(i) Finally, at pars.40-45, Ms Drejer-White outlined her consideration of the
Applicant’s circumstances (
the Tribunal’s comments that
nothing along these lines ever took place – see the liability reasons at
[50] and [56]).
short, there was no weighing of the Applicant’s evidence against that from
Ms Drejer-White (or, as seen below, from Ms Perkins),
or in the light of the
documentation provided by the Appellant. Therefore, in relation to a number of
evidentiary matters, the factual
foundation for the Tribunal’s decision
was necessarily, and fundamentally, flawed.
Anita Perkins, the Executive Group Manager for the Communities Division of the
Directorate provided a short [witness] statement,
dated 30 October 2023. In the
course of her statement, Ms Perkins
(a) Through a number of conversations with the Applicant between 30 and 31 March
2023, she was aware that the latter was looking
for work outside the
Directorate. Ms Perkins provided a referee Report for her (in writing and
orally) for the position with CIT.
(b) By a message on MS Teams on 30 March 2023, the Applicant confirmed to Ms
Perkins that she was successful in her Application for
the CIT job and had a
start date of 26 April 2023. In consequence of this success, the Applicant asked
Ms Perkins if she could take
a “flex day” on 24 April 2023. This was
messages over MS Teams on 31 March 2023.
(c) Ms Perkins noted further that she never indicated to the Applicant that she
would be provided with a further temporary contract
of employment. She also
confirmed that the position the Applicant held was intended to be made permanent
once there had been a merit-based
recruitment process. To this end, the
advertisement for that selection process for that position appeared on 24 April
2024, which
was obviously before the expiration of the Applicant’s
temporary position on 31 May 2023.
completeness, I also note the following additional material that was before the
Tribunal at the hearing, but otherwise not referenced
or considered in the
(a) At T 275-276, there is correspondence between the Applicant and Mr Henderson
(Assistant Director Employee Relations) between
13 and 19 April 2023. For
example, in Mr Henderson’s email to the Applicant of 17 April he confirmed
to her that (i) her “temporary
employment with the Directorate has not
been terminated and your existing contract will be honoured and allowed to
continue until
the nominal expiry date of 31 May 2023. ...You will continue to
receive full pay and all other entitlements until 31 May 2023 but
will not be
required to work.”
(b) At T 277, there is a copy of a further letter from the Integrity Commission
(dated 11 April 2023; the original letter from the
Commission, dated
7 April 2023, is at T 278-279), which confirmed that the information
contained in it regarding the Applicant was
of such importance that, in addition
to it being considered relevant to the functions of CSD, it was also considered
to be relevant
to the functions of the ACT Public Sector Standards Commissioner
(PSSC) and that the Commission intended to disclose it to the PSSC.
(c) At T 289-291, is a copy of Ms Drejer-White’s letter to the
Discrimination Commissioner (Ms Toohey) dated 6 June 2023. Without
outlining its
contents in detail, I need only note that it confirmed that (i) the Applicant
was employed only on short-term, temporary
contracts; (ii) the Applicant had
arranged an earlier “release date” from her employment because she
intended to take
up a full-time position elsewhere. This meant that there was no
consideration of her possibly taking up a renewal of her current
short-term contract because she would not be available; and (iii) the Applicant
“was not afforded a show cause process
as her contract of employment was
not being terminated and was allowed to continue until the nominal end
date.” And the early
release date regarding the Applicant’s
employment “was agreed to by the Applicant’s manager on 30 March
to the advice being received from the ACT Integrity
Commission.”
was no consideration of the Complainant’s evidence (
witness statements) that was before the Tribunal, which also goes to the
requirement to weigh and evaluate the competing evidence
this review of the evidence on behalf of the Appellant that was before the
Tribunal below, subject to the consideration of other
matters such as
“onus” discussed later, the following conclusions are inevitable in
relation to the factual matrix as
found by the Tribunal at first
(a) Given that the Integrity Commission itself expressed significant concerns
and that the material in its
letter to CSD was being forwarded to the ACT Public Sector Standards
Commissioner, it was proper for
Ms Drejer-White to consider it and to give it
proper weight. It was not appropriate, therefore, without indicating why and how
what evidence was relied upon) the Tribunal came to the view it did (at
[43] and [44]), to conclude that “the concerns of the
police regarding
non-disclosure, conveyed by the Integrity Commission, were not warranted”
and further that the Tribunal was
not persuaded “that the input of the
Integrity Commission adds anything to the consideration of this issue required
respondent.”
(b) Given the detailed account in her witness statement regarding (i) her
communication with the Applicant, (ii) her communication
with Ms Borwick and Mr
Henderson, and (iii) express statements regarding her consideration of the
Applicant’s circumstances,
it was not open to the Tribunal to make
findings (at [47] and [48]) that there had been no discussion with the
Applicant, or any
consideration of the Applicant’s personal circumstances.
The findings of the Tribunal regarding these matters were not open
to it in the
light of the detailed evidence of Ms Drejer-White and the supporting documents
referred to. Why there was no reference
to her evidence in the reasons was not
(c) Given the detailed account by Ms Drejer-White regarding her understanding of
the import and importance of the correspondence
from the Integrity Commission,
it was understandable that she proceeded cautiously. To proceed in this way, in
my view, was perfectly
understandable and proper in all of the circumstances.
She did not proceed, as the Tribunal below found, in either a “knee
reaction” or that she “leapt into a punitive action” against
the Applicant. Ms Drejer-White had formal responsibilities,
as she stated, to
protect the CSD. To so act was not punitive to the Applicant, particularly in
circumstances where the latter had
already given notice of her departure to
other employment and had negotiated an earlier departure date, all before the
information
from the Commission came to light. And the Applicant was nonetheless
paid out her full entitlements beyond the negotiated departure
(d) A final matter to note relates to the Tribunal’s conclusion at [55]
regarding, among other things, its view regarding not
offering the Applicant an
extension of the Applicant’s employment. This paragraph is examined
further below. However, for current
purposes, the last sentence of this
paragraph refers to the importance and significance of the need to consider
“other information
and context.” There was, in fact, “other
information and context” provided by the witness statement of Ms Perkins,
which unfortunately was not considered and certainly not referred to by the
Tribunal, other than as part of the list of materials
relied upon by the
Respondent. It will be recalled that her evidence was that the position the
Applicant held on a temporary, short-term
basis had been advertised on 24 April
2023 for a merit-based, full-time position, which necessarily meant that the
short-term position
held by the Applicant was not, in any event, available for
renewal or otherwise, except pursuant to the merit-based process referred
Ms Perkins. It is not clear, nor is it explained, why this and other information
was not referred to in the reasons below.
Plus, by this stage, the Complainant
had resigned, as agreed, on 21
Again, unfortunately,
there was no relevant weighing of competing evidence.
my view, in the light of the examination just conducted of the detailed evidence
provided to, but not discussed by, the Tribunal
below, the factual foundations
for the Tribunal’s decision in relation to those matters cannot stand.
These evidentiary and
procedural flaws are sufficient in themselves to set aside
the Tribunal’s decision below. Other matters discussed below lead
same conclusion.
Appellant’s submissions on liability
Appellant’s submissions on
, were as follows:
Liability decision
[2024] ACAT 17
its heart, the Liability decision is fundamentally flawed because the Tribunal
approached the determination of the claim as if
it was an unfair dismissal under
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) and failed to give proper
consideration to the relevant provisions, tests and the application of the
Discrimination Act
. This approach also resulted in erroneously imposing the
‘onus’ on the Territory (see Liability decision [42]).
is convenient to start with the relevant provisions and operation of the
Discrimination Act
and the HRC Act. We address the particular errors in the
context and application of these enactments.
and the area of employment
[Reasons for Appeal: substantive decision, para 6; List of Errors, para
Subsections
Discrimination Act
make it unlawful for an employer to
discriminate against a ‘person’ or ‘employee’
respectively:
and employees
(1) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a
(a) in the arrangements made for the purpose of deciding who should be
offered employment; or
(b) in deciding who should be offered employment; or
(c) in the terms or conditions on which employment is offered.
(2) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an
in the terms or conditions of employment that the employer affords the
(b) by denying the employee access, or limiting the employee’s access,
to opportunities for promotion, transfer or training
or to any other benefit
associated with employment; or
(c) by dismissing the employee; or
(d) by subjecting the employee to
any other detriment
emphasis added
Dictionary defines:
"employment" includes—
under a contract for services; and
employee; and
Discrimination Act
applies to acts and omissions of
‘representatives’ and provides:
(1) This section applies to the doing of an unlawful act
Note 1 A complaint may be made about an unlawful act (see
Human Rights
Commission Act 2005
an act—see s 4A.
(2) Conduct engaged in on behalf of a person by a representative of the
person is taken to have been engaged in by the person if the
conduct was within
the scope of the representative’s actual or apparent authority.
(3) However, subsection (2) does not apply if the person establishes that
the person took all reasonable steps to prevent the representative
from engaging
in the conduct.
(4) In this section:
representative
, of a person, means an employee or agent of
the person.
Complainant
DT232023’s complaint engaged
There was and is no dispute
Territory was an ‘employer’ for the purpose of
Complainant
DT232023 was a ‘person’ for the purpose of
Complainant
DT232023 was an ‘employee’ for the purpose of
as at the date
of the alleged discrimination being 12 April 2023. As the Tribunal found, she
was a ‘temporary employee’
(Liability Decision
Tribunal failed to give any consideration of
with respect to the
allegations that CSD refused to offer a new temporary contract. Rather it
appeared to treat a decision about
whether the complainant should be employed as
a ‘detriment’ in employment. Likewise, the Tribunal did not consider
make any findings with respect to dismissing the complainant, by reference to
the Liability decision at [30], the Tribunal referred to both
ss 10(2)(a)
Discrimination Act
. However, as the Order makes plain, the only
finding was with respect to
Discrimination Act
: see paragraph
2 above. The Tribunal’s reliance only on
has resulted in
confusing and erroneous findings.
Complainant
DT 232023 had the onus of proving
or any other subsection was
relevantly engaged and how. For the following reasons, the Tribunal should have
found Complainant DT
232023 failed to prove
was properly engaged and on
that basis should have dismissed the
to apply the proper test with respect to being ‘subjected to a
the Tribunal failed to consider the meaning of ‘any other detriment’
s 10(2)(d).
The Tribunal did not consider or address the meaning of
‘detriment’ for the purpose of
Discrimination Act
This resulted in a failure to properly identify what ‘detriment’
means for the purpose of
and then consider the evidence as to whether
the acts of the Territory ‘subjected’ Complainant DT232023 to a
‘detriment’.
As a result, the Tribunal fell into error because
and conflated the concept of ‘detriment’ in
definition of ‘direct discrimination’ of ‘unfavourable
treatment’ (see Liability Decision at [38]
(with respect to the
Territory’s submission and [53]);
confused and conflated the concept of ‘detriment’ in
the consequences of an act of discrimination that causes ‘loss and
damage’. The latter being relevant to the determination
of a remedy but
only if there has been a breach of
(see s 53E(2)(b) of the HR Act) at
[38] (with respect to the Territory’s submission);
to apply an objective test with respect to determining if there was a
the Tribunal has applied the correct approach, it should have started with
considering the meaning of ‘detriment’.
The term is not defined in
Discrimination Act
but the expression has its ordinary meaning. In
Applicant DT62023
v Canberra Institute of Technology
[2024] ACAT 30
, the Tribunal said:
‘Detriment’ is not
defined in the Act. The Macquarie Dictionary defines ‘detriment’ as
“loss, damage,
or injury.”
The Encyclopaedic Australian
Legal Dictionary provides a general definition of ‘detriment’ as
“prejudice, loss,
or material
disadvantage.”
Additionally, the Encyclopaedic Australian
Legal Dictionary provides a specific definition where the term relates to civil
and political
rights as “prejudice or loss, including humiliation or
denigration
applying the ordinary meaning,
Discrimination Act
provides that the
Act must be interpreted in a way that is beneficial to a person with a protected
attribute to the extent that it
is possible to do so consistently with the
objects of the Act and the
Human Rights Act 2004
. The Tribunal gave no
consideration to such matters.
the Tribunal should have identified the relevant evidence to make an objective
assessment of whether Complainant DT232023 had
been subjected to a detriment.
The Tribunal did not apply an objective test. Rather it relied on Complainant
DT232023’s subjective
experience or reaction to being directed to take
paid leave until her temporary contract expired. The Tribunal just accepted
Complainant
DT232023’s submission which was confined to the subjective
effect or consequences (see Liability Decision [34] [35]).
The Tribunal’s reasons failed to address and consider the requirements of
, specifically that the sub-section cannot be satisfied if an employee
alleges no more than they have suffered a consequence.
is intended to draw a clear distinction between an employee
being subjected to a detriment (being the act done by the respondent/employer)
and consequences of such an act, being the consequential loss or
error is plain in the Tribunal’s Order. There the Tribunal describes the
breach as ‘by acting to the detriment of
the complainant’.
the error is also clear from the reasons at Liability decision [52]-[54] which
make findings to the effect of a detriment
‘arising from’, meaning
being the consequence of actions:
14 Macquarie Dictionary (online) ‘detriment’ (def 1)
15 Encyclopaedic Australian Legal Dictionary (online)
‘detriment’ (def 1)
16 Encyclopaedic Australian Legal Dictionary (online)
‘detriment’ (def 2)
17 Sivananthan v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Service
[2001] NSWADT
; Burns v Sunol
[2014] NSWCATAD 62
; Bashour v Australia &
[2024] VCAT 1197
Watts v Australian Postal Corporation
[2014] FCA 370
(2014) 222 FCR 220
that the complainant applied for full-time employment elsewhere does not prevent
a finding being made of a
detriment to the complainant arising from
respondent's conduct in removing her access to its systems, placing her on paid
leave, and its immediate pre-emptive decision
not to extend her
respondent ceased to provide the complainant with work. The respondent submits
that this is not a detriment. It submits it did
not treat her unfavourably
because it paid her. This is too narrow a definition of detriment.
persuaded that the payment of money
negates the detriment
that arises
from removal
from access to the respondent systems, the absence of real
work, and the decision not to offer her any work in the future. Placing
applicant on paid or gardening leave and not allowing her to continue in active
employment is a detriment
. A decision made, without consultation, to refuse
to extend the complainant’s contract, whether or not she intended to avail
herself of that opportunity, is a detriment.
respondent was never bound to offer an extension of the applicant’s
employment at the conclusion of her fixed term contract.
That is clear from the
Commencement of Employment documents executed and accepted by the complainant.
However, I am satisfied that it is direct discrimination to determine that no
such employment will be offered
on the basis of an ill-considered conclusion
by the respondent based on mere knowledge of the existence of the criminal
record itself,
with no other information or context
Third, the Tribunal mischaracterised the alleged unlawful conduct for the
s 10(2)(d).
One of the issues raised in Complainant DT232023’s
submission was she wanted to ‘gain permanent employment’ (see
Further, Complainant DT232023’s ‘Particulars of
Discrimination’ (Exhibit A2) made it plain that her complaint
concerned about a future offer of permanent employment. If this is the case,
then the claim was more properly directed to
s 10(1)(b).
As a result the
Tribunal’s reasons are confusing and inconsistent. At points, the Tribunal
refers to ‘extension’
(see [1]) or a ‘renewal’ (see
[23]) and the specific findings at [54] and [55] (reproduced
and proper approach to ‘detriment’
the proper test has been applied, the Tribunal should have found
Complainant
DT232023 was not subjected to a detriment for the purpose of
removing her access to the systems. There was no evidence about the need for the
complainant to access systems. There was no evidence
as to how or why not having
access to the employer’s systems subjected Complainant DT232023 to a
detriment, particularly in
circumstances where she was not required to perform
work or needed to use the ‘systems’;
Complainant
DT232023 was not subjected to a detriment for the purpose of
alleged failure of Ms Dreyer-White failing to consult with her. There was no
evidence that Ms Dreyer-White had an obligation
to do so. This finding is not
supported by reference to the employment contract or to the source of another
obligation. There was
no evidence with respect to how or why consultation was
appropriate. If there was no right to be consulted, then it was not open
Tribunal to find that the failure to consult resulted in subjecting the
complainant to a detriment in employment;
Complainant
DT232023 was not subjected to a detriment for the purpose of
directed to take ‘gardening leave’ being on paid leave. There was no
evidence as to how such a direction subjected
Complainant DT232023 to a
detriment. The Tribunal’s findings at [54] are not based on any evidence
presented to the Tribunal
with respect to the nature, scope and terms of
Complainant DT232023’s employment. For example, there was evidence of the
Employment Contract (Exhibit R8) which referred to
Sector Management Act 1994
). The Tribunal made no
reference to the PSM Act and did not take into account the requirements of the
Complainant
DT232023 was not subjected to a detriment for the purpose of s10(2)(d) by an
alleged failure of Ms Dreyer-White to consider
Complainant DT232023’s
family and domestic background, her current circumstances and material outlined
by Complainant DT232023’s
psychiatrist (Liability decision [56]). Contrary
to the Tribunal’s findings, there was no evidence that
established:
Dreyer-White knew about Complainant DT232023’s family and domestic
background or her current circumstances and/or material
outlined by Complainant
DT232023’s psychiatrist as at 13 April 2023;
Dreyer-White was required to make inquiries about Complainant DT232023’s
family and domestic background or her current circumstances
and/or material
outlined by Complainant DT232023’s psychiatrist;
of those matters were relevant to Ms Dreyer-White’s
considerations;
of those matters were relevant to determining if Complainant DT232023 should be
directed to take paid leave; and
if Ms Dreyer-White knew about these matters or took them into account, the
result would not be any different.
Tribunal made findings without any reference to relevant evidence or the proper
context in which an employment relationship operates.
The Tribunal failed to
consider well- established principles in relation to the relationship between an
employer and employee.
Tribunal’s finding at [54] that ‘Employment requires the performance
of work’ is, with respect, not correct.
The employment relationship
depends on an employment contract that operates with relevant modern awards,
enterprise agreements, relevant
statutory and common law
obligations.
Tribunal’s finding at [54] ‘[t]he provision of gardening leave is
not the performance of an employer’s obligations
employment’ is also wrong. As the Victorian Supreme Court said in
BearingPoint Australia Pty Ltd v Hillard
[2008] VSC 115
“Garden leave” is a colloquial or
euphemistic term for an employer insisting that an employee, who has given
notice, stay
away from work for the duration of the notice period, whilst
continuing to pay the employee’s remuneration.
There is no obligation
requiring an employer to ‘continue’ an employee in ‘active
employment’
. Further, contrary to the Tribunal’s finding there
is no obligation to provide ‘employment’ or
(emphasis added)
as the High Court said in
v Ramsey Butchering Services Pty Ltd
[2005] HCA 22
(2005) 221 CLR 539
an employer has no general obligation
to provide work to an employee, at common law.
Tribunal’s finding at [54] with respect to not to ‘offer ... any
work in the future’ is not supported by any
evidence or a proper
understanding of s 10.
Discrimination Act
does not extend to
future offers of work at unknown times.
Section 10(1)
expressly addresses when
and how discrimination may arise in determining who should be employed. There
was no consideration of
is considered in it full and proper
is directed to when an employee is subjected to a detriment
in the employment that exists at the time, not some future form of
employment.
Tribunal’s finding at [55] that Complainant DT232023 was subjected to a
detriment for the purpose of
because the Territory made a decision
not to extend her contract is wrong. As the Tribunal found at ]55]. The
Territory was ‘never
bound to offer an extension of the applicant’s
employment at the conclusion of her fixed term contract.’ The finding
[55] that the Territory should have made a determine to offer further
employment, in circumstances where it had no obligation
to do so, does not
Discrimination Act
18 Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Barker
[2014] HCA 32
(2014) 253 CLR 169
recently in Bird v DP (a pseudonym)
[2024] HCA 41.
See also WorkPac Pty Ltd v
(2021) 271 CLR 456
at 477 [56]-[58], 478-479 [62]; Construction,
Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Personnel Contracting Pty Ltd
[2022] HCA 1
(2022) 275 CLR 165
, 228 [172].
19 See Neil I and Chin D, The Modern Contract of Employment, 2nd edition
[6.100] – [6.122]
20 Communications, Electrical, Electronic,
Energy, Information, Postal and Allied Services Union of Australia v Dee Vee Pty
[2012] FCA 988
per Tracey J at [27], Quinn v Overland
[2010] FCA 799
IR 40 at 59-61 per Bromberg J at [95]-[104], Chan v Commonwealth of Australia as
represented by the NDIS Quality and Safeguards
[2023] FCA 1458
per Shariff J, Rugg v Commonwealth of Australia as represented by the
Department of Finance
[2023] FCA 179
per Mortimer CJ.
these reasons, the Tribunal has erred in identifying a proper basis for
to be engaged. If the Appeal Panel accepts that there was no
‘detriment’, then
was not engaged and the complaint
should have been dismissed.
the erroneous approach with respect to the Territory’s obligation on the
employer under
has also had significant and material consequences for
the Tribunal’s Damages decision, particularly to the basis on which
damages were assessed.
Section 8(1)
(2) and errors in
failing to apply the test of discrimination [Reasons for Appeal: substantive
decision, para 4(a) and(b); List of
Errors, para 1(1)(d)(i) d (ii)]
contrary to our submission, the Appeal Tribunal considers the Tribunal correctly
was engaged, then further errors arise in the application of
the definition of ‘direct discrimination’ in
Discrimination Act
sets out the meaning of discrimination for the purpose of
as follows:
(1) For this Act,
discrimination
occurs when a person discriminates
either directly or indirectly, or both, against someone else.
(2) For this section, a person
discriminates against someone
else if the person treats, or proposes to treat, another person unfavourably
because the other person
has 1 or more protected attributes.
(3) For this section, a person
discriminates against
someone else if the person imposes, or proposes to impose, a condition or
requirement that has, or is likely
to have, the effect of disadvantaging the
other person because the other person has 1 or more protected attributes.
(4) However, a condition or requirement does not give rise to indirect
discrimination if it is reasonable in the circumstances.
(5) In deciding whether a condition or requirement is reasonable in the
circumstances, the matters to be taken into account include—
(a) the nature and extent of any disadvantage that results from imposing the
condition or requirement; and
(b) the feasibility of overcoming or mitigating the disadvantage; and
(c) whether the disadvantage is disproportionate to the result sought by the
person who imposes, or proposes to impose, the condition
or requirement.
Liability decision [31], the Tribunal said it understood that Complainant
DT232023 ‘alleges that she was directly discriminated
against, as per
section 8(2)
Discrimination Act
.’ Other than reciting
[30], the Tribunal did not address any of the elements the Complainant DT232023
was required to prove. The Tribunal did not refer
to or consider any relevant
authorities addressing how
should be applied.
Appeal Tribunal will be aware that the Tribunal has considered the proper
approach to
on a number of occasions. In
Applicant DT62023,
Tribunal said:
tribunal has previously observed that, whether a person is treated unfavourably
or disadvantaged for the purposes of the Act,
is a question of fact and the test
is objective. In, the tribunal described the test as follows:
Kidman v Casino Canberra Pty Ltd, the tribunal considered the issue of
unfavourable treatment to be a question of fact. The test
is objective rather
than comparative. The Tribunal noted
Discrimination Act
define ‘unfavourable treatment’ or what is meant by ‘treats or
proposes to treat another person unfavourably’.
Discrimination Act
does not invite a comparison between the way in which a person who has a
particular attribute is treated compared with a person without
that attribute or
who has a different attribute. In other words, it does not ask: “were you
treated less favourably than others?”
It asks, “were you treated
unfavourably?” This is an objective test. It calls for an examination of
the treatment accorded
to the complainant. If the consequence of the treatment
is unfavourable to that person there is ‘unfavourable treatment’
the question then turns to the reason for that unfavourable treatment, and
whether it is because of the attributes they possess.
‘Unfavourable
treatment’ has been said to encompass acts or omissions which result in
some detriment, being loss, damage
Australian Capital Territory v Wang, the tribunal noted that the words
‘effect’ and ‘disadvantaging’ are
not defined in the
Discrimination Act
. The tribunal adopted the following meaning of
‘disadvantage’ discussed in Prezzi, Patricia Anne v Discrimination
Commissioner
and later approved by Beaumont ACJ (with whom Higgins and Gyles JJ
agreed) in Edgely v Federal Capital Press of Australia Pty
[22] While the term “disadvantage” might be
thought to imply comparison, it does not necessarily do so. The context in
it is used may invite comparison, as where it is clear that what is in issue is
comparative treatment, but it may also be used
in a context where comparison is
absent. The Macquarie Dictionary defines “disadvantage” as
“absence or deprivation
of advantage; any unfavourable circumstance or
condition”. The primary meaning of “advantage” does not import
...or means specially favourable to success, interest or any desired
21 Andreopoulos v University of Canberra
[2020] ACAT 95
Kidman v Casino Canberra Pty Ltd ACN 051 204 114
[2020] ACAT 50
(citations omitted)
[24] It is thus unnecessary to inquire whether a complainant with a
particular attribute has been dealt with less favourably,
attribute, than persons without that attribute. All that is required is whether
the consequences of the dealing with the
complainant are favourable to the
complainant’s interests or are adverse to the complainant’s
interests, and whether
the dealing has occurred because of a relevant attribute
of the complainant. The same inquiry must be made where what is in issue
condition or proposed condition of dealing with the complainant by the person
who is the subject of a complaint...
Tribunal’s reasons reveal a failure to properly consider and apply
Rather, as noted above, the Tribunal conflated the elements of
‘detriment’ and ‘unfavourable treatment’ and
address the specific aspects of
in the manner described by the relevant
authorities.
is in effect no finding with respect to
in the Tribunal’s
Attributes and onus
[Reasons for Appeal: substantive decision, para 1 and 2; List of Errors,
para 1(1)(a) and (b)]
the purpose of
, the identification of a relevant attribute giving rise to
the alleged discrimination is critical. The attributes are set out in
sub-section 7(1). Relevantly, the list of attributes includes ‘irrelevant
criminal record’ at sub-section 7(1)(k).
Dictionary defines ‘irrelevant criminal record’ as
...in relation to a person, means a record relating
to an offence, or an alleged offence, if—
the person has been charged with the offence but—
a proceeding for the alleged offence is not finalised; or
the charge has lapsed, been withdrawn or discharged, or struck out;
the person has been acquitted of the alleged offence; or
the person has had a conviction for the alleged offence quashed or set
[2020] ACAT 95
, quoting Edgely v Federal
Capital Press of Australia Pty Ltd
person has a spent conviction or an extinguished conviction, within the meaning
Spent Convictions Act 2000
, for the offence.
the person has been served with an infringement notice for the alleged
offence; or
the person has a conviction for the offence, but the circumstances of the
offence are not directly relevant to the situation which
discrimination arises;
the person has a spent conviction of an extinguished conviction within
the meaning of the
Spent Convictions Act 2000
, for the offence
Spent Convictions Act 2000
which convictions can be spent (see that Act s 11 and when a conviction is spent
(see that Act, s 12).
a person has the attribute of ‘irrelevant criminal record’ is a
factual question.
Tribunal’s approach discloses a number of errors with respect to
determining whether Complainant DT232023 had the relevant
notwithstanding there was no dispute she had a criminal record.
the Tribunal incorrectly imposed the onus on CSD to prove the
complainant’s criminal was ‘not irrelevant’
(see [42]).
Contrary to [42], [44],[48], [50], [56] the Territory did not bear the onus of
establishing Complainant DT232023’s
criminal record was ‘not
irrelevant’. Paragraph [50] is particularly telling in this
Tribunal misconstrued s 7(1)(k), failed to have regard to any relevant authority
to support the ‘reverse onus’ and
failed to apply the correct
the purpose of s 7(1), a complainant must prove they have the particular
attribute relied on. In some cases, there may be no dispute
but in other cases,
the attribute may not be obvious, clear or agreed. In those circumstances, the
complainant must prove they have
the relevant attribute.
correct test was described in
Complainant 201908
v Commissioner For Fair
Trading (Discrimination)
[2020] ACAT 24
as follows:
Discrimination Act
, the applicant must establish that he possesses a
protected attribute within the meaning of
Discrimination Act
Therefore the onus is on the applicant to establish that he has an irrelevant
criminal record. This is a jurisdictional fact [fn3
Pereira v Commissioner
of Police NT Anti-Discrimination Commission (15 August 2012)]
Tribunal only has jurisdiction to consider this matter if satisfied
that the applicant does in fact have a protected attribute.
‘Irrelevant
criminal record’ is an unusual protected attribute when compared to the
other protected attributes in
Discrimination Act
, because the
attribute that is protected is not the possession of a criminal record per se,
but rather the possession of a criminal
record the circumstances of which are
irrelevant to the situation in which it is or was considered. This is the only
protected attribute
that a person may or may not have depending on the
surrounding facts and law. [fn 4 See above Pereira v Commissioner of Police NT
Anti- Discrimination Commission (15 August 2012); Rees et al Australian
Anti-Discrimination and Equal Opportunity Law, 3
ed, (Federation
Press, 2018) at [10.7.7]
question of whether the applicant has an irrelevant criminal record must
therefore be considered first. To determine this, there
are four questions that
must be answered:
(a) Does the applicant have a conviction for an offence/offences?
(b) What are the circumstances of the offence/s for which the applicant was
(c) What is the situation in which the alleged discrimination arises?
(d) Are the circumstances of the offence/s directly relevant to the
Complainant 201908
at [72], the Tribunal
[72] The next question is whether the applicant’s
criminal convictions are not directly relevant to the circumstances in which
they are considered. This is a question of mixed fact and law, but the factual
element is a question of jurisdictional fact –
if the applicant does not
have the protected attribute, the Tribunal cannot adjudicate this matter. The
applicant bears the onus
the Tribunal, the Territory submitted that the Complainant DT232023 had to show
she had the protected attribute.
However, the Tribunal did not
engage or address the submission. Further, no part of the Tribunal’s
reasons referred to any
authority to support its finding that altered the
language and effect of
contrary to [42], there is nothing in the
Discrimination Act
that imposed any
obligation on the Territory to establish that Complainant DT232023’s
criminal record was ‘not irrelevant’.
The Tribunal set out
Discrimination Act
(at [33]) and s 53CA of the HR Act (at [32]). These
provisions expressly address when the onus shifts to a respondent. Nothing in
these provisions extends to an onus to disprove an element of an
Pallett v Commonwealth of
Australia, Department of Human Services - Centrelink
[2017] FCA 1132
Union Business Solutions (Australia) Pty Ltd v Robinson
[2019] FCAFC 181
See also Complainant 202012
v Australian Capital Territory (As Represented By The Director-General,
Community Services Directorate
(Discrimination)
[2023] ACAT 17
Transcript p 26/13-14 and p 41/5 – 47 and p
the Tribunal does not refer to any provision in the
Discrimination Act
Act or any authority for its finding at [42] that the ‘[employer] must
determine that matter’. Territory had
the onus of establishing the
employee had an irrelevant criminal record. The matters described in [43]
highlight how the Tribunal
has misconstrued the provisions and operation of the
Discrimination Act
and HR Act. The approach described appears to be based on the
Fair Work Commission’s approach to determining whether the termination
employment on the ground of employee’s criminal conviction/s is
That is not the test for the
Discrimination Act
the contention that the Territory had an obligation to make inquiries after
Complainant DT232023 lodged a complaint with the
Commission and was required to
establish during conciliation that the complainant’s criminal record was
‘not relevant’(see
[49]) is, with respect, completely misconceived
and wrong. There was no obligation on the Territory under the
Discrimination Act
or otherwise to do so.
the Tribunal’s findings are premised on the Territory having an obligation
as an employer to consult, give notice and
provide procedural fairness. This
finding is not made by reference to any evidence or how such an obligation
(see [23], [48]). The finding is contrary to well-established
principles that an employer is not bound to act reasonably, to give
to accord an employee an opportunity to be heard,
unless there is a
specific contractual or statutory obligation to do so. There was no obligation
on the Territory under the
Discrimination Act
or otherwise to provide
Complainant DT232023 with the information provided by the Integrity Commission
(Liability decision [23]).
the Tribunal’s approach to determining the ‘relevance’ of the
criminal record was based on subjective considerations
focusing solely on the
complainant. The Tribunal did not apply an objective test (see [17]). For
example, the Tribunal did not consider
the express and implied terms and
conditions of Complainant DT232023’s employment, any relevant policies,
the nature and scope
of her duties, the CSD’s functions and
responsibilities, Complainant DT232023’s access to information or
engagement with
other employees or the public. If the Tribunal had referred to
or considered any of the relevant authorities, it should have assessed
available evidence by reference to the approach described in Complainant 201908
v Commissioner For Fair Trading (Discrimination)
[2020] ACAT 24
the Tribunal’s findings relied on information that was irrelevant to the
specific issue that arose for determination,
Complainant
DT232023’s disclosure of a criminal record in February 2021 and November
2021 (Liability decision [12], [16], [45]);
Compare in Hussein v Westpac Banking Corporation
(1995) 59 IR 103
Bobrenitsky v Sydney Trains
[2023] FCAFC 96.
27 Byrne v Australian Airlines Ltd (1995) 185 CLR 410 at 443 (McHugh
and Gummow JJ); Intico (Vic) Pty Ltd & Ors v Walmsley
[2004] VSCA 90
(Buchanan JA, Ormiston JA agreeing at [1]. Eames JA agreeing at [25]).
previous complaint resolved without admissions (Liability decision [15],
absence of any misconduct allegations (Liability decision [17],
Conclusions and orders with respect to the
Liability decision
conclusion for all of these reasons, the Liability decision should be set aside
and based on the available evidence, the complaint
should be dismissed.
VII. The Respondent’s submissions on liability
Respondent’s submissions regarding
The statutory framework and principles
Discrimination Act 1991
(ACT) ('the
Discrimination Act
') provides
that an irrelevant criminal record is a protected attribute. The Dictionary to
the Act defines the term, and states that
a criminal record will be irrelevant
if "the circumstances of the offence are not directly relevant to the situation
in which the
discrimination arises". In Complainant 201908 the Tribunal stated
that consideration of a criminal record must be directly relevant
exercise of a particular decision, in order to be permissible under the
Discrimination Act
provides the meaning of 'discrimination.' In the
present situation, the relevant requirement is that the appellant treated, or
to treat, the respondent unfavourably because of her protected
attribute, the irrelevant criminal record. In Kidman,
upheld on appeal,
the Tribunal held that an assertion of
unfavourable treatment warrants an objective, not a comparative, test. Simply,
'if the consequence
of the treatment is unfavourable to that person there is
"unfavourable treatment.'"
The Tribunal also noted that lawful
action (such as to take steps towards disciplinary action against an employee)
can nonetheless
be unfavourable treatment.
provides that it is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against
an employee by subjecting the employee to any other detriment.
defined in the
Discrimination Act
, the Tribunal has taken the word detriment to
have its natural meaning, consisting of prejudice, loss or material
disadvantage.
Assessment of detriment may also warrant an objective
test, whereby the detriment suffered is something which a reasonable person
would consider to be a detriment.
Complainant DT232023 v The Australian Capital Territory
[2024] ACAT 89
9 Kidman v Casino Canberra Ltd
[2020] ACAT 50
10Casino Canberra Ltd v Kidman
[2022] ACAT 22.
11 Kidman (n 7) [22].
12 Ibid [30].
13 Applicant DT62023 v Canberra Institute of Technology
[2024] ACAT
14 Burns v Sunol
[2014] NSWCATAD 62
Decisions from tribunals in other jurisdictions suggest that the detriment
must only be more than trivial.
Human Rights Commission Act 2005
(ACT) ('HRCA') places the onus of
establishing a complaint about discrimination on the complainant. Under
subsections (1)(a), 2(a)(i)
and 2(b)(i), The complainant must present evidence
to establish that they have been treated unfavourably because of a protected
the Tribunal is satisfied that the respondent to a discrimination complaint has
engaged in an unlawful act,
requires the tribunal to make a single or
combination of orders prohibiting the repeated act, requiring redress, or
ordering the
respondent to pay compensation for any loss or damage suffered by
the person because of the unlawful act.
that regard, it is submitted that each of the Liability decision and the Damages
decision correctly identified the relevant statutory
provisions and
principles.
Liability decision - reasons for appeal 1 - 3, 5
submits that the Tribunal erred in applying a 'reverse onus' of
in relation to the foundational issue being the protected attribute of
irrelevant criminal record.
at appeal reasons 5, the appellant complains that the Tribunal failed to apply
an objective test in determining if the respondent
had an irrelevant criminal
record by imposing an obligation on the appellant to considering the
circumstances, failing to consider
the duties she was performing and importing
an obligation to consult with the respondent.
respondent submits that there is considerable overlap in these reasons for
appeal, and therefore responds to them together as
it is submitted that the appellant's criticism of the Liability decision in this
regard does not reflect a fair reading of
the decision.
Senior Member Drake did use the word 'onus' at paragraph 42, she was not using
that word in the context of the legal onus of
proof in the Tribunal
proceedings.
discussion at [42] and [431 is plainly directed to the obligation imposed upon
the appellant at the time it made its decision
following receipt of the 11 April
letter from the Integrity Commission. So much is clear from the text of the
decision in these paragraphs,
where the Senior Member describes that the
appellant was not able to delegate its decision making to the Integrity
Commission. The
Senior Member is simply describing that the appellant, as
employer, was the party responsible for ensuring that it did not discriminate
against the respondent upon the basis of an irrelevant criminal
15 Bogie v The University of Western Sydney (1990) NSWEOC 92 [313];
Sivanathan v Commissioner of Police (NSW)
[2001] NSWADT 44
its consideration, the Tribunal also set out at [45)-[49] steps that may have
been taken by the appellant, upon receipt of the
Integrity Commission letter, to
assess the relevance of the respondent's criminal record. This analysis does not
demonstrate a reversal
of onus in the proceedings, but rather accords with the
similar analysis described by the Tribunal in Complainant 201908 v Commissioner
for Fair Trading (Discrimination)
[2020] ACAT 24
it is submitted that the Tribunal's analysis at [50] does not amount to
“the imposition of an obligation” but
rather an analysis of what was
required so as to be satisfied whether a person’s criminal record was
relevant or irrelevant.
The Senior Member Said:
those factors would have included the respondent's previous determination to
employ her with her acknowledged criminal record,
her satisfactory performance
to date and the absence of any acts of dishonesty during her employment which
might have been otherwise
anticipated in someone with her criminal record. Also,
her personal circumstances.
is submitted, therefore, that the Tribunal did not err as alleged.
whilst the Tribunal did not refer to authority, the decision in any event
applied the principles set out in Complainant 201908
referred to above to the
relevant evidence before it to conclude that the respondent was a person with
the protected attribute of
irrelevant criminal record.
evidence included the respondent's evidence of the disclosure of her criminal
record at the time of her application in February
2021., her subsequent further
elaboration during the 2021 HRC conciliation, the further disclosure of the
criminal record in the
new starter pack and, importantly, her unbroken period of
employment since November 2021 where she had demonstrated satisfactory
performance with no misconduct.
appellant presented very little evidence to rebut the respondent's claim. The
statement of Magdalena Dreyer-White
relied upon by the appellant
included the following statement at [25]:
Had I been aware of
Ms Rasic's criminal history, I would have made inquiries with her and risk
assessed her against the inherent requirements
of the position of Executive
Assistant. It may have been that my advice would have been not to place Ms Rasic
in that role.
Ms Dreyer-White was discussing the steps she would have taken if the
complainant's criminal record had come to her attention
at the time she was
appointed to the Executive Assistant role. Whilst this evidence was not
reproduced in the Tribunal's decision,
there is a remarkable similarity between
the process Ms Dreyer-White describes she would have employed in those
hypothetical circumstances
(ie. the absence of the Integrity Commission letter)
and the analysis of the Senior Member as to the steps to that ought to be taken
to determine whether a criminal record is irrelevant
Notably, Ms Dreyer-White does not say that she would have removed the
respondent’s access to systems, removed her from active
employment or
advised her she would not be offered further temporary contracts
is submitted that the Tribunal was entitled to conclude that the evidence
comfortably established that the respondent's criminal
record was irrelevant to
her employment, and that the appellant's evidence did not rebut that
proposition. It is unsurprising that
the Tribunal reached that conclusion given
that the respondent had been truthful in her pre-employment disclosures, was
satisfactorily in the same position from which she was removed for
several months and had not been the subject of any complaint for
misconduct in
the 17 months of her continuous engagement.
Reasons for appeal
is submitted that the appellant's complaints as to the alleged failure of the
Tribunal to consider the tests of 'unfavourable treatment'
Discrimination Act
do not demonstrate any error.
provides the meaning of discrimination.
Section 10(2)
then picks up the
use of the word discriminate, given the meaning in
, and describes that
subjecting an employee to detriment is unlawful discrimination. Plainly, a
finding of detriment under
is capable of satisfying the definition of
unfavourable treatment in
the Tribunal clearly understood that its task involved the assessment of the
question as it is specifically referred to at paragraphs 29 - 32 of the
Liability decision and it engaged with the appellant's submission
conduct did not amount to unfavourable treatment.
Tribunal did not err in its application of
as alleged or at
Reason for appeal 6
appellant submits that the Tribunal erred in finding that its treatment of the
respondent was a detriment within the meaning of
that term in
Discrimination Act
respondent submits that the appellant's approach is too narrow, does not accord
with principle and authority and fails to have
proper regard to the
the conclusion of the hearing, there was no contest as to the nature of the
action taken by the appellant in response to the receipt
by it of the letter for
the Integrity Commission.
Tribunal characterised the following matters as 'detriment':
(a) The removal of access to the appellant’s systems;
(b) The absence of real work;
(c) The decision not to offer any work in the future.
17 Liability decision at [38], [53]
the Tribunal did not refer to any authority when deciding the detriment
question, it is submitted that upon a fair reading
of the decision, the relevant
principles were considered.
appellant submits that the matters found to be detriment were not such –
rather - they were mere consequences, without the
necessary detrimental
appears to be the appellant's position that because the respondent was paid
until the expiration of the term of her temporary contract
and because she had
expressed an intention to take another job she had been offered by CIT, the
action taken by the appellant was
not detrimental.
arguments ignore completely the importance of work and the impact of its
removal, particularly for a person who has a protected
attribute like an
irrelevant criminal record. The Tribunal no doubt had regard to the subjective
response of the respondent to that
circumstance. But it is submitted that her
response was an entirely predictable one, which any reasonable person would
anticipate.
It was, objectively, detrimental action.
appellant also argues that because the common law does not necessarily imply
into contracts for work a term requiring the employer
to provide meaningful
work, the appellant's decision to preclude the respondent from the workplace
cannot be discrimination. With
respect, that is an argument that ought to be
rejected. It cannot stand with the serious statutory obligation imposed by the
Discrimination Act
. It is difficult to imagine that the same argument would be
made by any government as an employer if, for example, one of its departments
had put a person of a particular ethnicity on gardening leave because of that
ethnic background. The proposition barely needs to
be stated to be
is further argued by the appellant that the Tribunal's decision at [54] as to
the decision not to offer any future work in the
future was an error. The 12
April letter said "your temporary employment contract with the Community
Services Directorate (the Directorate)
will not be renewed". The Tribunal, at
[54], characterised that decision as a decision not to offer future work. That
characterisation
of the decision was open to the Tribunal. It was made in the
context of assessing whether the decision was of detriment. It was limited
that purpose. No error is demonstrated.
in Casino Canberra Limited ACN 051204114 v Kidman (Appeal)
[2022] ACAT 2022
[81] the Appeal Tribunal considered the function of
sections 8(2)
Discrimination Act
together and said:
A careful reading
of these sections,
interpreted and applied in other cases discussed
below, identifies the following aspects of this part of the scheme:
(a) The tribunal must be satisfied that the person
'unfavourably' by being subjected to some detriment.
Liability decision [54], [55], [56]
(b) Whether the person was treated unfavourably can be ascertained by
reference to consequences of that treatment for, or the effect
of hat treatment
on, the person
(c) Whether a person was treated unfavourably is determined by reference to
the effect of the treatment on that person, not by comparison
of the treatment
of the person with the treatment of others.
(d) The treatment is direct discrimination if the person was treated
unfavourably ‘because’ the person has one or more
of the protected
attributes.
to detriment, the Appeal Tribunal in Kidman went on to cite the decision of
Deputy President Peedom in the ACT Discrimination Tribunal
in Cooley and
Australian National University
where the Deputy President
A detriment involves
loss, damage or injury
(see Shaikh v Commissioner, NSW Fire Brigades (1996) EOG 92-808 and Sivananthan
v Commissioner of Police
[2001] NSWADT 44
at 41) and is broad enough to cover
any disadvantage, as long as it is real and not illusory. Whether
detriment has been suffered is to be determined objectively and not by the
subjective perceptions of either the complainant or respondent
(see Ellis v
Mount Scorpus Memorial College
[1996] VADT 16
(29 March 1996)).
is submitted that having regard to the authorities, each of the matters found by
the Tribunal to be detrimental to the respondent
were objectively so. In
addition, there was also sufficient evidence before the Tribunal of the hurt and
distress of the respondent
to find, objectively, that she had been subjected to
Conclusion as to liability
respondent submits that the appeal as to liability ought to be
Legislative
are multiple decisions of this Tribunal, and of Courts, which set out the basic
statutory parameters of claims that allege
discrimination.
For current
purposes, I note the following.
Discrimination Act
provides that the Act applies to
discrimination on the ground of a number of “protected attributes”.
These relevantly
disability,
irrelevant criminal
and subjection to
domestic or family
8 of the same Act relevantly provides:
(1) For this Act,
discrimination
occurs when a person
discriminates either directly or indirectly, or both, against someone
(2) For this section, a person
discriminates
against someone else if the person treats, or proposes to treat, another
person unfavourably because the other person has 1 or more
attributes...
10 Applicants and
(1) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a
(a) in the arrangements made for the purpose of deciding who should be
offered employment; or
(b) in deciding who should be offered employment; or
(c) in the terms or conditions on which employment is offered.
(2) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an
(a) in the terms or conditions of employment that the employer affords the
employee; or
(b) by denying the employee access, or limiting the employee’s access,
to opportunities for promotion, transfer or training
or to any other benefit
associated with employment; or
(c) by dismissing the employee; or
(d) by subjecting the employee to any other detriment.
relevantly provides:
If, apart from an
exception, exemption, excuse, qualification or justification under this Act,
conduct would be an unlawful act, the
onus of establishing the exception,
exemption, excuse, qualification or justification lies on the person seeking to
rely on it.
Human Rights Commission Act
) specifies the
onus in establishing a discrimination complaint before ACAT as being, in the
first instance, upon the
of establishing complaint about discrimination etc
(1) This section applies to a discrimination complaint, referred to the ACAT
under this division, about discrimination by a person
against another person
(a) treating, or proposing to treat, the other person unfavourably because of
a protected attribute of the other person (
direct discrimination
(b) imposing, or proposing to impose, a condition or requirement that has, or
is likely to have, the effect of disadvantaging the
other person because of a
protected attribute of the other person (other than a condition or requirement
that is reasonable in the
circumstances) (
indirect discrimination
(2) It is a rebuttable presumption that discrimination has occurred if the
complainant—
(a) establishes that—
(i) for a complaint about direct discrimination—the treatment or
proposed treatment is unfavourable; and
(ii) for a complaint about indirect discrimination—the condition or
requirement has, or is likely to have, an effect of disadvantaging
person; and
(b) presents evidence that would enable the ACAT to decide, in the absence of
any other explanation—
(i) for a complaint about direct discrimination—that the treatment or
proposed treatment is because of a protected attribute
of the other person;
(ii) for a complaint about indirect discrimination—that the effect of
disadvantaging the other person is because of a protected
attribute of the other
(3) The presumption under subsection (2) is rebutted if the person complained
(a) for a complaint about direct discrimination—the treatment is not
because of a protected attribute of the other person; or
(b) for a complaint about indirect discrimination—the effect of
disadvantaging a person is not because of a protected attribute
of the other
The onus of establishing an exception or exemption to discrimination
is on the person seeking to rely on it (see
Discrimination Act 1991
(4) In this section:
protected attribute
means a protected attribute under the
Discrimination Act 1991
Consideration
reasons of the Tribunal below are economical, notably those exposing the
“consideration” of evidence and submissions,
which run from [42]
– [56]. Regrettably, they often conceal more than they expose. Without
going through every paragraph of
the “consideration” section of the
reasons, especially in the light of the discussion above, it is sufficient to
the following matters.
[42] simply states:
The Respondent bears the onus to establish
that the Applicant’s criminal record is not irrelevant. It must determine
the matter.
The respondent cannot delegate the determination of that
statements presume or assume that the Applicant had relevantly discharged her
responsibility, under
section 53CA
Human Rights Commission Act
the HRC Act
), and equally under section.70 of the
Discrimination
), to establish her contention that the Respondent had
relevantly discriminated against her as alleged and as set out in [12] –
[28] of the reasons.
Unfortunately, there is no “consideration” of section.53CA of the
or of section.70 of the of the
, or any relevant
authority (all of which are contrary to the Tribunal’s position) and the
Applicant having discharged –
and how she had done so – her onus to
establish relevant “discrimination” by the Respondent.
is evident from the discussion above in relation to the Applicant’s
documentary evidence that was not considered by the Tribunal
below, [43] –
[55] of the Tribunal’s reasons are all concerned with a range of
deficiencies the Tribunal saw in the conduct
of the Respondent, which in turn
led to the determinations regarding “detriment” by the Respondent
against the Applicant/Complainant.
closest the Tribunal came to consider the evidence of the Applicant was in [56],
which begins with the statement: “I have
considered the
complainant’s family and domestic background, her current circumstances,
and the context of her criminal record,
including the material outlined by the
complainant’s psychiatrist.” Such matters do not relate to the issue
of the liability
of the Appellant. To the degree relevant, they might relate to
short, there was no consideration by the Tribunal below regarding how the
Applicant had relevantly discharged the onus she bore
under section 70 of the
and section 53CA of the
to establish that the
Appellant had discriminated against her. What evidence the Tribunal considered
in this regard was not explained.
This constituted a fundamental evidentiary
flaw, and was contrary to basal principle.
at [53] and [54] regarding the Applicant being placed on what is somewhat
commonly termed “garden leave”, the
Tribunal stated (emphasis
[53] The respondent ceased to provide the complainant
with work. The respondent submits that this is not a detriment. It submits it
did not treat her unfavourably because it paid her.
This is too narrow a
definition of detriment
I am not persuaded that the payment of money negates the detriment
that arises from removal from access to the Respondent’s
systems, the
absence of real work, and the decision not to offer her any work in the future.
Placing the Applicant on paid or gardening
leave and not allowing her to
continue active employment is a detriment. Employment requires the performance
of work. The provision
of gardening leave is not the performance of an
employer’s obligation to provide employment
. Removal of the
opportunity to perform work is a detriment. A decision made, without
consultation, to refuse to extend the complainant’s
contract, whether or
not she intended to avail herself of that opportunity, is a detriment.
are multiple difficulties with the unsupported assertions here. Leaving to one
side for the moment the issue of “detriment”,
which is discussed
later in these reasons, I note the following.
these paragraphs from the decision under appeal, traverse (a) the duty of
employers, (b) the rights of employees, (c) what
constitutes
“employment” or employment entitlement (without specifying whether
these terms are understood under common
law or any particular statute), (d) an
alleged requirement for consultation about extending a limited, short-term
contract of employment,
and (e) a contention that an alleged refusal to extend a
contract (that was expiring and where the Respondent had earlier resigned
employment to take up a full-time position elsewhere, and which position was no
longer available)
constituted a
detriment, the latter without any reference to the statutory definition of
detriment in section 10(2) of the
There is no discussion
of, or reference to, any authority in relation to any of these matters.
there is no discussion about, definition of, or authority for what the Tribunal
at first instance (at [54]) intended to
mean by the reference to “real
work” or “active employment.” Nor is there any finding, in the
light of [13]
of the reasons, regarding the import and effect of section
10(2)(c) in relation to a dismissal of the employee.
there is no review of any of the multiple authorities that consider the issue of
paying employees not to work. As noted
below, a review of even some of them
results in a rather more complex and nuanced jurisprudential situation than the
unqualified
declaratory statements in the reasons regarding “real
work”, access to systems, consultation and the alleged refusal
the Respondent’s employment. All of these matters, and a few others, are
bundled together in the paragraphs here,
and elsewhere in the reasons. In my
view, a review of the authorities would have made clear that the unqualified
contentions or views
expressed in the paragraphs under discussion here are
unsupportable. The statements by the Tribunal here were plainly erroneous.
example, and accepting the dated language, in
Automatic Fire Sprinklers Pty
Ltd v Watson
, Dixon J said: “A master [
] who sends [a]
servant upon a holiday upon full pay can be sued for wages under the contract.
...They also serve who only stand and
recently, in
Capital Aircraft Services Pty Ltd v Brolin
, the ACT Court of
Appeal said, at [24] and
[24] In our
opinion, neither the duty of good faith nor the duty to act in accordance with
the objective of the contract required
the appellant to offer the respondent any
amount of work. Nor can we see why such a term needs to be implied to give
business efficacy
to the contract. As Mason J said in Codelfa Construction
Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of NSW
(1982) 149 CLR 337
the conditions necessary to ground the implication of a term were summarized by
the majority in BP Refinery (Westernport)
Pty Ltd v Hastings Shire
Council (1977) 180 CLR 266 at 283:
...(1) it must be reasonable and equitable; (2) it must be necessary to
give business efficacy to the contract, so that no term will
be implied if the
contract is effective without it;(3) it must be so obvious that ‘it goes
without saying’; (4) it must
be capable of clear expression; (5) it must
not contradict any express term of the contract.
[25] In the present case, we are unable to see how conditions (2), (3) and
(4) could be held to have been satisfied. The contract
was essentially an
agreement for casual employment. It contained no warranty to the effect that
work would be available or that,
if available, it would be offered to the
respondent in preference to any other suitably qualified person. There was no
evidence as
to whether the appellant had entered into similar contracts with
other such people, employed any on a full time or part time basis
or otherwise
drew on their services. There was evidence that some work had, in fact, been
offered to the respondent, and that more
would have been available to him but
that does not provide any adequate basis for the retrospective implication of a
term of the
kind suggested. Had the work subsided to a trickle or even ceased,
it is difficult to see how the respondent could have mounted any
credible action
against the appellant for breach of such a term.
recently still, in
Grace Worldwide (Australia) Pty Ltd v Steve Alves
Slattery J in the New South Wales Supreme Court said, at [51] – [53]
applicable legal principles may be shortly stated.
The law as to whether an
employer is required as a matter of contractual obligation to provide an
employee with work, or merely to
pay the employee the amount required under the
employment contract when the employee is ready, willing and able to perform the
is “a vexed one
”: Wesoky v Village Cinemas
International Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 32
question in each case is one of construction of the contract in question
Where the contract provides that benefits accrued to the employee as a
consequences of the work, courts have more readily implied
a contractual
obligation on the part of the employer to provide the work, unless the employer
has an express contractual right not
to do so: Wesoky at [16].
[52] Any modern analysis of this issue is assisted by reference to the
judgment of Morritt LJ in William Hill Organisation Ltd v
[1998] EWCA Civ 615
[1999] ICR 291
Hill). The question in that case
was whether the employment of a senior dealer in a betting business required the
employer merely
to retain the dealer in service, or to give him actual work to
be done. Observing that the question will always depend upon the particular
contract, Morritt LJ stated (at 298–299) that the cases did illustrate
certain categories and trends that were of assistance.
Morritt LJ pointed to the
common feature of the cases that the courts are more ready to find an obligation
to provide work in theatrical
engagements and then went on as follows:
Similarly, engagement for a specific project such as employment on a
specific voyage (Driscoll v Australian Royal Mail Steam Navigation
Co (1859) 1 F & F 458), or in a specific and unique post such as the
chief sub‐editor of a newspaper (Collier v Sunday
Referee Publishing
[1940] 2 KB 647
), or as the manager of an overseas
business (Addis v Gramophone Co Ltd
[1909] AC 488
), have been
treated by the courts as giving rise to an obligation on the part of the
employer not to do anything which puts the promised
employment out of his power.
And where the promised remuneration depends on the employer providing the
opportunity to earn it then
an obligation to afford the employee an opportunity
so to do is readily implied: cf Devonald v Rosser &
[1906] UKLawRpKQB 101
[1906] 2 KB 728
and Addis v Gramophone Co
[1909] AC 488
[53] In William Hill, Morritt LJ posed (at 301) the same question in
this field as Sir John Donaldson posed in Langston v Amalgamated
Engineering Workers (No 2)
[1974] ICR 510
, which Morritt LJ
conveniently summarised for his own purposes in William Hill as
In my view, in all cases involving garden leave the first question must be
that posed by Sir John Donaldson in Langston v Amalgamated
Engineering Workers (No 2)
[1974] ICR 510
. Does the consideration
moving from this employer extend to an obligation to permit the employee to do
the work or is it confined
to payment of the remuneration agreed? If the answer
is in the sense of the latter alternative then the employer is entitled to send
his employee home on garden leave notwithstanding the absence of an express or
implied power to do so because there is no contractual
obligation to prevent
him. If the answer is in the sense of the former alternative then the employer
needs a provision entitling
him to send his employee on garden leave so as to
absolve him from what would otherwise be a breach of contract. It is unlikely,
given the hypothesis on which the point arises, that there could be an implied
power for that purpose. Thus, in practice, an employer
will need to stipulate
for an express power to send his employee on garden leave in all cases in which
the contract imposes on him
an obligation to permit the employee to do the
further difficulty in not having considered any authority regarding the cases on
employment, particularly where an employee continues
to be paid but does not
perform any work, such as those discussed above, the Tribunal at first instance
compounded the difficulties
by not linking correctly the duties of an employer
and the entitlements of an employee with what was, and what was not, a
“detriment”
. This is in circumstances where,
for example, the Tribunal found, at [54], that “removal of the opportunity
to perform work
is a detriment.” In the same place, the Tribunal further
found that “A decision made, without consultation, to refuse
to extend the
complainant’s contract, whether or not she intended to avail herself of
that opportunity, is a detriment.”
the light of these and multiple other authorities, it may reasonably and
properly be said that (a) whether an employer has a duty
to provide work
(“real” or otherwise), (b) whether removal of the opportunity to
perform work is a detriment, and (c)
whether a decision to refuse to extend a
contract had been made by the Appellant, are all matters of construction of the
contract involved between the parties. It is not implied as a matter
of law. No such consideration or analysis of the terms and conditions,
context of the Applicant’s contract with the Appellant, was undertaken in
the decision under appeal. The failure properly
to consider or address any of
these authorities necessarily led the Tribunal into error.
also note that, in a contest under the
, the High Court in
Workpac Pty Ltd v Rossato
discussed generally the incidents of casual
employment, which has equal application to persons on short-term, temporary
as the Applicant was here, and noted, at [56] and [57] (emphasis
Commonwealth
Bank of Australia v Barker
, French CJ, Bell and Keane JJ said:
"The employment relationship, in Australia, operates within a legal
framework defined by statute and by common law principles,
informing the
construction and content of the contract of employment
A court can determine the character of a legal relationship
between the parties only by reference to the legal rights and obligations
constitute that relationship. The search for the existence or otherwise of a
"firm advance commitment" must be for enforceable
terms, and not unenforceable
expectations or understandings that might be said to reflect the manner in which
the parties performed
their agreement
because there was no consideration of the terms, or context, of the
Applicant’s employment with the Directorate, in
the light of the above
discussion, it follows that it was impermissible for the Tribunal at first
instance to make the broad and
unsupported assertions set out in [53] and [54]
noted above regarding the characterisation of the paid leave provided to the
Respondent,
and other contentions in the same places, such as various
obligations said to be imposed upon the employer. Likewise, the Tribunal’s
assertion (at [54]) regarding the employer here having a duty to consult with
the Applicant (a) ignores the statements of principle
outlined above from the
High Court of the necessity to properly consider the detail of the employment
contract in question,
had no relevant authority cited to support this contention.
although set out earlier in the Tribunal’s reasons (at [29] and [30]),
there was no actual discussion, as there should
have been, of sections 8 and
10(2) of the
in relation to the Appellant’s alleged
discriminatory conduct towards the Applicant. Necessarily, there was also no
discussion,
notably in the “consideration” section of the reasons,
of the sections of the
just mentioned, or of what
“detriment” actually means for the purposes of any of the
legislation involved, or in the context
of the facts and circumstances
The following matters need
to be noted in relation to these sections and their application to the facts
(a) A “detriment” refers to a substantial or real (as opposed to a
transitory or trivial)
disadvantage.
“Detriment” must also be
objectively
There is no
discussion in the reasons below of what is and what is not a detriment. Nor is
there any discussion or application of
any objective test of the evidence before
the Tribunal regarding any detriment alleged. Instead, at [34] and [55], the
Tribunal summarised
the impact or effect upon the Applicant of her resignation
and consequent matters, which was necessarily an assumed acceptance of
Applicant’s subjective assessment of her circumstances.
(b) A Tribunal or Court must also be cautious to ensure that the proper
distinction between, on the one hand,
the objectively assessed detriment
to an employee, and on the other,
the consequences of any such detriment
are properly observed.
only matters relied upon by the Tribunal were statements by the Applicant
regarding her [subjective] views about her family
and domestic background, her
current circumstances, and, among other things, the opinion of her
psychiatrist.
As significant as
these matters are, they are the Applicant’s assessment of her state as a
consequence of what had transpired
since her resignation from the Appellant.
(c) The facts and circumstances here plainly engaged, among other provisions,
section 10(2)(d) of the
. There was no objective assessment of
evidence regarding whether, so assessed, there was a “detriment” for
the purposes
of the section. The Tribunal simply accepted at face value, and
without examination in the light of any authority, the Applicant’s
statements of how she felt in the light of being placed on paid leave, but which
required also a consideration of the terms of her
short-term contract, and the
context of the situation as set out (but not examined) in
the evidence of
Ms Perkins regarding the Applicant’s position having been advertised for a
full-time role and a process (from
which the Applicant would, presumably, not
have been excluded) for a merit-based selection.
conclusion, it is sufficient to note a few remaining matters somewhat
at [41], the Tribunal noted the Respondent’s submission that the
Complainant did not possess a protected attribute, i.e.
“an irrelevant
criminal record.” In the next paragraph of the reasons, there is the
assertion that “the Respondent
bears the onus to establish that the
Applicant’s criminal record is not relevant. It must determine that
matter. The respondent
cannot delegate the determination of that
noted earlier in these reasons, s.53CA of the
provides for where
the relevant onus rests in discrimination complaints. It rests first of all with
the Complainant. In the facts
and circumstances of this matter, the Tribunal
below did not set out, or consider (in the jurisprudentially accepted sense in
), what evidence, objectively considered,
from the Applicant had relevantly satisfied the statutory onus. Nor did the
Tribunal relevantly
consider and weigh the evidence of the Appellant.
at [45] and [46] of the reasons, the Tribunal recorded the view that the
Applicant had informed the Appellant of her criminal
convictions, in different
ways, for example,
in her original application for employment documents,
and in the [privileged] conciliation conference with Mr Rose. There is, however,
again no weighing by the Tribunal itself of the Applicant’s criminal
record, notably in the light of Ms Drejer-White’s
(unconsidered) evidence,
regarding the Applicant’s criminal record. Only by such proper evaluation
of that record in the light
of all the evidence, could it fairly be said that it
was, or was not, a relevant criminal record, and in turn, whether it was
by the terms of section 10(2)(d) of the
An assumption, or
an acceptance of the Applicant’s subjective views, or the views of Mr Rose
(who was no longer employed by
the Appellant), did not absolve the Tribunal from
making a proper, relevant and objective assessment of all the evidence regarding
what was, and what was not, a relevant criminal record. This did not occur.
addition to these evidentiary, procedural and inapposite statutory flaws in the
decision below, and particularly in the light of
the discussion in these reasons
regarding onus, I otherwise accept and adopt the submissions of the Appellant,
particularly in relation
to the proper construction and application of sections
7 and 8 of the
Conclusions
these reasons, the decision below cannot stand and must be set aside, and the
primary Application below dismissed.
noted at the outset of these reasons, it is axiomatic that if the liability
decision is set aside, the damages decision must likewise
be set aside. That
will certainly be the decision of the Tribunal. But as also foreshadowed, a
comment or two regarding the decision
on damages is apposite in the
circumstances, not least because of the size of the award.
as also noted earlier, the decision on damages did not confine itself to the
findings made in the liability judgment. This
was impermissible. Further, in
making further findings regarding causation, the Tribunal below failed to afford
procedural fairness
to both parties by denying them the opportunity to make
submissions.
the curious reference (at [104]) to “comparable tort cases” does not
identify what specific cases are being
referenced.
the decision relating to damages plainly assumed the correctness of, and the
evidence relied upon in, the liability decision.
There was no examination of the
“missing” evidence from the Appellant. This is particularly
unfortunate in the light
of the Tribunal’s assertion (at [95]),
I accept that, subjectively, the decision by the original
decisionmaker was made in good faith, in circumstances that would explain
need for haste and an understandable alarm she may have felt. Objectively,
however, as found in the liability decision, that
was wrong and, in any event,
there has been ample opportunity by the Respondent to get it right.
the Tribunal meant by “getting it right” was enigmatic, unexplained,
and unsupported by authority. Otherwise, I need
only refer to the reasons above
to highlight the multiple errors in the liability decision regarding, among a
number of things, the
failure properly to consider the statutory regime
regarding “onus” and who bore it, and likewise (repeated almost
) the failure to consider in the liability decision the
evidence provided by the Appellant.
“objectively” and in accordance with authority, the actions of Ms
Drejer-White regarding the Applicant were perfectly
sound, especially in the
light of the detail in the Integrity Commission’s two letters. Likewise,
there seems to have been
little or any relevant consideration of the Applicant
having actually resigned from her temporary contract. Rather, undue and improper
assumptions were made about her employment, and which also took no account of
the relevant context of her position, as outlined in
the unconsidered evidence
provided by Ms Perkins.
in either judgment, and in accordance with the High Court authority mentioned
earlier, was there any consideration of the actual
terms of the
Applicant’s temporary contract, save for the liability decision referring
at [55] to the Appellant not being bound
to offer an extension of the
Applicant’s temporary employment.
for current purposes, it is sufficient to note the following general comments
regarding the awarding and assessment of damages
from two prominent decisions of
the Federal Court of Australia.
Richardson v Oracle Corporation Australia Pty Ltd
, the Full Federal Court
stated that a Court or Tribunal may be assisted by general law principles, such
as in tort, but they must
not assume their operation over the relevant statutory
framework involved in the particular case. The Court stated this again simply
noting that tortious principles may be of assistance in the fixing of
compensation, but tort principles are not the governing
Yet tortious
principles were applied in the damages decision here, notwithstanding the
decision being cited
comments by the Full Court in
were subsequently applied by
Mortimer J (as her Honour then was) in
Wotton v Queensland
the Court awarded the Applicant $30,000 for future losses. The
Applicant in that matter was a consulting manager, obviously working
for the Respondent. Here, as already well recorded, the Applicant was a
temporary employee working on a series of short-term
contracts, the last one
from which she had resigned, and the contract itself was to come to an end very
shortly. She was awarded
$80,000 for future loss of earning capacity, and
overall a remarkable total sum of $265,372.87, all in relation to a temporary
who had resigned her short-term contract, which the Tribunal in the
damages reasons at [7] acknowledged, yet allowed for multiple
amounts of damages
under headings such as “future loss of earning capacity” and
“future loss of superannuation.”
other example of a concerning finding in the damages decision is displayed in
[69], thus:
In respect of medical expenses, no invoices were
provided nor particulars to show what the past expenses might have been, and Mr
in oral argument said the claim was confined to the future. For the
future, drawing on Dr Furst’s estimates about what might
be required, it
was said there should be allowed 28 GP consultations at $90 per visit. This
comes to $2,520. Also, 72 consultations
with a psychologist at $300 per
consultation, making a total of $21,600; 63 consultations with a psychiatrist at
$500 a visit, totalling
$31,500; and $15 per month for 84 months [ie 7 years]
for medication. This is said to total $58,888, and reduced by 20% for
vicissitudes,
amounts to $45,504.
simply note, without further comment, that these calculations were all made
without evidence or particulars and rested upon estimates
from a witness for the
Applicant who was not cross-examined.
are multiple references to the statutory regime regarding “damages”
in the Appellant’s submissions. It is
unnecessary to repeat them here, other than to record, in all the circumstances,
and especially
in the light of the Appeal Tribunal’s decision regarding
the liability decision, that I agree with and otherwise accept and
Appellant’s submissions in relation to damages.
the reasons given here, both decisions of the Tribunal must be set aside, and
the primary Application must be dismissed.
The Tribunal orders:
orders of the original tribunal for DT 23/2023 dated 13 February 2024 are set
orders of the original tribunal DT 23/2023 dated 26 November 2024 are set
primary application be dismissed.
..............................
Acting Presidential Member Dr W J Neville
The Appeal Tribunal that heard
the appeal was constituted by PM Robinson and me. After I had prepared a draft
of the reasons, certain
personal matters arose which precluded PM Robinson
continuing in the appeal. The Appeal Tribunal was thereupon re-constituted to
comprise only me.
New South Wales v Avery
[2006] HCA 14
(2006) 230 CLR 174
. Gleeson CJ, at [2] and [3] agreed with the
joint reasons.
See, for example,
Macken’s Law of Employment
, Ninth Edition, (Sydney: Lawbook Co.
2022) Ch.15 “Anti-discrimination”. A. Stewart,
Guide to Employment Law
, Sixth Edition, (Sydney: The Federation Press, 2018)
Chapter 14 “Discrimination and Victimisation.”
Creighton &
Stewart’s Labour Law
, Seventh Edition, (Sydney: The Federation Press,
2025), Chapter 20 “Employment Discrimination and the General
Protections”.
Complainant DT232023 v The
Australian Capital Territory represented by the Community Services Directorate
(Discrimination)
[2024] ACAT 17
the liability decision
) (14 February
Complainant DT232023 v The Australian Capital Territory represented by
the Community Services Directorate (Discrimination)
[2024] ACAT 89
damages decision
) (26 November 2024).
Complainant DT292023 v
The Canberra Institute of Technology (Discrimination)
[2024] ACAT 42
June 2024).
Giusida Pty Ltd v
Commissioner for ACT Revenue
[2016] ACTSC 275.
His Honour’s reference
in par.14 in “Legal Practitioner” is obviously a reference to
s.82(1)(a) and (b); the reference
to sub-section (1) has been omitted. This
decision was discussed in
The Owners – Units Plan no 1475 v Davidson
& Anor (Appeal)
[2022] ACAT 10
at [3] – [5].
Turnbull v New South
Wales Medical Board
[1978] 2 NSWLR 281
at 297. Generally, see also the High
Court’s comments in
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Victorian Stevedoring &
General Contracting Co Pty ltd v Dignan
[1931] HCA 34
(1931) 46 CLR 73
at 109-110.
Pye v Registrar, Domestic
Animals Act 2000 (Appeal)
[2022] ACAT 102.
[2017] ACAT 49
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR
ACAT Act, section 7
Victorian Stevedoring
& General Contracting Co Pty Ltd v Dignan
[1931] HCA 34
(1931) 46 CLR 73
Respondent’s
submissions, dated XYZ [4-14]
The lists of witnesses who
provided statements are set out respectively at [7] and [9] of the liability
Among many places, see the
comments regarding ordered decision-making and the reasons that disclose this
process by French CJ and
Kiefel J in
Wainohu v New South Wales
at [54] – [58] (
and the regularly cited
decision of the New South Wales Court of Appeal in
Soulemezis v Dudley
(Holdings) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 NSWLR 247
In Ms Drejer-White’s
witness statement (T 211-217) her name is spelt with a “j”; in the
reasons, it is consistently
spelt with a “y”. Nothing turns on
That correspondence is at T
I note the very different
context of Mr Rose being in a confidential conciliation situation and process,
on the one hand, and on
the other hand, Ms Drejer-White receiving “out of
the blue” a letter from the Integrity Commission that expressed concerns
employment.” The context is significant and important.
Such distinction
was not noted or apparently considered by the Tribunal.
See also [52], where the
Tribunal assessed the Appellant’s conduct regarding, among other things,
not extending her contract
as an “immediate pre-emptive
See, for example, s.53CA of
Previously noted as at T
The Integrity
Commission’s letter of 7 April 2024 was provided to the Applicant under
cover of an email from Mr Henderson of
19 April 2024. See T 275.
See T 218-222.
It will be recalled that the
evidence of Ms Perkins was that this “early release date” was
arranged on 31 March 2023.
See T 295-298 and T
Appellants submissions,
dated 28 February 2025 [19-37]
Respondents submissions,
dated 11 April 2025 [15-52]
Among many decisions, see
Shammas v Canberra Institute of Technology
[2012] ACAT 24
Complaint 202258 v Southern Restaurants (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2023] ACAT 57
Burns v Media Options Group Pty Ltd
[2013] FCCA 79
very recently,
Complainant 182023 v Director-General Community Services
Directorate (Discrimination)
[2025] ACAT 34.
Discrimination Act
Discrimination Act
Discrimination Act
Discrimination Act
Regarding the relevant
“onus” that rests upon Applicants in discrimination matters, see the
Full Federal Court decision
Australian Medical Association v Wilson
(Siddiqui’s case)
[1996] FCA 1618
(1996) 68 FCR 46
See also the submissions
summarised at [34] – [36] of the reasons below.
See the earlier discussion
regarding the evidence of Ms Perkins but which was not discussed by the Tribunal
Automatic Fire Sprinklers
Pty Ltd v Watson
[1946] HCA 25
(1946) 72 CLR 435
Capital Aircraft Services
Pty Ltd v Brolin
[2007] ACTCA 8.
Grace Worldwide
(Australia) Pty Ltd v Steve Alves
[2017] NSWSC 1296.
See further the various
and similar discussions in, for example,
Avenia v Railway and Transport
Health Fund
[2017] FCA 859
(2017) 272 IR 151
– [117], [142] – 150],
[154] and [194] (Lee J in the Federal Court of Australia), which involved a
dentist who was suspended
from practice under a detailed service contract, the
Court holding that his suspension and no provision of work was generally
in the circumstances and in the light of the contract between the
parties. See also the High Court’s comments in
Mann v Capital Territory
Health Commission
[1982] HCA 10
(1982) 148 CLR 97
regarding a surgeon not being provided
with ongoing work, and the difficulties for him to recover damages for injury
not yet suffered
but only apprehended, and
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v
[2014] HCA 32
(2014) 253 CLR 169
regarding duties of good faith not implied in
contracts of employment in Australia, and the incidents of the employment
at [16] – [29] and [35] – [41] in the joint reasons of
Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ.
Workpac Pty Ltd v Rossato
(2021) 271 CLR 456.
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Barker
[2014] HCA 32
253 CLR 169
, which generally discussed, in the context mainly of an
investigation, that there was no general duty on an employer to act fairly
reasonably, which is to be contrasted to the Tribunal recording, and seemingly
accepting, at [34], the Applicant’s complaint
or concern about ever being
treated fairly.
Having asserted in [54] that
there was some duty to consult with the Applicant regarding the extension (or
refusal)) of her contract,
somewhat paradoxically at [55], the Tribunal said
that the Respondent “was never bound to offer an extension of the
Applicant’s
employment at the conclusion of her fixed term
contract.” How these statements could or should be reconciled was not
It is unnecessary to repeat
the discussion earlier in these reasons regarding work and being paid not to
work for a period of time.
Nonetheless, that discussion of the jurisprudence is
relevant also to the consideration here of “detriment” and the
findings in this regard.
Taylor v August and
Pemberton Pty Ltd
[2023] FCA 1313 at [398] (Katzmann J). See also the
discussion in
Applicant DT62023 v Canberra Institute of Technology
Georgiou v Spencer (No.2)
[2011] FCA 22
(Besanko J).
See, for example, the
discussion by Mortimer J (as her Honour then was) in
Watts v Australian
Postal Corporation
[2014] FCA 370
(2014) 222 FCR 220
Generally, see [34] –
[36] and [56] of the reasons.
See the damages decision at
[83] – [88].
Richardson v Oracle
Corporation Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 82
(2014) 223 FCR 334
Wotton v Queensland
[2016] FCA 1457
(2016) 352 ALR 146
RTF format (1.14 MB)
Signed PDF/A format