WNA Construction Pty Ltd v Canberra Building and Maintenance Pty Ltd [2025] ACTCA 17 (4 June 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
WNA Construction Pty Ltd v Canberra Building and Maintenance Pty
[2025] ACTCA 17
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
McCallum CJ, Loukas-Karlsson and Baker JJ
The appeal should be dismissed.
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – payment claim under
Building and
Construction Industry (Security of Payment) Act 2009
(ACT) – whether
payment claim was “given” to the appellant – where payment
claim was sent to a new email address
– where new email address had same
domain name as previously used email addresses – where no evidence was
to the email address not being a valid email address in circumstances
where it would have been easy to do so –
Jones v Dunkel
made – whether payment claim was sufficiently specific – where
specificity requirement is not overly demanding
– where there was
reasonable identification of the work that was performed – appeal
Legislation Cited:
Building and Construction Industry (Security of Payment) Act 2009
Building and Construction Industry Security of Payment Act 1999
Legislation Act 2001
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Cases Cited:
Allied Pastoral Holdings Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1983] 1 NSWLR 1
Ausipile Pty Ltd v Bothar Boring and Tunnelling (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2021] QCA 223
; 9 Qd R 220
Bloc Constructions
(ACT) Pty Ltd v ABS Façade (ACT) Pty
[2023] FCA 1282
Browne v Dunn
(1894) 6 R 67
BSA Advanced Property Solutions (Fire) Pty Ltd v Ventia Australia Pty
[2022] NSWCA 82
108 NSWLR 350
Canberra Building and Maintenance Pty Ltd v WNA Construction Pty Ltd
[2023] ACTSC 153
Ceerose Pty Ltd v A-Civil Aust Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 215
Chase Oyster Bar Pty Ltd v Hamo Industries Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWCA 190
78 NSWLR 393
Commercial Union Assurance Company of Australia Ltd v Ferrcom
22 NSWLR 389
Coordinated Construction Co Pty Ltd v Climatech (Canberra) Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 229
Farah Constructions v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
[2007] HCA 22
Harlech Enterprises Pty Ltd v Beno Excavations Pty Ltd
[2022] ACTCA
Ho v Powell
[2001] NSWCA 168
51 NSWLR 572
John Holland Pty Ltd v Cardno MBK (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWSC
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
101 CLR 298
KDV Sport Pty Ltd v Muggeridge Constructions Pty Ltd
Multiplex Constructions Pty Ltd v Luikens
[2003] NSWSC 1140
Nepean Engineering Pty Ltd v Total Process Services Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2005] NSWCA 409
64 NSWLR 462
Neumann Contractors P/L v Peet Beachton Syndicate Ltd
[2011] 1 Qd R 17
Piety Constructions Pty Ltd v Megacrane Holdings Pty Ltd
Probuild Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v DDI Group Pty Ltd
95 NSWLR 82
Probuild Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shade Systems Pty Ltd
Protectavale Pty Ltd v K2K Pty Ltd
[2008] FCA 1248
Style Timber Floor Pty Ltd v Krivosudsky
[2019] NSWCA 171
T & M Buckley P/L v 57 Moss Rd P/L
[2010] QCA 381
27 BCLR 280
TFM Epping Land Pty Ltd v Decon Australia Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWCA
Willmot v Queensland
[2024] HCA 42
419 ALR 623
WNA Construction Pty Ltd (Appellant)
Canberra Building and Maintenance Pty Ltd (Respondent)
Representation:
B Buckland (Appellant)
A Greinke (Respondent)
Kamy Saeedi Law (Appellant)
Chamberlains Law Firm (Respondent)
File Number:
ACTCA 27 of 2023
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: ACT Supreme Court
Before: Curtin AJ
Date of Decision: 22 June 2023
Case Title: Canberra Building and Maintenance Pty Ltd v WNA Construction
[2023] ACTSC 153
Building and Construction Industry (Security of Payment) Act 2009
Security of Payment Act
) establishes a regime where a contractor can
obtain an interim payment for construction work that it has performed. The
the regime is to provide for the continuation of cash flow to
contractors for building work, and hence to transfer the risk of insolvency
the contractor to the principal.
scheme is triggered when a contractor (a claimant) sends a “payment
claim” to the principal (the respondent). Upon
receipt of the payment
claim, the respondent has a short period of time in which to provide the
claimant with a “payment schedule”,
setting out any reasons for
withholding payment. If the respondent does not provide the claimant with a
payment schedule within the
time specified under the legislation, the respondent
becomes liable to pay the whole of the amount sought in the payment claim. Where
this occurs, an adjudicator appointed under the Act will then determine the
respondent’s liability to pay the whole, or part,
of the amount sought in
the payment claim. The adjudicator’s decision does not, however, determine
any final rights between
the parties. The respondent’s rights to dispute
its liability under the contract, and to recover any amount paid that it was
liable to pay, are expressly preserved under the legislation.
appeal concerns a payment claim that is alleged to have been issued by the
respondent, Canberra Building and Maintenance Pty
Ltd (Canberra Building), to
the appellant, WNA Construction Pty Ltd (WNA) for work said to have been done by
Canberra Building across
13 development sites in Canberra in late 2019 and early
are two issues that arise for determination on this appeal. The first issue
concerns whether the payment claim was “given”
to WNA in accordance
Security of Payment Act
. In brief, WNA contends that Canberra
Building failed to demonstrate that the email address to which the payment claim
was sent was
a valid email address of WNA. The second issue concerns the
specificity of the payment claim. WNA contends that the payment claim
describe the work that was performed by Canberra Building with sufficient
specificity to enliven any obligations under the
Security of Payment
first instance, Theakston LCM (the Magistrate) found in favour of WNA on both
bases: that is, that Canberra Building had not demonstrated
that the email
address related to WNA, and that the payment claim did not sufficiently
particularise the work that was said to have
been performed. In upholding an
appeal by Canberra Building against this decision, Curtin AJ (the appeal judge)
held that the payment
claim was sufficient to enliven the regime under the
Security of Payment Act
, and that the Magistrate had erred in finding
that there was no evidence that the email address was related to WNA:
Canberra Building and Maintenance Pty Ltd v WNA Construction Pty Ltd
[2023] ACTSC 153
(the Appeal Judgment). WNA contends that the appeal judge
erred in both findings.
the reasons outlined below, WNA has not established error in the Appeal
Judgment. Accordingly, the appeal should be dismissed.
The issuing of
the payment claim
is a construction company which specialises in the construction of residential
properties. Canberra Building is a company which
undertakes construction work in
the ACT and NSW.
Lei (Eddie) Xia is the manager of WNA. His parents are the directors and
shareholders of WNA. Mr Xia was unavailable to work from
15 October 2019 to
18 December 2019. For this reason, on or shortly after 15 October
2019, WNA engaged the services of Canberra Building
to assist with overseeing a
number of properties that were being developed by WNA, including
44 Vellacott Street, Denman Prospect
3 and 7 Chester Close, Holt
82 Lorrway Street, Holt
15 Fullston Way, Holt
60 Fitzhardinge Crescent, Evatt
86 Jaeger Street, Bruce; and
Various properties in Negus Street, Watson.
Reid is the sole director of Canberra Building. In his affidavit, Mr Reid
explained that he prepared a contract which set out the
work that he understood
was required to be performed. The contract, which was annexed to Mr Reid’s
affidavit, was in broad
terms, containing both hourly and salary rates for a
builder/ project manager and a carpenter. The contract also set out the work
be performed at each site in broad terms. For example, under the heading
“Denman Prospect 44 Vellacott St, Block 43, Section
contract stated:
Frame stage with fail protection installed on Friday
- Site clean and
secure site
- Finish Frames
and trusses
Tie downs missing
Bracing to be finished
Lintels installed
- Brick work
- Finished to
lock up with Garage door and the like
- Per sheet
sparky, plumber
Fixout, wet areas, Kitchen BIRS, etc
Trades info needed
Cerifier [sic]
Brick layers
Window supplier
Kitchen supplier
directions for 3 and 7 Chester Street, Holt; Block 40, Section 127; and, 15
Fullston Way, Holt were in similar terms. The work
to be performed at the Watson
properties was described in terms of unspecified “dwellings” (for
example, “3 Dwellings
site cut complete today 9/11/19 – Will meet
plumber on site on Monday and determine when he can start and start the rest of
the building process”).
contract was not signed by the parties. After this contract was given to WNA by
Mr Reid, there were a series of text messages
between Mr Reid and WNA, in
which Mr Reid was given further instructions about work to be performed on
the properties. Mr Reid stated
that he understood that Canberra Building
was to charge at hourly rates in accordance with the rates stipulated in the
the next few months, Canberra Building performed construction work for WNA on
the properties and issued invoices for that work
to WNA. Those invoices were
sent by email to either Ms Campos, or Mr Howman. Ms Campos was an employee of
WNA. She had been working
with WNA since 2019. Mr Howman acted as bookkeeper to
WNA, although he was not formally employed by the company. Canberra Building
received payment for various of these invoices.
Xia returned to work at WNA in early to mid-January 2020. Throughout January
2020, Mr Xia inspected work carried out by Canberra
Building. He considered that
the work performed by Canberra Building was defective. Consequently, Mr Xia
terminated the contract
with Canberra Building. Canberra Building ceased
providing construction work for WNA at the end of January 2020.
16 April 2020, Mr Reid sent Canberra Building’s final invoice, Invoice No
217, to “accounts@wnaconstruction.com.au”
‘accounts’ email address), together with copies of earlier invoices
that he had sent. This was the first time that
Mr Reid had used this email
address. As noted above, Mr Reid had previously sent invoices by email to either
Ms Campos, or Mr Howman.
The domain name of the email address
(@wnaconstruction.com.au) was the same as the domain name of Ms Campos’
email address.
email stated as follows:
Please see attached our tax invoice for work completed at the following job
sites per our contract:
- Block and
Section 13/64, 14/64, 16/64, 18/64, 19/64 & 21/64 Negus Street, Watson ACT
- 44 Vellacott
Street, Denman Prospect ACT 2611;
Chester Close, Holt ACT 2615;
- 82 Lorrway St,
Holt ACT 2615;
- 15 Fullston
Way. Holt ACT 2615
Fitzhardinge Crescent, Evatt ACT 2617; and
- 86 Jaeger
Street, Bruce ACT 2617.
We note claims for these works have previously been made and documents the works
have previously been provided [sic]. However, please
find attached these
documents again for your reference. The amount is outstanding, and we would
appreciate your prompt payment in
email attached an invoice, Invoice No 217, which was dated 25 March 2020. That
invoice stated:
Invoice For: Description:
WNA Constructions Pty Ltd ACN 630 651 624 Labour & Materials
Email: accounts@wnaconstrcuction.com.au [sic]
DESCRIPTION
For all work completed for WNA pursuant to our contract dated
November 2019 at the following job sites:
- Block and
Section 13/64, 14/64, 16/64, 18/64, 19/64 & 21/64 Negus Street, Watson ACT
- 44 Vellacott
Street, Denman Prospect ACT 2611;
Chester Close, Holt ACT 2615;
- 82 Lorraway
Street Holt ACT 2615
- 15 Fullston
Way, Holt ACT 2615
Fitzhardinge Crescent, Evatt ACT 2617; and
- 86 Jaeger
Street, Bruce ACT 2617.
All work completed at agreed hourly
rates per the contract and as provided to you previously via invoices no. 193,
194, 196, 198,
201, 202, 203, 204, 206 and 207.
Please be advised that due to
an accounting error on the previously issued invoice no. 203, the correct total
for invoice no. 203
is $6,154.50, which is reflected in this invoice.
be advised that due to an administrative error on the previously issued invoices
no. 194, 196, 198, 202, 204 and 206, those
invoices failed to confirm they were
inclusive of work completed at 82 Lorraway Street, Holt ACT 2615, and 15
Fullston Way, Holt
Less part payments totalling $12,875.70 towards
invoice 194.
This is a payment claim pursuant to the
Building and
Construction Industry (Security of Payment) Act 2009
Total Including GST
Terms: Due date for payment to be net 7 days
Deposit details [redacted]
email also attached invoices 193, 194, 196, 198, 201, 202, 203, 204, 206 and
invoices varied in detail. For example, Invoice No 193 was described as being
for two job sites: Negus St Watson and 44 Vellacott
St Denman Prospect. The
invoice then set out the following
Description
Hourly Rate
Prop, timbers, Generator hire
Steel lintels
Timbers CBM Stock
Brick supplies
Cement and sarking
Excluding GST
No 194, which was described as relating to Chester St Holt and 86 Jaeger St
Bruce, was in a similar format. However, this
invoice specified where work was
done by a foreman or a carpenter (a matter that could have been ascertained by
the hourly rate in
Invoice No 193). Invoice No 194 also separately
particularised the materials for the Bruce and Holt premises.
Nos 196 and 198, which also related to Chester St Holt and 86 Jaeger St Bruce,
were in the same form as Invoice No 193. However,
again, the materials were
separately particularised. Invoice No 198 also referred to attached Bunnings
No 201, which related to Negus St Watson and 44 Vellacott St Denman Prospect was
slightly more detailed. It set out the work
performed in the following
Description
Hourly rate
Forman Materials drop off and measure up for fence
Carpenter Widen window frames and install
Forman Scheduling
Carpenter Widen window
frames and install windows
Forman Pickup excavator and measure
up eaves at Watson
Material Watson
1-Diesel for Truck and
3-19x19 Beading
Excluding GST
No 202, which related to Chester St Holt and 60 Fitzhardinge Cr Evatt, was more
detailed still. It set out the work performed
in the following
Description
Hourly rate
Forman Meeting, Harvey Norman to pick
up mixers, scheduling template
Forman Measure up
Forman Scheduling template, holt site inspection with
sparking and check on plumbing progress
Forman Material pickup
and drop off for Evatt & instruct carpenters on works
Carpenter Install, architraves, skirting and beading
Scheduling template, Holt: Install lock boxes, meet sparky on site, check on
plumbing works, measure up blocking for garage
door and man
Material Holt
1-Ply for front door
3=Security Cameras
Materials Evatt
1-Doors x 3, CSD roller, Flush
2Architraves, Skirting, quad
TransLink 15% Hour
Excluding GST
No 203, which related to Negus St Watson and 44 Vellacott St Denman Prospect,
contained detailed descriptions as to the labour
performed, and by whom (foreman
and carpenter), but not by reference to the particular work site. However, like
Invoices No 196 and
198, the materials claimed were particularised by work
No 204 and 206, which each related to Chester St Holt and 60 Fitzhardinge Cr
Evatt, contained detailed descriptions of the
work performed (eg “Evatt,
Patched holes at, fixed fly screens, installed flush pulls”), with the
majority of the labour
specified by work site. The materials on each of these
invoices were also specified by work site.
No 207, which related to Negus St Watson and 44 Vellacott St Denman Prospect,
contained two line items for a carpenter and
a labourer, which were not
particularised by work site; materials which were particularised as only
relating to the Denman Prospect
site; and then included amounts for previous
invoices overcharged and undercharged.
did not issue a payment schedule or otherwise respond to the email dated 16
April 2020. WNA did not pay Invoice No 217, nor any
of the invoices which it
proceedings before the Magistrate
8 May 2020, Canberra Building commenced proceedings for debt in the Magistrates
Court pursuant to the
Security of Payment
, claiming for the full amount
of Invoice No 217, plus interest and costs.
[9] of its Amended Statement of Claim (ASOC), Canberra Building asserted that:
On or about 16 April 2020, the plaintiff issued a payment claim within the
of the Act, seeking payment in the sum of $53,504.90
Particulars
(i) Email of 16 April 2020 attaching invoice no. Invoice No 217 [sic].
the remainder of the ASOC, Canberra Building asserted that WNA was required to
issue a Payment Schedule within 10 business days,
that WNA failed to issue a
payment schedule or to pay the debt, and that, as a result, WNA owed Canberra
Building the full amount
of the debt, together with interest.
its Amended Defence, WNA denied that Canberra Building was entitled to the
relief sought. WNA asserted that it did not enter a
written contract with
Canberra Building as alleged or otherwise; that the written contract which
Canberra Building alleged was entered
into was void for uncertainty; and that
any contract was an employment contract between Mr Reid and WNA, which did
not render WNA
liable to pay Canberra Building. In short, WNA admitted that it
did not pay Canberra Building, but denied that it was liable to do
otherwise denied that Canberra Building was entitled to the relief sought in the
its Amended Defence, WNA did not assert that it had not received the payment
claim that Canberra Building alleged it had “issued”.
At [6] of its
Amended Defence, WNA denied the allegations in [9] of the ASOC, repeated its
allegations that there was no contract
between Canberra Building and WNA and
“[said] further that [Canberra Building] did not issue a valid payment
claim within the
meaning of s 15 of the
Building and Construction (Security
of Payment) Act 2009
his opening address to the Magistrate, Mr Buckland, who appeared for WNA in the
proceedings below and on this appeal, informed
the Magistrate that the
“employment contract issue” (see pleadings set out at [30] above)
was not pressed. Mr Buckland
indicated that WNA’s defence was that the
payment claim, and, in particular Invoice No 217:
... didn’t comply with the requirement in subsection 1 [of s 15 of the
Security of Payment Act
] that the claim was made under the construction
contract and so another person who is or may be liable to make the payment, nor
it properly identify as per subsection 2A the construction works to which
it related.
Buckland continued:
... to get the benefit of the presumption in section 17 about the debt being due
and payable, which is the basis of the plaintiff’s
claim, there are steps
which they must follow to get the benefit of it, particularly those in section
15, and we say that in this
circumstance, invoice 217 does not comply with
those requirements – the two I’ve just identified to your Honour
and that will be made clear in the course of my argument.
his opening address, Mr Buckland did not foreshadow any argument that the
payment claim had not been received by WNA, nor that
the ‘accounts’
email address was not a valid email address for WNA.
evidence in the proceedings before the Magistrate consisted of an affidavit
(with annexures) of Mr Reid (the sole director of
Canberra Building) and a
witness statement and oral evidence of Mr Eddie Xia (WNA’s primary
employee, and the son of the owners
his affidavit, Mr Reid set out the commercial history between the parties, and
explained the circumstances in which Canberra Building
had agreed to work as a
subcontractor for WNA. He annexed the contract, various text message exchanges
between himself, Ms Campos
and Mr Howman, and copies of previous invoices
which had been invoiced, together with a bank statement demonstrating which
had been paid, and which remained unpaid.
Reid said that in about February 2020, he had a conversation with Ms Campos,
Mr Howman and Mr Xia, in which Mr Xia indicated that
he would not pay the
invoices which were then outstanding. Mr Reid then stated:
On 16 April 2020, I caused a payment claim to be issued to [WNA] in the amount
of $53,504.90.
The Payment Claim was comprised of tax invoice no 217 issued by the plaintiff.
Exhibited at TAB 6 is a copy of the Payment Claim.
I emailed the Payment Claim to Eddie Xia of [WNA], which was the usual process
by which I would issue tax invoices on behalf of [Canberra
Building] to [WNA]
throughout the duration of the works under the Contract.
I did not receive any payment schedule or response from [WNA] within in [sic]
response to the Payment Claim.
I have received no payment in whole or in part satisfaction of the Payment
to the affidavit was a copy of the email which Mr Reid sent (set out at [15]
above) and Invoice No 217 (set out at [16] above).
cross-examination, Mr Reid gave the following evidence explaining why he had
sent Invoice No 217 to the ‘accounts’
email address:
MR BUCKLAND: All of the emails with invoices prior to April 2020 you sent to
Kaye Campos or Peter Howman, correct?
MR REID: I will say yes. If that’s – if that’s the date
you’ve got.
MR BUCKLAND: Yes. So why the change?
MR REID: They asked to change the email, to send it to somewhere else.
MR BUCKLAND: But you’d finished working for WNA at the end of January
2020, hadn’t you?
MR REID: Thereabouts, yes.
MR BUCKLAND: So there would’ve been no request in February or March or
early April 2020, would there?
MR REID: Request for what?
MR BUCKLAND: To change the email address?
MR REID: When I was working for them it was.
MR BUCKLAND: So you say the request came while you were working for them?
MR REID: Because there was more than one email, so there was more than one email
we could send it to.
MR BUCKLAND: But all the emails that you sent prior to 16 April, as I asked you
a few minutes ago, were sent to Kaye Campos and Peter
MR REID: Yes, yes. Yes, and then I spoke to Peter after I left and he instructed
me not to send him any more invoices because I no
longer work for WNA.
MR BUCKLAND: Right. So you just, what, found the invoice on – you found
the email address on the internet?
MR REID: No, I already had that – already had that email.
MR BUCKLAND: So you just elected to send it to somebody else?
MR REID: I don’t recall why I picked that particular email, what was the
reason for it, so they would get it.
MR BUCKLAND: Why didn’t you send it to Kaye Campos?
MR REID: Because I was dealing with Eddy [sic] at that stage.
in the cross-examination, Mr Reid confirmed that he only sent Invoice No 217 by
email, and that he had not posted the invoice
or delivered it by hand.
Reid was not asked any further questions, either in cross-examination, or in
re-examination, concerning where, or when, he had
originally obtained the
‘accounts’ email address. Nor was he has asked any questions about
whether the email that he
had sent had ‘bounced back’. Mr Reid was
not asked whether he had received any notification suggesting that the email
not been received.
his witness statement, Mr Xia explained the circumstances in which he was
unavailable to work in late 2019 and said that he had
a “very limited
knowledge of what occurred between November 2019 and January 2020, particularly
in relation to payments of
accounts and invoices, as [he] did not receive
Xia said that when he became available to work in January 2020, he inspected
Mr Reid’s work and formed the view that the
work performed was
defective. He said that he terminated Mr Reid’s “employment”
in or around January 2020.
to the payment claim, Mr Xia said:
I have seen the invoice number 217 from plaintiff. It is very confusing. I do
not understand what work is being claimed for in that
Xia did not provide any further explanation in his witness statement as to when,
or where he had first seen Invoice No 217.
his cross-examination, Mr Xia agreed that he had had a conversation with Mr Reid
in February 2020 in which he (Mr Xia) had told
Mr Reid that he would not pay Mr
Reid’s invoices. Mr Xia then gave the following evidence.
MR SMITH: Do you know what invoices Mr Reid was referring to?
Mr XIA: I only – I cannot recall a lot of things, but they did show me a
lot of – a bunch of invoice, which is when I
read it as well, I really
don’t understand.
MR SMITH: Yes, but do you recall seeing invoices?
MR XIA: Yes, of course.
MR SMITH: Do you recall what number those invoices were?
MR XIA: No.
MR SMITH: Or the date of those invoices?
MR XIA: No. I don’t actually pay attention to that, you know, to that at
all, because I’m not in charge.
Mr Xia was being asked questions about a conversation which he had with Mr Reid
in February 2020, it would appear that the “invoices”
which Mr Reid
“was referring to” in that conversation were invoices which predated
Invoice No 217 (which was not issued
until April 2020).
counsel asked Mr Xia whether he had seen Mr Reid’s email dated 16 April
2020 or Invoice No 217 prior to the commencement
of litigation. Nor did either
counsel ask Mr Reid whether the ‘accounts’ email address was a
valid email address of WNA.
There was no other evidence adduced by either party
addressing whether or not the ‘accounts’ email address was a valid
email address for WNA.
WNA’s pleadings did not clearly state that service of the payment claim
was disputed, and although that issue had not
been mentioned by Mr Buckland in
his opening address on behalf of WNA, it appears that the Magistrate understood
the question of
service of the payment claim to be one of the issues in dispute
between the parties.
Specifically,
in determining an objection during Mr Xia’s cross-examination, the
Magistrate asked Mr Buckland whether the issues
in dispute were “
as well as whether or not the payment
claim was void because it did not provide adequate details of the work”
(emphasis added).
At the conclusion of the evidence, the Magistrate again
observed that he understood that one of the issues in dispute was whether
could be satisfied that the email was “given to the defendant”.
responding to the Magistrate at these points, and in his closing submissions,
the legal representative for Canberra Building did
not raise the issue of
whether service of the payment claim was raised on the pleadings. Rather, he
contended that the sending of
the email to the ‘accounts’ email
address satisfied the legislative requirement that the payment claim be
hearing oral submissions on behalf of Canberra Building, the Magistrate
delivered a short
judgment finding in favour of WNA. In that
decision, the Magistrate held that Canberra Building had not demonstrated that
No 217 was served on WNA:
... the evidence is the payment claim was sent to an address and that address is
accounts @wnaconstruction.com.au. Now, that domain
name is consistent with the
defendant’s name. And its also consistent with other email addresses used
elsewhere within the
material. But, there is simply no evidence that that
precise email address relates to the defendant. And so, in those circumstances,
I cannot be satisfied that the payment claim was, in fact, given to the
defendant on 16 April 2020 or at any other time.
Magistrate also found that Invoice No 217 failed to set out the construction
work to which it related, and hence did not comply
with s 15(2)(a) of the
Security and Payment Act
. In particular, his Honour held:
My concerns are that when you look at invoice 217 it just does not, in any real
way, describe the construction work that the claim
related to. While it
describes a number of addresses, that in itself, is not enough.
While it makes references to a contract that, in itself, is not enough. There is
a need to refer to the contents of the invoices
that were attached. And while
some invoices are quite detailed and more inadequate [as transcribed] for the
purpose of meeting this
requirement, some are not. So, for example, the very
first invoice simply has seven dates and then a list of materials. And states
two sites and I think on its face applying the test which is an assessment of
the way the document patently appears taking into account
any extrinsic
relationship or evidence of a relationship between the parties it simply is
inadequate to describe what the work relates
from various interstate authorities concerning relevantly similar legislation,
his Honour continued:
Each indicate that the test is one that should be applied with common sense in a
practical way. There’s no requirement for
the description to be
particularly technical but it needs to be adequate. And that means sufficient to
provide the recipient with
an understanding for the basis of the claim and
therefore allow the recipient to provide a meaningful payment schedule which is
response to the claim.
In this case where the work is simply not identified the precise property is not
identified. For example, stating two properties
where the work may have been
done, one or the other or both is simply not enough. And so therefore, I make a
positive finding that
the payment claim does not adequately identify the
construction work or related goods and services to which the progress claims
proceedings in the Supreme Court
Building appealed from this judgment to the Supreme Court pursuant to
Magistrates Court Act 1930
a judgment delivered on 22 June 2023, the appeal judge allowed the appeal on two
bases. First, the appeal judge found that the
Magistrate had erred in holding
that the payment claim was not a valid claim under the
Security of Payment
[at [95]]. Second, the appeal judge found that the Magistrate had erred
in finding that the payment claim had not been validly “given”
WNA [at [102]].
addressing the first ground of appeal, the appeal judge observed that there is
legislation in each Australian State and Territory
which is in similar terms to
Security of Payment Act
: Appeal Judgment at [62] – [66]; see
Harlech Enterprises Pty Ltd v Beno Excavations Pty Ltd
Probuild Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shade Systems Pty
[2018] HCA 4
. His Honour then reviewed, in
chronological order, various interstate authorities concerning the proper
construction of provisions
which are in relevantly identical terms to s 15 of
Security of Payment Act
: Appeal Judgment at [68] – [87].
Honour noted that supporting invoices in the present case “mentioned two
sites” and that there was “no separation
of labour/materials for one
site from the labour/materials for the other”: Appeal Judgment at [94].
However, his Honour concluded
that notwithstanding these deficiencies,
“Invoice No 217, read with its supporting invoices, met
undemanding test”: Appeal Judgment at [94]. His Honour continued (at
[95] – [98]):
... Taking into account the speed with which these documents were to be
produced, interpreting them in a common sense practical manner
and remembering
that what may appear as unintelligible shorthand to a lawyer would be readily
understood by the parties who were
experienced in the building industry and were
familiar with the particular construction contract, I am of the view his Honour,
respect, erred in holding Invoice No 217 to be invalid for not identifying
the construction work or related goods and services to
which the progress
payment related.
It is true, as WNA submitted, that the payment claim did not identify the work
done by Mr Reid for which he charged “labour”
in the payment claim.
But the payment claim was not a pleading and did not need to be as precise as
that type of document. When Canberra
Building was contracted to provide the
services of Mr Reid as foreman, then Mr Reid’s labour was self-evidently
provided in
that role and no more precise description was required. There was no
need for Canberra Building to detail, almost on a time-charging
basis, what
particular work he was supervising on a building site at any given time. To
require that level of detail would be to
frustrate the purposes of the SOP
In my view there was no failure to comply with s 15(2) of
the SOP Act which was patent on the face of Invoice No 217. The
purported in a reasonable way to identify the particular work and any
reasonable assertion by WNA that it was unable to identify
some of the work
could be made clear in a payment schedule justifying a refusal to pay, as
Hodgson JA held. That dispute could then
be determined by adjudication.
It follows that in my view his Honour erred in finding that the payment claim
did not include the minimum amount of detail required.
finding that the Magistrate had erred in finding that the payment claim had not
been validly “given” to WNA, and hence
allowing the second ground of
appeal, the appeal judge took into account the following matters:
(a) In his affidavit, Mr Reid stated that he had “emailed the payment
claim to Eddie Xia of [WNA]”. Although this statement
admissible form, no objection was taken to it, and it was admitted into
evidence: Appeal Judgment at [104];
(b) In cross-examination, Mr Reid gave unchallenged evidence that
“they” (that is, Ms Campos and Mr Howman) asked him
to send his
future invoices to “somewhere else”: Appeal Judgment at [105];
(c) Although Mr Reid could not recall why he had sent the email to the
‘accounts’ email address, he denied finding the
‘accounts’ email on the internet. He said that he did not send it to
Ms Campos because he was dealing with Mr Xia at
that time (as confirmed by the
fact that the invoice began “Dear Eddie”): Appeal Judgment at [107]
(d) Mr Xia gave no evidence on the topic: “[h]e was a witness who one
would have expected could have given evidence whether
the email address used by
[Mr Reid] was related to WNA, and whether WNA had received the email attaching
Invoice No 217”: Appeal
Judgment at [110].
that the principle in
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
101 CLR 298
of application to a witness’ evidence in chief (
Commercial Union
Assurance Company of Australia Ltd v Ferrcom
(1991) 22 NSWLR 389
the appeal judge continued (at [112]):
In my view [a
Jones v Dunkel
] inference should be drawn. That is, the
most natural inference to draw from the failure of Mr Xia to address whether the
email address
used by Canberra Building was related to WNA, and whether WNA had
received the email attaching Invoice No 217, was that WNA feared
to adduce that
evidence from him. That is therefore some evidence that such examination in
chief would have exposed facts unfavourable
to WNA. The result of that is that I
am able to more readily accept Mr Reid’s evidence of service:
online ed, at [1215].
appeal judge correctly observed that a
Jones v Dunkel
inference cannot be
used to “fill gaps” in the respondent’s case: Appeal Judgment
at [117]. However, his Honour
held that there was “no gap” in
Canberra Building’s case, as there was “evidence of service in
Canberra Building’s
written evidence in chief, and further oral evidence
which emerged in cross-examination”: Appeal Judgment at [117].
this reason, the appeal judge concluded that the Magistrate erred in finding
that there was “no evidence the email address
was related to WNA”:
Appeal Judgment at [118]. In so finding, his Honour indicated that he did not
place any weight on the
similarity between Ms Campos’ email address and
the ‘accounts’ email address, nor did he find that Mr Xia’s
written statement that he had “seen invoice No 217” was an
“admission against interest”, noting that Mr Xia
had not said when
he had seen the invoice: Appeal Judgment at [119], [121]. The appeal judge
likewise rejected WNA’s contention
that Canberra Building’s
solicitor had “conceded” that there was “no evidence”
that the ‘accounts’
email had any connection to WNA: Appeal Judgment
at [122] – [126].
Honour also rejected WNA’s contention that a
Browne v Dunn
R 67 inference should be drawn against Canberra Building with respect to
Canberra Building’s failure to put to Mr Xia
that the payment claim
was in fact received. In particular, his Honour noted that
Browne v Dunn
only applies where a witness gives evidence contrary to that of an opposing
party’s witness, and that Mr Xia had not given
evidence that the email was
received: Appeal Judgment at [128], citing
Allied Pastoral
Holdings Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1983] 1 NSWLR 1 at 16.
His Honour found that “[a]s Mr Xia gave no evidence on the topic, there
was no requirement to cross-examine
him on the issue”: Appeal Judgment at
Accordingly,
his Honour allowed the appeal, set aside the Magistrate’s orders, and, in
lieu thereof, entered judgment in favour
of Canberra Building in the sum of
$53,504.90 with interest and costs.
Security of
Payment Act
turning to consider the issues in dispute on the appeal, it is convenient to
first set out the various provisions of the
Security of Payment Act
establish a person’s entitlement to a progress payment for construction
work, and the procedure for recovering those payments.
to entitlement, s 10 of the
Security of Payment Act
provides that on and
from each reference date, a person is entitled to a “progress
if the person has undertaken to carry out construction work,
or to supply related goods and services under a construction contract.
“construction contract” and “construction work” are both
broadly defined: see ss 6 and 9 of the
Security of Payment Act
reference date is either the date stated in, or worked out, under the contract,
for the progress payment, or, if the contract
does not provide a date, is the
“last day of the calendar month in which the construction work was first
carried out, or the
related goods and services were first supplied, under the
contract” and the last day of each subsequent named month.
procedure for recovering progress payments is set out in Part 4 of the
Security of Payment Act
Security of Payment
, which has particular
significance for both grounds of appeal, provides as follows (emphasis
(1) A person who is or who claims to be
entitled to a progress payment under section 10 (1) (the claimant) may give a
claim (a payment
claim) to the person who, under the construction contract
concerned, is or may be liable to make the payment (the respondent)
For how documents may be served, see the
Legislation Act
A payment claim must—
(a) identify the construction work or related goods and services to which the
progress payment relates; and
(b) state the amount of the progress payment that the claimant claims is payable
(the claimed amount); and
(c) state that it is made under this Act (emphasis added).
(3) The claimed amount may include any amount—
(a) that the respondent is liable to pay the claimant under section 29 (3); or
(b) that is held under the construction contract by the respondent and that the
claimant claims is due for release.
(4) A payment claim may be given on or after —
(a) the last day of the calendar month in which the construction work was first
carried out, or the related goods and services were
first supplied, under the
contract and of each subsequent calendar month; or
(b) if the construction contract provides for a payment claim to be given before
the last day of a calendar month—the day provided
under the contract;
(c) if the construction contract has been terminated—the day of
termination.
(5) However, a payment claim may be given only before the later of—
(a) the end of the period worked out under the construction contract; and
(b) the end of the period of 12 months after the construction work to which the
claim relates was last carried out or the related
goods and services to which
the claim relates were last supplied.
(6) A claimant must not give more than 1 payment claim for each calendar
month, unless the construction contract provides for more
than 1 payment claim
to be given in a calendar month.
(7) Nothing in this section prevents the claimant from—
(a) including more than 1 progress payment in a payment claim; or
(b) including in a payment claim an amount that has been the subject of a
previous claim; or
(c) giving the respondent a payment claim in a particular calendar month for
work carried out, or related goods and services supplied,
in an earlier calendar
a payment claim is “given” to a respondent pursuant to s 15, the
respondent “may reply to the claim by giving
a schedule of proposed
payment (a payment schedule) to the claimant”: s 16(1). Such a payment
schedule must identify the payment
claim to which it relates and state the
amount of the payment, if any, that the respondent proposes to make: s 16(2). If
the scheduled
amount is less than the claimed amount, the schedule must indicate
why the scheduled amount is less, and explain any reasons why
the respondent is
withholding payment: s 16(3).
a respondent does not reply to the payment claim within the lesser of 10 days,
or the time required under the relevant construction
contract, “the
respondent becomes liable to pay the claimed amount to the claimant on the due
date for the progress payment
to which the payment claim relates”: s
16(4). If the respondent does not then pay the progress payment on the due date,
claimant may either “recover the unpaid portion of the claimed amount
from the respondent, as a debt due to the claimant, in
any court of competent
in relation to the payment
claim”: s 17(2)(a). The claimant may also give
notice of an intention to suspend carrying out construction work or supply
goods and services under the construction contract: s 17(2)(b).
the claimant commences proceedings for recovery of the debt in a court of
competent jurisdiction, the court must not enter judgment
in favour of the
claimant unless it is satisfied that the respondent is liable to pay the claimed
amount because it failed to provide
a payment schedule within the time
specified, and that the respondent has failed to pay the whole or any part of
the claimed amount
on or before the relevant due date: s 17(3)(a). In such
a proceeding, the respondent is not entitled to bring a cross-claim, or to
a defence in relation to any matter arising under the construction contract:
s 17(3)(b).
the respondent provides a payment schedule in response to a payment claim within
the time specified, and disputes in that payment
schedule an entitlement to pay
the whole, or part of the amount claimed, the dispute may be determined by an
adjudicator pursuant
to div 4.2 of the
Security of Payment Act
adjudicator must have “the qualifications, expertise and experience to
perform adjudications”, and also must have
“successfully completed a
relevant training course”: s 20.
procedure for adjudication is set out in ss 19, 21 and 22 of the
Security of
Payment Act
. In brief, the claimant may make a written application for an
adjudication: s 19(3). That application must,
, “identify
the payment claim and any payment schedule to which it relates” and may
contain relevant submissions: s 19(3).
an adjudicator is appointed and gives notice of acceptance, the respondent may
give a response to the claimant’s adjudication
at any time before the
later of 7 business days after the respondent receives a copy of the
application, or 5 business days after
receiving notice of the
adjudicator’s acceptance of the application: s 22. That adjudication
response must also be in writing,
and may contain submissions relevant to the
response: s 22(2). An adjudication response may only be provided if the
respondent provided
the claimant a payment schedule within the time specified
under the Act: s 22(3). The respondent must not include any reasons for
withholding payment unless those reasons have already been included in the
payment schedule that was provided: s 22(4).
deciding an adjudication response, the adjudicator may ask for further
submissions from either party, but must allow the other
party to comment on any
submissions made. The adjudicator may also “call a conference of the
parties” and/or carry out
an “inspection of any matter related to
the claim”: s 23.
Security of Payment Act
provides that, in determining the
adjudication decision, the adjudicator must only consider:
(a) this Act;
(b) the construction contract to which the application relates;
(c) the payment claim to which the application relates, together with any
submission, including relevant documentation, properly
made by the claimant in
support of the claim;
(d) the adjudication application;
(e) the payment schedule, if any, to which the application relates, together
with any submission, including relevant documentation,
properly made by the
respondent in support of the schedule;
(f) the adjudication response, if any;
(g) the result of any inspection by the adjudicator of any matter related to the
adjudicator must decide the adjudication application within an exceptionally
short timeframe: s 23. As Leeming JA observed in
Style Timber Floor
Pty Ltd v Krivosudsky
[2019] NSWCA 171
, “the entirety of
the dispute is ordinarily
to be determined within some 15
business days of the adjudication application being made”.
adjudication certificate may be filed as a judgment for debt, and may be
enforced, in any court of competent jurisdiction: s 27.
Significantly,
no part of the recovery procedure specified under pt 4 of the
Security of
Payment Act
“affects any right” that a party to a construction
contract may have under the contract, or for anything done or omitted
under the contract: s 38. In any proceeding before a court or tribunal in
relation to any matter arising under a construction
contract, the court or
tribunal must, in any order or award made, take into account any amount paid to
a party to the contract under
or for the purposes of the Part, and also may make
any appropriate orders for the restitution of any amount so paid, and any other
orders considered appropriate, having regard to its decision in the proceeding:
Security of Payment Act
provides that a court does not have
error of fact or
law on the face of the decision, but further provides that an
appeal may be made to the Supreme Court with the consent of the parties,
the leave of the Court, on any question of law arising out of an adjudication
Determination
outlined above, Canberra Building purported to issue a payment claim under s 15
Security of Payment Act
. Having not received a response to the
payment claim, Canberra Building commenced proceedings in the Magistrates Court
for recovery
of the amount sought in the payment claim pursuant to s 17(2) of
Security of Payment Act
Building was entitled to judgment if it satisfied the Magistrate that WNA was
liable to pay Canberra Building because WNA
had “failed to provide a
payment schedule ... within the time allowed”, and WNA had not paid
Canberra Building the whole
or any part of the claimed amount on or before the
due date for the progress payment: s 17 of the
Security of Payment
was no dispute that WNA had not provided a payment schedule in response to the
payment claim, and that WNA had not paid any
part of the amount claimed on or
before the due date. However, both parties properly accepted that the Magistrate
could not enter
judgment in favour of Canberra Building unless the payment claim
issued by Canberra Building complied with s 15 of the
Security of Payment
outlined above, the Magistrate held that s 15 had not been complied with for two
reasons: first, because Canberra Building had
not demonstrated that it had
“give[n]” the payment claim to WNA in compliance with s 15(1) of the
Security of Payment Act
; and second, because the payment claim did not
“identify the construction work or related goods and services to which the
payment relates” in compliance with the requirement in s 15(2) of
Security of Payment Act
. The appeal judge held that the Magistrate
had erred in both findings. For the reasons outlined below, the appeal judge was
to so conclude.
Service of the
payment claim
outlined above, in order to trigger the obligations specified in the
of Payment Act
, it is necessary for the subcontractor to “give”
a payment claim to the person who is, or may be, liable to make the
15(1) of the
Security of Payment Act
term “give” is not defined in the
Security of Payment Act
and unlike legislation in other jurisdictions, there is no provision for a
company to specify an email address for service of a
payment claim: cf
Building and Construction Industry Security of Payment Act 1999
Nonetheless,
the term “give” is given content by
Legislation Act 2001
(ACT). Specifically,
Legislation
provides that:
This part applies to a document that is authorised or required under a law to be
served (whether the word ‘serve’, ‘give’,
‘notify’, ‘send’ or ‘tell’ or any other word
Legislation Act
(which is contained within the same
Part) states that a document may be served on a corporation “by emailing
it to an email
address of the corporation”.
Legislation Act
If the sender [of an email or fax] has no reason to suspect that a document
served by fax or email under this part was not received
by the recipient when
sent, the document is presumed to be served when sent unless evidence sufficient
to raise doubt about the presumption
term “recipient” is defined in
Legislation
to mean “the individual, corporation or agency on whom the
document is intended to be served”. The term “sender”
defined in the same subsection to mean “the person sending, or seeking to
send, the document”.
further provides:
(4) For subsection (3), the sender has reason to suspect that a document served
by fax or email under this part was not received
by the recipient when sent only
if, on the day the document was sent or on the next working day, the equipment
the sender used to
send the document indicated by way of a signal or other
message that—
(a) the equipment did not send the document when the equipment was used to send
the document; or
(b) for a fax—the number to which the fax was sent to the recipient was
not a fax number of the recipient; or
(c) for an email—the address to which the email was sent was not an email
address of the recipient.
view of the above provisions, it was not necessary for Canberra Building to
prove that Mr Xia, or any other employee of WNA, had
in fact received the
payment claim in order to establish that the payment claim had been
“given” to WNA.
oral submissions, counsel for WNA accepted that Canberra Building was only
required to prove that it sent the payment claim to
WNA on the date alleged. Mr
Reid’s evidence that he emailed the payment claim to the
‘accounts’ email address on
16 April 2020 was not
challenged.
Accordingly, the only
issue in dispute, both in the proceedings below and on this appeal, was whether
the ‘accounts’
email address was a valid email address for WNA.
agree with the appeal judge that Canberra Building had established on the
balance of probabilities that the ‘accounts’
email address was a
valid email address for WNA
Our reasons for so concluding are as
as the appeal judge held, Mr Reid gave evidence that he had “emailed the
payment claim to [Mr] Xia”. This evidence
was not challenged, or
contradicted, by other evidence.
an inference may be drawn from Mr Reid’s evidence that (i) “there
was more than one email we could send [invoices]
to”; (ii) Ms Campos and
Mr Howman had asked him to send his invoice to “somewhere else”;
(iii) he “already
[the ‘accounts’ email
address]” at the time that he sent Invoice No 217 (emphasis added); and
(iv) he had not found
the ‘accounts’ address on the internet, that
Mr Reid had been provided the ‘accounts’ email address by either
Campos or Mr Howman, both of whom would have been, by virtue of their positions,
well familiar with the valid email addresses
for WNA. (There was no suggestion
that Mr Reid ever corresponded with any other WNA employee whilst Mr Xia was
unavailable). Whilst
not determinative, the similarity in the email extensions
of Ms Campos’ email address and the ‘accounts’ email
provides further support for the drawing of this inference.
WNA’s pleadings and Mr Xia’s witness statement are also of
significance. As outlined above, WNA did not allege
in its defence that it never
received 16 April 2020 email; nor was the issue opened on by counsel for WNA. No
pleadings point has
ever been taken by Canberra Building. However, if Invoice No
217 had first been received by WNA in the course of the litigation in
Magistrates Court, one would have expected WNA’s defence to have clearly
disputed receipt of the 16 April 2020 email, and
for Mr Xia to have asserted in
his witness statement that he had not seen the Invoice prior to the litigation
(rather than simply
stating that he had “seen” the invoice and that
it was “confusing”).
failure of WNA to adduce evidence that the ‘accounts’ email address
was not an email address for WNA (whether from
Mr Xia or from another director
or employee of WNA) provides further support for a finding that the
‘accounts’ email
address was a valid email address of WNA. In
circumstances where there is already a strong inference to be drawn from the
that the 16 April 2020 email was received, it matters not that WNA did
not bear the onus of proof:
Ho v Powell
[2001] NSWCA 168
– [16]. As the High Court recently held in
[2024] HCA 42
419 ALR 623
, “[a]ll evidence is to
be weighed according to the proof which it was in the power of one side to have
produced, and in the
power of the other to have contradicted”. It would
have been an easy matter for WNA to adduce evidence that the
email address was not a valid email address for the
company. It did not do so.
as Canberra Building submitted, the appeal judge correctly rejected WNA’s
contention that the rule in
Browne v Dunn
precluded Canberra Building
from making a submission that the email had been “given” to WNA. As
the appeal judge held,
the rule in
Browne v Dunne
only applies where the
witness has given evidence which contradicts the case of the party seeking to
make the submission: Appeal
Judgment at [128], citing
Allied Pastoral
Holdings Pty Ltd
at 16. Mr Xia did not give evidence that the email was not
received, and did not give evidence that the email addressed used did
into account each of these matters, the appeal judge was correct to conclude
that Canberra Building had established, on the
balance of probabilities, that
the ‘accounts’ email was a valid email address for WNA. Accordingly,
this ground of appeal
should be dismissed.
payment claim sufficiently specific?
The principles to be applied
noted above, s 15(2) of the
Security of Payment Act
provides as
(2) A payment claim must—
(a) identify the construction work or related goods and services to which the
progress payment relates; and
(b) state the amount of the progress payment that the claimant claims is payable
(the claimed amount); and
(c) state that it is made under this Act (emphasis added).
15(2) and comparable interstate provisions have been considered in a number of
interstate appellate decisions. As each of
those authorities emphasise, s 15 and
like provisions must be construed within the context and in accordance with the
the scheme created by Parliament under the
Security of Payment
features of the scheme are central to its operation. First, is the role of an
experienced and trained adjudicator, which enables
the provision of a
“minimalist, hands off” alternative to “costly and
protracted” court proceedings:
at [47]. As can be seen from
the summary of the legislation at [65] – [80]
“provisions are characterised by strict fast-paced time constraints, and a
deal of informality”:
Style Timber Floor
at [26]. An experienced
and trained adjudicator is well placed to determine, in this fast-paced
environment, the proper construction
of payment claims and payments schedules
... given and received by parties who are experienced in the building industry
and are familiar with the particular building contract,
the history of
construction of the project and the broad issues which have produced the dispute
as to the claimant’s payment
Multiplex Constructions Pty Ltd v
[2003] NSWSC 1140
the scheme adopts a “pay now, argue later” approach, which
“does not decide final rights”, but “preserves
them for later
resolution”:
at [48]. As Leeming JA observed in
Timber Floor
, the legislative purpose is to achieve “a prompt
resolution of disputes and payment of monies, all without prejudice to
the parties’ rights at law”.
aspects of the scheme strongly support a construction of the
Security of
Payment Act
which encourages resolution of disputes concerning payment
claims within the adjudication system which the legislation creates, and
discourages recourse to the courts on issues relating to interim payments except
in exceptional cases: see
BSA Advanced Property Solutions (Fire) Pty Ltd v
Ventia Australia Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWCA 82
108 NSWLR 350
Chase Oyster Bar Pty Ltd v Hamo Industries Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWCA 190
(“the purpose of the legislative scheme is best served
by restricting the scope of intervention by the courts”). As
JA observed in
Ausipile Pty Ltd v Bothar Boring and Tunnelling
(Australia) Pty Ltd
[2021] QCA 223
; 9 Qd R 220 at
, “the whole
scheme of the Act is designed to enable compulsory and fast payment to
subcontractors, with issues to be determined
at a adjudication rather than by
traditional litigation”. This purpose is apt to be undermined by a
construction of the legislation
which enables a respondent to “simply
ignore the payment claim” and to then litigate the validity of the claim
claimant seeks to enforce its debt in a court of competent
at [100] and
Nepean Engineering Pty Ltd v Total
Process Services Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2005] NSWCA 409
64 NSWLR 462
Nonetheless,
service by a claimant on the respondent of a payment claim is one of the
“basic and essential requirements of the
Claire Rewais and
Osama rewais t/as McVitty Gove BPB Earthmoving Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWCA 103
Brodyn Pty Ltd t/as Time Cost and Quality v
Davenport [2004]
NSWCA 394 at [53]; 61 NSWLR 421 at [53]. Further, there are “undoubtedly
limits to the characteristics of
a valid payment claim”, in particular, by
the “use of the obligatory ‘must’
[in s 15(2)]”:
at [35]. Where the payment claim does not “identify the
construction work or related goods and services to which the progress
relates”, the respondent does not become “liable to pay the claimed
amount to the claimant” under s 16(4)
Security of Payment
in view of the overarching purpose of the legislation, it also follows that the
requirement is “not overly demanding”:
Protectavale Pty Ltd v K2K
[2008] FCA 1248
– [12]. In particular, a
payment claim is “not ... required to be as precise and as particularised
as a pleading in the
Supreme Court”:
Multiplex Constructions
[76]. The determination of the validity of a payment claim should be approached
from the perspective of common sense; undue technicality
is not required:
Probuild Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v DDI Group Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWCA
95 NSWLR 82
. It is not necessary for the payment claim to
“[explain] in every respect the means by which a particular claim item had
calculated”:
T & M Buckley P/L v 57 Moss Rd P/L
(2011) 27 BCLR 280 at
. Nor will an error or inaccuracy in the
payment claim result in non-compliance with s 15(2), provided that the payment
claim identifies
the work in respect of which the claim is made:
Constructions
(ACT) Pty Ltd v ABS Façade (ACT) Pty Ltd
Perry J observed in
Bloc Constructions
at [44], the question whether the
requirements of s 15(2) are satisfied is to be determined objectively. The
subjective understandings
of the parties are not relevant. However, as Perry J
also observed in
Bloc Constructions
, this objective assessment is to be
conducted “from the vantage point of the parties to the particular
Bloc Constructions
at [45], quoting
KDV Sport Pty Ltd
v Muggeridge Constructions Pty Ltd
[2019] QSC 178
particular, the assessment takes into account the “background knowledge of
each of the parties derived from their past
dealings and exchanges of
documentation”:
Neumann Contractors
P/L v Peet Beachton
[2009] QSC 376
[2011] 1 Qd R 17
Bloc Constructions
Contested questions of principle
outlined above, a central principle that runs through the authorities is the
importance of the adjudication system in speedily
resolving disputes concerning
interim payments.
from that principle, it has been held that “if a respondent is unable to
identify some of the work in respect of which
a payment claim is made”, a
respondent should respond to the claim by way of a payment schedule which states
that the respondent
“does not propose to make any payment in respect of
that work because it cannot identify the work”: see
Nepean Engineering
WNA contended that such a response “does not give proper regard to the
limitations of adjudication responses to matters
raised in a payment
schedule”. In particular, WNA noted that s 22 of the
Security of
Payment Act
precludes a respondent from including “in the adjudication
response any reasons for withholding payment unless those reasons
have already
been included in the payment schedule provided to the claimant”. WNA also
noted that there is no equivalent prohibition
on the content of an adjudication
application: see s 21 of the
Security of Payment Act
. Counsel for WNA
submitted that, in these circumstances,
... a ‘can’t identify’ payment schedule is, in truth, not a
real exercise of the rights of the respondent, as the
failure of a claimant to
set out the construction work as required has deprived the respondent of its
only opportunity to set out
a substantive response to the work which is the
subject of the claim.
Nepean Engineering
submission on this issue is predicated on an assumption that a claimant may
respond to a “can’t identify”
payment schedule by providing
further particulars of the claim (which the respondent is then precluded from
answering). The correctness
of that construction may be doubted. Section 19 of
Security of Payment Act
prescribes a number of requirements for a
valid adjudication decision. Pursuant to ss 19(3)(f) and 19(3)(g), the
adjudication “must
identify the payment claim and any payment
schedule to which it relates” and “may
contain the submissions relevant to
application that the claimant chooses to include”. There is
no provision for the claimant to include additional substantive
matters in the
adjudication application. There is a strong argument that a claimant cannot
further particularise the payment claim
in an adjudication application pursuant
to s 19 of the
Security of Payment Act
. See further
Ceerose Pty Ltd v
A-Civil Aust Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 215
112 NSWLR 225
concerning the statutory limitations upon the material that an adjudicator may
is not necessary to determine the correctness of WNA’s contentions with
respect to the proper construction of ss 21 and 22
Security of Payment
in this respect. An adjudicator must afford both the claimant and the
respondent procedural fairness. Where a respondent files a payment
schedule that
indicates that a payment claim is disputed because the respondent cannot
identify the work that was performed, and
that contention is accepted (in other
words, considered objectively, the work that was performed cannot be identified
from the payment
claim), it would amount to a breach of procedural fairness for
the adjudicator to then make an adjudication in favour of the claimant
basis of matters to which the respondent has not had (and cannot have) an
opportunity to respond.
appropriateness of a “can’t identify” payment schedule has
been accepted by courts in New South Wales and in
Queensland, including
intermediate appellate courts:
Nepean Engineering
Constructions Pty Ltd v Megacrane Holdings Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWSC 309
TFM Epping Land Pty Ltd v Decon
Australia Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWCA 93
decisions of intermediate appellate courts in New South Wales and Queensland
should be followed unless shown to be plainly wrong:
Constructions v Say-Dee Pty Ltd
[2007] HCA 22
are these decisions not plainly wrong; we
consider that these decisions
are clearly correct. In particular, the proposition that a respondent should not
ignore a payment claim,
and instead should respond with a ‘can’t
identify’ payment schedule, accords with the purpose of the
Security of
Payment Act
, as set out at [103] – [105] above.
WNA also contended that the appeal judge erred by not following Santow
JA’s formulation in
Nepean Engineering
of the test to be applied
where the validity of a payment claim is in issue, namely that a payment claim
will not be valid unless
... sufficient specificity in the payment claim for its recipient actually to be
able to identify a “payment claim” for
the purpose of determining
whether to pay, or to respond by way of a payment schedule indicating the extent
of payment, if any.
Nepean Engineering
first instance, the appeal judge held that this formulation did not correctly
state the law. In particular, the appeal judge noted
that Santow J had
“disagreed” with Hodgson and Ipp JJA in
Engineering
Appeal Judgment at [70]. His Honour also noted that in
Protectavale
, Finkelstein J had also adopted the formulation, but that
his Honour had only cited the “dissenting” decision of Santow
and a first instance decision of Einstein J in
John Holland Pty Ltd v Cardno
MBK (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2004] NSWSC 258
– [21] in support of that
formulation. With respect to these authorities the appeal judge held (at [74])
... the views of Hodgson and Ipp JJA should prevail where they diverge from
those of Finkelstein J as their Honours’ reasoning
prevails over that of
Santow J. Equally, Einstein J’s decision must give way to the majority
reasoning of the Court of Appeal.
contended that the appeal judge’s rejection of Santow JA’s
formulation was based on an “incomplete reading”
Engineering
. Specifically, WNA noted that in
, Santow JA
“concurred in the result but wrote separately”. WNA contended that
Santow JA’s reasons were “by
way of addition and explanation, not
dissent”. WNA also noted that after expressing the formulation described
] above, Santow JA cited
Hodgson JA’s judgment in
Coordinated Construction Co Pty Ltd v
(Canberra) Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 229
, in which Hodgson JA
held that “the relevant construction work or related goods and services
must be identified sufficiently
to enable the respondent to understand the basis
of the claim”:
Nepean Engineering
at [48], citing
contention that Santow JA was not “in dissent” is strictly correct.
His Honour agreed with Ipp and Hodgson
JJA that the appeal should be dismissed.
However, it is not accurate to describe Santow JA’s reasons as “by
way of addition
and explanation” of the judgments of Ipp and Hodgson JJA.
Justice Santow made clear that he “respectfully disagree[d]”
important aspects of the reasoning of the majority justices concerning the level
of specificity required of a payment claim:
Nepean Engineering
It matters not that Santow JA cited a decision of a member of the majority
(Hodgson JA) in support of his own reasoning.
It is clear that at least some
aspects of Santow JA’s reasoning did not have the support of a majority of
Importantly,
the area of disagreement included the minimum requirements for a valid payment
claim. Hodgson JA held that “a
payment claim that purports in a
reasonable way to identify the work to which the progress payment relates”
is not invalidated
by reason of the respondent’s inability to identify the
work in question. In such a case, the respondent’s remedy is
payment schedule in which the response to that item is that the work can’t
be identified:
Nepean Engineering
at [39]. The test posited by
Ipp JA is arguably even less onerous:
Nepean Engineering
Only Santow JA considered that a failure to provide sufficient specificity for
the recipient “actually to be able to
identify” the claim would
result in it being treated as a nullity. Applying the principle stated by the
majority, if the recipient
of a payment claim ignores the claim rather than
serving a payment schedule, they forgo the opportunity to have the claim
adjudicated
and foreclose the entitlement to raise a cross claim or defence in
relation to matters arising under the contract: s 17(3)(b).
dismissing the appeal, Hodgson JA observed (at [28]) that there was force in
Nepean’s submission that the “work to which the payment claim
related was not identified in the sense that, in all of
the circumstances, the
material in the payment claim was not sufficient to convey to Nepean just what
was the work for which payment
was claimed”. However, his Honour
continued, “even if that is correct, this would not necessarily justify
allowance of
the appeal”, as there was “a substantial question
whether this would make the document other than a payment claim under
Act” [at [28]]. It is apparent that Santow JA did not agree with this
aspect of Hodgson JA’s decision.
Ultimately,
however, the difference in the reasoning between Ipp and Hodgson JJA, and
Santow JA in
Nepean Engineering
would appear to be one of degree rather
than of substance. Justice Hodgson ultimately concluded that a “payment
claim which
purports in a reasonable way to identify the work in respect of
which the claim is made” is sufficient to support both an adjudication
an adjudicator and a cause of action under s 15:
Nepean Engineering
[37] – [38]. In using the term “purport”, we do not
understand Ipp JA to have been suggesting that a payment
claim need only
describe itself as a payment claim. Rather, his Honour was simply emphasising
that a payment claim which does not
identify every aspect of the work that was
performed is not invalid for that reason alone. Provided there is a reasonable
identification
of the work that was performed, the payment claim will be
applications of these principles in cases decided since
Engineering
are consistent with this analysis. In particular, it is now well
accepted that a valid payment claim must “reasonably [identify]
construction work to which it related such that the basis of the claim [is]
reasonably comprehensible to [the recipient]”:
Bloc Constructions
at [41], citing
T & M Buckley
at [38]; see also
[16]. Complete comprehensibility is not required. Nor is “sufficient
specificity in the payment claim for its recipient
actually to be able to ...
[determine] whether to pay, or to respond by way of a payment schedule
indicating the extent of payment,
Nepean Engineering
[48]. Rather, where there is insufficient detail in a payment claim to enable a
respondent to determine “whether to pay”,
or “the extent of
payment”, a respondent should respond by way of a payment schedule which
states that the respondent
“does not propose to make any payment in
respect of that work because it cannot identify the work”.
Application
invoices that were incorporated into the payment claim in the present case are
summarised at [18] – [24]
can be seen from the above, the invoices varied in detail. Each invoice
expressly specified the dates, hours worked and rates of
payment. The invoices
also separated labour and materials, and separately listed the materials
supplied and the amount charged for
each. In many instances, the person carrying
out the work (labourer/ foreman) is stated. In those instances where it is not
the identity of the worker may be readily ascertained from the hourly
rate. In some instances, the invoices described the work performed
(eg Invoice
No 202, extracted at [22] above), whereas in other instances (eg Invoice No 193,
extracted at [18]
above), no particulars were provided of the nature of
the work performed, although it may be that an experienced builder could make
reasonable inferences with respect to the work performed based on the materials
used. None of the invoices separately particularised
the work performed by
reference to job site. Each invoice related to at least two job sites.
primary complaint is that the invoices covered a number of individual work
sites. In oral argument, Mr Buckland accepted
that a number of the invoices
would have contained an appropriate level of detail if they had clearly
specified the individual sites
on which work was performed.
do not accept that this kind of detail was required for the payment claim to be
valid. The contract in issue was framed in general
terms. The contact provided
for the hourly rates for various workers (builder/ project manager and
carpenter), and then listed a
number of sites with various work to be performed
at each site (eg “brick work cladding”; “paint”’;
“finish roof”; “install windows”).
a contract that provided for work to be performed, on an hourly basis, across
different work sites,
we do not consider that it was a necessary
criterion for the validity of the payment claim for the work performed at
different sites
to be separately specified. By way of analogy, if a contract
provided for work to be done on a very large site, a payment claim would
invalid simply because it failed to state where on the site particular work was
circumstances where the invoices lacked detail, it is possible, perhaps even
likely, that, if WNA had responded to the claim by
way of a payment schedule
which alleged that the payment claim was not sufficiently specific to enable a
proper response, an adjudicator
would not have allowed many, and perhaps even
all, of the claims made by Canberra Building in the payment claim. However, the
for determination by this Court is not whether an adjudicator would, or
should, have concluded that the payment claim was sufficiently
detailed to
justify the making of a determination in favour of Canberra Building. In the
present case, even the most sparse of the
invoices annexed to the payment claim
specified the hours worked and the hourly rate for the claim. In
view, the appeal judge correctly held that the payment claim was sufficient to
satisfy the minimal requirements of the
Security of Payment Act
appellant has not established error in the appeal judge’s determination.
Accordingly, the decision of the appeal judge which
entered judgment in favour
of the respondent, with interest and costs is affirmed. Of course, as outlined
above, this conclusion
does not affect any aspect of any underlying contractual
dispute between the parties.
the above reasons, the appeal should be dismissed with costs to be paid by the
I certify that the preceding one hundred and thirty-one [131] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Associate: H Clift
Date: 4 June 2025
Although Invoice No 217
contained a typographical error in the email address (see at [16] above), that
typographical error does
not appear in the copy of the email that was sent to
the ‘accounts’ address.
RTF format (479 KB)
Signed PDF/A format