Todd & Anor and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Anor [2008] ACTAAT 17 (15 May 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: TODD & ANOR AND ACT PLANNING & LAND AUTHORITY & ANOR
[2008] ACTAAT 17
(15 MAY 2008)
AT08/8 & 14
Catchwords:
Land and planning - review of decision approving multi-unit
development in an A10 area – whether development application meets
requirements of Residential Design and Siting Code for Multi-Dwelling
Developments – impact on streetscape and amenity –
traffic and
safety –waste management collection arrangements – adequacy of
private open space – overlooking –
adequacy of on-site parking and
impact of traffic noise on amenity of residents of proposed development.
Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991, ss 230, 245
Planning and Development Act 2007
Downer Community Association and ACT Planning & Land Authority &
[2007] ACTAAT 20
(5 September 2007)
Mr B Hatch, Senior Member
Dr D McMichael, Senior Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NOS: AT08/8 & 14
LAND AND PLANNING
Applicant in
HONG NIAN JIN
Applicant in
ACT PLANNING &
Party Joined
Mr B Hatch, Senior Member
Dr D McMichael, Senior Member
The decision under review is varied by:
(1) amending
paragraph 2 of section 2.0 to read:
“2. that within 28 days from the date of this decision, or within such
further time as may be approved in writing by the ACT
Planning and Land
Authority, the applicant shall lodge with the Planning and Land Authority for
approval revised architectural drawings,
based on the relevant drawings listed
in the previous condition, showing:
(i) proposed driveway relocated to be 1.5m from the northern side
(ii) driveway width of 5m for a distance of 7m from the front
(iii) revised design of proposed Unit 1 so as windows of habitable rooms are a
minimum of 1.5m from the driveway;
(iv) revised design of proposed Units 4, 5 and 6 so as the driveway between
Units 5/6 and 4 is widened to
(v) proposed garage doors for
Units 1,2,3,4 and 5 widened to 2.7m;
(vi) an additional uncovered car parking space having dimensions of 4.9m by
2.6m, located next to the proposed two visitor parking
spaces and assigned to
(vii) plantings of advanced stock of a species that has a mature height of 2.5m,
adjacent to the fence on the northern half of the
north-western side
(viii) details of an information sign within the block instructing residents to
place recycling bins in the designated pick up area
beside the driveway and to
place refuse bins adjacent to the kerb in Mathieson Crescent on collection
(ix) internal
reconfiguration of Unit 4 to be a one-bedroom unit;
(x) a fence along the eastern boundary, to be of masonry construction and at
least 1.8m high
that are generally in accordance with the plan lodged for discussion on 11
December 2007 which was Attachment A to the respondent’s
decision and
which was folio 52 of the Tribunal documents, and with the undertakings of the
party joined at hearing and the conclusions
of the Tribunal.”;
(2) amending paragraph 7 of section 2.0 by deleting the words “and
eastern” from the third line.
................................
Senior Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NOS: AT08/8 & 14
LAND AND PLANNING
Applicant in
HONG NIAN JIN
Applicant in
ACT PLANNING &
Party Joined
REASONS FOR DECISION
15 May 2008 Mr B Hatch, Senior Member
Dr D McMichael,
Senior Member
Introduction
Mr David Todd and Mr Hong Nian
“the applicants”
) have separately sought review of a
decision of the ACT Planning and Land Authority (
respondent”)
made on 21 December 2007
to approve with
conditions Development Application 200702963 (
proposed the demolition of a single dwelling on Block 14 Section 14 Weetangera
“the subject land”
) and the construction thereon of six
one-storey units with associated parking and landscaping.
street address of the subject land is 11 Mathieson Crescent Weetangera. Mr
Todd’s residence is at 9 Mathieson Crescent,
immediately to the north-west
of the subject land while Mr Jin’s residence, at 6 Mathieson Crescent, is
directly opposite.
3. Both appeals were heard concurrently. Ms Cherie
Malcolm, the lessee of the subject land was joined as a party to the proceeding.
Relevant Law
4. The decision to approve the DA was made
pursuant to section 230 of the Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991
“the Land Act”
and was subject to conditions imposed
pursuant to section 245 of the Land Act.
5. Because the DA was lodged
prior to 31 March 2008 it is subject to the provisions of the 2002 version of
the Territory Plan (
). The subject land lies
within an A10 area and is therefore subject to the A10 Specific Area Policies as
well as the general Residential
Land Use Policies in Part B1 of the Plan. In
particular, it is subject to the provisions of Appendix III.2 of the Plan - the
Residential
Design and Siting Code for Multi-dwelling Developments
The Proposed
Development
6. Mathieson Crescent, Weetangera, is a quiet suburban
residential street of one and two storey houses, but with at least one recently
developed dual occupancy. Section 14, Weetangera has been included in an A10
area and ten of the blocks in the section have a frontage
to Mathieson Crescent,
located generally to its north-east. All the other blocks fronting Mathieson
Crescent fall outside the A10
7. The subject land is located on
the north-eastern apex of a bend in Mathieson Crescent. It is a fan-shaped
block of 1783m
with a relatively narrow western frontage to
Mathieson Crescent (about 18m) widening to a rear eastern boundary (about 45m)
abuts the Coulter Drive road reserve.
8. The plans submitted
with the DA were for the construction of six units; four located to the south of
the subject land and two
to the north separated by a concrete driveway and
manoeuvring area. The four to the south were all to be two bedroom units, each
with an attached single garage while of the two to the north, one (Unit 6) was a
one bedroom unit with an attached single garage
and the other a two bedroom unit
with an attached double garage. Two additional uncovered parking spaces for
residents were located
on the north side of the driveway opposite Units 1 and 2,
and two parking spaces for visitors were located facing the eastern boundary.
Each unit save Unit 1 had an area of private open space
) located to the north or north-east of the dwelling.
Unit 1 had its POS located generally to the west of the dwelling, although
of it was located slightly south-west of portion of the dwelling.
plans submitted had the driveway located on the northern block boundary adjacent
to Mr Todd’s property. However a condition
of approval was that the
driveway be set back 1.5m from that boundary and be 5m wide for a distance of 7m
from the front boundary.
Another condition of approval was that the part of the
driveway which serves as a manoeuvring area was to be increased to a width
between Units 4 and 5/6. Revised plans submitted by the party joined as part of
Exhibit 6 showed how these changes could be
10. Other minor
changes to the original plans were required, either as a consequence of other
conditions of approval or arising from
the changes to be made to the driveway
and these too are shown on the revised plans submitted by the party joined.
The hearing
11. Messrs Todd and Jin were
self-represented. Mr G McCarthy, of counsel, represented the respondent. Mr D
Shearer, a licensed real
estate agent and residential development consultant
represented the party joined.
12. Neither Mr Todd nor Mr Jin called any
other witnesses to give evidence. Each of them relied on the factual matters
their statements of facts and contentions which were tendered in
evidence. Mr Raymond Brown, Principal Officer (North), Development
Office of the ACT Planning and Land Authority who had made the decision on the
DA as delegate of the respondent, and Mr
Marc-Ian Edwards, Administration and
Development Applications Coordinator, Asset Acceptance Unit of the Department of
Territory and
Municipal Services (
) who had approved
the proposed waste management arrangements and driveway specifications, gave
evidence for the respondent. The
party joined called no witnesses but tendered
documents in evidence, including plans indicating amendments to the proposed
development,
designed to satisfy the conditions of approval.
concern to the applicants
13. Despite the changes proposed by the
party joined to meet the conditions of approval, a number of issues remained of
one or other of the applicants. The main issues may be summarised
the impact of the
proposed development on streetscape and amenity of the
the impact of the
vehicle movements generated by the development on safety of pedestrians and
vehicles using Mathieson Crescent and
in particular the arrangements for
collecting and emptying of garbage and recycling
the adequacy of the POS
to be provided for Unit 1;
the impact on Mr
Todd’s amenity arising from potential overlooking of his house and back
the adequacy of the
on-site parking proposed to be provided; and
the impact of traffic
noise from Coulter Driver on the amenity of residents of the development.
These issues are dealt with seriatim below.
Evidence and contentions of the parties
of the proposed development on streetscape and amenity of the
14. Both Mr Todd and Mr Jin contended that the proposed
development did not respect the existing streetscape and adjoining development,
as required by one of the objectives of the A10 Area Specific Policy.
15. Mr Jin drew attention to Objective (d) of Part B1 of the Plan,
which was to “safeguard the amenity, safety and special
qualities and in
particular the landscape character of established residential areas whilst
carefully managing change in suitable
locations” and submitted that the
proposed development failed to achieve this objective. He described the existing
streetscape
of Weetangera as “low-density, low-rise and leafy
character” and asserted that the party joined had failed to meet the
respondent’s guidelines on DAs because there had been no analysis of the
area’s key natural, built and social features
nor were the desirable
elements of the location’s current character identified.
particular he contended that a development of six townhouses on one block would
be a significant contrast to the housing and
streetscape of Mathieson Crescent,
in terms of number of properties per block of land. He further contended that
because of changes
to the Plan which came into effect on 1 April 2008, a
development of this kind would not be approved in the future because of its
narrow frontage. He also contended that the presence of a row of six garbage
bins on the verge on garbage collection days would
not respect the
streetscape.
17. Mr Todd drew attention to the setbacks of dwellings
from their front boundaries in the blocks adjacent to the subject land (Blocks
12, 13 and 15), all of which were substantially greater than the minimum 6m
required by the Code. He contended that this was a design
feature of the blocks
around the corner of Mathieson Crescent and that the proposed development, with
its 6m setback of the front
of Unit 1 and a courtyard wall intruding further
into that setback, did not respect that aspect of the streetscape. He considered
that the courtyard wall would not contribute to the amenity of the street as
required by Performance Measure D2.3 of the Code.
18. Mr McCarthy
observed that the DA was to be assessed under the Land Act and the 2002 version
of the Territory Plan and that the
Planning and Development Act 2007
the 2008 version of the Plan had no relevance to the proposal.
relation to the streetscape, Mr McCarthy drew attention to the very broad nature
of the definition of “streetscape”
in the Plan, observing that it
could be summarised as what can be seen from the street. In this case, there
was little uniformity
in housing style, with a mix of one and two-storey houses
exhibiting a variety of roof forms, building materials and colours. He
attention to the Tribunal’s reasons for decision in
Downer Community
Association and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Anor
[2007] ACTAAT
(5 September 2007) in which it was stated at paragraph 17 that:
It does not follow from the fact that a development proposes an observable
difference to the existing style of development that it
fails to respect
Because the proposed development comprised single storey
buildings with hipped tiled roofs, which would be built of materials and
colours consistent with others in the neighbourhood, he submitted that it did in
fact respect the streetscape.
20. As to the question of
“amenity” (which is not defined in the Plan but which Mr Brown
considered to mean the extent
to which a property or place can be enjoyed by its
users) he submitted that an aerial photograph tendered as part of Exhibit 6
that the majority of houses in the vicinity were built at or close to the
minimum 6m setback and it was not unreasonable for the
proposed development to
adopt a similar setback, especially on what is a narrow frontage. From the
street it would not appear different
from nearby single dwelling
developments.
21. As to Mr Jin’s concerns about the number of
dwellings on the block, he reminded the Tribunal that the subject land is in
A10 area which was brought in to encourage more intensive development and a
greater variety of dwelling types. He noted that
it would be permissible to
build a two-storey multi-dwelling development on the block with a plot ratio of
50%, whereas what was
proposed were modest single-storey units occupying only
34% of the block.
The impact of the vehicle movements generated
by the development on safety
of pedestrians and vehicles using Mathieson
Crescent and in particular the
arrangements for collecting and emptying
of garbage and recycling bins
22. Both Mr Todd and Mr Jin expressed
concern about the possible impact of the increased vehicle movements and parking
with the development on pedestrian and vehicular safety.
Mr Todd was principally concerned about the recyclable waste collection vehicles
that would need to enter the driveway to empty
the bins and then would be
required to reverse onto the street before proceeding to other properties. He
contended that the proposed
manoeuvring area was not sufficiently large to allow
a waste collection vehicle to turn on site as required by Performance Criterion
24. He noted that TAMS had made no comments on road safety aspects
when approving the waste management proposals, nor had the respondent
specifically sought advice from them on safety. He observed that Mr Edwards had
agreed that the size of the waste collection vehicle
meant that the back section
would be across the verge when collecting the recycling waste, and contended
that this posed a risk to
pedestrians using the verge (where there were no
footpaths) especially when the truck was reversing out.
25. Mr Edwards
however opined that there was little or no safety risk as the drivers used the
left-hand driving position when collecting
bins, from where they had a good view
of what was happening nearby. In addition, the vehicles were fitted with
reversing cameras,
warning lights and reversing beepers and have proven to be
very safe to date. Allowing such vehicles to reverse onto an access road
Mathieson Crescent was common throughout Canberra, although each case was
considered individually against the Development
Control Code for Best Practice
in Waste Management in the ACT.
26. Mr Jin contended that the proposal
was inconsistent with objective (d) of the Part B1 Residential Land Use
Policies, viz:
To safeguard the...
...of established
residential areas...
and failed to meet the safety objectives of the
ACT Parking and Vehicular Access Guidelines, which are to ensure
traffic hazards are created by the provision of access and parking facilities
for a development, especially multi-uni development
safety of all users, especially pedestrians and cyclists is
considered.
27. Mr Jin’s main concern was with the proposed
collection site for six garbage bins on the verge of Mathieson Street to the
south of the driveway entrance. He contended that these bins would create an
impediment to the sight-line to the south, for drivers
of vehicles leaving the
subject land and posed a risk to pedestrians and children on bikes, who might be
hidden from view by the
bins. They would also impede a driver’s view of
approaching cars. Further, there was no way of ensuring that drivers would
the block in a forward direction, and an even greater risk would arise if a
driver was exiting in reverse. As evidence he tendered
a photograph that he had
taken showing six bins in the position proposed to be used and his own car in
the current driveway which,
he submitted showed that a typical driver would have
difficulty in seeing anyone or a car approaching because of the bins.
Mr Jin was also concerned that there was inadequate parking provision for
visitors to the development and that it was likely that
some visitors would park
in the street along the narrow frontage, which was situated on a sharp turning
point of what was a narrow
street. He contended that cars parked in such a
position would also impede a driver’s sight-line yet there was no evidence
that this aspect had been given any consideration by TAMS.
submitted that the respondent had failed to seek specific advice on safety
aspects from TAMS, despite the overwhelming number
of objections to the proposal
on safety grounds from residents of Mathieson Crescent, who were familiar with
the extent of pedestrian
usage of that portion of the street to access a pathway
leading to Coulter Drive and the Belconnen Town Centre.
30. Mr Edwards
gave evidence that, in his experience, pedestrians were more likely to walk on
the inside of a row of bins awaiting
collection and therefore would be readily
visible to a driver exiting the subject land. He said that when assessing any
aspects, including safety, were considered.
31. Mr Brown gave
evidence that he had parked his car in the current driveway and found that his
sight-line up the street was not
impaired by one garbage bin that was on the
verge at the time. He considered that while six bins there would create some
to viewing, the fact that Mathieson Crescent rises to the south meant
that a driver exiting the development would get a good view
of any traffic
coming down the street. Because the driveway was to be 5m wide, it would
contribute to efficient vehicle movements
to and from the street as required by
Performance Criterion P5.5. He agreed with Mr Jin that it was not possible to
force drivers
to exit the subject land in a forward direction, but considered
that the design of the development would facilitate this. He acknowledged
the development would generate more traffic than was the case at present, but
considered that Mathieson Crescent could cope
with it as it was not a busy
32. Mr McCarthy submitted that what was at issue was not the
safety of Mathieson Crescent as a street, but whether the proposed development
gives rise to any concerns about safety and, in this case, he contended that the
development made no appreciable difference. Its
location on the outside curve of
a bend in the street made it safer that it was now, as there were good views for
exiting drivers
in both directions and because cars approaching the bend were
more likely to be travelling at a slower pace, whether rounding the
entering the subject land. The 5m wide driveway entrance was wide enough to
allow entering and departing cars to pass, so
there would be no need for
entering vehicles to wait in the street for an exiting vehicle to leave. Within
the development there
would be ample room for vehicles to turn which would
facilitate exiting in a forward direction and would be much safer that the
situation. In the absence of any persuasive evidence to the contrary,
he submitted that safety was not an issue.
The adequacy of the
POS to be provided for Unit 1
33. Mr Todd considered that the POS
proposed for Unit 1 did not meet the requirements of the Code, because it
“faces south-west”
contrary to Performance Measure D4.3 of the Code.
He further contended that the shadow diagrams submitted with the DA (T-Document
260) were inadequate as they failed to take into account the effect of the fence
and courtyard wall surrounding the POS or a large
conifer tree on his own
property close to the boundary with the subject land.
34. He expressed doubt as to the accuracy of the estimate of the effect of the
shadow cast by the conifer onto the subject land,
contained in evidence
concerning an aerial photograph tendered by the party joined as attachment (e)
to Exhibit 6. That evidence,
from Alex Kwong, the original designer of the
development, was that he had calculated that the photo was taken between 11.15
11.45 am on 6 May 2004, and that the shadow on 21 June would be little
different (about 500mm longer) from that shown in the photograph
(attachment (d)
to Exhibit 6). Mr Kwong acknowledged that the conifer cast a shadow over the
existing driveway of the subject land,
but did not address its impact on the POS
of Unit 1. Mr Todd said he had observed the shadow cast by the conifer and
asserted that
it would completely cover the POS by 2.00 pm on the winter
35. He also drew attention to new shadow
diagrams that had been prepared by Crayon Pty Ltd using CAD software and
tendered in evidence
as attachment (f) to Exhibit 6. He contended that these
showed that the POS of Unit 1 would be shadowed by the adjacent dwelling
fence and courtyard walls for much of the day during the winter months, quite
apart from the shadow cast by the conifer.
36. Mr Shearer’s
statement of facts and contentions which was tendered in evidence (Exhibit 6) by
contrast asserted that the
POS of Unit 1 was consistent with the requirements of
the Code. He claimed that it was not located to the south, south-west or
of the dwelling and was in excess of the size required. He contended
that it would not be adversely overshadowed by the conifer
on Mr Todd’s
land, and that any future potential overshadowing could not be reasonably
considered as a design constraint.
He further contended that the POS of Unit 1
would be exposed to direct sunlight in excess of three hours on the winter
37. Mr Brown asserted that the POS of Unit 1 was located both
to the south-west and north-west of parts of the dwelling, but noted
that it had
the greater part of 6m of its north-western side open to receive sunlight. As
such, he considered it complied with section
4 [Private Open Space] of the Code.
Mr McCarthy submitted that any problems arising from the conifer on Mr
Todd’s land should
not be a determining consideration.
impact on Mr Todd’s amenity arising from potential overlooking of his
and back yard
38. Mr Todd was particularly concerned
Units 5 and
6. He drew attention to Performance Criterion 3.5 of the Code which
required that “building walls were to be sited...to ensure
no significant
loss of amenity to adjacent dwellings and private open space”. He noted
that the proposed development would
be built at the minimum setback of 3m and
with a finished floor level such that persons standing in the living areas of
Units 5 and
6 would be able to look into much of his back yard and onto the rear
of his dwelling where his child’s bedroom was located.
He contended that
this would significantly affect his amenity.
39. In his statement of
facts and contentions, Mr Brown acknowledged that there would be a line of sight
from the window of bedroom
1 [originally bedroom 2 but later renumbered as 1] of
Unit 6 which would be approximately 0.3m above the height of a 1.8m fence,
from the living/dining area of Unit 5 there would be a line of sight of
approximately 0.5m over such a fence. While such lines
of sight, he contended,
were not unusual between adjacent residences and he had not considered the
original proposal unreasonable,
in recognition of Mr Todd’s concern he had
suggested that the inclusion of plants adjacent to the fence that would have a
height of 2.5m, would block those sight lines and that such planting
could be made a further condition of approval. He had not,
however, specified
any particular kind or size of plant but had in mind a row of plants sufficient
to create a visual barrier.
40. Mr Todd did not consider this a
satisfactory solution because it was unclear how long such plantings would take
to grow to 2.5m.
However, Mr McCarthy submitted that it would be unreasonable
to refuse approval to the DA simply because it may take a little while
proposed plantings to achieve their objective. He reminded that the Plan does
not prohibit all overlooking; the requirement
of Performance Criterion 3.5 was
to avoid “significant” loss of amenity.
The adequacy
of the on-site parking proposed to be provided
41. Mr Jin referred
to his contention that the parking proposed for visitors to the development was
inadequate and would lead to
them parking on the street.
Tribunal questioned whether the provisions of the Code would be met, given that
there were to be 5 two-bedroom units requiring
two spaces each, 1 one-bedroom
unit requiring one space, and a requirement for 1½ visitor car spaces
(rounded up to 2) making
a total of 13 spaces. It noted that this number could
be reduced only “where all parking is shared in a development of more
than 2 dwellings” but in this case all the parking was not to be shared.
The DA plans provided for only 11 spaces.
43. In his initial
assessment Mr Brown had concluded that the proposal did meet the parking
requirements of the Code as well as the
ACT Parking and Vehicular Access
Guidelines (
“the Guidelines”
which are on the
Register of Planning Guidelines and required to be “carefully
considered” by the respondent. However,
at hearing he conceded that it
might not satisfy the provisions of the Code.
44. In his statement of
facts and contentions he provided an analysis of the requirements of the
Guidelines which revealed that the
proposal conformed with the Guidelines only
because four of the two bedroom units had a single enclosed garage and would be
to share the two uncovered parking spaces opposite Units 1 and 2. Two
visitor car parking spaces were to be provided which met the
requirements of
both the Code and the Guidelines. Nevertheless, Mr Brown had taken into account
the objector’s concerns and
had suggested that an additional resident car
parking space could be provided adjacent to the two visitor spaces, and
allocated to
Unit 4. This would bring the total number of spaces up to 12 and,
he contended, would be the preferable decision.
45. During the hearing
Mr Shearer advised the Tribunal that the party joined was prepared to redesign
Unit 4 to be a single bedroom
unit, and that this would reduce the Code
requirements to the 12 spaces to be provided. It was further suggested that the
space proposed by Mr Brown should instead be allocated to Unit 3, a
two-bedroom unit which would then have the required two spaces,
while Unit 4
would have the required one space in its garage, leaving the two spaces
originally planned for visitors. Units 1 and
2 could then have one of the two
original uncovered resident spaces as well as their single garage
The impact of traffic noise from Coulter Drive on the
amenity of residents of the
development
46. Mr Todd was
concerned that the traffic noise from Coulter Drive would impact on the amenity
of residents of the units to the
rear of the development. He contended that
because Coulter Drive was, at that point, sloping down towards Belconnen Town
Centre there
would be more than normal traffic noise as a result of vehicles
accelerating uphill and braking downhill. During a site inspection,
the Tribunal
noted that there was obvious traffic noise on the subject land.
McCarthy submitted that the noise level from Coulter Driver was irrelevant, as
the landscape plan indicated that existing
shrubs and trees along the Coulter
Drive boundary of the block was to be retained and additional trees and shrubs
planted, which
would reduce the impact of any traffic noise.
However, the traffic noise from Coulter Drive had been assessed by Heggies Pty
Ltd, Acoustical Consultants, whose report was
tendered in evidence by the party
joined as attachment (k) to Exhibit 6. The consultants found that the Coulter
Drive noise level
was above the Draft Noise Management Guidelines maximum
recommended residential façade noise level at peak hour for Units
and that the noise level in the POS of Unit 4 would be above the Guidelines
level for residential POS. They recommended
that the fence along the eastern
boundary of the subject land should be of solid construction at least 1.8m high,
and that construction
measures to reduce internal noise to acceptable levels
should be used. However, it is not clear from their report just what
Construction
Category under Australian Standard 3671 – 1989 would be
required. The consultants concluded that, provided their recommendations
implemented, they expected that the development would meet the requirements of
the Draft Noise Management Guidelines (1996)
which are on the Register of
Planning Guidelines.
Other issues
49. Other issues raised
by Mr Todd were:
his concern that a Pin
Oak on the verge adjacent to the proposed new driveway might be damaged by large
construction vehicles and
by waste collection vehicles;
his belief that the
development, as proposed, would encroach onto his lease;
his view that by
effectively removing one of the three large blocks with a single residence from
the section, the proposal was not
increasing, but reducing housing diversity and
hence was not consistent with the A10
objectives.
50. None of these issues were of a
substantive nature because:
the Pin Oak referred to
is a street tree and would be managed by Canberra Urban Parks and Places as
the approval is for the
development to be undertaken within the surveyed boundaries of the subject land.
The incorrect location of
a sewer vent shown on the plans was of no
significance; and
an objective of the A10
policy is to accommodate a wider variety of additional housing close to
facilities and services to meet changing
community needs and preferences housing
areas and not
at maintaining single houses on large
Consideration of the substantive
51. The Tribunal has carefully considered the submissions of
the parties and the evidence before it. It visited the site and viewed
subject land and the neighbouring properties. It has made findings on material
questions of fact and reached conclusions
The impact of the proposed development on streetscape and
amenity of the street
52. The Tribunal does not consider that the
proposed development, if constructed in accordance with the conditions of
approval, will
have an adverse effect on the streetscape, nor will the amenity
of the street be diminished.
53. It finds that the view of the
development from the street will be essentially that of a single-storey
dwelling, similar in form,
materials and colours to nearby houses. Although
Unit 1 will be set back only 6m from the front boundary and will have a
wall, while its immediate neighbours are set back a greater distance,
it will not detract from the general streetscape which is quite
diverse, or the
amenity of passers-by. The width of the proposed driveway will not
significantly alter the streetscape, nor will
the presence once a week of a row
of garbage bins awaiting collection.
54. We concluded that the
development, as approved with conditions, in not inconsistent with the
streetscape and amenity of the street
provisions of the Code or the
The impact of the vehicle movements generated by the
development on safety
of pedestrians and vehicles using Mathieson
Crescent and in particular the
arrangements for collecting and emptying
of garbage and recycling bins
55. There was no evidence to support
the contention that the additional traffic movements generated by the increased
number of dwellings
would create any safety issues for traffic using Mathieson
Crescent. It was clear to the Tribunal that Mathieson Crescent was not
street at the time of our inspection, nor was there any evidence presented to
suggest that it was carrying any significant
level of traffic at other
56. While the presence of a row of six garbage bins along the
verge adjacent to the exit driveway may create some impediment to clear
lines on the day when garbage is collected, they should not cause any problems
for a driver exercising reasonable care and
exiting the subject land in a
forward direction. Naturally, if a driver chose to reverse from the development
onto Mathieson Crescent,
the risk would be increased, but it would not be
significantly different from the risk which exists at present when all vehicles
exit the block in reverse, and again the exercise of reasonable care should
avoid any safety issues arising.
57. The evidence of Mr Edwards, who is
qualified and experienced in waste management planning, satisfied us that the
arrangements
for the collection of waste were appropriate and met the
requirements of the Development Control Code for Best Practice in Waste
Management in the ACT. While it is impossible to avoid all risk when large
vehicles are reversing in areas used by other vehicles
and pedestrians, his
evidence was that the waste collection vehicles used in the ACT have many safety
features and have proven safe
in operation.
58. We conclude that vehicle
movements into and from the proposed development will not compromise the safety
of pedestrians or vehicles
using Mathieson Crescent provided reasonable care is
taken by all concerned.
The adequacy of the POS to be provided
59. It is clear from the plans that the POS for Unit 1
cannot be described as being to the south, south-west or south-east of the
dwelling. For the greater part it is to the west, though a small portion of it
could be described as to the south-west of part of
the living/dining area of
Unit 1. Its dimensions and location in relation to a main living room satisfy
the requirements of Performance
Measure D4.3 of the Code.
60. The shadow
diagrams prepared by Crayon Pty Ltd (attachment (f) to Exhibit 6) indicate that,
while the POS will be shadowed at
9.00 am on 21 June, substantial sunlight will
reach the POS by noon and will continue into the afternoon, although somewhat
by the shadow from the timber horizontal slatted fence on its north-west
side. There will probably be some loss of sunlight later
in the afternoon from
the shadow of the conifer on Mr Todd’s land. At other seasons of the
year, the POS will receive substantial
amounts of sunlight each day.
Overall, we consider that the POS will receive adequate sunlight for the greater
part of the year. We agree with Mr McCarthy
that planning decisions about
access to sunlight cannot be determined by the presence of vegetation on
neighbouring leases, which
can (and will) change over time.
impact on Mr Todd’s amenity arising from potential overlooking of his
and back yard
62. The boundary between the subject
land and Mr Todd’s block is presently marked by a wooden fence and
substantial well-established
vegetation. Towards the rear of the block on Mr
Todd’s side there is a row of garden sheds which are slightly higher than
the fence. In general, there is at present little capacity for overlooking of Mr
Todd’s backyard from ground level on the subject
However, that will change if Units 5 and 6 are built. They will be set back
only 3m from the boundary and will have a finished
floor level at RL 613.4 which
is about 1m higher than the present ground level. Mr Brown’s
calculations of what view a person
with an eye-height of 1.7m might have from
Units 5 and 6 over Mr Todd’s fence appear to be reasonably accurate, as
proposition that 2.5m high vegetation would provide screening of that
64. We find that the Plan does not prohibit any overlooking of
neighbouring properties. Its objective is to prevent “significant”
loss of amenity. The presence of well-established vegetation and a line of
garden sheds in Mr Todd’s backyard already serve
to reduce the capacity
for overlooking. Nevertheless, we accept that plantings of the mature height
proposed by Mr Brown would materially
reduce any overlooking of Mr Todd’s
backyard when fully grown and that this should be made a condition of approval.
to minimise the time taken for them to reach full height, we will
require that advanced stock is to be used.
The adequacy of the
on-site parking proposed to be provided
65. We find that the on-site
parking originally proposed would be insufficient to meet the requirements of
either the Code or the
Guidelines. However, if the additional space proposed by
Mr Brown (adjacent to the two planned visitor spaces) is provided and allocated
to Unit 3, and if Unit 4 is redesigned to become a one-bedroom unit as proposed
by the party joined, then the parking will meet the
requirements of both the
Code and the Guidelines. We consider that it will be readily accessible and
sufficient for both residents
and visitors and should not normally result in
parking of vehicles in the street.
66. We conclude that the proposals of
the respondent for an additional parking space and of the party joined for
redesign of Unit
4 as a one-bedroom unit should be made a condition of
The impact of traffic noise from Coulter Drive on the
amenity of residents of the
development
67. We find that the
noise arising from traffic on Coulter Drive will impact on the amenity of
residents of the proposed development
unless the mitigating measures recommended
by Heggies Pty Ltd are undertaken.
68. We note that Condition 11 of
Section 2.0 of the decision under review required the party joined to prepare a
report addressing
how the building structure would limit internal noise levels
to specified levels, or comply with Australian Standard AS3761; Acoustics
–Road Traffic Noise Intrusion, Building Siting and Construction (which is
the higher standard) and that Condition 4 required
the lodgement with the
Planning and Land Authority for approval of design details and specifications
showing how the building will
comply with the recommendations of the report
referred to in Condition 11. The Heggies Pty Ltd Report fulfils Condition 11 and
will leave unchanged Condition 4 which will ensure that those recommendations
are implemented.
69. However Condition 11 referred only to limiting
internal noise levels within habitable rooms and not to noise affecting POS.
Consequently we will impose a condition requiring the construction of a solid
fence at least 1.8 m high along the eastern boundary
of the subject land and, to
avoid uncertainty, we will specify that it is to be of masonry construction.
We will vary condition
7 (Fencing) accordingly.
70. We conclude that, subject to the
incorporation of the design modifications imposed as conditions of approval by
the respondent
and to the additional conditions indicated above, the development
proposed will achieve the objectives of the A10 Specific Area Policy
the requirements of the Code and not be inconsistent with the Plan.
We will, therefore, vary the decision under review to include the additional
conditions indicated, but otherwise affirm the respondent’s
PUBLICATION
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by
________________________________________________________________________
AT08/8 & 14
APPLICANTS:
DAVID TODD/HONG NIAN JIN
RESPONDENT:
PLANNING & LAND AUTHORITY
PARTY JOINED:
CHERIE MALCOLM
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANTS:
RESPONDENT:
MR G MCCARTHY
PARTY JOINED:
SOLICITORS: APPLICANTS:
RESPONDENT:
ACT GOVERNMENT SOLICITOR
PARTY JOINED:
OTHER: APPLICANTS:
RESPONDENT:
PARTY JOINED:
MR D SHEARER
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
HATCH, SENIOR MEMBER
DR D MCMICHAEL, SENIOR MEMBER
7 & 8 MAY 2008
_______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (75.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format