R v DS [2025] ACTSC 495 (10 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
[2025] ACTSC 495
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – Young offender –
robbery – Dishonestly ride motor vehicle without consent
– Theft – Aggravated burglary with intent to steal –
provide name –
principles –
principles – Delay in proceedings – Where a
deferred sentence order was made in 2013
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
ss 211(2)(e)
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT) ss, 308, 310(a), 312(a), 318(2)
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Cases Cited:
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37
[2025] ACTSC 169
DPP v Myers
(a pseudonym)
[2022] ACTSC 308
Police v Pedro Swain (a pseudonym)
[2024] ACTCC 1
[1999] NSWCCA 111
[2018] ACTSC 165
[2020] ACTSC 286
[2017] ACTSC 210
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
[2022] ACTSC 7
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Crown)
DS (Offender)
Representation:
N. Deakes (Crown)
D. Bloomfield (Offender)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Crown)
ACT Legal Aid (Offender)
File Number:
SCC 177 of 2013
TAYLOR J: Revised ex-temp:
Introduction
is before the court to be sentenced on the following charges.
(a) CH 984/2013 - Aggravated robbery, contrary to s
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT), which attracts a maximum penalty of 2500
penalty units, 25 years imprisonment or both.
(b) CH 934/2013 - Dishonestly ride motor vehicle without consent, contrary to s
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT), which attracts a maximum penalty of 500
penalty units 5 years imprisonment or both.
(c) CH 933/2013- Theft, contrary to s 308
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT), which
attracts a maximum penalty of 1000 penalty units 10 years imprisonment or both.
(d) CH 932/2013 - Aggravated burglary with intent to steal, contrary to s 312(a)
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT), which attracts a maximum penalty of 2000
penalty units 20 years imprisonment or both.
S has asked the court to take into account the following additional offence when
making a sentencing order with respect to CH 934/2013:
(a) Fail to provide name, contrary s 211(2)(e)
Crimes Act 1900
which attracts a maximum penalty of a $500 fine.
History of the proceedings
is necessary to set out some background to these proceedings.
offences occurred many years ago when Ms S was a young person. The offending
conduct which made up CH 932/2013, CH 933/2013, CH
934/2013 occurred 30 August
2013 and CH 984/2013 occurred on 9 September 2013. Ms S was 15 years old at the
time of the offending
and entered pleas of guilty to all charges in the ACT
Childrens Court on 17 October 2013. On 12 December 2013 Burns J (as his Honour
then was) convicted the young person in relation to each of the offences and
made a Deferred Sentence Order (“DSO”) pursuant
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT). The result was a deferral of the
sentence and during the period the sentence was deferred Ms S was required to
comply with
several conditions. The DSO was to return to this Court for
finalisation on 1 July 2014. On that day Ms S did not appear and a bench
was issued for her arrest.
S was arrested on the warrant on 9 July 2025. She is now 28 years of age and
must be sentenced for the offences she committed in
2013 as a young person.
S was refused bail when she was brought before this Court on 10 July 2025. In
those circumstances and the Director’s position
on sentence, the parties
ultimately agreed that the most expedient and appropriate way to finalise the
matter was for the sentence
proceedings to conclude before me.
30 August 2013: aggravated
burglary (CH2013/933), theft (CH2013/932) and dishonestly ride motor vehicle
(CH2013/934)
on the morning of 30 August 2013, the offender and co-offenders KH [redacted]
and LC [redacted] were drinking alcohol together.
outside on the grass whilst the offender and KH entered
the residence.
co-offender KH then took an Oroton brand handbag valued at $500 containing a
blue Mimco brand wallet valued at $200 from a stool
in the kitchen belonging to
the resident ML.
co-offender KH also took an Apple iPad Mini with a green case belonging to PK
valued at $400 from the kitchen.
was woken by creaking floor boards and her dog barking.
left her bedroom, entered the living area of the residence and observed the
glass sliding door leading to the court yard to be
open. As she went to close
the door she saw the court yard gate was propped open with a rock from the
gate leads to a common parking area for the apartment complex.
walked to the court yard gate and saw a white Mazda 323 vehicle bearing New
South Registration [redacted], belonging to her partner,
NQ, reversed from where
it was parked overnight and driven from the area with the driver beeping the
woke the other members of the residence to see if they had taken the vehicle. NQ
was still asleep and had not given anyone permission
to use his vehicle.
short time later NQ and ML entered the kitchen and saw that the iPad and handbag
was missing. The handbag was recovered a short
time later in the apartment
and to advise that PK was tracking the iPad Mini
through a tracking application
called 'find my iPad' as he believed it was within the stolen motor vehicle. ACT
Police Operations
notified Police patrols of this information.
white Mazda bearing [redacted] registration plates
in the Jerrabomberra Wetlands
on the opposite side of the fencing to police. Three people were seen in the car
with the front passenger
wearing a blue hooded jumper.
white Mazda drove back into the wetlands at speed after seeing police. Police
followed the vehicle. A few hundred metres further
to the west police observed
the white Mazda parked on a dirt track. Police approached the white Mazda from
behind coming to within
50 metres before the vehicle sped away.
white Mazda sped along the pathway for approximately 90 to 100 metres before the
driver lost control, crashing down an embankment
coming to a stop at the
riverbank of Jerrabomberra Creek.
observed three people exiting the white Mazda. Police pursued the driver and
passengers on foot.
recognised the driver of the vehicle to be KH and the rear female passenger
identified herself to police as LC.
apprehended the offender who was riding in the front passenger side of the white
Mazda further down the river bank. The offender
identified herself to police as
MK [redacted] but could not provide identification. Police advised the offender
that providing false
details to police is an offence. Police suspected the
details to be false and later identified her as DS.
offender and co-offender KH were escorted to the police vehicle where they were
subsequently searched.
co-offender KH was in possession of a light blue back pack with the brand
'Adidas' labelled in yellow print. In this back pack
were the Apple iPad mini
and the blue Mimco brand wallet containing bank cards in the name of ML taken
from [redacted].
two items were seized and photographed by police and returned to the
offender was arrested and conveyed to Woden Police Station where she
participated in a record of interview. The offender was released
no time did NQ give the offender permission to ride within his vehicle and at no
time did any residents of [redacted] give anyone
permission to enter the
residence or take any property.
9 September 2013:
aggravated robbery (CH2013/984)
Shopping Centre, Benjamin Way, Belconnen, in the Australian
Capital Territory
and KT walked on foot from the shopping centre toward their current residence at
the [redacted].
the Light House Pub on Emu Bank, Belconnen. A
short time later FE and KT were
confronted by two females.
two females were the offender and a second female, described as of Aboriginal
appearance approximately 17 years of age, about
160cm tall with a blue top on,
whose identity is currently unknown to police.
offender said to FE,
"Do you have two dollars?"
"No, sorry."
and KT continued to walk away from the offender and unknown female toward
[redacted].
short time later the offender said to FE from behind,
"Do you have five
dollars? Do you have ten dollars? Are you lying to me?"
"No, I'm positive. Can you please leave me alone?"
offender walked beside FE and continued to demand money. The offender stepped in
front of FE, stopping FE from walking and separating
her from KT. The offender
pushed FE with two hands on the front of FE's shoulders. FE stepped back a few
steps as a result.
offender stepped toward FE and grabbed FE's bag from her left shoulder where it
was hanging. The offender swung the bag hard into
the left hand side of FE's
head striking her just below her eyebrow.
offender and unknown female immediately ran away with FE's hand bag and crossed
the bridge back toward the Light House Pub, Emu
Bank, Belconnen.
screamed out for help and KT ran back toward [redacted]. FE followed shortly
behind. A short time later the police were called
by security at [redacted].
indicated to police that her HTC mobile phone which was taken in FE's bag had a
GPS tracking system functioning and she was currently
tracking its
viewed the GPS tracker which indicated that the mobile phone was located at
Eggleston Crescent, Chifley, ACT.
bearing ACT registration [redacted] driving north bound
along Eggleston
Crescent, Chifley.
followed the vehicle onto Carslaw Street and observed the vehicle stop outside a
residence on Carslaw Street. Police saw a
number of passengers inside the
vehicle Police identified one of the passengers as LC.
observed the offender exit the front passenger seat of the vehicle and run on
foot through the alley onto McDonald Street.
Police then lost sight of the
spoke to the remaining persons inside the vehicle. One of the passengers in the
vehicle identified herself as KE.
outside the residence on Carslaw Street. Police conducted
a search of the garden
bed and located a white and beige HTC mobile phone.
12:55am, the offender was placed under arrest and conveyed to Woden Police
no time did FE give the offender permission to assault her or take any property
Nature and circumstances of the
maximum penalty is a yardstick against which to assess the objective seriousness
of an offence. In this case there are two offences
which carry substantial
periods of imprisonment. In coming to assess the objective seriousness of the
offending I must also consider
where the conduct sits on the spectrum of conduct
from the least serious example of the offence to the most serious example.
aggravated burglary saw the offender and co-offender enter a residential
premises whilst the occupants slept. The victims were
roused from sleep as a
result of the entry by the offender and co-offender however, there was no
interaction between the victims
and the offenders. The victims found the front
door open and personal items, including their car, stolen. The experience would
been frightening and disconcerting for the victims who were entitled to
feel safe in their own home. There was no damage or vandalism.
items stolen were a wallet, handbag, iPad and a car. They were all items which
have significance beyond their monetary value and
their loss would have caused
immediate inconvenience and concern. The handbag was found a short time later
in the apartment complex
and the wallet and iPad were returned to the victims.
ride in stolen motor vehicle offence was an unremarkable example.
aggravated robbery took place late at night in a public area and involved the
young person making demands of the victim for money.
There was a degree of
violence used in the course of the offence when Ms S pushed FE eventually
striking her just below her elbow
with her own handbag. The offending
undoubtedly caused fear and distress to the victim.
the offence was committed in company there was limited planning involved. The
victim’s handbag also contained her mobile
phone. The loss of these items
would have caused distress, concern and inconvenience. There is nothing to
suggest the robbery was
anything other than financially motivated.
Subjective circumstances
now an adult, Ms S is to be sentenced as a young person. A pre-sentence report
was prepared by Children, Youth and Families
(CYF) on 13 October 2025 as is
required for young offenders. The report provided the following information:
I have already recorded, Ms S is now 28 years old. She is Aboriginal and was
born in [redacted]. She has three siblings from her
parents’ union and
four half siblings. Her father was incarcerated not long after she was born and
[redacted]. She described
being “shipped around”. As a result, Ms S
attended various schools throughout her childhood and experienced frequent
disruption to her living arrangements. She received significant support from her
family which was identified as a protective factor
by the report author.
15 years of age [redacted]. [Redacted]. Ms S explained that she used alcohol to
cope with [redacted] and the [redacted] and that
she began experiencing what she
described as “emotional problems” before she eventually left school.
S gave birth to a son when she was 18 years old in July 2016. Ms S’s son
was born at 26 weeks gestation and they were both
flown to a hospital in Sydney
for care and treatment. Ms S experienced postpartum depression and turned to
drug use to manage her
mental health upon their return home. Her son is now 9
years of age and since 2021 has resided with Ms S’s maternal grandparents
in Griffith, NSW. Ms S confirmed she retained parental responsibility for her
son and that the caring situation with her grandparents
is a kinship agreement.
Ms S acknowledged that her relationship with her son has been complicated by
periods of incarceration. She
continued to have phone contact with him daily and
she looks forward to spending time with him.
S confirmed that she has been approved for an assessment for ACT Housing and is
currently engaged with services that can help her
in seeking stable
accommodation.
S has engaged in educational programs and has attained qualifications including
her Food Safety Certificate, Responsible Service
of Alcohol, Silica and Asbestos
Awareness and Certificate II in Worker Safety. Prior to being remanded at the
AMC Ms S was employed
at the Queanbeyan Leagues Club for three to four months.
The employment ended when she was remanded in custody and upon her release
will be reliant on Centrelink payments. She also noted that she may have a debt
with Centrelink.
S began drinking at 12 years of age and using cannabis at 15 years of age. She
reported having used a range of illicit substances
including methamphetamine and
heroin. She reported that she has not consumed illicit substances since being
remanded at the AMC and
that she has begun engaging with services that will be
able to provide drug and alcohol support. While at the AMC Ms S has been
anti-depressant medication to manage her mental health. She reported
that once released she would like to engage in counselling and
focus on building
healthy coping strategies.
report author noted that the PSR from 2013 detailed that Ms S had been diagnosed
by a forensic psychiatrist with complex post-traumatic
stress disorder and had
been prescribed an anti-depressant medication.
S identified that she has struggled to manage and regulate her emotions. She
expressed disappointment that her life has included
periods of incarceration and
recognised that she does not feel good about herself after engaging in
anti-social behaviour. She expressed
remorse for her offending and shame for her
S explained that in 2013 she left the ACT to be with her father in NSW before
eventually travelling to Queensland. She understood
there would likely be a
warrant out for her arrest but sought to avoid returning to custody, especially
once her son was born and
after being cared for in hospital. She stated that she
was extremely fearful about being separated from her son.
author of the PSR concluded that Ms S was suitable for a good behaviour order
and recommended that she engage with rehabilitation
Material from the Offender
for the young person tendered a letter from Toora that confirmed Ms S has been
accepted into the ‘‘Exiting Corrections,
Coming home” program.
As a part of that program, Ms S will be provided with accommodation and
therapeutic supports. She is
currently on the wait list for the Alcohol and
Other Drug support program. A further letter from Yeddung Mura confirmed that Ms
has a strong interest in engaging with support services post release and has
been engaging yarning circles in the AMC, showing a
strong desire to reconnect
with her culture.
case plan agreement from the AMC confirmed Ms S had been engaging with a wide
range of support services, educational opportunities
and had maintained contact
with her family while in custody. A detainee statement of employment form also
confirmed that Ms S has
been in a trusted employment role in the AMC.
S authored two letters to the Court; one in 2013 and the other in 2025. In the
letter written in 2013 she expressed remorse and
regret for her offending
conduct, noting that the victims would have felt unsafe in their own home as a
result. She also expressed
a desire to focus on making better choices by
finishing year 10 and completing further education in hairdressing. Ms S
reflecting in custody on the importance of her family relationships
and she was determined to make better choices in the future.
the letter written in 2025 Ms S accepted she was responsible for the delay and
stated that she initially left the ACT to attend
business’. After giving birth to her son, Ms S explained that she was
reluctant to present herself to police
and be separated from him after he was
born prematurely and hospitalised for the first six months of his life.
[Redacted]. This offence
led to her incarceration in NSW. Ms S expressed deep
regret for this offending.
S confirmed her willingness to participate in rehabilitation programs and other
supports designed to steer her away from the criminal
justice system.
Responsibility, remorse and
rehabilitation
is relevant to an assessment of a person’s likelihood of re-offending and
prospect of rehabilitation. Ms S told the
PSR author that she was embarrassed by
her offending behaviour. She expressed her regret for her conduct stating that
is she could
go back and change her actions she would.
her explanation from 2013 as a teenager Ms S expressed remorse and regret for
her actions and acknowledged the effect of her conduct
on the victims. As an
adult in 2025, Ms S accepted responsibility for the significant delay in the
finalisation of these matters
and acknowledged that there was “no
excuse” for her actions.
Notwithstanding
the significant delay in this matter, I am satisfied that Ms S’s
expressions of remorse were sincere and that
she has ultimately taken
responsibility for her offending as a teenager and her role in delaying the
outcome these procced.
S has demonstrated willingness to actively engage with support services which
bodes well for her prospect of rehabilitation. She
appears genuinely motivated
by the relationship she wants to maintain with her son to address some of the
challenges in her life.
Ms S also appears sincere in her desire to deepen her
cultural connections recognising it as a source of significant strength.
20 October 2025, I granted Ms S bail which was not opposed by the Director. In
the period that Ms S has been on bail she has complied
with conditions and
returned to Court in answer to bail.
I am satisfied that with continued engagement with services designed to assist
her, Ms S has good prospects for rehabilitation.
Time in custody
S spent 199 days in custody in relation to these offences.
following sentencing orders were made in relation to co-offender KH:
(a) Aggravated burglary: convicted and sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
12 months to be suspended after serving five months
on entering into a good
behaviour order for 12 months.
(b) Theft: convicted and sentenced to 5 months of imprisonment (which was time
already served).
(c) Ride/Drive motor vehicle without consent: convicted and sentenced to 5
months of imprisonment (which was time already served).
the time of the offending co-offender KH was an adult and had a criminal
Co-offender
LC was 15 years old at the time of the offences and did not have a criminal
history. The following sentencing orders were
made in the ACT Childrens Court:
(a) Ride/ drive motor vehicle without consent: proved and dismissed.
(b) Unlawful possession of stolen property: proved and dismissed.
(c) Knowingly concerned, aggravated burglary: non-conviction order with a good
behaviour order for 12 months.
are real similarities in what I know to be the subjective circumstances of LC
and Ms S and in their role in the ride motor vehicle
offence. With respect to
the aggravated burglary, LC’s culpability is less than Ms S’s given
she was dealt with for being
knowingly concerned in the burglary whilst Ms S was
a principal.
for Ms S accepted that convictions were imposed by Burns J on each offence when
the DSO was made on 12 December 2013.
Criminal History
the time of the offending Ms S did not have a criminal history.
Sentencing practice
the well-known limitations of comparable sentencing outcomes I have had regard
to the following matters which involved the
offence of aggravated robbery;
[2020] ACTSC 286
[2018] ACTSC 165
[2022] ACTSC 7
Police v Pedro Swain (a
[2024] ACTCC 1 and
[2025] ACTSC 169.
also had regard to the sentencing outcome recorded in
DPP v Myers
pseudonym) (No 4)
[2022] ACTSC 308.
Pleas of guilty
S entered pleas of guilty at an early stage in the proceedings. The timing of
her pleas had significant utilitarian value. I will
reduce the sentence imposed
by 25 per cent in recognition of that significant value.
Bugmy v The Queen; R v
Henry; R v Verdins
was sensibly and reasonably accepted by the prosecution that the
principles applied in this matter. Ms S experienced a childhood
of profound disadvantage which included instability, [redacted] and
alcohol and
drug use which has undoubtedly contributed to her own issues with substance
abuse and mental ill health. A disadvantaged
childhood experience must be given
“full weight”:
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571;
[1999] NSWCCA 111.
I consider that giving
‘full weight’ to Ms S’s disadvantaged childhood experience
operates to reduce her moral
culpability which in turn should moderate the
weight of general deterrence, denunciation and punishment in the sentence
pre-sentence report included a reference to a psychiatric assessment of Ms S
undertaken by forensic psychiatrist Dr Kasinathan,
contemporaneous to the
offending, on 18 September 2013. Dr Kasinathan diagnosed Ms S with Complex
Post-Traumatic-Stress-Disorder
and prescribed anti-depressant medication. The
prosecution accepted that the principles in
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
16 VR 269 are enlivened by virtue of a connection between Ms S’s mental
health condition and the offending conduct.
Determination
reduction in Ms S’s moral culpability moderates to a substantial degree
the weight to be attached to punishment, denunciation
and general deterrence.
The sentence imposed must recognise the harm caused to the victims by the
offending conduct. Rehabilitation
is a significant factor.
delay in this matter, given it was entirely of Ms S’s making, is not a
factor which warrants substantial leniency. I acknowledge
that the period of the
adjournment for the DSO represented a substantial period in the life of a young
person. This is not a statement
of criticism about the opportunity extended to
her by the making of the DSO, rather it is recognition with the benefit of
of the (perhaps unsurprising) influence of the complex challenges
experienced by Ms S as a young person. Ms S’s teenage years
were attended
to by significant instability, [redacted], mental ill health and life-altering
events [redacted]. I accept that Ms
S’s age (and relatedly, her maturity)
as well as the significant shift in her life circumstances with the birth of her
intensely affected her capacity to resolve these matters by bringing
herself to the attention of police and the court.
for Ms S conceded that the only appropriate outcome for the offence of
aggravated robbery and the offence of aggravated burglary
was a period of
imprisonment. The prosecution reasonably accepted that the time Ms S has now
spent in pre-sentence custody sufficiently
reflected the purposes of sentencing
including the need for rehabilitation to feature as a primary consideration. In
all the circumstances
just and appropriate outcome in this matter is one which permits Ms S to move
forward with her life and address the challenges
which face her as an adult,
without these proceedings creating further obligation upon her. The time she has
already spent in custody
because of the offending conduct she engaged in as a
young person and arising from her remand in custody in 2025, adequately captures
the gravity of the offending and gives fulfills the purposes of sentencing.
starting point for the offence of aggravated robbery is 6 months of imprisonment
reduced to 4 months and 14 days of imprisonment
in recognition of the plea of
starting point for the offence of aggravated burglary is 4 months of
imprisonment reduced to 3 months of imprisonment in recognition
of the plea of
orders of the Court are:
(a) On CH 984/2013, aggravated robbery, Ms S is convicted and sentenced to 4
months and 14 days of imprisonment to start on 30 August
2013 and end on 12
January 2014.
(b) On CH 934/2013, dishonestly ride motor vehicle without consent, Ms S is
convicted with no further penalty imposed.
(c) On CH 933/2013, theft, Ms S is convicted with no further penalty imposed.
(d) On CH 932/2013, aggravated burglary, Ms S is convicted and sentenced to 3
months of imprisonment to start 12 December 2013 and
end on 11 March 2014
I certify that the preceding ninety-six [97] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Sentence of her Honour Justice
Associate: N. Dwyer
Date: 13/11/2025
RTF format (282 KB)
Signed PDF/A format