Inquest into the death of Ms TL (a pseudonym) [2025] ACTCD 7 (5 November 2025)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Matter Title:
Inquest into the death of Ms TL (a pseudonym)
[2025] ACTCD 7
Decision Date:
Coroner Archer
See [22] - [25]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– manner and cause of death – multiple
injuries sustained in a single motor vehicle accident – findings published
to place on public records circumstances of the accident
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
ss 13(1)(g)
Transport (Safety and Traffic Management) Act 1999
File Number:
CD 156 of 2022
CORONER ARCHER:
Introduction
TL died in a motor vehicle accident on Black Mountain Drive that occurred at
old at the time of her
accident occurred as a result of Ms TL losing control of the vehicle she was
driving, causing it to collide with a tree that was
located near to the road
surface. Ms TL suffered significant injuries. She died later that night after
being transported to the Canberra
Hospital (“TCH”).
one else was in Ms TL’s car and no one else was injured in the accident.
TL’s death was reported to the ACT Coroner’s Court on 5 June 2022,
as it fell within the terms of section 13(1)(g)
Coroners Act 1997
(“the Act”), being a death that “appears to be directly
attributable to an accident”.
was required to hold an inquest
into the manner and cause of TL’s death and make findings that are
required by section 52 of the Act. That section of the Act
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find,
if possible—
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the person has
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
(i) state whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection with
the inquest or inquiry; and
(ii) if a matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the matter.
Circumstances Surrounding Ms TL’s Death
my behalf, the Australian Federal Police (“AFP”) conducted an
investigation of the circumstances of Ms TL’s death.
The accident scene
was examined and the road assessed for issues that may have contributed to the
accident. Members of Ms TL’s
family and her boyfriend were spoken to. The
car involved in the collision was examined by a mechanic. Dashcam footage from
was seized and analysed.
those sources of information, it appears that Ms TL had worked overnight on 3
June 2022. She slept all of Saturday morning and
remained at home until about
2100 hours on 4 June 2022. She left home at about that time, in a car registered
in her name. It was
a 1986 Toyota Sedan with ACT registration plates.
TL was first issued a learner drivers licence at the age of 15 years and 9
months. She had four years and two months driving experience
at the time of the
collision. She had held a C-class drivers licence since 28 August 2019, and a R
class driver licence since 1 February
dashcam footage and the associated audio allows Ms TL’s movements to be
reconstructed. That material provides insight into
the potential lethality of a
car driven contrary to the rules of the road, not according to weather
conditions, and in excess of
the capabilities of the car and its driver.
around 2150 hours, Ms TL drove to the summit of Black Mountain and met a person,
Mr AK, who was known to her. It is implied from
the audio of the dashcam footage
that they were both part of a small group who drove around suburban streets and
reported their movements
and observations to each other over their mobile
after, Ms TL performed a circular burnout in her vehicle in the carpark of
Telstra Tower. Ms TL then performed a lap of the
carpark and another circular
burnout before Ms TL and Mr AK both drove down from the summit of Black
TL and Mr AK descended from the Black Mountain summit to Clunies Ross Street in
Acton. Both vehicles drove north on Clunies Ross
Street for a short distance
before turning on a roundabout to drive south of Clunies Ross Street. Ms
TL’s vehicle performed
a number of side-to-side weaving patterns on the
roadway before turning right, onto Black Mountain Drive, following in the
of the vehicle driven by Mr AK.
TL drove up Black Mountain Drive quickly. The car driven by Mr AK accelerated,
opening a gap from the car driven by Ms TL. Ms TL
attempted to close the gap
along a stretch of Black Mountain Drive that has a number of corners that are
challenging to negotiate
at speed. She almost lost control on a number of
occasions. Ms TL was driving in excess of the posted speed of 60 km/h.
a driveway to a small building, approximately 830 metres from Clunies Ross
Street, the car driven by Ms TL lost traction with
the road surface. The rear of
the vehicle slid out towards the right and collided with a mature eucalypt tree
beside the roadway.
At point of impact, Ms TL’s car had rotated to the
point where the driver’s side was travelling forwards. The impact
the tree on the car was slightly behind the driver’s side B pillar of the
vehicle, resulting in the lower structural
frame of the vehicle being bent
inwards into the vehicle cabin. As the frame bent inwards, the driver seat
buckled and folded around
the body of the deceased. The speed of her vehicle at
the time of impact was estimated by the AFP to have been approximately 80
the collision occurred, the car driven by Mr AK continued towards the summit of
Black Mountain. Mr AK saw Ms TL’s car leave
the roadway. He found a
suitable location to turn and returned to the site of the collision.
called 000 and requested that ACT Ambulance attend the scene.
ACT Ambulance
Service (“ACTAS”) operations further requested ACT Fire and Rescue
(“ACTFR”) and ACT Policing
(“ACTP”) attend the location.
Ms TL was extricated from the vehicle expeditiously by ACTFR and taken to TCH
under lights and sirens, her life could not
be saved. No alcohol or drugs (other
than caffeine) were found in her blood in the toxicological examination
conducted in the post-mortem
car driven by Ms TL was examined and found to be roadworthy with no indication
that any mechanical or structural failure contributed
to the collision.
Mountain Drive is an undivided road with a single lane in each direction. The
roadway was sealed asphalt in reasonable repair.
Several cracks and potholes
were evident in the vicinity of the collision scene. The roadway at the location
of the accident is unlit,
and at the time long grass was growing at the edge of
the sealed roadway in a number of locations. Metal roadside guard rails are
present along several stretches of the roadway where steep off-road gradients
are present.
am satisfied that the physical state of the road did not contribute to the
accident. I do note that at the time of the collision,
weather conditions were
cold (about 7 degrees Celsius) and windy. Low cloud was present with
intermittent light rain tending to sleet.
As a result, the roadway was wet where
the accident occurred.
Post-Mortem Examination
my direction, Professor Johan Duflou, forensic pathologist, conducted a
post-mortem examination of Ms TL’s body on 7 June
2022. The examination
consisted of a CT scan, an external examination and toxicological testing.
Professor Duflou found that a range
of internal injuries and brain swelling
caused Ms TL’s death.
Prosecution of Mr AK
did not refer Mr AK to the DPP pursuant to section 58 of the Act. Independently
of that process, Mr AK was prosecuted for the aggravated
offence of furious,
reckless, dangerous driving pursuant to
section 7(1)(a)
Road Transport
(Safety and Traffic Management) Act 1999
. He was acquitted at a hearing.
make no findings of fact relevant to Mr AK which are inconsistent with the
outcome of those proceedings.
Decision To Dispense with a
to section 34A of the Act and having considered the information provided to me
by members of the Australian Federal Police
and Professor Duflou, I was
satisfied that the manner and cause of Ms TL’s death were sufficiently
disclosed, and, as such,
a hearing was unnecessary.
communicated my decision not to conduct a hearing and the reasons therefor to Ms
TL’s family on 11 September 2025. I provided
them with a copy of my
provisional findings and invited comment.
Formal Findings as to
the Manner and Cause of Death
considered the evidence available to me and outlined at [6], I find that Ms TL
died on 4 June 2022 at about 2310 hours at the
Canberra Hospital, Garran ACT
from multiple injuries sustained in a motor vehicle
Findings In Respect of Matters of Public
of public safety did not arise from my inquest.
Notwithstanding
the above, I have chosen to publish my findings as it is in the public interest
to provide an accessible record of
road accident deaths that occur in the
Condolences
convey my sincere condolences to Ms TL’s family. Her death has caused
great grief and distress. She was a person of great
capacities and her loss was
deeply felt by all who knew her. Dying in a car crash is a tragic way for such a
young person to die.
apologise to the family for the delay in finalising my inquest.
I certify that the preceding thirty [30]
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for findings of his Honour
Coroner Archer.
Associate: Jacqueline Du
Date: 5 November
Under the Act, the meaning
given to the term “inquest” varies. In this context it means a
process of investigation. There
can be a “hearing” for an inquest.
RTF format (162 KB)
Signed PDF/A format