Classic Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shearman (No 6) [2025] ACTSC 483 (29 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Classic Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shearman (No 6)
[2025] ACTSC 483
Hearing Date:
13 to 29 October 2025
Decision Date:
Catchwords:
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
building dispute – non-appearance of self-represented litigant
of medical certificate insufficient – directions made
regarding further detail of medical condition from medical practitioner
Cases Cited:
UTSG Pty Ltd v Sydney Metro (No 5)
[2019] NSWLEC 107
Classic Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd (Plaintiff)
Leigh Shearman (First Defendant)
Debra Shearman (Second Defendant)
Representation:
WDB Buckland (Plaintiff)
Self-represented (Defendants)
MV Law (Plaintiff)
Self-represented (Defendants)
File Number:
SC 417 of 2022
Introduction
matter was listed before me today for the continuation of a hearing that
commenced on 13 October 2025.
was no appearance by Ms Shearman. A short history in that regard is as
(a) The matter was originally listed for a three-week hearing commencing on 13
October 2025.
(b) Prior to the hearing commencement, the defendants had indicated that
although self-represented up until that time, there would
be representation by
Counsel at the hearing.
(c) On the first day of hearing Ms Shearman attended on behalf of the
defendants, represented by Mr Yin of Counsel. At the commencement
of the second
day of hearing Mr Yin advised that his brief to appear had been withdrawn and he
played no further active part in the
hearing. Thereafter, Ms Shearman has
conducted the defence of the claim as a self-represented litigant on behalf of
both defendants.
(d) On 23 October 2025 in the course of her cross examination of Ms McNabb, one
of the plaintiff’s witnesses, Ms Shearman notified
me of her inability to
continue as she was experiencing a migraine headache. She indicated that the
headache had commenced on the
prior day, forcing her to take medication
immediately following the conclusion of that hearing day and to retire to bed.
Ms Shearman
asserted that she had then risen at 4am on 23 October 2025 to
continue her preparation, but that she was too unwell to continue further
day. I adjourned the Court until 10am on 24 October 2025.
(e) In the afternoon of 23 October 2025 Ms Shearman provided to the Court and to
the plaintiff’s solicitor a medical certificate
from Dr Cameron Evans who
appears to be a General Practitioner at the Holt Medical Centre. Dr Evans
certified that “Mrs Deborah
Shearman has a medical condition and will be
unfit for work/Court or any administration from 23 October 2025 to 24 October
inclusive”.
(f) On that basis, I adjourned the hearing until 10am on Monday 27 October 2025.
Ms Shearman attended court on that day and proceeded
to engage in cross
examination of two of the plaintiff’s witnesses throughout the course of
the hearing day with no overt sign
of incapacity.
(g) The hearing was scheduled to continue at 10am on 28 October 2025 with Ms
Shearman to be cross examined by Counsel for the plaintiff.
At 8:34am on 28
October 2025 Ms Shearman emailed the court and the solicitor for the plaintiff
advising that she was unwell and would
be unable to proceed with the hearing on
that day. She advised that she had booked an urgent medical appointment for that
and would send through the medical certificate when received. I
adjourned the matter until 2pm on that day and requested that the
certificate to be provided include further detail as to Ms Shearman's
(h) Ms Sherman subsequently emailed a further certificate from Dr Evans that was
in identical terms to the first certificate save
that the asserted period of
incapacity was from 28 October 2025 until 9 November 2025. That comprised the
entirety of the remaining
allocated period for the completion of the hearing,
which was scheduled to conclude on 31 October 2025.
(i) On 28 October 2025, I made orders in chambers as follows:
(1) The matter is adjourned to 10am on 29 October 2025.
(2) The second defendant is to provide to the Court, in writing, prior to
10am on 29 October 2025, an explanation for her failure
to appear at hearing
today, and in respect of any medical incapacity that is asserted, a certificate
from a medical practitioner
that deals expressly with her capacity to give
evidence in the hearing.
hearing before me on 29 October 2025 Counsel for the plaintiff initially
proposed that Dr Evans be contacted with a view to his
giving further evidence
in respect of the certificates provided thus far. After some discussion, that
application was withdrawn on
the basis that the hearing is adjourned until 10am
on 30 October 2025 with these short reasons and further direction to be provided
from the Court in the interim. Other than the provision of the identified
certificates, the defendants have made no effort to take
a further active part
in the proceedings and has not made any application, for example, seeking an
adjournment of the hearing.
am proceeding on the basis that the second defendant presently considers that
all that is required of her to prevent a continuation
of the hearing in her
absence is the provision of the medical certificates that are now in evidence.
For that reason, I considered
it apposite to publish these reasons.
Adequacy of Medical
Certificates
the course of the hearing Ms Sherman identified herself as being a person under
a disability, however, the nature of that disability
was not made known to
medical certificates relied upon provide no understanding at all as to the
nature of Ms Shearman's unfitness or as to how her
present medical state may
impede her continued participation in the hearing. The principles relevant to
the content of medical evidence
required to support an application for
adjournment of proceedings or to explain a non-attendance were summarised by
Pepper J in
UTSG Pty Ltd v Sydney Metro (No 5)
[2019] NSWLEC 107
42. While each case turns on its facts, the medical evidence should, at a
minimum, answer the central question of why — and
not just whether —
the medical condition will prevent a litigant from participating in a court
hearing either in person or
by some other means (for example, by telephone). It
is this nexus that is critical.
43. To be sufficient, the medical evidence should identify in broad terms the
medical condition that the person is suffering from,
the symptoms of that
condition insofar as they are relevant to a litigant’s participation in a
court hearing, the severity
of the condition, and its expected duration. The
doctor providing the certificate must be clearly identified and the certificate
must be signed and dated.
44. Absent this bare minimum the opposing party cannot, as a matter of fairness,
test the cogency of the medical evidence and the
Court does not have sufficient
information before it to meaningfully exercise its discretion to grant the
vacation sought. To the
extent that the provision of an appropriately detailed
medical certificate to the Court (and to the opposing party) results in a
of privacy, this is the price that must be paid by a litigant in order for the
Court to grant the indulgence of a vacation of
hearing dates, a course that a
Court does not undertake lightly having regard to the inevitable increased cost
to the parties of
the delay and the inefficient allocation of Court resources
that results.
, the appellants appealed against a series of
decisions and orders made against them by this Court. One of the appealed
is relevant to the present application, namely, a decision by Pain J
Bobolas v Waverley Council (No 3)
[2015] NSWLEC
to refuse to set aside orders made against the appellants by
Sheahan J. The appellants sought to rely on affidavit evidence that
“defences to council claims, but [they] were too sick to attend the
hearing to voice them in any way.” Attached
to the affidavit was a number
of what purported to be medical certificates relating to each of the three
appellants. Only three of
the certificates were considered by the Court of
Appeal to be relevant to the hearing before Sheahan J (at [210]). The first
“certifie[d]”
that the author of the certificate (whose name was
redacted) had examined the first appellant and that, in the author’s
“she was/is suffering from A MEDICAL CONDITION [and] she was/will
be unfit for work up to and including 1.5.15.” The
remaining two
certificates related to the second and third appellants and contained similar
language, however, they specified the
conditions suffered by the second and
third appellants as “CONTUSED L FOOT/ANKLE” and “CELLULITIS
respectively. Pain J rejected all of the medical certificates as
having no probative value.
46. On appeal, McColl JA held that Pain J’s rejection of the certificates
was “unexceptionable”. In doing so, she
opined that (at [221]):
A medical certificate relied upon to demonstrate a litigant is unable to attend
court must address the “critical question whether,
and if so why, the
medical condition would prevent the [litigant] from travelling to the Court and
participating effectively in a
court hearing.
47. McColl JA went on to conclude that the appellants’ medical
certificates failed to address the “critical question”
, in dismissing an application to adjourn a hearing
based on the illness of the three applicants, Hodgson JA stated that (at [4]):
Those medical certificates are not in a satisfactory form. They are not
supported by any appropriately verified evidence from the
doctor. They do not
identify the symptoms or the degree of the alleged problem, so as to justify the
assertion that the person would
be unfit to attend court. They provide a wholly
inadequate basis on which the court could be satisfied that there is a
reason why this matter, which has for some time been fixed for this
date, should not proceed.
49. In this Court, medical evidence tendered in support of an application to
vacate hearing dates in
Ross (No 13)
has been rejected because
...The medical certificate does not specify the condition said to render Mr Ross
to be unfit to attend the remainder of today’s
hearing in these
proceedings, nor does it specify the nature of the medication and its effects.
In addition, no explanation is given
in the certificate as to the nexus between
the unspecified medical condition Mr Ross is suffering from and his asserted
to continue representing himself in these proceedings.
50. The difficulties that arise when medical evidence is given in vague and
broad terms were summarised in
All too frequently judges see cryptic written statements from medical
practitioners referring to some undisclosed and undiagnosed
condition”, culminating in the assertion that a person is unfit to attend
court or unfit for a court hearing.
To the extent that such statements are put
forward as evidence about the state of the person’s health and the extent
impaired health may incapacitate a person from participating in court
proceedings, the statements fail the most fundamental test
for the reception of
expert evidence. Bald unexplained and unfathomable statements of that kind must
be simply rejected out of hand
as evidence of anything.
51. Finally, the Court of Appeal in
considered an
adjournment application arising from a factual matrix not dissimilar to the
present case. There, an application was
made by the applicant (a litigant in
person) by way of an email to the Registrar attaching letters from the
applicant’s treating
doctor and a clinical psychologist. In holding not to
grant the adjournment the Court determined that (at [23]):
The Court was not satisfied that the medical and other material provided by Mr
Woodhouse to the Registrar justified an adjournment
for reason of any medical
condition from which he may suffer. The note from his treating doctor indicates
that it would be “ideal”
if the hearing of the case were delayed so
as to avoid “stressors”. The psychologist’s letter suggests
further elaboration that any attendance by Mr Woodhouse in court would
be “ineffective”. Neither, in the Court’s
opinion, showed that
Mr Woodhouse’s condition in any practical sense would prevent him from
attending before the Court to support
his current application or that his doing
so would exacerbate that condition or otherwise put his health at risk.
am not satisfied that the evidence of Dr Evans, comprising the two short
certificates before me, is sufficient to address the critical
question of
whether, and if so, why, the medical condition of Ms Shearman prevents her from
coming to court and from continuing to
participate effectively in the hearing.
The certificates also fail to address in any meaningful way Ms Shearman's
capacity to otherwise
communicate with the Court and indicate her intentions in
relation to the continuation of the hearing. The evidence of Dr Evans in
present form does not provide a sufficient basis to warrant the court simply
adjourning the hearing to a date to be fixed.
therefore make the following orders:
(1) The hearing is adjourned until 10am on Thursday, 30 October 2025.
(2) Prior to that time, the defendants are to make any application they wish to
make in relation to the further conduct of the hearing,
with that application to
be communicated to the Court and to the plaintiff’s solicitor by email.
(3) In the event that the defendants wish to rely upon any further written
medical evidence concerning Ms Shearman's fitness to continue,
that evidence
must be emailed to the Court and to the plaintiff’s solicitor by 5:00pm
today. Such evidence should address as
(a) The nature of the medical condition from which Ms Shearman is suffering.
(b) The aetiology of the condition.
(c) Whether in the view of the medical practitioner the condition prevents her
from giving evidence in the proceedings and if so,
(d) Whether the medical condition prevents her from otherwise attending court in
person or remotely and participating effectively
in that hearing and if so,
(e) The anticipated duration of the identified incapacity.
(4) Where further medical evidence is relied upon the author of the report will
be required to make themselves available to give
evidence to the court by
telephone between 10:00am and 11:00am on 30 October 2025.
(5) In the absence of any application on the part of the defendants or further
evidence the hearing will continue at 10:00am on 30
October 2025.
I certify that the preceding eight [8] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of his Honour Acting Justice
Date: 29 October 2025
RTF format (226 KB)
Signed PDF/A format