Rahimi v MDS Tiling Pty Ltd & Ors [2018] ACTIC 1 (26 April 2018)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Rahimi v MDS Tiling Pty Ltd & Ors
[2018] ACTIC 1
Hearing Dates:
9 and 10 April 2018
Magistrate Theakston
Catchwords:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – choice of employer - Territory or State of
connection – liability of principal for uninsured contractor’s
injured worker
Legislation Cited:
Workers Compensation Act 1951
Cases Cited:
Avon Products Pty Ltd v Falls
[2009] ACTSC 141
Hanns v Greyhound Pioneer Pty Ltd
[2006] ACTSC 5
Tapia v Woolworths Limited
[2016] ACTSC 129
Workcover Authority of New South Wales v Billpat Holdings Pty Limited
[1995] NSWSC 49
Yaraka Holdings Pty Ltd v Ante Giljevic
[2006] ACTCA 6
Nazir Rahimi (Applicant)
MDS Tiling Pty Ltd (First Respondent)
Chase Building Group (Canberra) Pty Limited (Second Respondent)
Pamir Tiling Services Pty Ltd (Third Respondent)
Employers Mutual NSW Limited (First Respondents Insurer)
Representation:
Mr A Muller (Applicant)
Mr S Onitiri (First Respondent)
Mr D Crowe (Second Respondent)
Mr Y Qasemi (Director) (Third Respondent)
Mr D Shillington (First Respondents Insurer)
Slater + Gordon Lawyers (Applicant)
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers (First Respondent)
Bradley Allen Love Lawyers (Second Respondent)
Self-Represented/Party in Person (Third Respondent)
Hall & Wilcox (First Respondents Insurer)
File Number:
WC 318 of 2017
MAGISTRATE THEAKSTON:
1. On 19 April 2016, the applicant was working on a building
site at Kingston in the ACT. While mixing tiling adhesive, one of his
legs became entangled in the electric mixer. He attempted to remove his
trousers from the device, but overbalanced and squeezed
the trigger on the
mixer. This caused his hand to become caught in the trouser material, which in
turn causing a serious injury
to his left thumb.
2. Consequently, the
applicant applied for arbitration under the
Workers Compensation Act 1951
(‘the Act’).
3. A hearing was conducted to resolve a number of
fundamental issues, namely:
the applicant a worker for the purposes of the Act, and if so who was the
applicant’s employer or contractor?
(b) Which jurisdiction is connected to the employment of the applicant?
(c) Is a principal contractor liable due to the applicant’s employer being
Facts not in dispute
4. The following facts were not in issue and I make findings
accordingly:
(a) In 1995, the applicant was
born in Afghanistan. In 2013, he arrived in Australia as a recognised refugee
without his immediate
(b) The applicant did not have any accredited employment skills. He had worked
for three years, between the ages of 14 and 17, in
Pakistan performing
construction work. He had, and continues to have, limited English language
(c) Mr Yazdan Qasemi was and remains the sole Director and Shareholder for Pamir
Tiling Services Pty Ltd.
(d) Mr Medhat Eleisawy was and remains the sole Director and Shareholder for MDS
Tiling Pty Ltd. MDS provides waterproofing, tiling
and stone trade services to
builders. Mr Robert Rae is employed by MDS as a project manager. His duties
include running a number
of projects simultaneous. He finds opportunities,
prepares tender documents and engages others to perform the work. Mr Eleisawy
performs similar duties.
(e) From early 2014, the applicant performed labouring work at locations and
times directed by Mr Qasemi. That work contributed
to trade work being
performed on behalf of MDS. That work occurred at the following
(i) in Canberra
City, near the CIT;
(iv) at the
Bupa site near Weston Creek;
(v) in Darwin;
(vi) in Sydney;
(vii) at the
Prince Apartment site in Kingston.
(f) The applicant provided time sheets to, and was paid by, Mr Qasemi.
Initially that was by cash, then cheque and later by deposit
applicant’s bank account. Mr Qasemi did not provide the applicant with
pay slips or similar documentation.
(g) The applicant liaised directly with Mr Qasemi in relation to what site to
attend and when he was not well enough to attend work.
(h) On the work sites, the applicant was directed to perform specific tasks by
either Mr Qasemi or fellow Afghani workers Mohammed,
Ramazan, Zakir, or Kabir.
(There is a dispute about whether Mr Rae on occasions also gave the applicant
directions.)
(i) The applicant provided his own clothing and, later on, a spirit level. All
other materials and tools were provided by others.
(j) The applicant believed he, Mr Qasemi and other workers were working for
(k) During the periods when the applicant worked at sites as directed by Mr
Qasemi, he did not perform any work for any other person
or organisation.
(l) While working on sites as directed by Mr Qasemi, the applicant lived in
rented accommodation with other Afghani workers that
was paid for by MDS. When
the applicant worked in Darwin and Sydney, his accommodation and transport was
funded by someone else.
In Darwin, that was by RST Tiling Pty Ltd, who had
engaged MDS to perform the work, and in Sydney it was by MDS.
(m) The work the applicant undertook at the direction of Mr Qasemi, was the
applicant’s first job in Australia. Mr Qasemi
was aware that the
applicant was not familiar with Australian work practices and taxation
requirements.
(n) Between late 2015 and March 2016, the applicant was not provided with work
by Mr Qasemi, and obtained alternative employment
with Canberra Group Tiling and
later Emplace Pty Ltd. During at least part of that period, the applicant was
required to contribute
to the cost of his accommodation that had earlier been
paid for by MDS.
(o) In late 2015 and 2016, Chase Building Group (Canberra) Pty Limited built a
multi-unit building at Kingston, known as the Prince
Apartments. Chase engaged
MDS Tiling Pty Ltd to install the waterproofing and tiling for the building.
(p) In late March 2016, Mr Qasemi contacted the applicant and requested he work
at the Prince Apartment site. He indicated that
the work would take several
months to complete.
(q) On 19 April 2016, the applicant seriously injured his left thumb when mixing
adhesive at the Prince Apartment site. He attended
hospital and underwent
surgery. He was 21 years old at the time.
(r) In April 2016. MDS intended to pay $5,000 to the applicant. It erroneously
paid $10,000 into the applicant’s bank account.
It subsequently
requested, through Mr Qasemi, a $5,000 refund, which the applicant arranged.
(s) Shortly after the injury, Mr Eleisawy made a claim on MDS’ workers
compensation insurance policy in relation to the injury,
with the applicant
being described as an employee of MDS. On 19 May 2016, Employers Mutual NSW
Limited provisionally accepted liability
and made payments to the applicant and
towards his medical expenses for a period of time before ultimately denying the
(t) Pamir was not insured in the ACT for workers compensation.
Was the applicant a worker for the purposes of the
Compensation Act
, and if so who was the applicant’s employer or principal
contractor?
5. It was common ground that the applicant was a worker within
the meaning of that term as defined in s 8 of the Act.
completeness, I note that there was a submission made on behalf of MDS that s 12
of the Act applied. That provision relates
to labour hire arrangements and
provides an extension to the definition of ‘worker’ beyond the
extended definitions contained
in ss 8 and 11.
7. An application of the
principles and indicia adopted by Crispin P and Gray J in Yaraka Holdings Pty
Ltd v Ante Giljevic
[2006] ACTCA 6
and [30], which distinguish a
‘contract of service’ from a ‘contract for services’,
yields an overwhelming
conclusion that the applicant was engaged in a contract
of service. This is because the applicant was directed where, when and how
work and was patently a servant of another’s business and not carrying on
a trade of business on his own behalf. He did
not perform work for others at
the relevant times; had no separate place of work; did not advertise his
services to the world at
large; did not bring significant tools or equipment;
could not delegate his role to someone else; was paid a daily rate; worked in
unskilled capacity; and did not spend a significant portion of his remuneration
on business expenses. In the absence of a ‘contract
for services’,
s 12 has no application.
8. There was a dispute about precisely who the
applicant worked for.
The evidence
9. The applicant indicated that he believed he was working for
MDS. He appears to have formed that view following conversations with
Afghani workers, and because MDS appeared to be the source of the projects in
which he performed work. However, the applicant
is not a sophisticated person.
He is young, with limited education and had only been in Australia for a short
period of time before
his injury. He was patently unaware of Australian
business and employment practices, as evidenced by his unfamiliarity with
superannuation,
tax, and the use of Tax File and Australian Business
10. Mr Qasemi described Pamir as performing waterproofing, tiling
and stone work. The business was incorporated in 2010 and had provided
solely to MDS until 2016. All workers were Afghani and Pamir had 15 – 20
11. Mr Qasemi described Pamir providing a job to the applicant,
without a written contract. Some of Pamir’s workers stayed
in a house in
Canberra. The rent and utilities for that house were paid by MDS, while the
workers were performing work in support
of MDS. At one point, MDS withheld part
of a payment to Pamir as an offset against the rent MDS had paid for the house
workers were not working on MDS sites but still residing in the house.
Pamir paid the workers without withholding a component for
Qasemi described paying the applicant at a daily rate, which increased over
time. He denied discussing with the applicant
any payment amount for the Prince
Apartments job before the injury. He had spoken to the leading hand, Kabir,
rate the tilers would be paid. The applicant also
claimed he had been paid a daily rate.
13. Mr Qasemi indicated that MDS would
supply the materials and his workers would supply their own tools. He indicated
an exception
to this when Pamir provided a drill and drill bit. He also
described providing the applicant with a broom and shovel. He indicated
the applicant did not need to provide his own tools, which I understand was
because of his role as a labourer in support of
the other workers.
indicated that MDS did not directly employ tilers. It only employed office
staff and himself. When Pamir was engaged
as a subcontractor for the tiling, it
would submit invoices, which he drafted on behalf of Mr Qasemi due to Mr
Qasemi’s poor
handwriting, and the MDS office staff would arrange payment.
That payment was based on the area of tiling completed. The arrangement
settled by a discussion and then a shaking of hands, rather than by the
preparation of a written agreement. The only tools that
MDS supplied were
pallet jacks.
15. Mr Rae indicated he was not involved in the allocation of
workers to various jobs, but did discuss the number of workers required
with Mr Qasemi.
16. He went on to indicate that on the Prince Apartments
project, the workers were supervised by the Pamir leading hand Kabir, and
all projects, he did not personally direct the tasks of the workers. He always
went through either Mr Qasemi or a leading hand
like Kabir. The only exception
to that was if he had an issue with quality or safety. He conceded that he had
the responsibility
for the supervision of MDS projects and said that ultimately
the buck stopped with him. I understood that to relate to what was
achieved and
when, and not necessary who performed the actual work or what precise methods
were employed. I found Mr Rae’s
evidence to be authentic and compelling.
He was in a strong position to know the arrangements at the work sites and was
placed to understand the subtleties of the subcontractor arrangements
than the applicant. I therefore prefer his evidence to that
of the applicants,
who suggested that at times he was supervised by Mr Rae.
explained that he had described MDS as the employer of the applicant in an
incident report, because MDS was responsible
for the work site. He did not go
on to provide any foundation for a conclusion that the applicant was an employee
of MDS. It was
not clear if Mr Rae considered the legal meaning of the term
‘employer’ when completing that form or when giving his
In any event, any view Mr Rae may have about the applicant’s relationship
with MDS is not determinative of the issue.
18. Mr Eleisawy described the
employees of MDS as being limited to himself, Mr Rae and the two women who
worked in the company office
at Castle Hill. He described seeking the services
of a subcontractor to perform the tiling trade work MDS had secured. He
that process as commonplace within the building industry. He
indicated that at any time he had various subcontractors performing
various projects.
19. Mr Eleisawy indicated that when choosing a
subcontractor, he would negotiate the price per square metre and consider the
subcontractor’s
capacity to complete the job. That is, the number of
tradesman the subcontractor had available for the job. He indicated that MDS
would supply the tiles, grout, adhesive and spacers, and the subcontractor would
be expected to provide its own tools.
20. Mr Eleisawy indicated that he was
not at liberty to personally direct the tasks of a subcontractor’s staff,
and speculated
that if he tried to do so, he would be told to ‘go
jump’. He conceded that he had made a workers compensation claim
applicant, notwithstanding the applicant was not an employee of MDS. He said he
had done so due to pressure from the builder
and union, and a desire not to have
the Prince Apartment and subsequent projects disrupted by union
21. The above evidence of Mr Qasemi, Mr Rae and Mr Eleisawy is
largely consistent, and very close to the evidence of the applicant.
difference from the applicant’s evidence can be explained by the
applicant’s limited ability to perceive and understand
the subtleties of
company arrangements and work practices. Additionally, the applicant’s
evidence, at [35] and [42] of his
affidavit, that Mr Rae ‘supervised
us’ is not necessarily inconsistent with MDS managing the quality of the
performed by Pamir, and the Pamir leading hand supervising the Pamir
workers. I accept the above evidence of Mr Qasemi, Mr Eleisawy
and Mr Rae and
make findings accordingly.
Consideration of the question
22. The evidence as a whole points to the applicant being
engaged directly by Pamir. This is the case notwithstanding the
applicant’s
expressed belief, Mr Rae’s identification of MDS as the
employer on a form, Mr Eleisawy’s completion of a workers compensation
claim and MDS making a payment of $5,000 to the applicant.
applicant was engaged as a result of negotiations between himself and Mr Qasemi.
The latter was an officer of Pamir. There
is no evidence that Mr Qasemi had
actual or implied authority to engage a worker on behalf of MDS. In any event,
that decision was
made without any consultation with MDS. From the totality of
the applicant’s evidence I infer that the applicant understood
under the control of Mr Qasemi, or his delegate. The applicant’s own
understanding of who he answered to is of significance:
Workcover Authority of
New South Wales v Billpat Holdings Pty Limited
[1995] NSWSC 49
applicant was directed to attend particular work sites and to perform particular
tasks by an agent of Pamir. He also worked
as part of a team of workers engaged
by Pamir and was paid by Pamir.
24. Pamir provided a trade service to MDS.
While Mr Rae almost solely used Pamir as the subcontractor for the projects he
was responsible
for, and up until 2016 Pamir was providing work solely for MDS,
MDS through Mr Eleisawy also engaged other subcontractors. There
was inadequate
evidence before me to support the submission that the arrangements described by
Mr Qasemi, Mr Eleisawy and Mr Rae
were a sham.
25. The provision by MDS of
accommodation for the Pamir workers when in Canberra and Sydney, while a
relevant consideration, does
not persuade me that the applicant was not engaged
directly by Pamir. I reach the same conclusion in relation to the accommodation
and transport provided to the applicant by RTS and MDS in relation to the
projects in Sydney and Darwin. The provision of benefits
to workers by third
parties or principal contractors is not unheard of and cannot, of itself, alter
the legal relationship between
a worker and the entity that engages that worker.
26. Accordingly, I find that the applicant was employed as a worker by
Which jurisdiction is connected to the employment of the
27. The State of Connection or Employment Connection test is
provided at s 36B of the Act. The test is a precondition for compensation
awarded under the Act. It is a cascading test with three steps. The second
step need only be considered if the answer is
not provided by the first step.
Similarly, the third step need only be considered if the second step is
considered and does not
yield an answer.
28. In the present case, the break
in the applicant’s work with Pamir immediately before the Prince Apartment
project may be
of relevance. The applicant testified that he was told by Mr
Qasemi that the Bupa job had finished and there was no work for him,
and that Mr
Qasemi would let him know when MDS got another job. During that break the
applicant found alternative employment. In
light of those comments attributed
to Mr Qasemi, which I accept, I am not able to find that the work arrangement
between the applicant
and Pamir ceased and re-started prior to the Prince
Apartment project.
29. The first step of the test involves a determination
Relevant considerations for that test are provided at s 36B(6), which
In deciding whether a worker usually works in a Territory or State—
(a) regard must be had to the following:
(i) the worker’s work history with the employer over the previous 12
(ii) the worker’s proposed future working arrangements;
(iii) the intentions of the worker and employer;
(iv) any period during which the worker worked in a Territory or State (a
relevant place) or was in a relevant place for the purposes
of employment,
whether or not the worker is regarded as working or employed in the relevant
place under the workers compensation
law of the relevant place; but
(b) regard must not be had to any temporary arrangement under which the
worker works in a Territory or State for a period of not longer
than 6 months.
30. Gray J in Hanns v Greyhound Pioneer Pty Ltd
[2006] ACTSC 5
accepted that ‘usual’ meant ‘habitual or customary, or
that of “in a regular manner”’, and Higgins
Products Pty Ltd v Falls
[2009] ACTSC 141
observed that the test was
‘not a merely mathematical exercise’.
31. For the majority of
2014 and 2015, the applicant worked for Pamir at six work sites. Four of those
sites were within the ACT.
His first and last sites were within the ACT. For
four months in the early part of 2015, the applicant worked in Darwin.
32. Mr Qasemi drew a distinction with the arrangements in Darwin. While he
conceded he sent the workers to Darwin and paid them for
the work they did in
Darwin, he said that work did not relate to him because, as I understand it, he
did not make any profit on that
job. He also did not personally attend Darwin
or monitor the work. He made the workers available for the project in Darwin
that was better than them sitting in Canberra without a job. I accept
that evidence.
33. That arrangement was therefore exceptional in nature and
was not how Pamir ordinarily conducted its business. The Darwin project
not be described as just another part of the applicant’s usual job. It
also obviously involved the applicant moving
out of his usual accommodation and
temporarily relocating to the other side of the country. It amounted to a clear
departure from
the way the applicant habitually or customarily worked and the
way Pamir habitually and customarily operated.
34. Mossop AsJ, as he was
then, in Tapia v Woolworths Limited
[2016] ACTSC 129
made the following
observations about the temporary arrangement exclusion provided at s 36B(6)(b)
of the Act:
may therefore be applied in circumstances where the place or places where the
worker usually works has been distorted by a temporary
arrangement of less than
six months. The appropriate approach is to work out where the worker usually
works having regard to all
the facts. Having done that, the temporary
arrangement exclusion can be applied if the place or places where the worker
works has been affected by a temporary arrangement. The arrangement
must be a temporary departure from what would otherwise be the
usual state of
affairs. If there is such a temporary arrangement then the exercise of
determining where the worker usually works
must be undertaken without regard to
such temporary arrangements.
35. I note that, other than the Darwin and Sydney exceptions,
the applicant ordinarily worked on building sites located within the
to the exceptional and impermanent nature of the Darwin project, I characterise
that Darwin project as a temporary arrangement.
Accordingly, I will have no
regard to the applicant’s work in Darwin for the purpose of the first step
of the Employment Connection
36. That leaves a history where the
applicant ordinarily worked on sites in the ACT, with the one exception when he
worked for a brief
period on a site in Sydney. The proposed future working
arrangements were limited to the applicant working on the Prince Apartment
in the ACT for several months. Both the applicant and Pamir intended that to
occur, and there was no evidence of any other
intentions by either the applicant
or Pamir. On the evidence I am not persuaded that the brief single placement
within NSW extends
the location of where the applicant usually worked to include
37. Accordingly, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the
applicant usual worked in the ACT, and I make that finding.
38. Consequently,
the ACT is the Territory or State of connection.
Is a principal contractor liable due to the applicant’s
employer being uninsured?
39. I find that MDS was carrying on a business and it entered
into a contract with Pamir for the provision of tiling services which
of MDS’ business. I further find that the applicant was a worker employed
by Pamir and he was injured while carrying
out the work which was the subject of
the above contract. I find that Pamir was uninsured.
40. Accordingly, MDS is
liable to pay to the applicant any compensation that MDS would have been liable
to pay if the applicant had
been employed by MDS, pursuant to s 13 of the
41. I make the following declarations:
1. The applicant was
a worker for the purposes of the
Workers Compensation Act 1951
employed by Pamir Tiling Services Pty Ltd.
2. The Australian Capital
Territory is the Territory or State of connection for the applicant.
Tiling Pty Ltd is liable to pay to the applicant any compensation that it would
have been liable to pay if the applicant had
been employed by it.
certify that the preceding forty-one [41] numbered paragraphs are a true copy of
the Reasons for Judgment of his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Sam Lynch
Date: 26 April 2018
RTF format (204 KB)
Signed PDF/A format