Shearer and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Ors [2008] ACTAAT 34 (22 December 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: SHEARER AND ACT PLANNING & LAND AUTHORITY & ORS
(22 DECEMBER 2008)
Catchwords:
Land and planning – change of lease –
multi-dwelling residential development – section master plan –
consideration
of registered guideline – rear site coverage –
building envelope – bicycle traffic – access and mobility.
Australian Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act 1988
Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991, s 8
Planning and Development Act 2007
Sullivan and ACT Planning and Land Authority & Anor
[2007] ACTAAT
(3 May 2007)
Ms P O’Neil, Senior Member
Dr D McMichael, Senior Member
Dr E McKenzie, Senior Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/70
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
DAVID ALAN SHEARER
ACT PLANNING AND
ANTHONY CARTER
LORRAINE TOMLINS
Ms P O’Neil, Senior Member
Dr D McMichael,
Senior Member
Dr E McKenzie, Senior Member
The decision under review is set aside and in its place is substituted a
decision that the development application be approved, subject
to the following
conditions:
(a) That the development is to be carried out only in accordance with the
following annotated plans (being the December plans in Exhibit
(i) Drawings by AK Design, Dwg No 0743:
Demolition Plan,
Sheet 1 of 19, December 2008
First Floor Site
Plan, Sheet 3 of 19, December 2008
Level 2 Site
Plan, Sheet 4 of 19, December 2008
Level 3 Site
Plan, Sheet 5 of 19, December 2008
Basement Floor
Plan, Sheet 6 of 19, December 2008
First Floor
Plan, Sheet 7 of 19, December 2008
Level 2 Floor
Plan, Sheet 8 of 19, December 2008
Level 3 Floor
Plan, Sheet 9 of 19, December 2008
North and East
Elevations, Sheet 10 of 19, December 2008
South and West
Elevations, Sheet 11 of 19, December 2008
Section and
Details, Sheet 12 of 19, December 2008
Public lighting
and access/mobility Plan, Sheet 14 of 19, December 2008
Adapted Unit 2
Plan, Sheet 16 of 19, December 2008
Driveway and
basement details, Sheet 18 of 19, December 2008
Intention Plan, Sheet 19 of 19, December 2008
(ii) Any amendments to those drawings or other items and additional
drawings or other items approved or except in accordance with
the following
conditions;
Where there is an inconsistency between the drawings and items listed above
and the following conditions, the conditions shall firstly
prevail, then the
amended or additional drawings or items, to the extent of that
inconsistency;
(b) That within 28 days from the date of this decision, or within such
further time as may be approved in writing by the Authority,
the applicant shall
lodge with the Authority for approval:
(i) a revised site plan, revised landscape plan and revised architectural
drawings updated to show correct NGL, based on the relevant
drawings referred to
in the previous condition, showing:
blade walls shown on the ground floor plans and upper floor level façade
appearing on the proposed elevations redesigned
so that they are no closer than
6m from the land’s front boundary shared with Forbes Street;
location and detail of all plant and equipment including heat pumps, basement
ventilation and air conditioner units required by
the Building Code of
Australia, such that they do not result in any detrimental impact to the amenity
of the adjoining blocks;
windows nominated as ‘obscure glass’ in elevations shown as fixed
obscure glazing to a minimum height of 1.7m above
finished floor level, or to
another standard to prevent overlooking of the adjoining blocks to the
satisfaction of the Authority;
location and details of all accessible paths of travel required to provide
access to all relevant features within the site in
accordance with the
Planning Guidelines for Access and Mobility, AS4299 and AS1428.1
floor plans revised to show not less than 10% of the dwellings nominated as
‘Adaptable’ and designed and constructed
as Class C Adaptable
Housing in accordance with AS4299. Direct access shall be provided via an
accessible path of travel in accordance
with AS4299 and AS1428.1, from the
Adaptable Dwelling to its main Private Open Space (“POS”). If this
path cannot be
adapted easily and cost effectively, then an alternate dwelling
shall be nominated as ‘Adaptable’ and designed and constructed
Class C Adaptable Housing in accordance with AS4299;
storage area adjoining visitor car space #3 within the basement revised such
that there is 300mm clearance between the edge of
the car space and the edge of
the storage area;
to provide access from the living areas of Unit 4 to the adjoining open
POS of Unit 4 increased, such that the useable area of POS is not less than
depths of soil above the basement within the planting area to the south of the
walkway adjoining Unit 4 increased such that it
is not less than 650mm deep at
site plan and landscape plans revised to include details of fencing in
accordance with Condition (g) below and show details of
internal fencing of POS
areas in accordance with plans submitted by the applicant entitled
‘Fencing, Driveway and Preliminary
Services Plan’, Dwg No 0743,
Sheet 13 of 19, October 2008;
size and location of a water tank(s) for on-site retention and re-use of rain
water run-off from the site in accordance with the
requirements of Water
Sensitive Urban Design Guidelines;
design and detail of solid screening between the balconies of the upper floor
dwellings to ensure that sufficient aural and visual
8 redesigned so that no part of that dwelling overhangs the stormwater easement
to the northern side boundary;
awnings to the main entry and letterbox revised so as not to overhang the
stormwater easement to the northern side boundary, unless
written approval from
ACT Roads and Stormwater, Department of Territory and Municipal Services (TaMS)
is provided to the Authority;
revisions required by ActewAGL to provide access to their easements and services
to the satisfaction of the Authority;
collection facilities for the provision of mobile garbage bins to be in
accordance with the requirements of the Territory to
the satisfaction of TaMS,
designed and located to the satisfaction of the Authority; and
basement be revised to provide one (1) accessible car space designed and
dimensioned in accordance with The Planning Guidelines
for Access and Mobility
and AS2890: The Australian Standards for Off-Street Carparking.
(ii) a tree management plan generally in accordance with that
submitted as part of the original Development Application submission
reflect the above conditions, and further revised to ensure that Trees 5 and 6
shown in Dwg No 0743 are protected from
machinery damage and the root zone is
protected. If new drainage and plumbing is required along the easement, trees
to be under
bored or trenching to occur alongside building envelope away from
tree roots;
(iii) a revised energy rating demonstrating a minimum 4 star energy rating
for each unit;
(iv) the written endorsement of ActewAGL Sewer and Water and Electricity
Networks for the above revised plans;
(v) an exterior materials sample board, showing finishes generally in
accordance with those submitted as part of the original Development
Application
submission;
(vi) a cable reticulation plan, prepared by a suitably qualified person and
endorsed by each relevant service provider, showing:
underground
reticulation of all cables (including electricity, telephone and data);
points of connection (no new poles should be erected);
and location of associated items (including electrical sub-stations) within the
of any electrical sub-station that may be required.
electrical sub-stations are to be located
on leased land and screen from public view.
(vii) a driveway plan and long-section of the basement access ramp and
driveway verge crossing, prepared by a suitably qualified engineer,
that vehicular access and egress from the basement can be provided in accordance
with the Australian Standards for Off-Street
Car Parking AS2890.1;
(c) that the development shall be completed within 24 months from the date of
this decision or within such further time as may be
approved in writing by the
(d) that at all times during construction the site and surrounds shall be
managed in accordance with a Temporary Traffic Management
Plan, prepared by the
applicant approved by the Manager, Quality Co-ordination, Asset Acceptance,
TaMS, under the
Road Transport (Safety and Traffic Management) Act 1999
This plan is to address, as a minimum, measures to be employed during
construction to manage all traffic, including construction
traffic, in and
around the site, provision of safe pedestrian movement around the site, the
provision of parking for construction
workers, and associated traffic control
(e) that those sections of the internal driveway that will be traversed by
waste collection vehicles operated by or on behalf of the
Territory shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with
Development Control Code for Best
Practice Waste Management in the ACT, ACT Waste,
Department of Territories
and Municipal Services 1999, to accommodate heavy vehicles with loads of 7
tonnes per axle;
(f) that drainage of the basement car park, including any car wash down
facility, and the waste enclosure are to be connected to sewer,
satisfaction of ActewAGL and Environment and Recreation;
(g) that, pursuant to sub-paragraph 245(e)(i)(ii) of the Land Act, at the
lessee’s expense and before the completion of building
work, the existing
fence on the side and rear boundaries shall be upgraded to 1.8m high timber
lapped and capped fence, or to another
standard acceptable to the Authority.
The lessee must take all reasonable steps to obtain the written agreement of the
lessees before the erection of any new fencing. If there is no
agreement, the fencing is to be to the satisfaction of the Authority.
fencing shall not extend further forward than the new building line;
(h) that, during construction, all existing vegetation (trees, shrubs and
grass) located on the verge and unleased Territory land
immediately adjacent to
the development shall be managed, protected and maintained in accordance with a
Landscape Management Plan
(“LMP”) approved by the Manager, Asset
Acceptance, Asset Management Services Group, TaMS. The LMP is to be approved
and implemented before the commencement of works, including demolition, on the
site and is to be in accordance with
City Management Guidelines for the
Protection of Public Landscape Assets Adjacent to Development Works –
(i) that the public footpath is to be continuous across the driveway verge
crossing, that is, the footpath is to have precedence;
(j) that the existing concrete footpath shall be retained, or, if it is to be
replaced, it is to be reconstructed in concrete and
the same level and with a
finish and colour as close to the original concrete as possible, to the
satisfaction of the Authority;
(k) that the proposed driveway verge crossing shall be constructed at the
lessee’s expense in bitumen or in dark colour incorporated
concrete with a
surface that has a colour as close as possible to the existing verge crossing,
generally in accordance with TaMS
driveway Type HD2 as shown on TaMS Drawing
DS5-2, or equivalent, with a width at the boundary equivalent to the width of
the internal
(l) that the lessee shall protect and maintain in accordance with
Landscape Guidelines
all existing trees and shrubs located on the subject
site, on adjoining blocks overhanging the subject site, on the verge and
Territory land immediately adjacent, except for those specifically
identified for removal in the approved drawings and/or a Tree
Management Plan.
Tree protection fencing, if required, shall be erected prior to the commencement
of any work on the site;
CONDITIONS RELATING TO THE VARIATION OF CROWN LEASES
(m) that the lessee surrender the existing Crown lease over Block 8 Section
46 Division of Turner – (Volume 42 : Folio 4104)
and accept a new Crown
lease generally in accordance with the draft Crown lease found at
Attachment 1
of this decision;
(n) that if a “Change of Use Charge” is payable, the lessee shall
pay it within 28 days of being notified of the amount
or within such further
time as may be approved by the Planning and Land Authority;
(o) that no building work in relation to this Development Application is to
commence on the site until the new Crown lease is registered
Registrar-General’s Office;
(p) that the new Crown lease shall commence on the date of surrender of the
existing leases and will terminate on 27 July 2054 or
on such further date as
may be approved by the Planning and Land Authority under
Section 254
Planning and Development Act 2007
(q) that the lessee shall do all that is necessary to ensure that the new
Crown lease giving effect to this approval is registered
Registrar-General’s Office within 14 days of being notified that the Crown
lease is available for registration or within
such further time as may be
approved by the Planning and Land Authority.
...............................
Senior Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/70
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
DAVID ALAN SHEARER
ACT PLANNING AND
ANTHONY CARTER
LORRAINE TOMLINS
REASONS FOR DECISION
22 December 2008 Ms P O’Neil, Senior Member
McMichael, Senior Member
Dr E McKenzie, Senior Member
Mr David Shearer (
“the applicant”
), as agent of Benue Pty
Ltd, sought review of a decision by the ACT Planning and Land Authority
“the respondent”
“the Authority”
refuse to approve a development application for the construction of a
multi-dwelling development on Block 8 Section 46 of Turner,
located at 17 Forbes
“the subject land”
). Benue Pty Ltd is the lessee of
the subject land. Mr Anthony Owen, Ms Lorraine Tomlins and Mr Roy McAndrew
“the parties joined”
) live nearby and opposed the
development. They were joined as parties to the review.
2. The application was initially made in November 2007 but was refused in
May 2008 and again upon reconsideration in August 2008.
At those times a large
number of objections were received. A hearing into the matter, including an
inspection of the subject land,
occurred on 10 and 11 December 2008. By the
time of the hearing, the proposal had been modified to reduce the number of
residential
units from 12 to 10, to increase the area of open space at the rear
and to lower the building by 400mm. On the basis of those changes,
respondent was prepared to support approval of the development with conditions,
but the parties joined maintained their objections.
3. Written and oral evidence was received for the applicant from Mr Paul
Cohen, a qualified town planner, and for the respondent
from Mr Owen Pankhurst a
development assessment officer with the ACT Planning and Land Authority. Mr
Owen gave oral evidence for
the parties joined who also provided written
material in support of their objections.
Relevant law
4. This development application is to be assessed under the provisions of
the Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991 (
Land Act was repealed and replaced by the
and Development Act 2007
on 31 March 2008, when a new Territory Plan also came
into effect. However transitional provisions require this application to be
considered under the Land Act and the version of the Territory Plan in force at
the date of the development application (
decision cannot be made that is inconsistent with the Plan (section 8 Land
5. The subject land is covered by the B11 Urban Housing Policies within the
Residential Land Use Policies forming Part B1 of the
Plan. The objectives of
provide opportunities for significantly increased dwelling densities in
residential areas with immediate proximity to transport
corridors, commercial
areas and employment centres; and
provide certainty for staging of redevelopment in inner north Canberra and
promote orderly and integrated development.
6. The B11 policies authorise the preparation of Section Master
Plans as follows:
The Authority may from time to time prepare Section Master Plans to assist
in guiding residential development on land subject to this
Area Specific Policy.
Where a Section Master Plan approved by the Authority identifies additional and
not inconsistent requirements
to those specified in the Urban Housing Code at
Appendix III.3, residential redevelopment for multi-unit housing shall be in
with those provisions of the Section Master Plan. For the purposes
of this clause, a requirement in a Section Master Plan that is
greater that a
minimum or is less that a maximum requirement prescribed in the Territory Plan,
shall not be deemed to be inconsistent
with the Code.
7. The B11 policies further provide that design and sitting of
multi-dwelling housing shall be in accordance with the Urban Housing
Appendix III.3.
8. A Section Master Plan covering Section 46 of Turner can be found on the
Register of Planning Guidelines. The Register is established
by Part A3 of the
Plan, which requires that such guidelines shall be “carefully
considered”. The Section Master Plan
includes statements that it
“restricts building in the rear portion of blocks to 30% site
coverage” and “the building
envelope requirements must be accounted
for”. Maximum building site coverage is defined in the Section Master
Plan and a building
envelope is illustrated. Mr Owen for the parties joined
therefore submitted that the use of this mandatory language meant that a
development proposal with rear site coverage higher than 30% or which did not
fall entirely within the building envelope, such as
this one, must be rejected.
9. Mr Walker, of counsel for the applicant argued, firstly, as a matter of
statutory interpretation that to grant a higher status
to a Section Master Plan
prepared by the Authority above the Plan approval by the ACT Legislative
Assembly would be inconsistent
with the hierarchy created by the
Capital Territory (Planning and Land Management) Act 1988
Therefore a Section Master Plan could not be binding. Secondly, since the
relevant Section Master Plan had never
been formally approved by the Authority
as required, its status could not be more than that of a guideline. A similar
circumstance
Sullivan and ACT Planning and Land Authority
(3 May 2007) where the Tribunal found that a Section Master Plan
covering Section 1 of Braddon, unlike some other Section Master
having been formally approved on behalf of the Authority by the Chief Executive
Officer of the Authority, was a guideline
to be carefully considered but was not
10. Mr Mossop, of counsel for the respondent did not accept the first
argument put by Mr Walker, but submitted that it was not necessary
Tribunal to rule on the question. He agreed that adoption of a guideline is the
not the same as “approved by the Authority”
within the meaning of
the B11 policy. As the Section Master Plan had not been properly approved as
such by Notifiable Instrument,
the respondent contended that it should be
treated as a guideline only.
11. The parties joined argued that lack of approval of the Section Master
Plan by the Authority as indicated by a Notifiable Instrument
was merely an
administrative error that could be disregarded. We note that this error, if it
be an error, has been corrected in
the new Territory Plan so the circumstance is
unlikely to arise again. The parties joined submitted that the numerical
of the Section Master Plan were binding and should be treated as
mandatory where its language so indicated. But for the reasons given
we do not accept that the failure to properly approve the
Section Master Plan may be ignored. We find that the Section Master Plan
the status of a planning guideline under Part A3 of the Plan.
Rear site coverage
12. The Section Master Plan aims to retain the formal geometry of
streetscapes by encouraging building towards the front portion
of blocks and
retaining rear space to allow privacy of blocks and treed backdrops to a
development. The original proposal rejected
by the respondent had 42% rear site
coverage. This proposed development, as amended, reduces building in the rear
portion of the
block to about 35% site coverage.
13. Mr Cohen gave evidence that the purpose of the rear site coverage
requirement is to provide open space for the amenity of residents
contribute to the maintenance of the traditional spatial separation of dwellings
within the section. Within the rear site
coverage a 7.0m wide space is required
for deep root planting and this is distinguished from the requirement for soft
landscaping
within the balance of the rear area. He drew attention to the fact
that a 7.0m wide space will be available under the revised plans;
to the number
of existing trees in the section particularly to the rear of blocks; that a
number of mature trees would be retained
on the subject land; and to the
proposed landscape plan. In his opinion the objectives of the Section Master
Plan are met in the
amended proposal. Mr Pankhurst likewise considered that the
aims and principles of the Section Master Plan with respect to site
coverage are
met in the revised development proposal. He supported a condition of approval
proposed by the applicant that, where
the basement projects under the rear site
area adjoining proposed Unit 4, the depth of soil be increased to a minimum of
14. The evidence is that without that extension two car parking spaces in
the basement would be lost. The parties joined suggested
that one objective of
limiting the rear site coverage was to restrict the space available for car
parking so as to limit the number
of units that could be built and that the
extension of the basement a short way beyond the rear wall of the building in
provide sufficient car parking spaces demonstrated that the site was
being over-developed. That proposition was not supported by
either Mr Cohen or
Mr Pankhurst, who both rejected the proposition that a planning purpose of the
rear site coverage provisions was
to limit the number of dwelling units.
15. We have given careful consideration to the requirement in the Section
Master Plan in relation to rear site coverage. We accept
the evidence of both
Mr Cohen and Mr Pankhurst that, although rear site coverage is greater than the
30% maximum nominated in the
Section Master Plan, the objectives of the Section
Master Plan are achieved in the context of this proposed development. We accept
that the proposed condition regarding depth of soil to allow landscaping is a
desirable one.
Building Envelope
16. The respondent had considered that the development proposal exceeded the
building envelope illustrated in the Section Master
Plan to such an extent that
it was inconsistent with the urban design principles in the Section Master Plan.
Drawings produced by
the applicant to the Tribunal lowered the level of the
building by 400mm. Some consequential changes were required, including to
ramp giving access to the basement car park. The revised plans showed only minor
intrusions into the building envelope. Fresh
shadow diagrams were also
provided showing that mid-winter overshadowing of the house to the south fell
within acceptable parameters.
17. The parties joined were concerned that lowering the building by 400mm
would exacerbate flooding, to which they suggested the
subject land was
vulnerable. No evidence was provided to establish the extent, if any, of that
risk. The subject land is relatively
level, sloping only slightly towards the
west. Mr Cohen pointed out that in the normal course more detailed engineering
drainage of the development will need to be provided before
construction.
18. Both Mr Pankhurst and Mr Cohen opined that the building at the lower
level as illustrated in Exhibit 3 before the Tribunal, met
the planning
objectives of the Section Master Plan. Having given carefully consideration to
the building envelope requirements we
accept the evidence of Mr Cohen and Mr
Pankhurst that the planning objectives of the building envelope provisions in
the Section
Master Plan are met.
19. The estimated traffic generation from the proposed development is 60
vpd. Mr Cohen gave evidence that the additional volume
is well within the
capacity of Forbes Street, as measured by the Australian Model Code for
Residential Development (AMCORD) and the
Future Urban Areas Residential
Subdivision Development Code (FUARSC). The respondent also considers the
traffic impacts acceptable.
20. The parties joined drew attention to the status of Forbes Street as a
main route in the document “Ten Year Master Plan
Trunk Cycling and Walking
Path Infrastructure 2004-2014” produced by Roads ACT. The cycling route
is shown by signs at the
intersections with Forbes Street, but otherwise no
dedicated cycle path exists. Cyclists presumably use the carriageway or
within the verges. The parties joined criticised the traffic
assessment for failing to take cycle traffic into account. Mr Cohen’s
evidence is that cycle traffic is not normally counted because of its different
characteristics and its greater flexibility compared
with motor vehicles in
being accommodated into traffic flows. No evidence was provided to suggest any
risks to cyclists as a result
of the estimated additional 60 vpd which would be
added to Forbes Street. The parties joined are concerned that continued
re-development
of Turner and other suburbs in inner north Canberra envisaged in
the Territory Plan could eventually lead to conflicts between cyclists
traffic, but there is no evidence to suggest that it is likely to eventuate as a
result of approval of this development.
Mr Cohen suggested that, should
increased motor traffic in the future create problems for safe cycling, it was
open to the authorities
to provide a cycle path along the verge.
Access and mobility
21. Mr Pankhurst gave evidence that the residential unit proposed to be
adaptable needed to be identified on the plans and have direct
access via an
accessible path designed to meet the relevant Australian Standards AS4299 and
AS1428.1. As a result of the change
in floor level, he also identified the need
to ensure that the disabled basement car space had sufficient floor to ceiling
to allow it to meet AS2980. Neither Mr Pankhurst nor Mr Cohen saw any
difficulty in these requirements being met.
22. We find that the development proposal, as illustrated in Exhibit 3
before the Tribunal, is not inconsistent with the Territory
Plan, subject to the
imposition of conditions suggested by the applicant and respondent. We agree
with the need for those conditions,
which include the standard conditions in
relation to lease surrender and re-grant, the preparation of technical plans
relating to
sewerage, drainage, water and electricity supply, tree management,
provision of boundary fencing and management of the construction
site as well as
specific requirements for modifications to the building plans. We will also
impose a condition requiring the satisfaction
of four-star energy-ratings as
required by clause 10.2 of Part A3 of the Plan. This was satisfied in an
earlier version of the development
proposal but the energy rating has not been
re-assessed following the re-design of the development.
Attachment 1
Entered in Register Book Vol Folio
This is not a concessional
lease - s238(2)
and Development Act 2007
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
AND DEVELOPMENT ACT 2007
Australian Capital Territory (Planning and
Management) Act 1988
(C'th) ss 29, 30 &
LEASE GRANTED pursuant to the
Planning and Development Act 2007
the Regulations made under that Act on the day of
Two thousand and WHEREBY THE
PLANNING AND LAND AUTHORITY
(“the Authority”) ON BEHALF OF THE COMMONWEALTH
OF AUSTRALIA (“the Commonwealth”) in exercising its
functions grants to
company having its registered office at
the Australian Capital Territory number of shares/tenants
in common/joint
tenants (“the Lessee”) ALL THAT piece or parcel
of land situate in the Australian Capital Territory containing an
1045 square metres
or thereabouts and being
Block 8 Section 46
Division of Turner
as delineated on
Deposited Plan Number 324
Office of Regulatory Services at Canberra in the said Territory (“the
land”) RESERVING unto the Territory all
minerals and the right to the use, flow and control of ground
water under the surface of the land TO HOLD unto the Lessee for the
commencing on the
Two thousand and
(“the date of the
commencement of the lease”) and terminating on the
twenty seventh
Two thousand and fifty four
to be used by the Lessee
for the purpose set out in Clause 3(c) of this lease only YIELDING AND PAYING
THEREFOR rent in the amount
and in the manner and at the times provided for in
this lease and UPON AND SUBJECT TO the covenants conditions and agreements
in this lease.
INTERPRETATION 1. IN THIS LEASE unless the contrary intention appears:
(a) “Authority” means the Planning and Land Authority
established by
Planning and Development Act 2007
(b) “building” means any building or structure constructed or
partially constructed or to be constructed, as the context
permits or requires,
on or under the land;
(c) “dwelling” means a building or part of a building used as a
self contained residence which must include:
(i) food preparation facilities;
(ii) a bath or shower; and
(iii) a closet pan and wash basin
and includes outbuildings
and works normal to a dwelling;
(d) “Lessee” shall:
(i) where the Lessee consists of one person be deemed to include the
Lessee and the executors administrators and assigns of the
(ii) where the Lessee consists of two or more persons be deemed to include
in the case of a tenancy in common the said persons
and each of them and their
and each of their executors administrators and assigns and in the case of a
joint tenancy be deemed to
include the said persons and each of them and their
and each of their assigns and the executors administrators and assigns of the
survivor of them; and
(iii) where the Lessee is a corporation be deemed to include such corporation
its successors and assigns;
(e) “multi-unit housing” means the use of land for
more than one dwelling and includes but is not limited to dual occupancy
and triple occupancy housing;
(f) “outbuilding” means a shed, garage or similar structure
which is ancillary to the permitted use of the land as specified
in Clause 3(e)
of this lease;
(g) “premises” means the land and any building or other
improvements on the land;
(h) “Territory” means:
(i) when used in a geographical sense the Australian Capital Territory;
(ii) when used in any other sense the body politic established by
Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
(i) words in the singular include the plural and vice versa;
(j) words importing one gender include the other genders;
(k) a reference in this lease to any statute or statutory provision shall
include a reference to any statute or statutory provision
that amends, extends,
consolidates or replaces the statute or statutory provision and to any other
regulation, instrument or other
subordinate legislation made under the
2. THE LESSEE COVENANTS WITH THE COMMONWEALTH as follows:
RENT (a) That the Lessee shall pay to the Authority rent at the rate of five
cents per annum if and when demanded payable within
one month of the date of any
demand made by the Authority relating thereto and served on the Lessee;
MANNER OF (b) That any rent or other moneys payable by the Lessee
PAYMENT OF to the Authority under this lease shall be paid to such person
RENT as may be authorised by the Authority for that purpose at Canberra in
the said Territory without any deduction whatsoever.
3. THE LESSEE FURTHER COVENANTS WITH THE COMMONWEALTH as follows:
COMMENCEMENT (a) That the Lessee shall within twelve (12) months from the
OF DEVELOPMENT date of the commencement of the lease or within such
further time as may be approved in writing by the Authority
for that purpose
commence to erect an approved development on the land at a cost not less than
in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by the Lessee and
previously submitted to and approved in writing by
the Authority;
COMPLETION (b) That the Lessee shall within thirty six (36) months from
OF DEVELOPMENT the date of the commencement of the lease or within such
further time as may be approved in writing by the Authority
complete the
erection of the said approved development on the land in accordance with the
said plans and specifications and in accordance
with every Statute Ordinance or
Regulation applicable to such development;
PURPOSE (c) To use the land for the purpose of multi-unit housing of not
less than one dwelling and not more than ten dwellings;
PROVISION OF (d) That the Lessee shall provide and thereafter maintain
HYDRAULIC MAINS hydraulic mains stormwater drains sewer lines hydraulic
STORMWATER fire mains and hydrants on the land in accordance with
DRAINS AND plans and specifications prepared by the Lessee and
SEWER LINES previously submitted to and approved in writing by the
PROVISION OF (e) That the Lessee shall provide and thereafter maintain
STORAGE AREAS storage areas covered carparking hardstanding
CARPARKING carparking adequately illuminated vehicle access roads
AND ILLUMINATION pedestrian pathways and vehicle access drives on the land
to a standard acceptable to the Authority in accordance
with plans and
specifications prepared by the Lessee and previously submitted to and approved
in writing by the Authority;
PROVISION OF (f) That the Lessee shall provide facilities on the land to a
FACILITIES FOR standard acceptable to the Authority to enable electrical
ELECTRICAL AND and telephone cables and wires to be installed
TELEPHONE CABLES underground;
LANDSCAPING (g) That the Lessee shall provide and thereafter maintain
landscaping on the land to a standard acceptable to the Authority
in accordance
with plans and specifications prepared by the Lessee and previously submitted to
and approved in writing by the Authority;
PRESERVATION (h) That the Lessee shall not, without the previous consent
OF TREES writing of the Territory, remove any tree:
(i) that has been identified in a development approval for retention during
the period allowed for construction of the building; or
(ii) to which the
Tree Protection Act 2005
SERVICE AREAS (i) That the Lessee shall screen and keep
screened all service areas to the satisfaction of the Authority and shall
that all plant and machinery contained within the premises is suitably screened
from public view;
BUILDING (j) That the Lessee shall not without the previous approval
SUBJECT TO in writing of the Authority erect any building, or make
APPROVAL any structural alterations to any building, on the land;
REPAIR (k) That the Lessee shall at all times during the said term maintain
repair and keep in repair the premises to the satisfaction
of the Authority;
FAILURE TO (l) If and whenever the Lessee is in breach of the Lessee's
REPAIR obligations to maintain repair and keep in repair the premises the
Authority may by notice in writing to the Lessee specifying
the repairs and
maintenance needed require the Lessee to effect the necessary work in accordance
with the notice. If the Authority
is of the opinion that a building or some
other improvement on the land is beyond reasonable repair the Authority may by
writing to the Lessee require the Lessee to remove the building or
improvement and may require the Lessee to construct a new building
improvement in place of that removed within the time specified in the notice.
If the Lessee does not carry out the required work
within the time specified by
the Authority any person or persons duly authorised by the Authority with such
equipment as is necessary
may enter the premises and carry out the necessary
work and all costs and expenses incurred by the Authority in carrying out the
work shall be paid by the Lessee to the Authority on demand and from the date of
such demand until paid shall for all purposes of
this lease be a debt due and
payable to the Authority by the Lessee;
RIGHT OF (m) Subject to the provisions of the
Planning and
Development Act 2007
to permit any person or persons
authorised by the Authority to enter and inspect the premises at all reasonable
times and in any
reasonable manner;
RATES AND (n) To pay all rates charges and other statutory outgoings
CHARGES assessed levied or payable in respect of the premises as and when
they are due for payment.
4. THE COMMONWEALTH COVENANTS WITH THE LESSEE as follows:
QUIET That the Lessee paying the rent and all other money due and
ENJOYMENT observing and performing the covenants and stipulations on the
part of the Lessee to be observed and performed shall quietly
enjoy the premises
without interruption by the Authority or any person lawfully claiming from or
under or in trust for the Authority.
5. IT IS MUTUALLY COVENANTED AND AGREED as follows:
TERMINATION (a) That if:
(i) any rent or other moneys payable under this lease shall remain unpaid
for three months next after the date appointed for payment
thereof (whether such
rent shall have been formally demanded or not); or
(ii) an approved development in accordance with Clause 3(a) of this lease
is not commenced within the period specified in the said
(iii) an approved development in accordance with Clause 3(a) of this lease
is not completed within the period specified in Clause
(iv) after completion of an approved development as aforesaid the said
land is at any time not used for a period of one year for
the purpose for which
this lease is granted; or
(v) the Lessee shall fail to observe or perform any other of the covenants
contained in this lease on the part of the Lessee to
be observed or performed
and shall have failed to remedy such breach within a period of six months from
the date of service on the
Lessee of a notice in writing from the Authority
specifying the nature of such breach
the Authority on behalf of the Commonwealth may terminate this lease but
without prejudice to any claim which the Authority or
the Commonwealth may have
against the Lessee in respect of any breach of the covenants on the part of the
Lessee to be observed or
ACCEPTANCE (b) That acceptance of rent or other moneys by the Authority
OF RENT during or after any period referred to in Clauses 5(a) (i),
(ii), (iii), (iv) or (v) of this lease shall not prevent or impede the
exercise by the Authority of the powers conferred upon it by
FURTHER LEASE (c) Subject to the Lessee paying all money required to be paid
under the provisions of the
Planning and Development Act 2007
shall be entitled to a further lease of the land for such further term and at
such rent and subject to such conditions
as may then be provided or permitted by
Statute Ordinance or Regulation;
NOTICES (d) That any notice requirement demand consent or other
communication to be given to or served upon the Lessee under this
lease shall be
deemed to have been duly given or served if signed by or on behalf of the
Authority and delivered to or sent in a
prepaid letter addressed to the Lessee
at the registered office of the Lessee in the said Territory BUT if for any
reason the Lessee
does not have a registered office in the said Territory then
at the usual or last-known address of the Lessee or affixed in a conspicuous
position on the premises;
EXERCISE OF (e) Any and every right, power or remedy conferred on the
POWERS Commonwealth or Territory in this lease, by law or implied by law may
be exercised on behalf of the Commonwealth or the Territory
or as the case may
(i) the Authority;
(ii) an authority or person for the time being authorised by the Authority or by
law to exercise those powers or functions of the
Commonwealth or Territory;
(iii) an authority or person to whom the Authority has delegated all its powers
or functions under the
Planning and Development Act 2007
IN WITNESS whereof the Authority on behalf of the Commonwealth
and the Lessee have executed this lease.
Signed by [name of signatory] )
a delegate authorised to execute this
lease ) ....................................................
on behalf of the
Commonwealth in the ) Delegate
presence of [name of witness] )
.....................................................
Signed by )
.................................................... ................................................
Signature Signature
.................................................... ................................................
in full Name in full
..................................................... .....................................................
Director/Secretary Director/Secretary
PUBLICATION DETAILS
To be completed by Member's
________________________________________________________________________
DAVID ALAN SHEARER
RESPONDENT:
ACT PLANNING
& LAND AUTHORITY
PARTIES JOINED:
ANTHONY CARTER OWEN; ROY MCANDREW &
LORRAINE TOMLINS
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANT:
MR P WALKER
RESPONDENT:
MR D MOSSOP
PARTIES JOINED:
SOLICITORS: APPLICANT:
MEYER VANDENBERG
RESPONDENT:
ACT GOVERNMENT SOLICITOR
PARTIES JOINED:
OTHER: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
PARTIES JOINED:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
MS P O’NEIL, SENIOR MEMBER
MCMICHAEL, SENIOR MEMBER
DR E MCKENZIE, SENIOR MEMBER
DATE/S OF HEARING:
10 & 11 DECEMBER 2008
DATE OF DECISION:
_______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (153 KB)
Signed PDF/A format