Police v Martin [2025] ACTMC 4 (7 February 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Police v Martin
[2025] ACTMC 4
Hearing Dates:
17 January 2025, 29 January 2025
Decision Date:
Special Magistrate Hassall
I find the defendant not guilty.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW –
Contravene family violence order – police
attended defendant’s residence to serve order – defendant refused to
police access – defendant’s children referred to in order
already inside residence – defendant refused to accept
order – order
placed by police at defendant’s front door – whether defendant
personally served with order –
whether condition in order relating to
children void for uncertainty – whether alleged contravention offence
capable of being
committed where defendant engaged in no positive act –
whether defendant recklessly breached order
Legislation Cited:
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT) ss 16, 20
Family Violence Act 2016
Court Procedures Rules
(ACT) r 6405(2)
Family Law Act 1975
Cases Cited:
[2013] 296 VSC 353
Athens v Randwick City Council
[2005] 65 NSWSC 58
DPP (Cth) v Poniatowska
[2011] HCA 43
[2011] 244 CLR 408
Sims v Drewson
[2008] ACTSC 91
In the matter of Sunnya Pty Ltd
Branko Tadic (Informant)
Kelvin John Martin (Defendant)
Representation:
S Cronin (ACT Director of Public Prosecutions)
Paul Edmonds (Defendant)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Crown)
Paul Edmonds & Associates (Defendant)
File Numbers:
CC 9406 of 2024
SPECIAL MAGISTRATE HASSALL:
Introduction
defendant is facing a single charge of contravening a family violence order
) contrary to
Family Violence Act 2016
Family Violence Act
That charge is punishable by a
maximum of five years imprisonment, however the prosecution elected to have the
matter heard summarily.
The hearing in the matter commenced in January 2025, and
I reserved my decision until today. In my assessment, it is a matter which
suitable for summary determination.
prosecution case is that on the evening of 18 September 2024 and in the early
morning of 19 September 2024, between 8:23pm and
2:49am, after Mr Martin was
personally served with a copy of the family violence order, he committed an
offence by breaching its
conditions, namely, being within 20 metres of two of
his children, and being in contact with those children other than in accordance
with the conditions of a parenting order which had been made under the
Law Act 1975
Family Law Act
) in April 2023.
facts were largely agreed, and it is primarily legal issues which are in
dispute. I nevertheless refer to some of the conventional
principles which apply
in respect of contested criminal matters. In circumstances where the facts are
largely agreed, my role includes
drawing inferences from those facts and
applying the law to those facts. I bring an open and an unbiased mind, view it
and dispassionately, and do not let emotion into the decision-making
process. The prosecution and the defendant are each entitled
to my verdict, free
of partiality, prejudice, favour, or ill will. The prosecution bears the onus of
proving the guilt of the defendant.
The defendant does not have to prove that he
did not commit the offence. The standard of proof is beyond reasonable doubt,
defendant cannot be found guilty unless the evidence that I accept
satisfies me beyond reasonable doubt of his guilt.
I am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to any one or more of the elements
of the offence, the defendant must be acquitted.
In addition, if I am satisfied
that there may be an explanation consistent with the innocence of the defendant
or if I am not sure
where the truth lies, I must acquit the defendant. The
defendant did not give evidence in the hearing. No adverse inference can be
drawn against him due to his decision to exercise his right to silence, nor can
the absence of evidence from the defendant be used
to fill in gaps or used as a
makeweight for any deficiency in the prosecution case.
is a matter in which the defendant says that the case against him is
fundamentally flawed on legal grounds.
Elements of offence
Family Violence Act 2016
to the elements of the alleged offence, these are partially set out in a
prosecution aide memoire which was filed in the court
on 17 January 2025. A
preliminary requirement, not mentioned in the aide memoire, is that for the
relevant offence provision to apply,
, the defendant either must have
been present when the family violence order was made, which is not the case in
this matter, or must
have been personally served in accordance with the
Family Violence Act
with a copy of the family violence order. That
prerequisite was contested by the defendant in this matter.
provides that where the court makes an interim family violence order, the
registrar must serve two copies of the order, one marked
as an endorsement copy,
as soon as practicable; however,
provides that the court may direct an FVO
be served by police. A direction of that kind was made in the present matter, as
by paragraph 4 of the family violence order made by Magistrate Cook on
2 September 2024.
Section 70C(3)
provides that service must be personal service,
except in circumstances which are not relevant to the present case.
service is not defined in the
Family Violence Act
, nor in the
Legislation Act
(ACT), however it is regulated by r 6405 of
Court Procedures Rules 2006
Court Procedure
), which provides relevantly as follows: ‘
document personally on a person, the person serving the document must give the
person either a sealed copy of the document,
or a stamped copy of the
.’ R 6405(2) (and this is the critical subsection for the
present case) provides: ‘
If the person does not accept the copy, the
person serving the document may serve it by putting the copy down in the
presence and telling the person in general terms what it
.’ The defendant contests that personal service was carried out in
accordance with r 6405(2).
other elements of an offence contrary to s 43(2) are that (according to the
prosecution aide memoire, which was not contested):
the defendant engaged in
conduct intentionally; the conduct contravened a family violence order; the
defendant was reckless as to
whether the conduct contravened a family violence
order; a family violence order was in place at the time of the contravention;
the defendant had been personally served with a copy of the family violence
order by a police officer.
note at this point that one approach the legislature could have taken, given
that the offence provision only applies if personal
service has occurred, would
have been to make s 43 an offence of strict liability. It has not done so, with
the result that the default
fault element applies in this case. The prosecution
must establish beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant was reckless as to
whether his conduct contravened a family violence order. There were submissions
made by the parties about whether the
Criminal Code 2002
recognises the concept of inadvertent recklessness, sometimes
referred to as wilful blindness. I will come back to that issue in due
short, the elements in contest here were: first, whether the defendant was
personally served with a family violence order; secondly,
whether the condition
that the defendant is alleged to have breached, being condition 1 paragraph (e)
is valid, and if valid, sufficiently
certain in its operation; if so, whether
the defendant’s conduct in fact breached that condition; and lastly,
whether the defendant
was reckless within the meaning of the Code as to the
contravention of condition 1, paragraph (e).
to the facts, these were, for the most part, agreed, and large parts of the
prosecution evidence were admitted by consent.
The defendant and his former
wife, [redacted], have four children together whose ages, as at September last
year, were 18, 15, 13,
and 9. In April 2023, in division 1 of the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of Australia, parenting orders were made which provided
that during school terms, the defendant was to spend time with his children
between 4.30pm to 7.30pm each Tuesday, and on alternate
weekends, from 7.00pm on
Friday until 7.00pm pm on Sunday. The orders also provided that the
defendant’s former wife has sole
parental responsibility for the
8 of the relevant orders, being an injunctive order pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), provided that the defendant was not to attend
upon the premises at [redacted], Cook, being premises where the
defendant’s
former wife resided (I understand this to be the former
matrimonial home), save for the purposes of changeover in accordance with
orders. In addition, order 8 provided that the defendant was not to attend the
children’s schools including [redacted].
Order 17 provided that the
defendant’s former wife ‘
has sole use and occupation of the
property known as and situated at [redacted], Cook in the ACT’
that background, on 2 September 2024, Magistrate Cook of this Court made an
interim family violence order pursuant to the
provision of the
Violence Act
. That order, which became Exhibit P1C in the proceedings,
identified Ms Martin as a ‘protected person’ and prohibited
respondent from being at various places and doing various things. Amongst other
things, the respondent was prohibited from being
at the defendant’s former
wife’s Cook address other than in accordance with a parenting order made
Family Law Act
, being within 20 metres of the defendant’s former
wife, and critically for this case:
“... engaging in behaviour that constitutes family violence towards the
protected person, including but not limited to the
following behaviour: exposing
children to behaviour that constitutes family violence, being within 20 metres
of or locating or attempting
to locate or contacting [names of children –
redacted] except in accordance with an order or a parenting plan made under the
Family Law Act
last condition was paragraph (e) of the orders and is the condition that the
defendant is alleged to have breached in the present
evidence indicated that around 3.00pm on 17 September last year, the defendant
collected [redacted] from his school (which I note
was possibly in breach of the
injunction set out in paragraph 8 of the parenting orders made on 27
April 2023). The next day, 18 September, around 3.00pm, the
defendant’s
former wife collected [redacted] from school. Later, around 6.00pm, the
defendant entered the residence at [redacted],
Cook (again apparently in breach
injunction), spoke to [redacted], persuaded [redacted] to come with
him, and thereafter proceeded with [redacted] to [redacted],
Cook, being the
defendant’s residence. The evidence indicated that the couple’s
daughter, [redacted], was also at that
Teague Street address, although the
evidence did not indicate how she came to be there.
8.00pm, a number of police officers including Constables Stirling and Muhick
attended the defendant’s house with a view
to attempting to personally
serve the defendant with the family violence order that had been made on 2
September 2024. Up until that
point, the defendant had not been served with that
order, and there was nothing in the evidence to suggest he was aware of it.
officers arrived at the defendant’s address around 8.08pm in the evening
of 18 September. Around 8.15pm, Constable Stirling
attempted to discuss the
order with the defendant, who declined to open the front door and who spoke to
officers through a glass
window with the curtains drawn back. There was then,
over the subsequent hour or so, a series of communications between Constable
Stirling, Muhick, and other officers and the defendant through the glass window
and at one point, around 8.23 pm, Constable Stirling
referred to the defendant
as having been served with the family violence order after it was initially
placed on the ground at the
foot of the glass window, through which the police
were communicating that the defendant, and then a short time later, picked up
and placed at the foot of the front door. The evidence relating to the
communications between the defendant and police officers was
all recorded on
body-worn camera footage of Constable Doloto, which became Exhibit P2 and which
I will return to.
Consideration
Validity of condition (e) of the FVO
turn then to consider the issues raised by the defendant to contest that the
prosecution is fundamentally flawed, and that his guilt
is not established
beyond reasonable doubt. I start with some consideration of the relevant
provisions of the
Family Violence Act
, where in the context of a risk of
family violence between two adults, there is a potential for children to be
Act facilitates at least two different approaches. First, the applicant may
apply for a family violence order which identifies
not only themselves, but also
one or more children as ‘protected persons’ – provided that
child or those children
satisfy the definition of ‘
’ within the meaning of the Act: see s 16(1). That approach is
potentially available, even if the child or children are not
the intended target
of alleged family violence, because family violence is defined to include
exposing a child to behaviour which
constitutes family violence, or merely
exposing the child to the effects of such behaviour: see s 8(1)(b).
different approach is reflected by s 38(2)(i) which sets out, as an example of a
condition of a family violence order that may be
made under the Act, prohibiting
the respondent from doing various things in relation to ‘a child of the
protected person’.
It can be noted that a condition of this type does not
involve any conclusion or assumption that the respondent to the order has
engaged in family violence, within the meaning of the Act, in relation to the
relevant child. Rather, the fact that the prerequisites
for the making of a
family violence order in relation to the parent have been satisfied triggers the
power to make an order with
a condition of that type, regardless of whether or
not the child has been a victim of, or exposed to, family violence, and
of whether or not the child is a ‘protected person’ for
the purposes of the order.
that background, I turn to consideration of the condition of the family violence
order which the defendant is alleged to have
criminally contravened. The order
was made on 2 September 2024 and identifies the defendant’s former wife as
the ‘protected
person’. None of the four children are identified as
‘protected persons’. The order sets out various prohibitions
defendant, being within 20 metres of his former wife, contacting his former
wife, and being at the former matrimonial home
at [redacted] in Cook where his
former wife resides, other than in accordance with parenting orders made under
Family Law Act 1975
, to which I have made reference, it would have been open to the Court
to have included in the family violence order a prohibition
on the respondent
doing any of the same things in relation to one or more children of the parties,
regardless of the fact that the
children were not identified as ‘protected
persons’ under the order, and regardless of whether or not the children
been themselves the subject of family violence. That is not, however, the
approach that was taken. The provision of the order, which
relates to the
parties’ children, is condition (e). It reads as follows:
The respondent is prohibited from engaging in behaviour that constitutes family
violence towards the protected person, including
10 but not limited to the
following behaviour: exposing children to behaviour that constitutes family
violence, being within 20 metres
of, locating, or attempting to locate or
or a parenting
plan made under the
Family Law Act 1975
other words, what condition (e) purports to do is to set out a general
prohibition on the defendant engaging in family violence
towards his former
wife, and then purportedly sets out two examples of such conduct, namely,
exposing children to behaviour that
constitutes family violence, and secondly -
and I paraphrase and abbreviate - being within 20 metres of or contacting the
other than in accordance with a parenting order made under the
Family Law Act 1975
problem, as I see it, however, is that neither of the two examples provided,
which are the only prohibitions expressly related
to the children, necessarily
involves behaviour which constitutes family violence towards their mother, Ms
children to behaviour that constitutes family violence might involve family
violence towards Ms Martin, but it might not.
For example, if the defendant,
hypothetically, engaged, in some form of psychological or emotional abuse of one
of the children in
his own premises aimed solely at that child, without any
reference to his former wife and occurring entirely in the absence of his
wife, whilst that behaviour would constitute family violence in relation to the
child, it is difficult to see how it could
possibly constitute family violence
towards the defendant’s former wife.
and again, hypothetically, being within 20 metres of one of the children, other
than in accordance with a parenting order,
might constitute family violence
towards the defendant’s former wife, but it might not. For example, if the
defendant attended
an event at the child’s school which his former wife
did not, and he did so solely for the purpose of sharing in his child’s
experience but in breach of the parenting order, it is difficult to see how that
could constitute family violence towards the defendant’s
former wife. In
my assessment, it follows that a layperson who reads or read condition (e) with
a view to complying with it might
well have difficulty working out what it
prohibits. One plausible interpretation is that it only prohibits conduct of the
out in the order in relation to the children if that conduct also, in
fact, constitutes family violence against the defendant’s
former wife.
Another possibility is that a layperson such as the defendant might read the
provision and simply not know what it
means or prohibits so far as the children
are concerned.
interpolate at this point that it is arguable that the conduct of the defendant
which allegedly breached condition (e) of a family
violence order, putting to
one side for the moment whether he was personally served with it, arguably did
not constitute family violence
in relation to his former wife. Being within 20
metres of two of the children and contacting them, within his own residence in
absence of the defendant’s former wife, albeit in circumstances not
permitted by a parenting order, might somehow be argued
to constitute an
indirect form of family violence against his former wife, but it is at least
equally arguable in my view, and certainly
in the context of criminal
proceedings where the prosecution bears the onus of proving its case beyond
reasonable doubt, that it
does not constitute family violence in relation to the
defendant’s former wife. The conduct, on one view, involved no more
the defendant wanting to spend time with his children without giving a
moment’s thought to the position of his former
wife, and without directing
any of his conduct towards her.
follows in my view that the wording of condition (e) is flawed in a fundamental
way, and ultimately incapable of supporting a finding
of guilt of the defendant
beyond reasonable doubt in relation to his admitted conduct in this case. Either
the two examples contained
in condition (e) are void, which would leave only the
general prohibition relating to the defendant’s former wife which I am
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt the defendant could be said to have breached
by his admitted conduct. Alternatively, the meaning
of the purported examples in
the context of the general prohibition created by paragraph (e) is so uncertain
in the context of a
person who, unlike the defendant, in fact read the condition
and then engaged in conduct of the type engaged in by the defendant,
incapable of establishing beyond reasonable doubt that that person knowingly or
recklessly breached the condition.
reaching my conclusion, I had regard to the decisions of, first, the New South
Wales Supreme Court in
v Randwick City Council
[2005] 65 NSWSC 58 and the decision of the Supreme Court of Victoria,
[2013] 296 VSC 353. The first of those cases,
, dealt with a situation where orders made under environment
legislation were, on one view, ambiguous. The proceeding involved an
contempt of the orders by one of the parties. Critically, the court concluded in
that case that if the only ambiguity on
the face of the order is between two
meanings, and the recipient is shown to have breached the order whichever of the
two meanings
is adopted, that may be sufficient to establish contempt, unless it
appears that the breach may have been due to uncertainty as to
what steps were
is different from the present case because, in my assessment, the present case
is not one where, on either of the available interpretations
of condition (e) of
the family violence order, the defendant would be able to be proven beyond
reasonable doubt to have contravened
the order. As I have said, in my
assessment, it is open to find that none of the defendant’s conduct on the
evening in question
was directed towards his former wife, nor that it
constituted family violence towards his former wife, the protected person under
the order, meaning that on either of the interpretations of paragraph (e) to
which I have referred, the defendant would not have
been in contravention of the
, like the present matter, involved an alleged breach of
a family violence order. The conditions in that order were very broad. They
involved a person who was a politician. One of the conditions of the order
prohibited the respondent from providing information in
relation to a protected
person’s ‘personal, family, and professional interests to any third
person’. Some constitutional
issues relating to the freedom of
communication were raised, but an additional argument was that the relevant
provision was void
for uncertainty. The court concluded that the terms of the
relevant order were capable of being given a certain and definite meaning
were not invalid for legal uncertainty on their face.
my assessment,
is different from the present case. At paragraph
149, the court noted that the respondent did not point to any aspect of the
clause as uncertain in meaning in relation to the contravening conduct
which he committed. That is different from the present case,
because clause (e)
is uncertain in relation to the conduct which the defendant has admitted he
engaged in.
conclusion about paragraph (e) is sufficient to dispose of the matter in favour
of the defendant, but for completion, given the
parties argued a number of other
issues, I will briefly give my reasons and decision in relation to those
Personal service
defendant challenged that he had been personally served with a family violence
order in accordance with r 6405 of the
Court Procedure Rules 2006 (
For the purposes of that rule, particularly subs (2), the defendant admitted
that he did not accept a copy of the family violence
order, and further admitted
that he had been told, in general terms, what the order was. What he contested,
for the purposes of r
6405(2), was whether or not relevant police officers had
‘put down a copy of the order in his presence’.
evidence indicated that during the communications with the defendant through a
glass window, police officers had placed the order
initially at the foot of the
glass window whilst talking to the defendant and within his eyeshot, and that
they had later picked
up the same order, and again within eyeshot of the
defendant, placed it at his front door, with Constable Stirling, at the relevant
time, saying words to the effect that the defendant had been served and,
‘this is now yours.’
those circumstances, I am comfortably satisfied that the document was ‘put
down in the defendant’s presence’,
notwithstanding that he was on
the other side of the glass window. As I have noted, the defendant has admitted
through his lawyer
that he had heard enough through the glass window from the
police officers to understand, ‘in general terms’, what the
was, and the document was placed within 1 or 2 metres of his physical body,
albeit separated by a glass window within his
eyeshot. In those circumstances, I
am comfortably satisfied that it was placed down ‘within his
presence’. I note the
findings of Justice Black
In the matter of Sunnya
[2024] NSWSC 988
Reckless breach of
turn then to the question of whether the defendant was reckless as to his
conduct breaching provisions of the family violence order.
This issue only
arises if I am wrong about the validity of condition (e) and its actual effect
to prohibit the defendant from being
within 20 metres of the children, amongst
other things, other than in accordance with a parenting order, which is one of
contended for by the prosecution. As I have noted, s 43 is not
specified to be a strict liability offence. In those circumstances,
even if the
defendant had been personally served with the order, and I have found that he
was, the operation of the Code is such
that default fault elements apply, and in
particular, it still has to be established beyond reasonable doubt that the
defendant was
at least reckless as to his conduct breaching the family violence
order within the meaning of the Code - in other words, that he
was aware of a
substantial risk that his conduct would breach the family violence order, and it
was unjustifiable for him to take
the risk in the circumstances.
finding of recklessness, in my view, is problematic in a case like this where
the defendant simply refused to read the family violence
order or to accept it,
and resisted all attempts to have it explained to him by the attending police
officers by talking over the
top of the officers, asking them to leave
repeatedly, and from time to time, walking away from the window where they were
communicating
with him and, of course, refusing to open the front door.
were made to him through a glass window to the effect that if he did not come
out of the house, he will ‘technically’
be breaching the order, and
more specifically, as far as the children were concerned, that because the
parenting order did not specify
that he could have the children on Wednesday
night, which is what occurred on 18 September last year, he would be
breaching the family
violence order if he did not leave the house. The
prosecution submitted that the defendant, in effect, was wilfully blind to
his conduct breached the order, and (in circumstances where he was told
he would be breaching the order as it related to the children
if he stayed in
the house) did so; that amounted to recklessness, whether the defendant read the
actual wording of the order or not,
and whether the technical detail of the
order was allowed to be explained to him or not.
comparison, the defendant, through his legal representative, submitted that, in
circumstances where he has not read the family
violence order and refused to
have its conditions explained to him, he was not ‘reckless’ within
the meaning of the Code
as to a breach of the order. It was further submitted by
Mr Edmond that lawful blindness is not enough because inadvertent recklessness
is not something that is recognised in the Code under s 20, which refers to a
defendant being ‘aware of a substantial risk’.
There was some
discussion of this issue by Justice Besanko in
Sims v Drewson
, although his Honour’s comments about the concept of
inadvertent recklessness and the Code were
the facts, it seems to me at least possible that the defendant might have
thought police attended his residence because he was
contravening the parenting
orders that had been made by the Family Court in 2023, rather than because of a
family violence order
with which he had not previously been served and is taken
to have been unaware. In the circumstances, I would not have been satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that the defendant was reckless within the meaning of
the Code that his conduct breached the family violence
order, notwithstanding
that he accepts that he was told in general terms what it was, and that he had
been told, to some extent,
or attempted to be told through a glass window, and
that his conduct of continuing to be in the presence of the children on a
not allowed by the parenting orders would amount to a breach which
would result in his arrest.
my view, the prosecution case falls short of establishing beyond reasonable
doubt that the defendant was ‘aware of a substantial
risk’ that his
conduct would breach the family violence order as it related to their children,
being the order which he had
not read and refused to have explained to him. I
note this type of situation could be addressed by the legislation, particularly
Family Violence Act
being amended to provide where personal
service has occurred, the offence is one of strict liability, which would
require the defendant
to establish a reasonable mistake of fact.
Offence by omission?
and relatively briefly, I note that the defendant argued that the conduct in
which he engaged could not constitute an offence
because it was solely a
‘crime of omission’. Mr Edmonds, on behalf of the defendant,
referred me to s 16 of the Code,
which provides that an omission to do an act
can only be a physical element if the law creating the offence makes it a
physical element,
or the law creating the offence impliedly provides that the
offence is committed by an omission to do an act, and that there is a
deliver under a territory law or a law of the state or the Commonwealth.
Edmonds emphasised the fact that the defendant, as I have found, after he was
personally served with the family violence order,
engaged in no positive act. He
merely stayed in his own residence and declined to leave the residence. Mr
Edmonds asserted that,
for the purposes of s 16 of the Code and
Family Violence Act
it could not be seen to be a law which made
an omission a physical element of an offence, or impliedly provided that a
contravention
is committed by an omission to do an Act and that there is a duty
to do under a territory law or a law of the state or the Commonwealth.
Ultimately,
I disagree with this submission.
Family Violence Act
sets out examples of conditions of orders which can be made under the Act.
Amongst other things, it specifies that a respondent may
be prohibited from
‘being’ within a certain distance of a protected person, and
‘being’ at certain premises.
If Mr Edmonds is correct, then provided
the respondent to a family violence order did not contribute to a situation
where he or she
found themselves within a certain distance of a protected person
or at premises, in contravention of the conditions of a family violence
he or she would be able to simply remain at the location if they wished.
my view, that is inconsistent with the clear statutory purpose of
provisions of the
Family Violence Act
In my view, and I do not
ultimately need to decide this, either
does, within the meaning of
make an omission, at least, in some circumstances, a physical element of an
offence contrary to
, or it impliedly provides that the offence is committed
by an omission to do something while it imposes a duty to do that very thing,
such as if one finds oneself being a respondent to a family violence order, in a
state of contravention of the order, positive steps
must be taken to avoid a
criminal breach.
is significantly different from the offence provision considered
by the High Court in
DPP (Cth) v Poniatowska
[2011] HCA 43
[2011] 244 CLR 408.
case concerned the interpretation of a provision of the
Criminal Code Act
(Cth) in the context of social security legislation, which provided
that a person is guilty of an offence if the person engages in
conduct where
consequently the person obtained a financial advantage from a Commonwealth
my assessment, the offence provision considered by the High Court in
Poniatowska
had a different statutory purpose and did not contain any
indication that, unlike the
Family Violence Act
, that it was intended to
apply, at least in some scenarios, in respect of the omissions.
Ultimately,
I find the defendant not guilty of the alleged offence, and accordingly, I
dismiss the charge.
I certify that the preceding fifty [50] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for his Honour Special Magistrate
Associate: Vishanee Allaire & Lucy James
Date: 04/03/2025
RTF format (233 KB)
Signed PDF/A format