Paxevanos and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Ors [2008] ACTAAT 20 (19 August 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: PAXEVANOS AND ACT PLANNING & LAND AUTHORITY & ORS
(19 AUGUST 2008)
Catchwords:
Land and planning – review of decision to approve a
lease subdivision for multi-unit residential purposes and for a place of
and religious associated use – compatibility of proposal with existing
streetscape – number of storeys of multi-unit
development – side
boundary setbacks – private open space of units – overshadowing
– overlooking –
access and mobility – traffic –
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1989, s 37
Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991, ss 7, 8, 230, 245, Div 2.3
Legislation Act 2001
Tree Protection Act 2005
Tree Protection ( Interim Scheme) Act 2001
Kourpanidis v ACT Planning and Land Authority
[1998] ACTAAT 229
Mr M H Peedom, President
Ms P O’Neil, Senior Member
Mr R Nichols, Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT07/52
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
ROB PAXEVANOS
ACT PLANNING &
THE EXECUTIVE
UNITS PLAN 1165
EVERYL ELLIS
CHURCH INC.
OLD NARRABUNDAH
COUNCIL INC.
Parties Joined
Mr M H Peedom, President
Ms P O’Neil,
Senior Member
Mr R Nichols, Member
The decision under review is set aside and substituted by a decision that
approval of the development application be refused.
....................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT07/52
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
ROB PAXEVANOS
ACT PLANNING &
THE EXECUTIVE
UNITS PLAN 1165
EVERYL ELLIS
CHURCH INC.
OLD NARRABUNDAH
COUNCIL INC.
Parties Joined
REASONS FOR DECISION
19 August 2008 Mr M H Peedom, President
Ms P O’Neil,
Senior Member
Mr R Nichols, Member
The decision under review
The applicant in this case has applied for the review of a decision of a
delegate of the respondent made on 28 September 2007 pursuant
to sections 230
and 245 of the Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991 (
). The decision was to approve a development application subject
to conditions.
The development application
2. The development application was made in respect
of a parcel of land known as Block 11 Section 100 Division of Narrabundah
“the subject land”
3. The subject land is irregularly shaped and has an area of
. It has an elevated position with frontages
to Goyder Street, Leahy Close and Hindmarsh Drive, although it is separated from
Goyder Street carriageway by a wider than usual verge, apparently a service
easement for electricity services and to allow for future
road improvement.
4. The existing development on the subject land comprises a Macedonian
Orthodox Church building which has a domical system of roof
construction. The
building is a recognisable landmark within the Narrabundah community. It is
located on a knoll and is visually
prominent from lower lying areas,
particularly from Hindmarsh Drive when travelling either towards the east
(Fyshwick) or west (Woden).
5. A multi unit residential development known as ‘The Regent’ is
located on the adjacent Block 12 to the west of the
subject land. This
development comprises ten single storey units that address a central internal
driveway. Block 12 was sold at
auction in October 2000. The lease conditions
allowed a maximum number of 10 units to be developed on site and a maximum
height of two storeys. The Planning Control Plan for Block 12
dictated the development of a small, compact housing form with a substantial
landscape zone in the southern portion of the site (that is, visible from
Hindmarsh Drive).
6. To the east of the subject land, also within Section 100 and on the same
(southern) side of Goyder Street, is a single storey
retirement housing complex
operated by the Salvation Army (‘Mountain View’). This development
and the neighbouring development
further to the east (Jindalee nursing home) are
low density campus-style developments in landscaped settings. Other community
are located on large sites on the south side of this section of
Goyder Street (Buddhist Society, Polish Catholic Centre, Narrabundah
Centre and Marymead Child and Family Care Centre).
7. Immediately to the south of the subject land in Leahy Close is a multi
unit residential development (
“Greengate”
) that is two and
three storeys in height. Some of the closest units to the subject land are two
storeys in height and feature habitable
rooms at ground level that have an
outlook to the north, towards the proposed residential development on the
subject land.
8. Opposite the subject land on the northern side of Goyder Street, the
existing development is predominantly single storey detached
9. Goyder Street has a continuous canopy of mature trees. There are
additional plantings within well established private gardens
of residences on
the northern side of the street.
10. The development application seeks approval to:
(a) subdivide the subject land (16,940 square metres) into two separate
parcels – a church site (6,700 square metres) and a
multi-unit residential
site (10,240 square metres);
(b) a variation to the subsequent Crown leases to vary the purpose clauses to
(i) the church site to be used for a place of worship and religious
associated use; and
(ii) the multi-unit development site for residential purposes limited to not
more than 56 dwellings;
(c) (Stage 1) – establish the National Headquarters for the Macedonian
Church in Australia on the church site including the
construction of a new
community hall, a bell tower, a new Bishop’s residence, Baptismal pool,
cladding the existing dome of
the church with new copper sheets, parking
associated with the church and the community hall;
(d) (Stage 2) – construction of a multi-unit residential development
comprising 56 units with associated car parking; and
(e) associated landscaping, paving and other site works.
The hearing
11. At the hearing of the appeal, which was held on 18-20 March, 3 June, 17
and 18 June and 28 and 29 July 2008, the applicant and
the parties joined who
were objectors to the appeal (
“the objectors”
represented by Mr C Erskine, SC. The party joined, the Macedonian Orthodox
Church Inc. (
“the Church”
), was represented by Mr P Walker,
of counsel and the respondent was represented by Mr D Mossop, of counsel.
12. Evidence was given on behalf of the objectors by Ms C Middleton, Mr G
Shoobridge, Mr S Bevanda, the applicant and Mr T de Takach-Tolvay.
The written
statements of Ms E Ellis, Mr K Bruce, Major R Garven and Mr J Lynch were also
admitted in evidence on their behalf.
Evidence was given on behalf of the
Church by Mr A Adams, Mr B Baxter and Mr J Randall. Evidence was given on
behalf of the respondent
by Mr E Streatfeild. A number of documents were
tendered in evidence on behalf of the parties and the Tribunal also had before
the respondent’s statement of reasons for the decision under review and
other material required to be provided to it by section
37 of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal Act 1989 (
“the T documents”
). The Tribunal
also undertook an inspection of the subject land and the surrounding area in the
presence of the parties and/or their
representatives and heard the submissions
made by the representatives of each of the parties.
13. The objectors opposed the giving of approval to the development
application on a number of grounds. The principal grounds of
objection are set
out below together with our conclusions in relation to them and the relevant
planning policies on which those conclusions
were based.
Applicable planning policies
14. Under the Land Act, approval is unable to be given to a development
application that would be inconsistent with the Territory
Plan (see section 8
15. The subject land is subject to the Part B1 Residential Land Use Policies
of the Territory Plan (
“the Residential Land Use Policies”
Permitted uses of land subject to the Residential Land Use Policies include
single dwelling housing and, subject to restrictions,
multi-unit housing and
community activity centre.
16. The restrictions on multi-unit housing require a lapse of 5 years since
the original dwelling was certified as completed where
the lease is expressed to
require the erection of a single dwelling and, for a proposal for dual occupancy
housing, the plot ratio
of any additional new dwelling that does not directly
front a public road from which vehicular access is permitted shall not exceed
half of the permissible plot ratio of all development on the block or 17.5%,
whichever is the lesser.
17. “Community activity centre” is defined in Part D of the
Territory Plan to mean:
the use of land by a public authority or a body of persons associated for
the purpose of providing for the social well being of the
The restrictions on a community activity centre are requirements that it be
demonstrated that the use will not have a significant
adverse impact on
surrounding residential development and the building form and materials have a
domestic character and scale compatible
with the locality.
18. The Residential Land Use Policies (clause 3.6) also contain specific
objectives applicable to “suburban areas”, a
term which is defined
so as to include the subject land. The specific objectives are:
To ensure development respects characteristic features of existing
attractive streetscapes such as building scale, height and setbacks,
character and architectural style and is compatible with adjoining
development.
To retain a limited level of flexibility to accommodate a variety of
additional housing to meet changing community needs and preferences.
19. In addition, the following control is applicable to development in
suburban areas:
involving subdivision or consolidation of blocks must be accompanied by
information that demonstrates how the proposed development
fits in with the
existing suburban character of the area.
20. Within areas subject to the Residential Land Use Policies area
specific policies also apply to sub-areas. The subject land and
most of the
land in Section 100 with frontage to Goyder Street is subject to Area A3:
Residential/Community Sites area specific policies
) which provide:
a) Land use
Add to Schedule 1:
USE. Existing school buildings may be used for offices of sporting, cultural,
social or other ACT Government or non-profit
community based
organisations.
21. “Community use” is defined as:
a child care centre, a community activity centre, a community theatre, a
cultural facility, an educational establishment, a health
facility, a hospital,
a place of worship, and/or a religious associated use.
“Place of worship” means:
the use of land for the primary purposes of religious worship and
associated activities by a congregation, religious group or members
public whether or not the premises are also used for religious instruction,
tuition, meetings, training and other community
activities.
“Religious associated use” means:
the use of land for the activities conducted by religious organisations
other than for worship or for offices and may include residential
accommodation
by ministers of religion.
22. The Residential Design and Siting Code for Multi-Dwelling Developments
Appendix III.2 of the Territory Plan (
) applies to
the subject land. Clause 9.1(d) of Part A3 Territory Plan Administration
Policies provides that a proposal in a residential
area cannot be approved if it
is inconsistent with the relevant provisions of the Code.
23. Clause 9.2(b) of the Part A3 policies also provides that in relation to
development applications the relevant authority must
carefully consider any
relevant planning guideline or interim guideline contained in the Register of
Planning Guidelines. The Narrabundah
Neighbourhood Plan, the ACT Planning
Guidelines for Access and Mobility 2004, the Parking and Vehicular Access
Guidelines and the
Draft Noise Management Guidelines are such guidelines.
24. The Narrabundah Neighbourhood Plan under the heading “Future
Character of the Suburban Areas”, states that the “Suburban
Area” of Narrabundah is the residential area that will change the least
over time. It acknowledges that over time existing
dwellings in the area will
be renovated or redeveloped as single or dual occupancy developments to
modernise or adapt to contemporary
ways of life. However, it envisages that the
low density character will remain. Under the heading “Future character of
A3 Area” the Narrabundah Neighbourhood Plan recognises this area
contains a mix of residential/community sites managed by the
government or
non-profit community based organisations and includes the “low density
single storey” Regent townhouse
development. Under the heading
“Future character of the Medium Rise Residential Development Areas (B1
Area)” the Narrabundah
Neighbourhood Plan does not propose an extension of
the B1 Area in Narrabundah.
Development context
25. The objective and control referred to in paragraphs 18 and 19 above
require that consideration be given to the compatibility
of the proposed
development with the existing streetscape features while retaining limited
flexibility to accommodate a variety of
housing to meet changing community needs
and preferences. Evidence was given in relation to the issue on behalf of the
by Ms Middleton and Mr Bevanda and for the parties joined by Mr Adams
and Mr Baxter.
26. Ms Middleton is a qualified and practising town planner. She holds a
Bachelor of Town Planning Degree (UNSW), a Master of Planning
Degree (UTS) and a
Graduate Diploma of Population Health. She is a Fellow of the Planning
Institute of Australia and a Certified
Practising Planner.
27. In her evidence Ms Middleton gave her opinion that the proposed
development failed to meet the requirements of a number of applicable
policies. She said that the proposed development was apparently designed to
match the three storey development on the adjoining
development on Block 35,
which was permitted by the B1 policies that applied to that site and other
development in Leahy Close to
the south of the subject land, rather than respond
to the less intensive scale of residential development that existed within
residential areas where the applicable development control included a
maximum height of buildings of two storeys. She agreed that
the proposed
residential development on the subject land and the adjoining development of
Block 35 would be similar in character
but considered that it would be
inconsistent with the predominantly single storey residential development on the
northern side of
Goyder Street and the low rise one to two storey development on
the southern side of Goyder Street which was contained within landscaped
space. She accepted, however, that the view of the residential development
would largely be confined to that obtained from
Hindmarsh Drive where the
applicable speed limit was 80 kilometre per hour and that the most relevant
perspective of the proposed
development would be from Leahy Close. From that
perspective, the proposed residential development would be similar in scale and
character to the existing development in Leahy Close which was subject to Area
B1 Area Specific Policies which permitted three storey
development.
28. In relation to the proposed community hall, Ms Middleton noted that it
was to be 811m
and that in response to objections to
the development application the Church had provided the following further
information regarding
The bar and dance floor are ancillary to the use of the Community Hall and
have been included to ensure that the community hall can
be used for official
Church and cultural functions.
The main pastoral care and religious activities to be held at the
Community Hall include Sunday School, church choir practice, wakes
according to
Macedonian Orthodox traditions, assembly of the Diocese, gathering and
celebration of the church patron’s day
St Kliment, and assembly of all
Macedonian Churches in Australia.
To maximise the use of the Community Hall, it is intended that it is [sic]
also be used for Community Development Activities and Macedonian
and English
classes. Community development activities include Macedonian women’s
group activities (charity and fund raising),
Macedonian Australian Humanitarian
Organisation meeting, settlement information nights, health information sessions
and workshops,
legal information sessions and workshops, and information
sessions and workshops for youth. Macedonian and English classes include
classes in Macedonian language, history and culture, adult English classes, and
a library with Macedonian and English books, journals,
magazines and
newspapers.
29. She considered that,, having regard to its proposed size and use the
community hall should be regarded as a “Place of Assembly”,
not permitted in a residential land use area. “Place of Assembly”
is defined in Part D of the Territory Plan as:
the use of land for gatherings of people to attend functions whether or
not for the purposes of gain.
30. She also considered that the hall and the associated Bishop’s
residence and parking for 61 cars would be out of character
with the low rise
building forms, landscape character and architectural style of existing
development in the A3 area of Goyder Street
and the suburban residential areas
31. Mr Bevanda is a qualified and registered architect. He holds a Bachelor
of Architecture degree from the University of Canberra.
He has had over 15
years’ experience as an architect, specialising in design and
documentation of energy efficient passive
solar residential architecture. His
current work as an architect primarily involves designing new houses and
extensions to older
32. Mr Bevanda expressed the opinion that, to the extent to which the
proposed development appeared to have been designed to match
the adjacent
“mass and bulk” of the development on Block 35, it was out of step
with the less intensive character of
the established adjoining A3 suburban area
33. He said that the documentation provided with the development application
offered little information to demonstrate how the proposal
with its suburban neighbours. The context plan did not accurately represent the
close relationship the proposed
development would have to adjoining development
and their respective private outdoor spaces. There were no long site sections
elevations to document the physical relationship between the proposed
development and adjacent developments. There were no perspectives
to show how
the units were intended to appear in relation to the neighbouring dwellings.
34. Mr Adams is a qualified and practising town planner. He holds a
Bachelor of Applied Science in Applied Geography. He is a Certified
Planner and Member of the Australian Planning Institute. In regard to the
context of the development he said that he
could think of no sound planning
reason as to why development should be visually compatible in response to
statutory boundaries.
From the perspective of the “man in the
street” the statutory boundaries are irrelevant, what he or she is seeking
a pleasantly appearing streetscape, regardless of statutory boundaries. He
considered the material provided with the development
application including the
context plan and the discussion of adjacent land use and neighbourhood
relationships and street character
included in the design response report allows
a judgement to be made as to whether or not the proposed development fits in to
local environment. Mr Adams considered the proposed development was
compatible within its local setting.
35. Mr Baxter is an architect and urban designer. He holds a
Bachelor’s degree in Architecture and a Bachelor of Planning
and Design.
He has been a registered architect since 1988. In his evidence he described the
character of the different adjoining
developments and concluded that the
existing character of the area is an eclectic mix of different building types
and heights. He
considered therefore that an appropriate way of achieving
compatibility with the existing context is for the proposal to mediate
adjoining disparate elements. He concluded that the proposed development fits
in with the existing suburban character of
36. The evidence of the various witnesses is that the character of the
adjoining development is variable. Most of Leahy Close to
the east is
characterised by 2 and 3 storey apartments and town house buildings. On the
side of Leahy Close opposite the subject
land are the large scale, but generally
low rise institutional buildings of the Salvation Army housing complex. These
a much lower level than Leahy Close. The residential component of
the proposal is to be well separated from the single storey residential
development on the north of Goyder Street and Ms Middleton agreed that its
primary visual impact would be in Leahy Close. The subject
land and area are
currently dominated by the existing church building. There was no evidence to
suggest that the streetscape of
Leahy Close was an attractive streetscape or had
any particular characteristic features. It was not said that the context of the
subject land has any cohesive suburban character. The single multi-unit
development to the south of the church was developed in
2000 and Ms Middleton
advised that at the time two storey development was permitted by the development
conditions.
37. The view was put to the Tribunal by Ms Middleton and Mr Bevanda that the
character and scale of the development should not reflect
that of the adjoining
development in the B1 area but rather should reflect those controls which govern
residential redevelopment
in an A3 area. The Tribunal does not accept this
view. The proposal is not residential redevelopment and therefore is not bound
by the controls which affect redevelopment. The plan requires consideration of
the existing streetscape and existing character rather
than “zoning”
boundaries. In so far as the Bishop’s residence and hall are concerned
these are already permissible
under the provision of the existing lease.
38. Given the mixed character of the streetscape and adjoining development
the Tribunal finds there is no inconsistency with the
requirements of the
Territory Plan in regard to the proposal’s respect for characteristic
features of the existing streetscape
or compatibility with adjoining
development.
39. In relation to the community hall, we consider that the use proposed for
it by the Church would involve a religious associated
use and, hence, be
permitted as a community use under the A3 policies. There is nothing in the
design of the hall or the context
in which it is proposed that would suggest
40. The plans of the development application for
the proposed residential site of the subject land show six buildings (Blocks
containing a total of 56 self-contained residential apartments. Blocks A,
B, C, D & F comprise 3 floor levels. Each third level
is described in the
plans as an attic level and contains self-contained apartments. Access to the
apartments at each level, including
the attic level, is obtained from a stairway
with a landing at each level. Each stairway is contained within an enclosed
that is constructed partially forward of the front face of each block
and partially recessed within it. At the top of the stairs
leading from the
ground floor level to the first floor level there is a full length return
platform to the foot of the stairs from
the first floor level to the attic level
landing. There is a void above the staircase and landing outside the entrance to
floor level apartment.
41. The main roof of each block is pitched at 35 degrees. The external
component of each stairwell is capped by a roof pitched at
35 degrees and at
right angles to and slightly lower than the ridge of the main roof.
42. Elevation drawings of the rear face of the 3-level blocks show a dormer
style window and a balcony for each apartment. Each balcony
is contained within
the line of the roof. Entrance to the balcony is from a sliding glass door
opening from a living area. The front
of each balcony is enclosed by a vertical
wall to balustrade height on the interior side. On the external side the tiled
roof slopes
35 degrees from balustrade height to the guttering level below.
Either side of the balcony is enclosed by vertical walls angled from
height at the front to ceiling height at the rear.
43. A roof pitched at 3 degrees from the main roof ridgeline extends
approximately 0.6m above the balconies of the apartments in
Blocks A, B & C.
It is shown to extend 1.9m above the balcony of the apartments in Block D. We
are unable to locate any drawing
which depicts the roof overhang of the
balconies of the apartments in Block F.
44. Control 3.4 of the Code is entitled “Number of Storeys”. It
provides that, with exceptions not applicable in this
case, “buildings
shall not contain more than two storeys. Subject to clause 3.6, a basement
and/or an attic, may also be permitted”.
(Clause 3.6 is not relevant).
45. “Storey” is defined as:
a space within a building that is situated between one floor level and the
floor level next above, or if there is no floor level above,
the ceiling or roof
above but does not include an attic or a basement.
46. “Attic” is defined as:
any habitable space contained wholly within a roof pitched at not more
than 36 degrees above the ceiling line of the storey immediately
below, except
for minor elements such as dormer windows and the like.
47. A Development Application and Design Response Report prepared by
architects on behalf of the lessee was relied upon by the objectors
of their contention that the proposed development would contravene clause 3.4.
It stated that:
The building height is mainly 2 storeys with the units facing Leahy Close
to have a third storey in the loft space of the pitched
roofs. This will match
the height of the existing adjoining development in
“Greengate”.
48. The adjoining Greengate development is located in an area which is
designated as Area B1 and subject to controls which permit
a maximum of three
storeys building height.
49. In giving her evidence Ms Middleton said that, in her opinion, the
external stairwell structures were not consistent with the
definition of
“attic” as they were not contained wholly within the roof form and
was not a minor element. The stairwell
appeared to have been designed as an
architectural feature. She was shown a revised plan of the stairwells (Drawing
No A505C). She
said that she would need to consider more detailed plans but the
drawing appeared to remove the prominence of the roof over the stairwell
upper level and reduced their impact. She considered it to result in the
stairwell being a minor element and no longer a feature.
50. Mr Bevanda gave evidence that the elements of the buildings which
included the top of the three storey high stairwell, each with
landings and/or
lobby/hallway spaces were not habitable space contained wholly within the roof
and could not be considered as an
attic. He also considered that the balcony of
each unit which was exposed and not covered by a roof could not be considered as
within the roof and should be considered as a storey. Further, he
considered that the balconies, bathrooms and laundry spaces were
not habitable
spaces or rooms and did not, therefore, comply with the definition of
51. It was suggested to Mr Bevanda in cross-examination that, to the extent
to which the partial covering of the balconies might
result in them being
regarded as a “storey”, the removal of any roof overhang would
result in them not being a “storey”.
In response, Mr Bevanda said
that because of the exposure of the balconies to the sun and the absence of any
cross ventilation within
the affected apartments, the absence of any roof
overhang would make them unliveable.
52. Mr Baxter considered that the balconies were visually unobtrusive as
they had been “cut out” of the main roofline.
The dormer windows, in
his view, were of traditional expression consistent with the definition of the
“attic” in the
Territory Plan for minor elements not contained
within the roof. He considered that the revised plans for the stairwells
a better architectural solution and resulted in them being able to be
regarded as minor elements similar to a traditional dormer
window bay that
projects from the main roof.
53. Mr Adams considered that the use of the third floor level for modest
scale apartments would tend to add to the variety and improve
the affordability
of housing options in the area thereby meeting important planning objectives. He
disagreed with Ms Middleton’s
view that the apartments were not contained
wholly within the roof. He considered that the stair elements were not floor
that their location external to the pitch of the roof was not relevant
to the definition of “attic”. He also considered
that the stairwell
as depicted in the revised plans should be regarded as a relatively minor
element. In his view those plans showed
that the stairwell servicing the loft
apartments was not dissimilar to a dormer window and was compatible with the
definition of
“attic”. He considered that there should be eave
protection for the balconies but this did not result in them being a
because they would not be covered by a roof.
54. The planning policies to which reference has been made in these reasons
for decision are contained in the Territory Plan. The
Territory Plan is an
instrument made under the Land Act (see definition of “instrument”
Legislation Act 2001
and Division 2.3 Land Act). While the views of
the expert witnesses who were called to give evidence on behalf of the parties
to the meaning of Clause 3.4 may be informative, the policies are required to
be interpreted by the application of relevant provisions
Legislation Act
except so far as those provisions are displaced (see
Legislation
Section 139
Legislation Act
requires that an interpretation that
best achieves the purpose of the provision of the statutory instrument in
question is to be
56. Clause 3.4 of the Residential Land Use Policies is one of a number of
controls that identify the purposes for which land may
be used and which impose
requirements that apply to proposals to undertake development (see clause 3
Guide to the Territory Plan).
The purpose of Clause 3.4 is to be determined
primarily by reference to its terms. The imposition of a restriction on the
of storeys of a building has the practical effect of limiting the height,
albeit without imposing a restriction determined by measurement.
Together with
other planning controls that affect setback distances from boundaries and, in
some cases, the plot ratio of development,
a restriction as to the number of
storeys of a building affects the bulk and density of development to which it
applies. It may
also achieve a level of compatibility of adjoining and nearby
development, the extent of overshadowing that is cast and have other
57. Having regard to what we discern to be the purpose of Clause 3.4 we find
nothing to prevent its terms being given their ordinary
58. Each of the attic level balconies is contained within a space that has
been cut into the main roof of the building within which
it is located. Each
balcony is fully enclosed on only one side and covered by a small section of
roof overhang that affords protection
of the kind given by eaves. The
balconies, in our view, do not form part of the interior part or inside of the
buildings in which
they are located and are not “space(s) within a
building”. Accordingly, they do not constitute a “storey”,
that word is defined, and do not involve any contravention of Clause 3.4.
59. During the course of the hearing it was proposed that the eaves overhang
of each balcony be removed so as to make it more clear
that there was no roof
above their floor. The evidence before the Tribunal, particularly that of Mr
Bevanda, is that the removal
of the eaves would be an unacceptable design
outcome. In light of the conclusion which we have reached that the balconies
spaces within a building, such a design revision is unnecessary.
60. In relation to the stair well, it is, we consider, arguable that the
platform return at the first floor level is of sufficient
dimension to be
regarded as a floor so as to make the space below it a separate storey within
that space of each building. The landing
outside the entrance door way of each
attic level apartment is, however, only approximately 2 metres in width and of
insufficient
dimension to be capable of being regarded as a floor. It is
unnecessary, therefore, to determine whether the stair well is excluded
definition of “storey” on the basis that it is an
61. In our view, neither the balconies nor the stair wells fail to comply
with the requirements of Clause 3.4. We note, however,
that a number of the
expert witnesses regarded the alternative design proposal contained in drawing
No. A505C as a preferable design
solution. That design replaces the upper
staircase with a return staircase that reduces the size of the stair well above
floor level and replaces the pitched roof with a sloping roof
consistently with the slope of the main roof. Were the development
application
to be approved, we consider that there should be added a condition that would
allow approval to be given to that option.
Side Boundary Setbacks
62. Mr Bevanda gave evidence that, in his opinion, the proposal did not
comply with the requirements of Appendix III. 2 of the Territory
relation to side boundary setbacks from the north-western boundary adjoining the
proposed Bishop’s residence. The
relevant Performance Criteria of the
The privacy of dwellings and private outdoor spaces to
be protected.
Dwellings to be sited to enable their northern facades
to receive adequate sunshine in winter.
Dwellings to be sited to ensure good sunlight access to
their main private open space.
Buildings to be sited to minimise overshadowing of
northern facades of adjacent dwellings and private outdoor spaces.
63. A related performance measure is D3.1 which specifies 9 metres for the
side boundary clearance from an upper floor level for
the “outer walls of
unscreened decks, balconies and external stairs over 12 metres behind the Upper
floor level building line”.
64. Mr Bevanda identified the first floor levels of units in Block F (units
42-56) as being a minimum dimension of 4 metres from
the side boundary as
compared with the 9 metres minimum of Performance Measure D3.1. Each unit is at
an angle to the common boundary
and has an upper level balcony typically about 4
metres distance from the boundary at its closest point. The apartments being to
the south do not overshadow the bishop’s residence, nor was there evidence
that the Bishop’s residence limited sunlight
to the units or their open
65. Although the proposed setbacks do not meet the relevant performance
measure, there is no basis for a conclusion by the Tribunal
that this would
result in a failure to meet performance criteria P3.2, P3.3 or P3.4. We have
addressed the issue of privacy, to
which performance criterion P3.1 is directed,
Private Open Space
66. Mr Bevanda identified a number of ground floor units that failed to have
the minimum dimension of 6 metres set out in Performance
Measure D4.2 of the
Code. He did not give evidence of a failure to meet the relevant Performance
Criteria or Objectives.
67. The plan provides in Appendix III.2 Performance Measure D4.2:
Location and dimensions of private open space:
attached or detached house, provision of at least one area of useable private
open space that is screened from public view,
directly accessible from an indoor
daytime living area and meets the following minimum area and dimension
requirements: Minimum
10% of the average block area per dwelling,
Minimum Dimension
• Minimum dimension of private open space on balconies:
68. The relevant Performance Criteria of the Code is P4.2:
Part of the private open space to be capable of enabling an extension of
the function of the dwelling for relaxation, dining, entertainment,
and children's play, and be directly accessible from the dwelling.
69. Mr Streatfeild pointed out that the condition of approval 9(b)(v)
required the 6 metre dimension to be achieved for units 1,2,7,8,13
relation to units 19,21,22,26,27,31 and 32, Mr Streatfeild was of the view that
the Objectives and Performance Criteria
of the Code were met. He considered
that although these units appeared to have a dimension in one direction of about
5 metres, nevertheless,
the overall configuration and northern orientation
together with direct access to the large central communal open space ensured
provided a reasonable level of amenity. The Tribunal accepts Mr
Streatfeild’s view that the open space provision for these
units is not
inconsistent with the Plan.
70. A further issue raised during the hearing was whether the private open
space of the units facing Leahy Close was adequate because
of the slope
resulting from the difference in levels between the buildings and the courtyard
wall. This would be affected by the
nature of construction of the courtyard
walls and the extent of fill placed to obviate excessive slope and would vary
from unit to
unit. Mr Baxter provided some diagrams showing how different areas
might be dealt with. He was of the view that it was not necessary
large flat area.
71. Ultimately different occupants of the units may choose to use these open
space areas in different ways. It is not necessary at
the point of construction
to determine a detailed allocation of these spaces but rather to be assured that
the area is capable of
their designated use. No evidence was given that the
slope of the areas prevented the criteria being met and as the performance
was met the Tribunal does not find an inconsistency with the Territory
Overshadowing
72. Shadow diagrams show that Block F of the proposed residential
development would cast shadow onto part of the nearest house to
the east on
mid-winter mornings. That is the applicant’s house within the
Regent’s Park complex. On 21 June shadow
would fall onto the main bedroom
and living room façade prior to 9am, but would be gone from the yard
entirely by 10am. The
family/kitchen area of the house and the children’s
play area outside of it would not receive shadow from the proposed residential
development at any time and would retain access to sunlight throughout the day
in mid-winter. No other units in the Regent’s
Park complex would be
affected by overshadowing.
73. The shadow diagrams also show that shadow would be cast by Block D of
the proposed residential development in the afternoons
onto the nearest unit
within the Milson complex to the east. Shadow would enter the private open
space outside the unit at about
2pm and reach the facade of the building by 3pm.
The units on either side would be less affected.
74. While any overshadowing in winter is undesirable, that extent of
overshadowing is not excessive in the context of adjacent multi-dwelling
developments. The Territory Plan at Appendix III.2 does not require
overshadowing to be non-existent, but to be minimised. The
overshadowing does
not result from a failure to meet side setback measures in the Territory Plan.
We do not find that the proposed
development fails to satisfy the requirements
of the Territory Plan in this regard.
Overlooking
75. In addition to overshadowing, the applicant expressed concern about
overlooking from the windows and balconies of Block E of
the proposed
residential development. Block E complies with the prescribed side and rear
setbacks in the Code. It does not have
attic level apartments, and the only
possible overlooking is from the first floor units. There are four such units
within Block
E, but two of them are located more than 30 metres from the
boundary closest to the applicants’ land, so that any overlooking
ameliorated by angle and distance as to be of no concern in planning terms.
Limited overlooking could occur from the bedroom
window and balcony of proposed
unit 41 on the first floor, and to a lesser extent from those of unit 40 next to
it. The respondent
has required that the balustrade be of solid material, as
opposed to transparent material in some other units, and that the bedroom
windows have external shutters fixed over them. These features are designed to
reduce the possibility of overlooking. Noting that
the proposal meets the
performance measures for these side setbacks, we do not find that it fails to
satisfy requirements of the
Territory Plan in this regard.
76. A more significant setback issue arises in relation to distance between
Block F on the north-west boundary of the proposed residential
development and
the proposed Bishop’s residence on the church land. The performance
measure in the Code, as noted above, stipulates
a 9 metre setback from the
boundary for upper floor balconies. The balconies of the 8 first floor units
facing the Bishop’s
residence are between 4 and 8 metres from the
boundary, while those of the two attic level units in Block F are 8 metres from
boundary. Thus they do not meet the relevant performance measure. The
Bishop’s residence is in turn only 3 metres on the
other side of that
boundary. The balconies face north-west and are the designated, and indeed
only, private open space for the 6
upper floor level units in Block F. Some
would have a clear view into the rooms marked as “study” and
and the rear yard of the Bishop’s residence.
77. Revised plans were submitted on behalf of the Church to the Tribunal
which showed Block F containing units 42-56 further away
from the side boundary
so that the first floor levels were set back 9 metres from the boundary. Whilst
the revised plans resolved
the setback issue, Mr Streatfeild indicated they
would not be supported by the respondent because they introduced other problems
including an entrapment zone along the side boundary and potential interfacing
problems between units 9 and 56 and also between units
7 and 52. He was also
concerned that moving the building may have implications for vehicular
accessibility for the basement and
that this had not been assessed.
78. Mr Streatfeild referred to the terms of the approval which had a
condition 9(c)(iii) that: “privacy to the Bishop’s
residence and
rear yard from Block F balconies on the multi unit site be demonstrated by
diagrams”. Diagrams indicating how
and a pergola were submitted in evidence. Mr Walker in his final submission
suggested that
the Tribunal could add a condition of approval which required
further amendment of the plans in the way indicated. These would specifically
require awnings and a pergola on the Bishop’s residence to negate loss of
such a mechanism would be
sufficient to ensure the performance criteria were met.
79. There are three
Eucalyptus Blakelyi
located near the Leahy Close
frontage. They are regulated trees as defined in the
Tree Protection Act 2005
At the time of the earlier development application over this land, the trees
were assessed under the Tree Protection (Interim Scheme)
Act 2001. The
Conservator of Flora and Fauna approved the removal of one of the trees on the
grounds that it was a danger to public
safety, while the remaining two trees
were required to be protected during the construction phase. That approval had
that there was no approval extant for the removal of one tree nor for
construction work in the root protection zone of the other
two trees when the
application was approved. The respondent imposed a condition dealing with that
80. The Conservator’s approval was predicated upon the earlier plans
and, moreover, the tree protection legislation has changed
in the intervening
period. During the course of the hearing, fresh approvals from the Conservator
for the removal of one tree and
for groundwork within the tree protection zone
of the other two trees was granted under the
Tree Protection Act 2005
respondent and the Church both proposed conditions relating to tree protection
which required that no damage be caused to a
protected tree and that no
prohibited ground work be carried out otherwise than in accordance with an
approval given by the Conservator
of Flora and Fauna under the
Tree Protection
. We believe the conditions proposed by the respondent to be
appropriate.
Access and mobility
81. The Church tendered in evidence two letters from Eric Martin &
Associates, architects, the effect of which was to assert
that, subject to
attention being given to a number of specified matters, the proposed development
met the requirements of the ACT
Planning Guidelines for Access and Mobility and
AS4299 Adaptable House Class C.
82. Mr Bevanda was of the view that the letters did not document full
compliance with the Guidelines and the Standard and drew attention
considered to be the resolution of a number of issues not to a high standard.
Nevertheless, he was disposed to accept
the assurances given by Eric Martin
& Associates that the minimum standards could be met.
83. In response to questions asked at the hearing, Mr Streatfeild agreed
that levels shown on the ground floor plan made it apparent
that the landing of
unit 55 was 1.73m higher than the ground level at the foot of the stairs leading
to it. He accepted that it
would be necessary to change the approach of the
pathway leading to unit 55 or provide lift access to it so as to achieve
with the access and mobility guidelines. A similar solution would be
required for adjoining units 50 and 51.
84. It is clear that, as presently depicted, the plans in respect of which
approval is sought do not demonstrate compliance with
access and mobility
requirements. The evidence of Mr Streatfeild satisfies us, however, that
compliance is capable of being achieved
and we consider that the condition
proposed by the Church, as follows, should be imposed on any approval of the
development application:
Delete condition 8.1 and 9(f) proposed by the respondent and substitute:
within 28 days from the date of this decision, or within such further time as
may be approved in writing by the Planning and
Land Authority, the developer
shall lodge with the Planning and Land Authority for approval:
(a) a revised access and mobility report and plans demonstrating
compliance with the ACT Guidelines for Access and Mobility; and
(b) revised plans A-01 Issue C, A-07 Issue F, A-50 Issue D, A-51 Issue D,
A-52 Issue D, A-53 Issue D, A-54 Issue D, A-55 Issue D and
Drawing 303
(landscape plan) showing access to Units 50, 51 and 55 clarified with regards to
levels adjacent to the entry from the
footpath to ensure that an unimpeded path
of travel, in accordance with the ACT Guidelines for Access and Mobility.
85. Evidence was received from Mr Paxevanos, Mr Stan Bruce, Ms Everyl Ellis
and Mr Tomas de Tokach-Tolvay, all of whom are residents
of the area, of their
experience of traffic delays and parking problems. Expert evidence was heard
from Mr Graeme Shoobridge of
Hughes Trueman for the objectors, Mr John Randall
of Bill Guy and Partners for the Church and Mr Paul Isaks of the Office of
in the Department of Municipal Services for the respondent.
86. This part of Narrabundah/Red Hill has been recognised as having traffic
problems for many years. In 2000 the then Department
of Urban Services
commissioned Maunsell McIntyre Pty Ltd to develop a master plan, in light of the
history of relatively high vehicle
speeds and traffic volumes and accident
history contributing to a deficiency in residential amenity in the study area.
The conclusion
to Goyder Street Local Area Traffic Management Study Report 2001
“the Maunsell Report”
Goyder Street has long been recognised as a street with a very high
proportion of through traffic, high traffic speeds (downhill),
visibility over crests and traffic volumes that make it difficult for
pedestrians to cross roads and residents to enter
and exit their driveways.
Although daily traffic flows have been slowly declining over the past 20
years the road is still carrying excessive volumes and speeds
of traffic.
Recent planning decisions have resulted in further increases in traffic along
Goyder Street. Traffic noise is also
a concern to residents, especially from
heavy vehicles using the road as a through route.
87. The Maunsell Report at Figure 3-2 shows land uses within the study area
at the time, from which it appears that further medium
density residential
development has occurred in the Leahy Close/Goyder Street in the intervening
88. The Maunsell Report recommended that a master plan be implemented in two
stages for traffic management in the area. The Goyder
Street, Narrabundah Local
Area Traffic Management Evaluation of Stage 1 Works by the Department of
Territory and Municipal Services
found that much of the Stage 1 work had been
undertaken, resulting in an improvement but not resolution of the adverse
traffic effects.
The work undertaken included redesign of the intersection of
Goyder Street with Dalrymple Street and changes at the intersection
of Hindmarsh
Avenue and Dalrymple Street. Two traffic calming measures proposed have not
been implemented.
89. The combination of works was believed by the author of the Maunsell
Report to have had the effect of reducing the extent of
“rat-running”
and thereby the reduction in recorded traffic volumes,
although speeds still remain higher than desired. It was agreed by the experts
that in peak hour there was a substantial delay at the intersections.
Photographs were tendered showing queues of traffic on Dalrymple
Street at peak
hour. Moreover, both Mr Randall and Mr Shoobridge gave evidence that the
intersection of Goyder and Dalrymple Streets
recorded high minor accident rates.
90. The traffic volume count in Goyder Street was estimated by the Office of
Transport at 4,030 vehicles per day in April 2007, taking
into account
adjustments made by Mr Isaks for reductions during school holiday periods. This
is the most recent count available to
the Tribunal, and is consistent with the
counts for the years since the road works were undertaken, being 4,050 in 2004
in 2006 (no count is given for 2005). For the five years preceding
the redesign of the Goyder Street/Dalrymple Street intersection
implementation of traffic management measures following the Maunsell Report, the
traffic volumes had been measured at between
4,300 and 4,800 vehicles per day.
In earlier years traffic volumes had reached 5,000 and 6,000 vehicles per day.
91. In summary the evidence shows that Goyder Street traffic is in excess of
that recommended by the Maunsell Report; Dalrymple Street
south is over
capacity; Dalrymple Street north is just under capacity; while Leahy Close is at
capacity and in excess of capacity
at peak hour. The proposed residential
development would generate approximately 340 vehicle movements per week day
which would exit
onto Leahy Close. Leahy Close is classified as an Access
Street C. It exits onto Goyder Street, near the intersection with Dalrymple
Street. It already carries all traffic from the large number of residential
units there, for which it provides the only street access.
92. There is no disagreement among the experts as to the accuracy or
interpretation of the traffic data. Their disagreements revolve
around such
questions as whether Goyder Street should be treated as a major collector street
or a minor collector street. That is
a clear point of disagreement between Mr
Randall and Mr Shoobridge. Mr Randall considers that Goyder Street acts as a
major collector
street, as is indicated by the volumes of traffic it has carried
over many years, and that accordingly 6,000 vehicle movements per
upper limit. His Traffic Impact Statement for the development was based on that
premise. He considered that the development
could be approved because the
traffic volume in Goyder Street would meet that standard. Mr Shoobridge’s
position was that
Goyder Street is classified as a minor collector street, the
traffic management measures have been devised on that premise and that
properly fits the description of a minor collector street. For a minor
collector street the upper limit is 3,000 vehicle movements
per day. Mr
Shoobridge’s evidence was that whether a street is a major or minor
collector is a reflection of its function
within the street hierarchy, not the
traffic volume it carries. Streets such as Goyder Street may carry traffic
volumes greater
than they should if they are used not only as collectors for
local traffic, but for “rat-running”. For example, Goyder
used by traffic travelling between south Canberra and Woden. Accordingly, Mr
Shoobridge did not think the proposed development
should be approved, absent the
implementation of additional traffic management measures.
93. Mr Randall opined that since the proposed development lies within the
local area it should be approved, since the problem is
one created mainly by
through traffic rather than internal traffic. However he agreed in
cross-examination that whether traffic
is internal or external does not affect
the perception of loss of amenity of residents. He did not disagree with the
the conclusions of the Maunsell Report, based on a need to improve
the amenity of residents and aimed at reducing volumes in Goyder
Street from the
then existing levels in the order of 4,5000 vpd. Amenity in the traffic context
was accepted by Mr Randall to include
traffic noise, air pollution, vehicle and
pedestrian safety, and difficulty in access to and egress from the road
94. We do not think that where Goyder Street sits in the ACT street
hierarchy is a matter we need to resolve. It is acknowledged
that street
hierarchy definitions devised for new areas are not readily superimposed onto
older areas where road systems were designed
on different criteria. It was not
disputed that the Stage 1 traffic measures aimed at reducing the traffic volume
in Goyder Street
to 4,000 vpd were appropriate. The latest traffic measures
show that it is just marginally above that objective. A volume of 3,000
being the indicative two-way traffic volume for a minor collector street would,
the experts agree, be preferable from the point
of view of the amenity of
residents. That is the criterion stated at C117 in the ACT Planning and Land
Authority document “Future
Urban Areas Residential Subdivision Code March
2008”, as the maximum desirable traffic volume for streets fronted by
Both Dalrymple Street and Goyder Street are fronted by dwellings and
carry well in excess of 3,000 vpd.
95. Mr Isaks’ view is that Goyder Street has the capacity to absorb
the additional traffic, in conjunction with the progressive
implementation of
recommended traffic management measures aimed at reducing through traffic. His
oral evidence, however, was that
there are no current plans to proceed with two
traffic calming measures proposed in the Maunsell Report that have not been
implemented
nor had he been able to ascertain whether, and if so when, they
would proceed. Rather it seems that work in other suburbs now has
priority. He
also confirmed his opinion, first recorded in 2006, that if the development were
to proceed a small number of residents
on Goyder Street should be provided with
a reversing area to allow them to access and depart their blocks in a forward
That suggestion has not been taken up.
96. With regard to Leahy Close, the evidence is that the additional traffic
movements generated by the development would render it
over its capacity at peak
hours. The data shows that Leahy Close is already at capacity at peak hours
causing delays in exiting
for residents. Further delays could be expected at
the Leahy Close/Goyder Street intersection at peak hours if the development were
approved. No measures to ameliorate this potential problem were advanced by its
proponents.
97. Section 7 of the Land Act states the object of Territory Plan as
(1) The object of the plan is to ensure, in a way not inconsistent with
the national capital plan, that the planning and development
of the ACT provides
the people of the ACT with an ecologically sustainable, healthy, attractive,
safe and efficient environment in
which to live, work and have their
recreation.
(2) The plan must set out the planning principles and policies for giving
effect to its object.
(3) For giving effect to the object of the plan and the principles and
policies mentioned in subsection (2), the plan may—
(a) set out specific objectives and policies; and
(b) specify purposes for which land may be used; and
(c) identify land for subdivision 2.3.4, specifying in addition the
principles and policies for its development; and
(d) for division 5.7—identify an area of land as public land and
reserve it for a purpose specified in section 193; and
(e) provide for other matters relevant to the exercise of the powers of
the Territory, the Executive or a territory authority under
a territory law, or
the administrative review of the exercise of those powers; and
(f) provide for other matters that are necessary or convenient.
98. Attention was drawn to Part A3 clause 9.3 of the Plan (Plan
Administration Policies) which requires careful consideration of,
among other
The amount of traffic likely to be generated and its impact on the
movement of traffic on the road system.
99. The Residential Land Use Policies at Part B1 of the Plan include the
objective to:
amenity, safety and special qualities .... of established residential areas
while carefully managing change in suitable
locations .
100. There is evidence of long-standing adverse impact of traffic
on the amenity of the neighbourhood sufficient to stimulate the
ACT Government
to commission the Maunsell Report in 2001 and implement most of its
recommendations. Additionally there is evidence
of residents before the
Tribunal of more recent experience of traffic delays. There is evidence that
the development, if approved,
would increase existing delays at the Leahy Close
intersection and that the recognised environmental capacity of that street would
be exceeded. Some hundreds of vehicle movements per day would be added onto
other nearby residential streets, in particular Goyder
Street and to some extent
Dalrymple Street. Both already experience traffic volumes in excess of those
considered appropriate for
new residential areas. There is evidence that Mr
Isaks recommended some years ago that residential development on this land
preferably be accompanied by measures to allow some residents of Goyder
Street to exit their properties safely. There is no evidence
of any attempt to
require any such measures or to manage the additional traffic. Rather, the
evidence is that no further works on
the road system in the neighbourhood are
101. The objectors submitted that it was a function of the planning system
to ensure that infrastructure was provided consistent
with development and land
use changes. Accordingly it followed that subdivision of the church land and
change of use of part of
it for 56 residential units should not occur when the
evidence demonstrated that the road infrastructure would be inadequate. The
respondent and the Church submitted that the evidence did not establish that
there would be significant adverse impact of traffic
movement on the road
system. We have carefully considered the evidence of the impact of the
additional traffic on the road system
servicing the proposed residential
development but do not agree that it would be insignificant.
102. Reliance was placed by the Church on
Kourpanidis v ACT Planning and
Land Authority
[1998] ACTAAT 229
, where traffic impact of a proposed
development in the Dickson Group Centre was in issue. In that case the Tribunal
did not consider
that a development should be refused despite evidence of
traffic problems in the area. There the evidence was that the increase
traffic caused by the development would be only one of a number of contributors
to increased traffic congestion. Other identified
contributors were in
particular the development of Gungahlin but also other proposed developments in
the Dickson area. This case
also differs in that it is in a residential not a
commercial area, where the Territory Plan specifically requires that the effects
of traffic volume on the amenity of the established residential areas be
considered.
103. We believe it would be inappropriate to add to it a further 340 or more
traffic movements to Goyder Street in the absence of
any evidence of a further
downward trend in traffic volume or of identified additional traffic engineering
solutions being implemented.
We have regard to the fact that the additional 340
vpd would return traffic levels on Goyder Street close to those recorded before
the Maunsell Report and the expenditure of government funds on traffic
reduction, which work was endorsed by the expert witnesses.
We note that the
evidence shows that not only Goyder Street but also Dalrymple Street and Leahy
Close experience traffic stress and
also Mr Isaks’ opinion that works to
provide safer egress for some residents of Goyder Street would be beneficial.
Mr Shoobridge’s approach to that of Mr Randall, whose view was
that development should not be constrained even if traffic standards
met. We can find no basis for that approach in the Territory Plan.
104. Complaints about the potential for residential development to cause
traffic problems are not uncommon, but this proposed development
differs from
other larger residential development proposals by virtue of its location. Its
only street access would be onto Leahy
Street, a small street already at or over
capacity and with only one exit. The traffic would then flow onto other
residential streets
that have been demonstrated to have traffic problems and in
part through intersections already congested at peak hour, before it
arterial roads. In the absence of any proposals by the respondent or the Church
to deal with the impact of the additional
traffic that would be generated by
this proposed development, and the evidence that the implementation of
recommendations to remove
recognised pre-existing problems in the local area
remains indefinitely incomplete, we find that Objective (d) of the Residential
Land Use Policies is not satisfied.
105. The proposed residential units would require 84 parking spaces for
residents and 14 for visitors according to the ACT Parking
and Vehicular Access
Guidelines (
“the Parking Guidelines”
). One hundred and one
have been provided. The Bishop’s residence has two parking spaces.
According to the Parking Guidelines,
the church would require 33 parking spaces.
Sixty-one have been provided for both the church and the community hall, on the
that the two buildings would not be in use at the same time. It is not
disputed that the parking for both the residential component
of the development
and the church is adequate.
106. The major area of difficulty lies in relation to the number of parking
spaces needed for the hall proposed to be erected on
the church site parallel to
Leahy Close. This would be a single storey building with a GFA of
, containing a commercial size kitchen and various
other meeting rooms in addition to the main hall with a seating area of about
, a fixed stage and a dance floor. Disagreement
exists as to the basis on which the parking needed for this building should be
calculated.
The Parking Guidelines provide different methods for assessing
parking needs for different uses. A church or theatre requires one
space for every four users. A community hall requires four parking spaces for
107. Information provided by the Church described the potential use of the
hall as including wedding receptions, 21st birthday celebrations
and the like.
In its first report, Bill Guy and Partners had placed the hall in the same
category as the church. That is consistent
with the proposed lease purpose of
“religious associated use”. Four hundred users were anticipated,
with a resultant
need for 100 car spaces plus 10 for staff. In Bill Guy and
Partners second report it was reclassified as a community hall. As well
changing the category, the number of users was reduced to 240, so that only 36
car spaces were required. No provision was made
for staff parking. Mr
Randall’s evidence was that the change of numbers was as a result of
changed instructions from the client.
The outcome of the changes was to allow
the proposed development to meet the parking requirements in the Parking
Guidelines, whereas
hitherto it had not, yet neither the building scale nor its
uses had changed. Mr Randall and Mr Baxter referred in oral evidence
church halls with limited parking, but it was argued on behalf of the objectors
that the church halls selected for comparison
did not have parking arrangements
typical for church buildings in Canberra. Mr Bevanda also gave evidence of the
use of the hall/function
room at All Saints Church in Ainslie. He had been
informed that it was less than 200m
and no more than
120 seats were provided. He thought that was a reasonable usage.
108. The respondent’s decision accepted 36 spaces as the appropriate
number. However, in evidence it also advanced the proposition
that if the
number of parking spaces on site was inadequate, nearby public land could be
used. There is a substantial area of public
land on the verge between the
church site and the Goyder Street carriageway which includes an electrical
easement. Mr Streatfeild
gave evidence that in his experience it was common and
relatively easy for organisations to obtain a temporary licence from the
part of the Department of Territory and Municipal Services to use
nearby public land for overflow parking for special events attracting
than usual number of cars. In his opinion the public land along Goyder Street
could be so used and would hold about perhaps
60 cars, thereby overcoming any
shortfall of dedicated parking on the premises. While we do not question Mr
Streatfeild’s knowledge
and experience in these matters, there is no
evidence from the relevant authority indicating that it would approve the use of
verge land for parking. Mr Randall gave evidence that he was aware of,
although not personally involved in, negotiations with the
authorities to get
approval for verge parking, but so far as he knew the matter was unresolved.
The T documents show that the ACT
Planning and Land Council, in considering the
proposal in 2006, specifically stated that “all car parking associated
community facilities should be contained within the church site”.
109. Mr Adams agreed with the view that the parking rate given in the
Parking Guidelines for a place of assembly, being four spaces
of GFA, was appropriate. As the hall is proposed
, 36 car spaces would be required. He said
that he was sure that the 61 planned parking spaces would be more than enough.
He considered
the capacity of the hall by reference to the Building Code of
Australia (
), which he said was concerned with
issues such as safety. The BCA allows one person per one
. As the hall would be roughly
, it could accommodate up to 400 people, requiring
100 car spaces at the rate of one space per four people. He quoted a rate
by the Westin Hotel in Sydney for function rooms accommodating one
person per 1.9m
. In his view that would be a more
appropriate rate, but it is unclear to us why the Westin Hotel in Sydney would
be considered comparable.
In cross-examination he agreed that 400 people could
be seated on theatre style seating in rows facing the stage for a performance
assembly, although he thought that would be unusual.
110. Mr Shoobridge said that assessing parking needs on the basis of the
“number of bodies”, that is the number of seats,
gives a more direct
connection than relying on floor area. He thought that the rate of one car park
per four persons for church
use was probably based on the needs of a family of
four. In his opinion it was not necessarily safe to assume the church and hall
use would not overlap. He saw nothing to justify the change from 110 to 36
parking spaces. In the event of a shortfall he foresaw
the use of the Goyder
Street verge in the first instance, followed by parking on Leahy Close and
Goyder Street. He agreed that the
latter might only occur in exceptional
circumstances, would be unlikely in peak hours and that parking overflow is
acceptable for
events beyond the 95 percentile.
111. Notwithstanding Mr Shoobridge’s reservations, we are inclined to
proceed on the assumption that church and hall use will
not overlap, so that
their parking needs would not be cumulative. We think it unlikely that a church
service would be held at the
same time as the other kind of functions identified
for the hall. However we accept his opinion that for a building of this type
the number of seats gives a better correlation with the number of users than
does gross floor area. We are concerned about the significant
decrease in the
projected maximum number of users from 400 to 240, given the lack of
justification for that significant decrease
and the fact that there has been no
associated proposal to reduce the scale of the hall. On the other hand, 400 is
likely to be
a maximum that might be reached very occasionally so as to fall
outside that for which on-site parking must be provided.
112. As to verge parking, we note that this is a new development proposal
and that the Church has available to it nearly 17,000m
of land. Sound planning would dictate that a development should not be
approved on the expectation that public land will necessarily
be available for
overspill parking, other than for exceptional events. We note the views of the
Planning and Land Council
in that regard. We make no assumption as to
the availability of overflow parking.
113. The question before us is whether 61 parking spaces would be adequate
in most circumstances. If Mr Adams is correct and 1.9
persons per
is realistic, then there would be about 216 people
in the hall, requiring 54 parking spaces. Mr Bevanda quoted with approval the
use at All Saints Ainslie of 120 seats per 200m
rate of 1.66 persons per m
. That would suggest 240
people could comfortably be accommodated and we think provides a better
comparison than the Westin Hotel
in Sydney. It agrees with the revised 240
maximum of the Church and results in a requirement for 61 spaces. Only if
parking were needed for function staff would there be at most a small
shortfall in parking. On that basis, we are prepared to accept
that parking
provision of 61 spaces is sufficient to satisfy the requirements of the
Territory Plan.
114. The development application in this case comprised a number of separate
components. It was submitted on behalf of the Church
that each component
constituted a separate decision which was required to be considered on its
merits. Each of the components identified
in written submissions made on behalf
of the Church contained as one of its ingredients, approval to the construction
of a multi-unit
dwelling with or without the specification of a maximum number
of units. Having regard to the conclusion which we have reached as
impact that approval of additional multi-unit dwellings would have on traffic,
it would not be appropriate to approve any
component of the development
application.
PUBLICATION DETAILS
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by Member's
________________________________________________________________________
ROB PAXEVANOS
RESPONDENT:
ACT PLANNING &
LAND AUTHORITY
PARTIES JOINED:
THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF UNITS PLAN 1165; KEVIN
BRUCE; EVERYL ELLIS; EDNA HAMILTON; MACEDONIAN ORTHODOX CHURCH INC; OLD
NARRABUNDAH
COMMUNITY COUNCIL INC.
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANT:
MR C ERSKINE SC
RESPONDENT:
MR D MOSSOP
PARTIES JOINED:
MR P WALKER (FOR MACEDONIAN ORTHODOX CHURCH
MR C ERSKINE SC (FOR OTHERS)
SOLICITORS: APPLICANT:
NICHOLAS DIBB SOLICITORS
RESPONDENT:
ACT GOVERNMENT
PARTIES JOINED:
CLAYTON UTZ (FOR
MACEDONIAN ORTHODOX
CHURCH INC.)
NICHOLAS DIBB SOLICITORS
OTHER: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
PARTY JOINED:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
MR M H PEEDOM, PRESIDENT
MS P O’NEIL,
SENIOR MEMBER
MR R NICHOLS, MEMBER
DATE/S OF HEARING:
18-20 MARCH; 3, 17 &
18 JUNE; 28-29 JULY
DATE OF DECISION:
_______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (176 KB)
Signed PDF/A format