Phillip Cao v Vaneet Grover [2008] ACTRTT 22 (21 October 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: Phillip Cao v Vaneet Grover [2008] ACTRTT (22)
Catchwords:
Water abstraction charges
Date: 21 October 2008
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES
TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT 489
PHILLIP CAO
(Applicant/Lessor)
VANEET GROVER
(Respondent/Tenant)
Tribunal :A. Anforth
Date :21 October 2008
Respondent/tenant is to pay the Applicant/lessor the sum of $413.26.
Office of Rental Bond is to deduct this sum from the bond held and pay the sum
to the Applicant/lessor with the balance to be
paid to the
Respondent/tenant.
Respondent/tenant is not required to pay any of the outstanding water
abstraction charge or network facilities tax.
..................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
) NO: RT 489
PHILLIP CAO
(Applicant/Lessor)
VANEET GROVER
(Respondent/Tenant)
REASONS FOR DECISION
matter concerned residential premises at 61 Matina Street, Narrabundah in the
ACT. The tenancy commenced on 16 August 2007 for
a period of 12 months at a rent
of $340 per week. A bond of $1360 was paid and lodged with the Office of Rental
Bond. This tenancy
followed immediately from a prior tenancy of 12 months
between the same parties on the same terms.
lease contained a clause which provided:
10. The tenant need to pay the expenditure of the house, such as
electricity, gas and phone bill, also the water bill. Landlord to
sewerage fee.
12 June 2008 the Applicant/lessor filed an application with the Tribunal. The
particulars of the complaint were in the following
Summary of Particulars
Issues in dispute
1. Failure to pay water bills on 3 separate occasions.
2. Damage to the rear security door - failure to rectify and written
repudiation of responsibility.
3. Failure to vacate despite formal written notice.
Nature of relief sought
1. Warrant for eviction.
2. Replacement of rear security door including installation
3. Payment of unpaid water bills before vacating.
History of dispute
Tenancy agreement between Tenant and Lessor's agents
1.1 The Tenant signed a lease agreement on the 16
of August 2007 for a lease from the 11
of August 2007
of August 2008 for the amount of $340.00 per
1.2 This was a renewal of a previous lease agreement which was under similar
conditions. The Lessor (Phillip Cao) was represented
by Andrew Yan (who in
conjunction with Ling Ling Cao has acted for the Lessor during both leases).
1.3 The Lease agreement includes a clause (no. 11) whereby either party can
terminate the lease at any time with two weeks notice.
1.4 Neither Andrew Yan nor the Lessor is available, the Lessor is currently
represented by Jason Yan and Ling Ling Cao under a power
of attorney.
Violation of tenancy agreement - unpaid
2.1 Clause 10 of the Lease agreement states that the tenant will pay for
electricity, gas, phone and water and states that the Lessor
will pay sewerage
fees. The water bill consisted of sewerage and water consumption and supply fees
and was paid in whole by the Lessor
who would then invoice the tenant for
consumption related water charges.
2.2 This arrangement had been the accepted practice by the tenant until the
end of 2007 when the tenant began ignoring the agents
written and oral requests
for payment of water consumption bills. The first such case was an invoice
issued towards the end of November
2007 for $151.92. This original invoice was
confirmed to have been received by the tenants during subsequent conversations
agents in January where the tenant and his wife were asked why the bill
was not paid.
2.3 This began a series of written correspondence during which the tenants
initially failed to address the matter of the unpaid water
bill which was
brought to their attention - and was the original cause of the communications by
the agents; and which also involved
a dispute over property damage (the rear
security door of the property, discussed in paragraph 3).
2.4 During the correspondence, the tenants were offered the opportunity to
jointly terminate the tenancy due to their failure to rectify
damage to property
and the issue of unpaid bills in conjunction to the continual decline of the
relationship, with the offer of a
positive reference if the dispute could be
resolved quickly.
2.5 Our bank records show that the outstanding bill was paid shortly after
our request to rectify: on the 16th January 2008, nearly
6 weeks after the
original request for payment.
Violation of tenancy agreement - Damage to
the rear security door, failure to rectify & failure to vacate when given
3.1 In late 2007, the tenant requested the agents (Andrew Yan & Ling Ling
Cao) to view damage to the backdoor, they noticed that
three screws were
missing, which they believed could be rectified with a screw-driver, and which
did not impact on the functioning
or integrity of the door.
3.2 About a fortnight later when they returned to the property again they
discovered the back door was on the ground with its steel
hinges twisted,
preventing re-attachment since it had appeared to have been pulled down.
3.3 Both Andrew Yan & Ling Ling Cao immediately informed the tenants of
their view at this inspection of the damage, that given
the state of the door,
the damage was clearly a result of unwarranted force and showed signs deliberate
damage; and it was therefore
the tenants responsibility to repair the damage.
The tenant's responded that they were not damaging the house but did not offer
explanation as to the cause of the significant damage when asked.
3.4 Approximately 2 weeks later the Tenants contacted the Agents by phone at
approximately 7am demanding that damage to the rear door
be fixed. The agents
responded by reiterating that the damage showed signs of unreasonable force
being applied to the door and it
was therefore the responsibility of the tenant
to repair it.
3.5 When the tenant's demands were rebuffed, the tenant then repudiated the
agent's authority to act - by claiming that Ling Ling
Cao had no right to talk
or reject his request since they were not the owner of the property - and became
very loud and abusive towards
3.6 Shortly afterwards the agents began written correspondence with the
tenants in early January 2008 during which time the tenants
responded to the
requests for payment of the water bill and repairs to the back door by
obfuscating their responsibility (described
below in para 3.7). After several
requests for the tenants to repair the damage, the back door was then raised as
being a result
of Lessor neglect.
3.7 During the correspondence they continually declined responsibility for
repairs to the rear door by citing alternating reasons
between the Lessor's
obligation to keep the premises secure; and the inconvenience of not being able
to ventilate the house through
the back door while ignoring the original issue
of the tenant's culpability for the damage.
3.8 The tenants were informed that even if they reasonably believed the
damage to the door was not directly their fault, they had
a duty to prevent
negligent damage including from their guests as well as a duty to mitigate any
existing damage that did occur.
However given the twisting and the type of
damage to the heavy steel frame that was witnessed by the agents and the fact
door was on the ground, they were unequivocally informed that the
damage was the tenant's responsibility.
3.9 An offer to voluntary terminate the lease were made by the Lessor's
agents due to the continuing failure of the tenants to accept
responsibility for
damage to the rear security door in conjunction with the failure to pay their
water bill in a reasonable timeframe;
combined with the clear deterioration of
the relationship between the parties.
3.10 They responded with demonstrably false claims about the promptness with
which they paid their bills. Bank statement show that
six weeks had elapsed
before payment of the requested amount. This was accompanied by their view that
they were not obliged to pay
certain metered amounts on the water bill which
related to their consumption of water. This is addressed later at paragraph
3.11 A formal request to vacate was made due to their repeated written and
oral repudiation of the requests to rectify damage to the
property (by letter of
23 January 2008). This was done twice, with the second request made under the
standard legally proscribed
form. The tenant contacted us by phone to tell us
that there was no alternate accommodation available - though the Tenant admitted
they had not begun searching.
3.12 They were informed both in the original letters and over the phone in a
conversation with Jason Yan (who would later assume Andrew
Yan's role in the
coming months as an agent for the Lessor) that the period to vacate was flexible
and could be extended to assist
them in finding alternate accommodation. They
responded that they would require it extended until the end of the lease and
to negotiate an alternate time frame.
3.13 The tenants have never disputed in correspondence that the door was in
good condition and could be closed when the property was
delivered nearly 2
years ago under their first lease and at the beginning of the second lease.
History of tenancy
4.1 During the course of the tenancy, numerous repairs have been made
including the replacement of a new toilet and a new oven (which
was then rapidly
damaged requiring professional warranty repairs).
4.2 Throughout the tenancy the Lessor's agents have tolerated a great deal of
damage to the property and have paid for repairs which
they have not always
believed to have been reasonable.
4.3 The agents have also found the tenants to be less than forthcoming in
their communications including making demonstrably false
and misleading
statements regarding their payment of bills or their knowledge of property
damage heretofore mentioned as well as
the dire difficulty in finding alternate
accommodation despite little evidence of any genuine attempt being made.
4.4 The Lessor's agents also suspect that the tenant is subletting rooms in
the property to acquaintances without approval due to
repeated comments about
the tenants guests and the continual presence of the tenants adult relative.
4.5 The tenant was phoned by Ling Ling Cao, on the
of March 2008, to enquire if they had found
alternate accommodation. The tenant's wife responded that they had not begun
and were not vacating. They also demanded that we provide them with
alternate accommodation if we wanted them to move out and then
made a point of
ridiculing Ling Ling Cao's English skills as poor.
4.6 Two days later the tenants organised plumbing repairs without initially
paid by the Lessor.
When they were eventually contacted before the repairs commenced, they were
unwilling to turn off the water supply
while this water was being wasted failed
to give an adequate reason. They have since failed to pay their water bill for
this period.
4.7 It is our belief a key reason for the failure of the tenant to vacate is
not their legitimate belief that they have acted properly
or difficulty in
seeking alternate accommodation but a reluctance to relinquish the convenience
of living in the next suburb to the
tenant's work (Fyshwick).
Violation of tenancy agreement - Failure to pay water bill x 2.
5.1 Although the original disputed water bill were eventually paid 6 weeks
late, the next water bill for $166.32 which was invoiced
of February, has remained unpaid after more than 4
5.2 The tenant has definitely received the invoice since it was enclosed with
another letter which specified Jason Yan as taking over
the responsibilities of
Andrew Yan along with a contact number. This number has subsequently been used
by the tenant to inform the
agent of the plumbing repairs mentioned in paragraph
5.3 This has been followed by another unpaid water bill which was invoiced
for $ 177.87 on the 29
which remains unpaid despite
the expiry of the two weeks notice to pay.
5.4 Previously the tenant has raised the issue that water network tax and
abstraction fees are not the responsibility of the tenant
since they are fees
and rates. It is the agents belief that these are the tenants responsibility for
the following reasons:
i. The ACT government has declared in subordinate legislation that that the
abstraction fee and water network tax are consumption
passed on in full to consumers of utility services"
( Independent Competition
and Regulatory Commission (Water Abstraction Charge) Declaration 2003 (No 1);
Independent Competition and
Regulatory Commission (Utilities (Network Facilities
Tax)) Declaration 2006 (No 1))
ii. Both the abstraction fee and water network tax are metered amounts and
are charged pro-rata on water consumption at the rate of
$0.55 per kL and $0.09
per kL respectively. This would make it a metered fee directly proportional to
the consumption of water as
a good/service by the tenant rather than a tax on
the premises.
Under clause 46 of the standard residential tenancy terms the tenant is
responsible for
"all charges associated
with the consumption of
Although clause 42 (a) of the standard residential tenancy terms states that
the lessor is responsible for
"rates and taxes relating to the premises",
this does not describe the aforementioned fees which are levied pro-rata on
tenant consumption of goods and services rather than on
the premises itself.
The RTT case of
Baird v Campbell & Ors 2005
states that the
abstraction charge is a Lessor responsibility - however the actual reasoning at
paragraph 57 and 70 is very limited
and makes no reference to the aforementioned
subordinate legislation which directly declares the contrary. It appears that
the reasoning
in this case is invalid since it was made in the absence of
applicable law.
The case also fails to make any distinction between fees & taxes on the
un-metered supply fees which
the Lessor's responsibility and those
associated with metered consumption which would normally be paid by the
iii. The explanatory notes to the aforementioned regulations as well as the
ACTEWAGL web site explains the abstraction fee as part
of A.C.T. governments
water management policy in response to the scarcity and environmental impact of
water usage.
If the impact of these fees were to be on a party other than the final
consumer, then the financial disincentive imposed by the Government's
policy would be removed since Lessors have limited means of influencing tenant
water consumption during a lease other than
by passing on these charges.
iv. The same network taxes are also levied pro-rata upon electricity
consumption which, similar to water consumption, is a tenant
responsibility.
This tax on water is identical, and should be treated in the same way - as the
tenant's responsibility.
For these reasons the water abstraction fees and the water network supply tax
are in fact the tenant's responsibility.
5.5 The overdue water bills also include the base usage fees which have never
been contested by the tenant as being a tenant responsibility.
5.6 The failure to pay would constitute the third & forth violation of
the tenancy agreement (the fifth if the tenant is in fact
subletting the
property as is suspected). This is in addition to the two notice's to vacate
served after the second violation which
has been ignored.
Since the tenant has repeatedly refused to vacate the property despite our
numerous requests and written notices - the earliest being
February 2008 the latest being 29th May 2008 - we
are therefore requesting a warrant of eviction in addition to payment of the
bills in full and repair of damage.
to the application was a copy of the lessor’s letter of 10 January 2008 to
the tenant which read:
I am writing in response to your letters dated 7 January 2008. With
regard to our visit, we were in Matina street after shopping and
only stopped in
the driveway after noticing that the premises unexpectedly appeared inhabited
despite our conversation in which you
explained you would be away from your home
and that no-one would be available to discuss with us any matters.
My wife and I had not alighted from our vehicle when your wife greeted us in
our car and spoke with us for less than 5 minutes, during
which time we
expressed our concern that the water bill, which she confirmed to have received,
has remained unpaid. We did not enter
the premises nor did we have any intention
of doing so. We do not consider this brief conversation unreasonable
interference - any
more so than a phone call- as you state, and we have no
intention of interfering in any such manner.
At this point I would like to draw your attention to the matter of the unpaid
water bill for $151.92 for consumption related water
charges, which we drew to
your attention in late November 2007 and which remains unaddressed and
We have given ample opportunity to comply and have made numerous phone calls
in addition to our written request. The latest request
being our conversation
with your wife while we were in our car. It is concerning to us that it was only
after we raised this issue
with your wife that she began to request repairs as a
response, including matters such as the mowing of the grass and trimming of
foliage - matters which would be normally considered part of the upkeep of the
property by the tenant, we have even loaned to you
a weed trimmer to assist in
On this issue we also consider that the matter of the toilet tissue paper
hanger to be a minor matters which is part of the normal
upkeep of the property.
Clause 55(3) of the agreement does not require the notification of the land lord
for anything that an ordinary
tenant would reasonably be expected to do, for
example, changing a light globe or a fuse. We consider that the toilet tissue
hanger in the laundry to fall within this category.
With regard to the back yard screen door, we would also like to draw to your
attention the general duty upon tenants on discovering
damage, whether at fault
or not, to mitigate the repairs required under the
Residential Tenancies
However our responsibility to repair on this matter is limited since at the
commencement of the lease the screen door was in good
condition and did not
require any such repairs. We consider the initial damage, and total removal of
the door from its hinges to
be unreasonable especially given clear the signs of
force on the door, the rapid deterioration of the door until the type of damage
we observed.
That is, the initial condition of the door on commencement of the lease
compared to the type of damage subsequently occurring under
your tenancy is
highly indicative of unreasonable damage and outside any fair usage of the
Under Clause 63(a) of the agreement - during the tenancy, the tenant must not
intentionally or negligently damage the premises or
permit such damage.
Consequently we consider the repair to be the total responsibility of the
tenant and expect the tenant to make necessary repairs,
since we are not
responsible for such deliberate/negligent damage. We remind you that we have
made this view clear on previous occasions
regarding this damage.
We re-iterate our concern that our requests for payment of agreed bills under
the signed agreement such as water consumption are met
with evasion and
unexpected requests for repairs including many minor matters that are the
responsibility of the tenant.
Over the course of your tenancy, I have already made several major repairs
and have replaced a toilet, an oven and a wardrobe door,
not all of which I
believed was fair and reasonable.
Given your repeated failure to accept responsibility for property damage that
is your responsibility, the failure to mitigate damage
when it does occur and
the failure to pay the outstanding bills despite numerous requests; and given
our joint disquiet over this
lease we believe it would be best if we were to
agree to voluntarily terminate the tenancy. We suggest the property to be
no later than the 8
February 2008,
particularly since December - January offers the best opportunity to find
alternate rental accommodation in Canberra
due to the expiry of many leases for
students and out of state professionals.
Residential Tenancies Act
, such damage as we have observed to the
property in addition to the failure to pay the water consumption bill- despite
ample notice
and opportunity to remedy- is grounds for an application to the
residential tenancy tribunal
for forcible
termination.
Before the release of your bond we expect that the outstanding amount for
water to be paid, rent to paid up and the screen door and
any other damage to be
fixed and restored and the property to be left clean.
to the application were the following documents:
(a) A water
bill for the period 14/8/07-20/11/07 for the premises in the sum of $278
composed of $102.64 for consumption; $122.19
for sewerage supply charge and
water supply charge; $4.50 for sewer network tax; $6.93 for water network tax;
$42.35 for water abstraction
(b) A water
bill for the period 31/12/07-31/3/08 for the premises in the sum of $293
composed of $120.24 for consumption; $122.19
for sewerage and water supply
charge; $4.50 for sewer network tax; $6.48 for water network tax; $39.60 for
water abstraction charges.
(c) A letter
from the lessor to the tenant dated 27 February 2008 attaching the water bill
immediately above and asking for payment
of $166.32 being the consumption, water
network tax and the water abstraction charge.
(d) A water
bill for the period 13/2/08-14/05/08 for the premises in the sum of $304 being
$128.59 for consumption; $122.19 for sewer
and water supply charge; $4.50 for
sewer network tax, $6.93 for water network tax; and $42.35 for the water
abstraction charge.
(e) A letter of
29 May 2008 from the lessor to the tenant asking for payment of the above water
bill in the amount of $177.87.
application annexed a copy of a notice of termination from the lessor to the
tenant dated 23 January 2008 requiring possession
on or before 16 Febraury 2008
on the ground that the tenants failed to rectify the damage to the back door and
the lessors “genuine
belief that the tenant will recklessly cause or
permit further damage to the property”. Attached to the notice of
termination
was an Australian Post registered post receipt indicating postage on
10 January 2008.
application and annexures were served on the tenant by the Registrar with a
notice listing the matter for 15 July 2008.
30 June 2008 the tenant filed his response to the lessors claim which included a
range of counter claims against the lessor. The
tenant’s response
This is in reference to the notice reference no RT489 of 2008
issued to us on 20
June 2008 for termination of
tenancy agreement for my rental place 61 - Matina Street, Narrabundah.
Our Landlord has accused us of violating few rental agreements. I would like
to draw your attention on each of the following but before
that I would like to
tell you how it all started.
Our landlord has violated a very basic agreement in the rental tenancy
agreement of visiting the premises without the permission.
week of January our landlord showed desire to
visit the premises on the phone but as we had some guest visiting us from
and it was Sunday that day so we were going out to show them around. We
told our tenant that today is not a good day to come but
he is more than welcome
to come and visit the premises any other day.
We also advised our landlord that we will be leaving the house around 1530
hrs but we got late for some reason and for our surprise
our landlord came to
our house at 1600 hrs. As he was already informed that no one will be at home so
should we conclude that he
was going to visit the premises in our absence?
We sent a letter to him on 7
January 2008
reminding him of the Clause 52 imposes an obligation on the landlord to
guarantee that they shall not cause or permit
any interference with the
reasonable peace, comfort or privacy of the tenant.
Our landlord has violated rental agreement by not providing the rental
place in the vacant position.
When we rented the house in August 2006 there were pile of rubbish including
2 mattresses were sitting in the backyard which was the
leftover from the
previous tenants. Also half of the Garage is filled with landlords stuff or the
stuff left by previous tenants.
Our landlord promised us that he will arrange
something to get rid of the rubbish in backyard and to clean the garage as well.
last 2 years we have been made hundreds of promises that he will get it
clean. He didn't care to get rid of that stuff so we had
to clean his rubbish
from the back yard as our kids couldn't play in the backyard because of that
rubbish. His stuff is still lying
in the garage. At first place only we
shouldn't have paid full rent as we were not provided with the vacant house. We
didn't want
to create any issue and we have been paying the full rent since
Now I would like to draw you attentions on other matters
Violation of tenancy agreement - unpaid water
We have been living at 61 - Matina Street, Narrabundah from August 2006 and
all the bills have been paid without any delay. The situation
in which we failed
to pay the water bills arose when our rear security door was came out of the
frame. We advised the same to the
landlord and he blamed us for forcefully
bringing the door to the ground. At that time also we were paying all the bills
any delay. Then, he accused us of not paying the last water bill, which
we never received. But, as he mentioned about that bill in
his letter and also
sent us that bill, we paid it straight way.
As the door matter was not resolved so we went to the Tenant Advice Services
to seek advice. We told them about the situation and
also showed them our water
bills. The consultant had look into our water bills also the bill in question.
As per the consultant at
the rental Tenant Advice Services, our landlord was
charging us the water network tax and water abstraction amount as well which
is not supposed to charge us. We have been advised by the consultant that it's
the landlord responsibility to pay the water network
tax and water abstraction
We were not aware of that before so we contacted the landlord and advised
them of the same and requested them to send us all the previous
bills so we can
calculate how much we paid extra so far. We sent a letter to the landlord on
January and requested the landlord to pay the
access amount back which we have paid earlier for water network tax and water
abstraction
charges and he failed to do so. In fact we contacted the ActewAGL
enquiring about the basis of those taxes and we were informed that
they charge
these taxes for maintenance of dams etc. and is generally paid by Landlord. We
informed our landlord the same on phone
and told him again that if he can bring
any document saying that tenant has to pay those taxes, we are ready to pay
those as we were
paying before. But he never came back.
Regarding notice to vacate — 2
of Agreement.
Regarding his notice to vacate, we informed him by our later dated 7 February
telling him that his notice to vacate is invalid as
we haven't damaged his
property. There is no valid reason for vacating the house till end of lease.
Violation of tenancy agreement - Damage to
the rear security door, failure to
The house in which we are living is very old. All the doors in the house have
become loosen from the hinges as the wooden frame of
the door are getting
rusted. Our landlord visited us in early November; at that time we showed him
all the doors and he accepted
that doors are getting loosen from the hinges. He
fixed the door of bedroom 2 but he couldn't fix the back door. He tried to fix
it by hammering the screws in the screw holes but the screws didn't fix as the
screw holes gone bigger in size due to the rust. He
promised us that he will get
the door fixed within a week's time. In spite of our repeated requests he never
fixed the back door
and one day it broke down itself. Now he has blamed us for
forcefully bringing the door down. I don't think any sensible person will
his house door down. We had to face a lot of trouble because of that broken
door. We had 2 small kids in the house and we always
kept the house in clean and
in hygienic state. It was summers at that time and we couldn't leave the wooden
back door open during
the day as flies and ants come into the house. There is no
provision to let the air pass through house as the rear back door was
that was the only door which has fly screen on it.
As per the Rental Tenancies - The Renting book, there is a clause for urgent
repairs. As per that clause it is the tenant's responsibility
to advice the
landlord of any urgent repairs and it is the landlord's responsibility to carry
out the repairs, hi Our case our landlord
already knew about it but he failed to
fix the problem.
History of tenancy
Our tenant has written that
"During the course of tenancy, numerous
repairs have been made including the replacement of a new toilet and a new oven
then rapidly damaged requiring professional warranty repairs)"
also he has mentioned
"Throughout the tenancy the Lessor's agent have
tolerated a great deal of damage to the property and have paid for the repairs
then have not always believed to have been reasonable"
I would like to tell you that when we rented this place Toilet flush tank and
gas oven was not in working state. So to put the house
on rent I think it was
the landlord responsibility only to get the oven and toilet tank fixed. No
tenant will get those things fixed
to get the house on rent. About the rapidly
damaging the property, anyone is welcome to the house to have a look and see if
has been done. We did require a repair to the gas oven once because
one of the hot plate wasn't turning off as there was a fault
in its knob. Why
would we break the knob and then bear the trouble of turning the gas line off
from the main switch every time as
we cant leave the hot plate on all the
In April we had a problem with our hot water tap in the bathroom as it wasn't
shutting off. We tried to fix it but we couldn't. We
informed our landlord's
agent about the same and advised him that we are calling Plumbing Doctor to come
and fix the tap as we can't
let the water get wasted. Plumber fixed the Tap and
after that Jason told us that we are supposed to take his permission before
out any repairs.
We did advise him of the problem before calling the
plumber and he even told us to wait for 15 minutes and he will try to arrange
someone who won't charge much. As it was Easter weekend no one was available
except the Plumbing Doctor.
Even if I wasn't able to get in touch with Jason
I would have called the plumber anyways to get the tap fixed as the repair was
urgent nature and I think anyone would have done the same.
I would be really happy to know what other numerous repairs landlord have
carried out in last 2 years. I would really appreciate if
Landlord can provide
me a list of repairs which they have carried out on the premises.
Regarding subletting rooms in the property without approval, I would like to
say that all the persons living on the persons have signed
the lease agreement
with the landlord and they are authorized to live their as per the Lease
Our Landlord thinks that my job is in Fyshwick that's why we are not vacating
the premises. I would like to let the tenant know that
my brother who is living
at the same premises works in Belconnen. How can this reason be justified that I
work in Fyshwick that's
why we are not vacating the property.
Violation of tenancy agreement -
Failure to pay water bill X 2
Violation of tenancy agreement - unpaid water
to the tenant’s response were copies of three letter from the tenant to
the lessor dated 7 January 2008 and a letter
from the tenant to the lessor of 21
January 2008 which read:
(First letter of 7 January 2008)
This is in reference to your visit to our rented premises at 61, Matina
Street, Narrabundah on Sunday, January 6'2008 late afternoon
(about 1600
I would like your attention to the telephonic conversation around 1.5 hours
(about 1400 Mrs) before your visit on same day during
which you showed your
desire to visit the place. I told you clearly that I have some overseas guests
in my place and I am leaving
if you come some other day for which you said ok.
In spite of above, You visited our place around 1600 hrs and it was by chance
that our program was delayed and we saw you coming to
our house and my wife has
to cancel her program and she stayed home to attend you as you arrived without
our consent. If we had left
in time, then you would have visited the premises
without our presence since you hold the second keys.
I would like to remind you that as per ACT
Residential Tenancies Act
Clause 52 imposes an obligation on the landlord to guarantee that they
shall not cause or permit any interference with the reasonable
peace, comfort or
Your visits without our mutual agreement are totally unjustified and we have
taken it as very serious thereby affecting our privacy
as you visited the place
even I told you that we are going out. This is a serious breach of Tenancy
You are requested to please not repeat this in future, failing which I have
no option left other than taking the matter to Tribunal.
(Second letter of 7 January 2008)
Please refer to your letter and notice to vacate dated 23rd January'08, we
would like to inform you that we will not be vacating the
premises because your
notice to vacate is not valid as advised by Tenants Advice Services,
As already discussed with you, we have not damaged your door and premises at
(The third letter of 7 January 2008)
This is in regards to the repairs to be done in your house which we are
renting since August'2006 at 61, Matina Street, Narrabundah.
There are certain repairs, which had to be carried out since we moved in and
for which you have not done anything in spite of our
repeated requests. Also
there are some repairs which have come in last few months because they were not
corrected at first place
and for them again you have not done anything. In fact
you have refused to get them done as conveyed by you to my wife during you
recent unauthorised visit on Sunday, January 6'2008.
The repairs, which require immediate attendance, are as follows:
1. Rubbish (including mattresses) leftover by last tenants lying at the
backyard should be removed immediately as it has and is creating
living conditions, especially we having small kids playing in the backyard. We
are telling you to arrange to remove the
rubbish since beginning of leave but
you have never acted upon our request.
2. Toilet Tissue Paper hanger in the laundry/ second toilet to be fixed
immediately as you have left that hanger around a year before
and never bothered
to arrange to fix that.
3. The back door, which came down since it was not, attended right from the
beginning. The holes in the hinges have gone big and that
has led to falling of
door. This was shown to you during your visit to house 2 months before. After
having a careful look at other
doors and noticing the same problem with other
doors as well, you fixed them temporarily by hammering the screws. For this
you agreed that you will arrange to get it fixed in a week's time but that
week never came. As it is summer time and we require that
door in order to have
air crossing in the house, this is a serious problem in view of small kids at
open. Also, the spring/hydraulic arrangement
for auto closure of this door is not working since beginning of lease.
Apart from above, there are some minor repairs, which are to be done and
conveyed to you.
Please refer to the Clause 55, which states that you as landlord have to
maintain the premises in reasonable state of repair and since
all the above
repairs are of urgent nature and as per Clause 60, landlord is required to
arrange to get these repairs done in short
In above of above, I request you to please arrange to get above mentioned
repairs done in 2 weeks time considering them of urgent
(The letter of 21 January 2008)
This is in response to your letter on 10th January. I would like to draw you
attention as follows:
1. In regards to your proposal for mutual termination of the lease agreement,
I would like to let you know that we don't accept your
offer for mutual
termination of the lease agreement.
2. I would also like to draw your attention on the repairs, which need to be
done in the house and few other things as well. As far
as the door is concerned,
when we rented the premises all the doors was not in the good condition. When we
requested you to get the
door fixed you visited our premises and fixed the door
in Bedroom no 2 as that door was also going to come out soon and you told
that you will get the back door fixed ASAP. As per the ACT
Residential Tenancies
, it is the landlord's responsibility to provide secure premises and to fix
the urgent repairs. Wooden door at the back not secure
enough as it's lock is
also loose, we fixed it before but it still remains the same. In that scenario
anyone can break into the house,
as the Iron door is not there which provides
main protection.
3. I would also like to draw your attention on the rubbish sitting in the
backyard and also in the garage. It has been sitting there
since the day we
rented the premises and you told us that you'll get rid of it soon. We can't
utilise the full space of garage because
of that and because of the rubbish
sitting in the backyard our kids can't play in the backyard. It is the
Landlord's responsibility
to provide a totally vacant premises to the
4. Also regarding the Water charges, I would like to let you know that we
have always paid the Water Charges as advised by you. This
time also, we have
paid the amount of $ 152.92 on receipt of Bill attached with your letter dated
January 10'2008. Although, I have
always paid the bill as per you advice, but we
have realised that you have over charged us for the Water rates and Taxes as
As per the Clause 42 and 46 we are only supposed to pay the Water
Consumption Charges not the Rates and Taxes. It is the Landlord's
responsibility
to pay the Taxes and rates. So if you could please credit us with extra amount
which you have was charged equal to
amount of $49.28 (Charged as Water Network
Tax & Water Abstraction Charge in last bill). My account details are as
Account Name: Vaneet Graver
Account Bank: Commonwealth Bank.
BSB NO: 063011
Account No: 10298003
Also, it will be highly appreciated if you can provide us the copies of
previous water bills also, so that we can check for the Water
Charges paid and
seek back claim in case we have paid anything extra before too.
5. About the grass mowing, we do grass mowing regularly and my wife asked you
to remove that large tree which is in front of the main
door, which is there
since beginning of the lease as it has never been removed from the roots and it
cause interference to the entry
into the house.
I think you didn't understand what my wife was referring to you that day. You
are requested to please arrange to remove that growing
tree from the roots
permanently.
Also, in regards to the lawn mower left by you at the premises, we have never
used that mower as it has got a very short electrical
lead and it doesn't reach
the lawn even at short distances. As told to you before also, you can take back
your lawn mower as it has
never been used and not needed.
6. Also, as discussed in my last letter too, there are certain minor repairs
(like toilet tissue hanger, window screens etc), that
are required to be done in
order to have the premises in reasonable state of repair. You are requested to
arrange to get those repairs
done at the earliest.
Concluding above, We request you to please get the points no 2, 3, 4 & 5
in 2 weeks time, otherwise we have no option other than
to seek order from the
ACT Rental Tribunal for the same.
You can contact me if want to discuss anything to resolve the issues
Hoping that you will respond positively to our requests.
tenant annexed a series of photographs showing:
(a) bedding and
furniture in a shed and outside a shed
falling off a fence
11 July 2008 the lessor filed a further reply to the tenants response which
In response to the submissions by the aforementioned case, I would
like to respond to some new ancillary issues which were raised
which we have not
had the opportunity to address in our previous submission.
On the matter of the full garage, at the beginning of the first tenancy in
2006 the landlord's agents offered to remove the chairs
and the wardrobe in the
garage (which was originally in the house). This was in addition to a sofa which
was removed. However the
tenants specifically did not want these chairs or the
wardrobe removed -claiming at the time they could use the chairs outdoors and
they could use the wardrobe. In 2006 during their first tenancy, the agents
organised for a person to come with a trailer to remove
any items they did not
We are therefore surprised at their recent claim of removing any garbage from
the garage when this is the first time we have heard
of this since their letter
only references a mattress in the garden which they did not have removed when
given the opportunity.
Though the tenants have claimed they "did not want to create any issue" as a
reason for not bringing this up earlier, from our experience
the tenants have
not been shy about asserting their demands such as those detailed in previous
submissions [ The tenants were even
able to extract a rent reduction for the
first two weeks of the second lease by delaying a rent increase on the second
lease (which
is clear on the lease document) before the lease was even
finalised, however we do not consider this last issue itself to be material
the current dispute.].
In addition we have never before heard of or seen the two mattresses which
are pictured in the photos nor have we seen other items
in the garage such as
the silver tubes. Nor have we been aware of the damage to the fence or missing
palings before.
We would like to highlight that among the many photographs included by the
tenant, the damage to the rear door has not been photographed,
appearance and nature of damage this is a key matter which we have raised.
In relation to the plumbing repairs over Easter, clause 59 of the proscribed
terms requires the tenant to inform the lessor of any
urgent repairs and
requires the Lessor to organise them. The tenant informed us by SMS at first
instance that he had already booked
a plumber. I believed this was improper,
since there was no impediment to phoning us first at either our home or mobile
phone which
would have been less haphazard and more effective than SMS at the
first instance. I informed him of these points by phone and then
again by SMS [
This sequence of events did not delay
the repairs. Since the repairs were still scheduled from the first phone call by
and the plumber arrived more than 90 minutes later].
The tenant has claimed that the current dispute arises from our visit in the
first week of January. The original agents - Andrew Yan
Cao - were returning from the Fyshwick markets when they found the tenants in
the front yard contrary to their original
claim that they would be away from the
house. They did not make any offer to allow the agents to visit as they claimed.
previously been unwilling to discuss the matter of the outstanding
water bill over the phone. The agents spoke to the tenants from
the rolled down
window of their car when they saw them and did not leave the car at any stage.
This sequence of event was re-iterated
to the tenants in a letter dated
of January 2008. This sequence of actual events
has not been disputed by the tenants although they have characterised the nature
of the visit differently and have made inferences about the intentions of the
However, with regard to the actual issues in dispute which we have made the
application on, our view has not changed from our previous
submission:
• The tenant is illegally subletting the property and his brother is
not on the lease as he claims.
• The tenant is liable to pay consumption related amounts for water for
the reasons detailed previously has failed to pay these
amounts on multiple
occasions and has even to failed to pay amounts which are uncontested by the
• The tenant has caused or allowed the backdoor to be damaged and is
liable for said damage for the reasons detailed in the
last submission. The door
has not been left in a state of unreasonable disrepair by the Lessor.
Attached is a letter originally sent to the tenant dated
January 2008 in response to the letter the tenant
included dated the 21
of January 2008.
(letter of 23 January from lessor to the tenants)
In response to your letter dated, 21
2008,1 would like to re-iterate the statements in our previous letter, that is,
the damage to the door is your responsibility
and we require it to be fixed. The
door shows sign of twisting and severe force which makes the door un-attachable
to the frame whereas
you have previously claimed that the problem related to
loose screws.
The landlord is not responsible for such damage where it is deliberate or
negligent irrespective of whether or not it relates to the
securing the
premises, we re-iterate that notwithstanding this you also neglected your duty
to mitigate damage as required by the
residential tenancies act.
Under Clause 63(a) of the agreement - during the tenancy, the tenant must not
intentionally or negligently damage the premises or
permit such damage. As such
you are liable for this damage.
We also note that payment for the last water bill from November was only
received on 16
of January 2008, after our last
In regard to the claim of an overcharged water bill; although clause 42(a) of
the agreement states the landlord is responsible for
rates and taxes, this does
not describe the water charges which you mention. Water abstraction and network
tax - are charged on a
pro-rata basis, if you review the last bill we sent you,
you will find that the cost is charged at 77kL x $0.55 (for abstraction)
77kL x $0.09 (for water network). These fees are not related to the
(like land tax or supply charges) but to metered water
consumption
which is the responsibility of the tenant.
Clause 42(c) of the agreement states that the lessor is responsible for
services where there is
an accurate metering device, but this
consumption
metered and charged according to actual usage and
therefore not the responsibility of the landlord. I have paid the water supply
sewerage charges which are the responsibility of the landlord. We remind you
that we have previously supplied statements to you.
Moreover under clause 46 of the agreement: The tenant is responsible for all
charges associated with the consumption
of services supplied to the
premises, including electricity, gas,
and telephone. These pro-rata
fees are your responsibility and you have not been overcharged. These fees are
measures which the A.C.T.
government has taken to reduce water consumption by
the end user.
We will not be removing the tree, this is part of the property and is an
entirely unreasonable request.
We do not consider your objection to the length of the mowers cord valid, it
could have been easily fixed with an extension cord.
Though we do not consider
this issue to be of any consequence.
As we stated in our last letter repairs as minor as the toilet paper hanger
to be of a routine nature. Clause 55(3) of the agreement
does not require the
notification of the land lord for anything that an ordinary tenant would
reasonably be expected to do, for example,
changing a light globe or a fuse. We
consider that the toilet tissue paper hanger in the laundry to fall within this
Once again we are concerned that our requests to rectify the situation have
been met with evasion and requests for new repairs. As
I have described above I
consider most of these requests disingenuous and a delaying tactic and
retaliatory to avoid responsibility.
We note for example that your statement
regarding the security aspects of the broken door are new and different to your
claim of the need for ventilation.
I have been most offended by the rudeness you have exhibited to my wife over
the phone in suddenly failing to recognise her right
to act in spite of our
previous history indicating otherwise and the failure to recognise our requests
coupled with your repeated
evasion which I have detailed in this and my previous
We do not wish to continue the lease, we believe the best means of resolving
this amicably is for us to assist you in finding alternate
property by providing
a reference and offering a flexible period to vacate.
I am exercising our term in our signed contract to provide at least two weeks
notice to end the lease by either party - at point 11,
however we are willing to
provide 3 weeks. In the alternative I am also exercising our right to end the
lease based on your failure
to rectify the damage to the back door despite
However as I mention I am willing to assist you by negotiating on the time
needed by yourself to find other property if you require
it to prevent
unnecessary hardship. Unless we hear from you to extend this period please
consider this 3 weeks notice. We believe
this is more than fair, however please
Please note that we will require the property to be available for viewing by
prospective tenants in the final weeks as per the
Residential Tenancies
, we will arrange suitable times with yourself as
that period approaches.
Before the release of your bond we expect that the rent to paid up and the
screen door and any other damage to be fixed and restored
and the property to be
left clean including a vacuum of the house. However we will not ask you to
dispose of the mattress propped
against the side of the garage at the property
if this is a matter of contention.
Once the property is restored to our satisfaction then we will release your
bond and further assist you by providing a reference to
assist you in finding a
new property.
the hearing on 15 July 2008 Mr Jason Yan appeared for the lessor and Mr Sumit
Anand appeared for the tenant. Mr Yan tendered a
General Power of Attorney from
Mr Cao in this favour. Mr Anand tendered a letter of authority from the lessor
to act on his behalf.
hearing the parties the Tribunal issued an order for termination of the tenancy
on 10 August 2008 and adjourned the balance
of the claim for monies allegedly
owing until 15 August 2008. the Tribunal made the following procedural
9 That the matter is adjourned for further hearing on Friday the
of August, 2008 at 10.00am.
10. That the Lessor is to file and serve a copy of all water accounts since
the commencement of the lease by the 22
11. That the Lessor is to tabulate the consumption charges, extractions and
connection charges for each water account and total all
12 That the Lessor is to advise the amount of payments made by the Tenant for
water to date.
13. That the Tenant is to file and serve by the 29
of July, 2008 his reply, indicating the amount paid by the Tenant to date for
14. That the issue of the extraction charges remains to be determined.
23 July 2008 the lessor filed the following tabulation of the water bills which
were the same three water bills filed with the
original application:
In compliance with orders 10,11 & 12 of the residential
tenancies tribunal the following are tabulated amounts for the quarterly
consumption related fees: The supply fees, abstraction fee, network tax and
consumption fee for the current lease for 61 Matina street,
Narrabundah from the
beginning of the Lease in August 2007.
Attached are the bills for the first 3 quarters of the year long lease, the
bill for the final quarter has not yet been issued.
Consumption charges
Abstraction
Network tax
Consumption
Paid by tenant
08/2007 -11/2008
11/2007-02/2008
x-^ 7-Mar-08
02/2008 -05/2008
Amount outstanding $ 344.19
Supply charges (no supply charges have been invoiced to the tenant)
Supply period
Sewerage supply
Water supply
Sewer network tax
10/2007-12/2007
1/2008-03/2008
04/2008 -06/2008
tenant responded by letter of 24 July 2008 asking for copies of all water bills
since August 2006 which the tenant claimed was
the commencement of the
13 Augsut 2008 the landlord filed a tabulation of the water bills for what is
described as “the previous lease” of
the premises. Copies of the
actual water bills were annexed:
The supply fees, abstraction fee, network tax and consumption fee
lease for 61 Matina street, Narrabundah starting
in August 2006.
Attached are the bills.
Consumption charges
Abstraction
Water network tax
Consumption
Paid by tenant
08/2006 -11/2006
11/2006-02/2007
02/2007 - 5/2007
05/2007 - 8/2007
Supply charges (no supply charges have been invoiced to the tenant)
Water supply
Sewerage supply
Sewerage network tax
Paid by tenant
Paid by landlord
9/2006-12/2006
12/2006-3/2007
3/2007 -6/2007
6/2007-9/2007
landlord tabulated the total charges for the period of present tenancy as
Abstraction Fee
Network fee
Consumption
Total including final metre
landlord filed a copy of the Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission
(ICRC) (Water Abstraction Charge) Revocation 2008
(No1) Declaration which
commenced on 1 July 2008 and which read:
Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission (Water
Abstraction Charge) Revocation 2008 (No 1)
Disallowable instrument DI2008—119
made under the
Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission Act
(Declared fees to be passed on to consumers)
EXPLANATORY STATEMENT
The Water Abstraction Charge (WAC) is a statutory fee payable by the holder
of a licence to take water, determined under the
Water Resources Act
Previous price determinations by the Independent Competition and Regulatory
Commission (ICRC) in relation to water services did not
take into account the
WAC paid by the licence holder. Instead, the
Independent Competition and
Regulatory Commission (Water Abstraction Charge) Declaration 2003 (No
declared the WAC to be a statutory fee affecting the cost of providing
water services that may be passed on in full to consumers
of the service.
In April 2008 the ICRC Final Report for the water and wastewater price review
determined that the WAC is a standard business cost.
As such the WAC has been
taken into account by the ICRC in the price direction for the provision of water
services to operate from
1 July 2008 to 30 June 2013.
As a consequence, the
Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission
(Water Abstraction Charge) Declaration 2003 (No
Dl 2003-332
from the date of commencement of the price direction.
landlord filed a copy of the ICRC (Utilities (Network Facilities Tax)
Declaration 2006 (No1) which commenced on 1 January 2007
and ceased effect on 30
June 2008, which read:
Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission (Utilities
(Network Facilities Tax)) Declaration 2006 (No 1)
Disallowable instrument DI2006—272
made under the
Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission Act 1997
(Declared fees to be passed on to consumers)
EXPLANATORY STATEMENT
Utilities (Network Facilities Tax) Act 2006
imposes a tax on a
network facility on land in the ACT. The rate of tax is determined by the
Treasurer under
section 139
Taxation Administration Act 1999
A network facility is any part of the infrastructure of a utility network not
fixed to land subject to a lease, a license granted
by the Territory or any
right prescribed by regulation.
Utility networks include networks for transmitting and distributing
electricity, gas, sewerage, water and telecommunications.
Examples of a network facility include powerlines or pipes over or under
land, and telecommunications cabling.
This Declaration is made under
section 4C(l)(a)
Independent
Competition and Regulatory Commission Act 1997
which provides that a
statutory fee that affects the cost of providing a utility service may be passed
on in full to consumers of
the service.
This Declaration provides that the statutory fee affecting the cost of
utility services under the
Utilities (Network Facilities Tax) Act 2006
the rate of which is determined by the Treasurer under
section 139
Taxation Administration Act 1999
may be passed on in full to consumers
by owners of network facilities.
15 August Mr Yan appeared for the lessor and the tenant appeared in person. The
lessor sought to amend his claim to include a claim
for cleaning and repairs
following the termination of the tenancy. The matter was further adjourned to 29
September 2008 with the
following procedural orders:
Upon hearing Phillip Cao the Applicant, and Vaneet Grover the
Respondent, the Tribunal made the following
1. That the application is adjourned until
Monday the 29th day of
September, 2008, at 2.00pm.
2. That the parties are to file and serve further submissions on the law
relating to the abstraction charge and network fee within
3. That the application is amended to include a claim for cleaning and
repairs by the Lessor.
4. That the Lessor is to file and serve within 14 days of the claim made
together with
(a) relevant reports
(c) invoices
(d) condition reports
5. That the Tenant is to file and serve within further 14 days its response
to the claim together with any quotes, photos or other
22 August 2008 the lessor filed the following submissions:
Liability of the water abstraction fee and the network fee
In addition to paragraph 5.4 of the originating application on this matter,
The Lessor makes the following additional submissions:
6.1. he lessor has paid all supply charges and has not invoiced the tenant
6.2. Clause 46 of the standard residential tenancy terms imposes liability on
the tenant for the abstraction and network fees stating
"The tenant is responsible for
all charges associated
consumption
of services supplied to the premises, including electricity,
and telephone, "
The broad obligation imposed on the tenant by the language of this clause is
in contrast to the narrow obligations imposed on the
lessor by clause 42 of the
standard terms:
42 The lessor is responsible for the cost of the following:
(a) rates and taxes relating to the premises:
(b) services for which the lessor agrees to be responsible;
(c) services for which there is not a separate metering device so that
amounts consumed during the period of the tenancy cannot be
6.3. Clause 42(a) is addressed in paragraph 5.4 of the previous submissions
mentioned earlier.
6.4. Clause 42(b) does not apply to the lessor in this situation since clause
10 of the signed lease agreement states that the tenant
is liable for water
6.5. Clause 42(c) does not apply to the lessor in this situation since there
is a water metering device which is reflected in the
water bills.
6.6. The disallowable regulation enabling the water abstraction
has since been revoked from the date of
commencement of the original regulation [Commissioner for ACT Revenue v Kithock
[2000] FCA 1098
(2001) 181 ALR 609].
The explanatory statement of the revoking
regulation indicates that the abstraction fee has actually been "a standard
business cost"
all along. In addition to the reasons mentioned in paragraph 5.4,
for this reason it is part of the consumption price structure.
6.7. The disallowable regulation for
the abstraction fee and
water network fee state that it is to be passed onto the end consumer. Since the
fees are charged per kilolitre
of water consumption - the end consumer is the
6.8. The disallowable regulation enabling the water network fee expired on
6.9. In the alternative if the network fee is a tax then it is not a tax when
passed on by ACTEWAGL. The fee is imposed on consumers
after being passed on by
ACTEWAGL. It is billed by ACTEWAGL on statements as
utilities water network tax" and can be viewed on previously submitted bills.
This recovery arrangement means that it is
not a tax in the hands of the
consumer, since it is levied on the utility as owners of water network
facilities, and then passed
onto subsequent consumers with the recovery charge.
Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission
(Water Abstraction Charge) Declaration 2003 (No 1) DT 2003-332 Explanatory note;
Harper v Minister for Sea Fisheries
[1989] HCA 47
(1989) 168 CLR 314]
Taxes passed on in this
manner are not taxes in the hands of the final
They are therefore part of the cost
structure of water consumption and part of the fee for service which makes this
the liability
of the tenant.
6.10. Similarly the abstraction charge is also a fee imposed on the utility
for catchment management services and the associated environmental
the explanatory note) which is then subsequently passed onto end consumers by
regulation and therefore the liability of
the tenant.
6.11. In the alternative the water abstraction fee is not a tax at all
because it is a pro-rata charge for water as a scarce natural
This makes it a fee for the consumption of a
6.12. In the alternative both fees are an excise imposed by a body other than
the Federal government, therefore the laws were invalidly
enacted [Section 90
Commonwealth Constitution.]
29 August 2008 the landlord filed further written submissions which read:
Outstanding fees and damage to 61 Matina Street, Narrabundah
during the tenancy of Vaneet Grover
1. The following is a summary of the repairs and outstanding fees, that we
have subsequently discovered on the tenants vacating the
1.1. The dead lock installed by the tenant (which we do not have keys for)
without lessor consent on the backdoor is broken. The lock
on the letterbox also
does not work with any keys we have or returned to us - Replacement of locks by
a locksmith:
1 2. Outstanding rent for the 8
of August 2008 at $48.57/day (previously set by the
tribunal in the last order):
a) Clause 7 of the lease states that rent is paid on a Friday, the tenants
moved out on Sunday morning - the rent is for the Friday
and Saturday following
from the last rent payment.
b) The last rent payment was for only $1 360.00 - for 28 days exactly.
1 3. Outstanding water bills previously notified:
1.4. Final water bill from meter reading: $75.83
1.5. Steam clean for dirty carpets, which the tenant accepted responsibility
for on the 10
of August 2008 during our meeting.
1.6. Holes in the wall including between the living room and bedroom &
painting over damage (quotation): $400 - $450
1.7. Repair of damaged back security door & hole carved in the bedroom
1.8. Refit of kitchen cabinet door which is damaged and now can not be closed
(quotation):
1.9. Bedroom flyscreen, Kitchen flyscreen & front door flyscreen - each
have substantial holes:
Quote to be delivered at a later date.
1.10. Missing fence palings:
Quote to be delivered at a later
Total (so far): $2146.87
2. Although the tenant did not clean the house despite our written notice to
do so (see attached photos), we have forgone the cost
of general cleaning from
the bill which we have carried out by ourselves (not including the steam
cleaning which was been agreed
to by the tenant).
3. We are also not claiming the replacement of the backdoor despite the
damage caused by the bad installation of the lock - only the
cost of replacing
the badly installed and broken lock which could not be opened from the
4. Although the evaluation of damage may have tax depreciation consequences
for the asset being replaced - for our requested repairs
in paragraph 1, we have
generally not sought new for old replacement but rather repairs to bring the
fixture to a good usable state
had the damage not occurred.
5. Clause 64 of the standard terms also requires the tenant leave the
"in substantially the same condition as the premises were in at the
commencement of the Tenancy Agreement".
Any consideration of depreciation
should also not contravene this explicit proscribed term as part of the 1997
Residential Tenancies Act
6. Most of the repaired items we have requested are also items more commonly
part of the house and not commonly depreciated due to
wear and tear.
7. The hole in the wall and the hole carved in the door in paragraphs 1.6
& 1.7-doors and walls are part of the house and usually
do not require
repair or replacement in the manner done so due to normal wear and tear nor are
they normally depreciated.
8. For example the damage to the back security door in paragraph 1.7, was
repaired not replaced. This door was delivered in good working
condition in mid
2006 (this assertion has not been disputed). The steel bottom hinge was heavily
twisted and ripped off it's hinges.
See Picture E.
9. This damage correlates a pattern of undue damage we have discovered
throughout the house on the inside.
10. We are requesting payment of the entirety of the amounts outstanding
having already considered the write downs involved and the
nature of the repairs
in restoring the damaged items to a usable state given the damage sustained.
11. Currently this amounts to
We are requesting the bond
and the additional shortfall of $786.87, noting that this
includes amounts of unpaid rent, water bills, and carpet cleaning; and not
property damage.
12. Attached are the relevant receipts and quotes with the exception of the
water bill from paragraph 3 which we have previously supplied
the receipts
landlord’s submissions annexed a range of photographs taken after the end
of the tenancy showing:
(a) the front
door and the back door hinge
carved in the bedroom door
(d) the back
door showing a deadlock
(e) a bedroom
wall showing a hole drilled through it
(f) a series of
28 further photographs showing various aspects of the premises before and after
the tenancy
(g) an invoice
for new locks in the sum of $285.00
(h) an invoice
from Morgan’s Group for carpet cleaning in the sum of $162.00
(i) an invoice
from Weber M&B in the sum of $303.80 for the supply and fitting of two doors
and a security door.
(j) an ACTEWAGL
statement for water for the period 1 July 2008-30 September 2008 showing
consumption of $62.39; sewer supply charge
of $110.95; water supply charge of
$21.25; water net work tax of $1.89; water abstraction charge of $11.55.
tenant filed submissions on 10 September 2008 which read:
This is in reference to the notice reference no RT489 of 2008
issued to us on 28
August 2008.
In regards to the Charges on Water Network Tax & Abstraction Charges, pi
find attached info as Annexure-I, which clearly states
that tenant only pays
Water Consumption Charges & other charges have to be paid by landlord. But,
in our case, our landlord has
overcharged us by charging these taxes, which are
never meant to be paid by us.
I would like to advice you that we don't take any responsibility of the
damages mentioned by our landlord as mentioned in points 1.6,
1.7, 1.8, 1.9
& 1.10 on his letter. We have returned the house in the same condition in
which house was given to us in August
2006. We are attaching the photographs
taken by us at the time of vacating the house as Annexure-II.
In last 2 years no money was spent at all on renovating the house and now our
landlord is totally lying and wants to renovate his
property at our cost. If he
thinks that place was damaged by us then he should have told us at the time when
we returned the house
keys. We were not shown any damage and no picture was
taken in our presence.
We have stayed at that place for 2 years and if our landlord had a doubt that
we are damaging the property then why didn't he take
any initiative to inspect
the property. I would like to pay your attention that landlord never inspected
the house during our 2 years
of tenancy at his place.
In fact, he visited the house only at our many requests when we asked him to
get the fly screen door fixed. He never considered his
responsibility to look at
other things in terms of inspection. This can be seen from the condition of the
fence which was visible
even when one passes through. But he never bothered to
look into the things.
We do take the responsibility of getting the carpets steam cleaned and we
agreed to that with the landlord that they can get it done
and we will pay the
bill. At the time of handover of keys on 10th august our landlord didn't object
to anything or had any problem
in the condition house was returned.
When we rented the house in August 2006, it was not provided to us in the
vacant condition. He always kept on making false promises
that he will get his
stuff removed which was never done till the end of lease. In fact, we request
Tribunal to advise our landlord
to compensate us for not giving us the premises
in vacant condition.
Also, our landlady has harassed us by making phone calls to our office during
day time by threatening us to vacate the house and also
she has called many
times during the night time at home threatening the same. This clearly shows how
far these guys can go in order
to get their false motives served.
In view of above, I request you to please consider us and give fair justice
to the case.
tenant annexed a series of 12 pages of photographs.
29 September 2008 Mr Yan appeared for the lessor and the tenant appeared in
person. The Applicant tendered a revised list of the
claims made:
Revised quotation
Description
Lock replacement
Not disputed
Outstanding rent
Set by tribunal on
Outstanding water bills
Final water bill
Steam clean for dirty carpets
Not disputed
Hole in the wall
Painting not being
Repair back security door & bedroom door
Damage of kitchen cabinet
Alternate tradesmen quote
Fence paling
Approx. 2. 50 each :
above revised claim by the lessor did not include many issues raised in the
above correspondence and submissions. The Tribunal
informed the Lessor that it
only intended to address the claims actually made and if the revised claim
accurately reflected the Lessor’s
claim then this is all that would be
addressed. The lessor had ample opportunity to put in issue everything he chose
to. In fact
most of the lessor’s claims relating to the alleged damage to
the property were only raised for the first time by the lessor
submissions of 29 August 2008. Notwithstanding the lateness of these claims the
Tribunal still permitted them to be pressed.
tenant maintained his counter claim for:
lessor’s alleged failure to fix the back door and fence
(b) the lessors
failure to deliver vacant possession in that the lessor’s possession
occupied half of the two car garage.
tenant also raised as range of matters going beyond the scope of the above
counter claim. The Tribunal informed the tenant that
it would only consider
those claims the tenant had made. The tenant also had ample opportunity to put
in issue everything he chose
Tribunal took the parties through each of the revised claims and allowed them to
summarise the evidence and submissions on the
law, that they wished to put.
tenant admitted responsibility for the rent of $97.14 (item 1.2); the carpet
cleaning of $162.00 (item 1.5); and damage to the
kitchen cabinet of $250.00
(item 1.8). The lessor dropped the claim for the fence (item 1.10).
tenant denied liability for the locks (item 1.1); the hole in the wall (item
1.6); the damage to the back security door and bedroom
door (item 1.7); and the
damage to the flyscreen (item 1.9).
tenant admitted the water consumption charges in the sum of $311.22 but denied
responsibility for the abstraction charges ($93.50)
and the net work taxes
($15.3) which the tenant contended were lessor costs.
lessor resisted the counter claim on the bases that:
(a) at not time
was the lessor on notice of the need to fix the back door or fence
(b) the tenant
consented to the lessor leaving his goods in the garage and the lessor would
have removed them had the tenant so requested.
the end of the hearing the Tribunal informed the parties that the matter would
be reserved for a written decision on the lessor’s
claim and the
tenant’s counter claim.
Findings of fact:
Tribunal is satisfied that the tenant’s admissions of liability at
paragraphs 31 and 33 were correctly made and finds for
the lessor in the sum of
remaining issues are those items of the lessor’s claim denied by the
tenant at paragraph 32 above; the issue of responsibility
for the water
abstraction charges and network taxes, and the tenant’s counter claim per
paragraph 28 above.
claim by the Lessor for the dead locks was raised for the first time in the
submissions of 29 August 2008. The Lessor asserted
that the tenant had replaced
the dead locks without consent and did a poor job. The photographs revealed what
appeared to be a poor
job at affixing deadlocks which would need to be redone.
Apart from a simple denial of the claim the tenant did not address the issue
whether he had in fact replaced the deadlock or not. In these circumstances the
Tribunal accepts the Lessor’s evidence and
quotations for rectification in
the sum of $285.00.
The hole in the wall
hole is between the living room and bedroom. The photographs show a large
drilled circular hole. Again the tenant did not enter
into anything other than a
general denial. It was not asserted by the tenant that the hole was there at the
start of the tenancy.
In these circumstances the Tribunal is satisfied that the
tenant, or someone upon the premises with the tenant’s consent, drilled
the hole. The Tribunal allows $200.00 in rectification costs.
The bedroom door
photographs showed a sizeable drilled hole through the bedroom door. Again the
tenant did not enter into anything other than a
general denial. It was not
asserted by the tenant that the hole was there at the start of the tenancy. In
these circumstances the
Tribunal is satisfied that the tenant, or someone upon
the premises with the tenant’s consent, drilled the hole.
The back security door
item features in both the lessor’s claim against the tenant and in the
tenant’s counter claim against the lessor.
The outcome depends on how the
door came to be damaged. If the tenant damaged it then he is responsible for
replacing it. If the
tenant did not damage it then the lessor is liable for
having failed to repair it during the tenancy.
photographs of the door tend to support the lessor’s contentions that it
had been forcible removed from the hinges. Of itself
this does not mean that the
door was not already in disrepair as alleged by the tenant. The tenant has
consistently maintained that
the hinges to the door had come away from the door
jam and had requested repair. The Tribunal accepts the tenant’s evidence
that the lessor actually attended and attempted to refix the hinges to door jam
without success. Nevertheless the fact that the screen
door needed repair is not
a ground for forcefully ripping it from its hinges as appears to have been
Tribunal is satisfied that the tenant, or someone upon the premises with the
tenant’s consent, has ripped the door from
its hinges. The Tribunal allows
the rectification cost of the screen door and bedroom door at $303.80.
The flyscreen
photographs of the flyscreen shows ageing without evidence suggestive of a tear
or other malicious damage. The lessor did not
advance any thesis about the cause
of the damage consistent with the tenant’s intentional or negligent
actions and the Tribunal
is satisfied that the damage is just ageing.
The lessors partial occupation of the garage
is no dispute between the parties that the lessor had personal property in the
back yard and garage. The photographs confirm
this. The issue is whether the
tenant consented to the presence of the property or not. In his letter of 21 Jan
08 to the lessor
the tenant affirmed his position that he wanted the lessor to
remove the property. Even then the lessor did not remove the property.
might have been the lessor’s understanding on the issue prior to this
date, the lessor could have had no doubt after
21 January 2008 but still did
nothing to remove the property.
Tribunal accepts the tenant’s contention that he neither wanted the
lessor’s property in the garage and did not consent
to its presence.
Accordingly the lessor is in breach of his duty to deliver vacant possession at
the commencement of the tenancy.
Tribunal allows compensation to the tenant calculated as the equivalent of a
rent reduction of $20pw over the terms of the tenancy
for the loss of use of
half the garage and the inconvenience caused. The tenancy commenced on 16 August
and was terminated on 10
August 2008, being 51 weeks @ $20 pw = $1020.00.
The water abstraction charge and the water net work
claim made by the lessor for the unpaid abstraction charge amounts to $93.50 and
for the unpaid water net work tax amounts to
$15.30 per paragraph 17 above.
According to the lessor’s tabulation at paragraph 17 above, the tenant
have in fact paid $160.60
in previously abstraction charges and $10.08 in
previous network facilities taxes.
relevant contractual and statutory provisions regulating the issue of the
abstraction charge and net work tax as between the lessor
and the tenant are
prescribed terms 42-46 of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
42 The lessor is responsible for the cost of the following:
(a) rates and taxes relating to the premises;
(b) services for which the lessor agrees to be responsible;
(c) services for which there is not a separate metering device so that
amounts consumed during the period of the tenancy cannot be
accurately decided;
(d) all services up to the time of measurement or reading at the beginning of
the tenancy;
(e) all services after reading or measurement at the end of the tenancy
providing the tenant has not made any use of the service after
the reading.
43(1) The lessor must pay for any physical installation of services
(eg water, electricity, gas, telephone line).
(2) The tenant is responsible for the connection of all services that will be
supplied in the tenant's name.
44 The lessor must pay the annual supply charge associated with the supply of
water or sewerage.
46 The tenant is responsible for all charges associated with the consumption
of services supplied to the premises, including electricity,
gas, water and
turning to the above prescribed terms it is necessary to look at the statutory
background in which the abstraction charges
and network taxes arise.
Sections 29
Water Resources Act 2007
provide for the grant of a license to
“take” water from water resources in the ACT and for the levying of
for the license. But
section 11(2)
provides that:
(2) However, a person does not
water if the
person uses water taken by someone else under a license to take water.
Example—s (2)
using water provided by a water utility
is sufficiently clear that ActewAGL is required to possess a license to take
water for commercial supply and may thereby be subject
to a license fee under
Water Resources Act 2007
. But it does not appear to the Tribunal that
the owner or tenant of a suburban house who contracts with ActewAGL for the
water is “taking” water within the meaning of
and is thereby directly liable for a fee imposed under
section 107.
ICRC Act 1997 provides:
(1) The Minister may declare in writing, that-
statutory fee
affects the cost of providing a utility service
and may be passed on in full to the consumer of the service: or
for a regulated service is to be passed on in full to the
consumer of the service.
present purposes nothing appears to turn on whether section 4C(1)(a) or (b) is
apposite to the water supplied by ActewAGL. The
statutory fee referred to in
section 4C(1)(a) or (b)is presumably the fee payable by ActewAGL under the
Water Resources Act 2007
and the Minister’s declaration pursuant to
section 4C permits ActewAGL to pass on this statutory fee in full to the
“consumer”.
then raises the issue of who is the “consumer” for the purposes of
section 4C for which there is no definition in
the ICRC Act. The contractual
relations between ActewAGL and the consumer of its water services is determined
Utilities Act 2000
For suburban premises the water is supplied
under a standard customer contract
Utilities Act 2000
defines who may apply for a water supply under a
standard customer contract and includes both the owner and the tenant of a
84(1) A water supplier must, on application by a person, and in
accordance with the supplier's standard customer contract, supply
owned or occupied
by the person.
then provides that the standard customer contract forms “an enforceable
contract” between ActewAGL and the owner or occupier
who applied for the
water service. The terms of the contract are fixed by a process outlined in the
Utilities Act 2000
and are the same for all customers.
“customer” is defined in
Utilities Act 2000
include “a person for whom the service is provided” as well as the
person who made the application for the service.
Thus the standard customer
contract can apply to a tenant living in the premises and using water even if
that tenant did not personally
apply to ActewAGL for the supply. Prima facie,
this appears to be inconsistent with
which only deems the binding
contract between ActewAGL and the person who actually applied for the water
service. Thus if a lessor
applied for the water service albeit that the water
was supplied for the benefit of a tenant, then the binding contract is with the
lessor only but the tenant has the status of a “customer”.
Utilities Act 2000
governs who must pay provides that the
of the land where water is supplied under a standard
customer contract is liable for the amount payable under the
defines the “owner” of the property to which water is
(6) In this section “owner means:
(a) for land held in fee simple-the person in whom the fee simple is vested for
the time being: or
(b) for land held under a lease-the lessee for the time being; or
(c) for land occupied under a tenancy granted by the Territory-the tenant for
the time being; or
(d) for other land occupied by a person with the consent of the Territory-that
section 94(6)(b)
governs cases where there is a “lease” in
existence for the property and imposes the duty to pay the abstraction charge
the lessee. There is no definition of a “lease” in the
Legislation Act 2001
nor in any other legislation
that is relevant for present purposes. This means that the term
“lease” must take its meaning
at common law.
common law the definition of a “lease” turns on the exclusive right
of possession to the premises (
Radaich v. Smith
[1959] HCA 45
(1959) 101 CLR 209
The Wik Peoples v. Queensland
(1996) 71 ALJR 173
Bruton v. London and
Quadrant Housing Trust
[1999] UKHL 26
1999 3 AER 481).
Although the definition of a
“residential tenancy agreement” in section 6A(3)
Residential
Tenancies Act 1997
expressly does not require an exclusive right of
possession, prescribed term 53
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
confers an exclusive right of occupancy on a tenant under a residential tenancy
agreement, and for that reason a residential
tenancy agreement is also a
“lease” at common law (
Estate of Tanya Humphries v. Commissioner
for Housing
2003 ACTSC 40
Cohen-Hallaleh v. Cyril Rosenbaum Synagogue
[2003] NSWSC 395).
may be that the legislature did not intend the word “lease” as it
section 94(6)(b)
to include residential tenancy agreements. But the
Leases ( Commercial and Retail) Act 2001
does use the term
“lease” and hence presumably section 94(6)(b) was intended to apply
to commercial and retail leases.
In this event the tenants of commercial and
retail lease would inherit the obligation under section 94(6)(b) to pay the
abstraction
charge. Assuming this to be the case, it is not immediately obvious
to the Tribunal why the legislature would choose to impose the
duty to pay the
abstraction charge on a small commercial and retail tenants but not on a
residential tenant.
is an alternative interpretation to section 94(6)(b) which assumes that the
drafts person has omitted to include the word “Crown”
word “lease”. The superficial attraction of this approach is that it
relieves tenants in general from responsibility
for the water abstraction
charge, and putting para 94(6)(a) to one side, it provides a form of coherency
in that the remaining paragraphs
of s94(6) each deal with estates in land held
from the Territory.
problems with this approach are threefold:
(a) It does
require an assumption that there has been a drafting error and the reading into
the statute of specific words:
(b) As section
94(6) currently stands there is a coherence in the sense the “owner”
is defined as being the party with
the right to possession of the property as
opposed to the party holding the legal title to the property. In the case of
the party holding the fee simple has the right to possession subject to
any lease. Para (b) then provides that if a lease exists
pursuant to which the
tenant takes the exclusive right to possession, then the charge for the water
abstraction attached to them.
The use of the term “lease” in para
(b) is apt to catch both residential and commercial leases. Paras (c) and (d)
deal with tenancies and occupation agreement granted from the Territory
which again confer on the tenant and the occupant the right
to possession of the
paragraph (b) is read as being limited to Crown leases only, then the seemingly
anomalous situation arises in that the Territory
in its capacity as a landlord
is not responsible for the water abstraction charge, but a private landlord is
responsible for the
charge. Conversely, a tenant of the Territory is responsible
for the charge but a tenant of a private landlord is not. It does not
likely that the legislature intended to introduce such a bias into the market
and to create horizontal inequity in this form.
Tribunal understands that ActewAGL has a practice that all water accounts must
be in the name of the lessor and not the tenant.
Be this as it may, there does
not appear to anything in the
Utilities Act 2000
to support this
practice. To the contrary
sections 17
lead to the conclusion that
a tenant may apply for the supply of water and may be a customer under a
standard customer contract.
Not only does this appear to be the case but the
appears to impose on the tenant the responsibility of
paying all charges raised under the standard customer contract.
standard customer contract itself at clause 3.1 specifically envisages that a
tenant may be the party to the standard contract
and clause 6.2 of the standard
contract imposes the obligation to pay the abstraction charge on the party to
the standard customer
Tribunal finds it difficult to arrive at any consistent understanding of the
above statutory provisions. What is clear is that
either a lessor or a tenant
can apply to ActewAGL for a water supply under a standard customer contract.
Whoever makes this application
is then a party to the standard customer contract
and will thus inherit responsibility for all the charges lawfully levied for the
water supply, including the abstraction charge.
is not clear is the identity of the “consumer” referred to in
and whether this consumer is synonymous with the
customer who is the party to the standard customer contract with ActewAGL. It is
also not clear how this all applies in the present circumstances where the
lessor made the application for the water supply and as
such is the party to the
standard customer contract albeit the tenant has the status of a
“customer” as well. In particular
section 94 then raises the spectre
that the lessor is the party to the standard contract but the tenant has a
statutory obligation
to pay for the charges under the standard contract.
does not appear to be anything in the
Utilities Act 2000
that expressly
permits the lessor to pass on this cost to the tenant as the ultimate
“consumer”.
state of the above legislative scheme is so unclear as to warrant the attention
of the Legislative Assembly to make clear to the
community who is responsible
for what charges.
a proper reading of the above legislative scheme produces the result that only
the lessor is the party to the standard contract,
and is the only party directly
responsible to ActewAGL for the payment of the abstraction charge, then the
issue becomes which of
prescribed terms 44 and 46
Residential Tenancies Act
applies. If prescribed term 44 applies then the lessor is left with
responsibility for the abstraction charge. If prescribed term
46 applies then
the tenant is responsible for the abstraction charge.
a proper reading of the above legislative scheme produces the result that the
tenant is directly responsible for the payment of
the abstraction charge
pursuant to
then it is not necessary to find any provision of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
which governs the imposition of liability
or the right of the landlord to recover the abstraction charge from the tenant.
in this case it seems that ActewAGL has no right to include the
abstraction charge on the lessors account in the first instance and
lessor’s generally should may have paid the charge to ActewAGL under both
a mistake of fact and law that would permit lessor’s
generally to recover
the charges paid from ActewAGL. This just further highlights the need for
legislative reform on the point.
the matter is far from clear, the Tribunal favours the approach most consistent
with the common law of contract, namely that
the party who applied to ActewAGL
for the water service to the premises is the only true party to the standard
customer contract
and is therefore responsible for all charges levied under that
contract. If the lessor applies for the water service then notwithstanding
, the obligation to pay those charges to ActewAGL under the
contract rests on the lessor and not the tenant.
this event the abstraction charge is a charge levied by ActewAGL as part of the
cost of supplying the water albeit the charge is
estimated in part by reference
to consumption with a minimum amount payable even where no consumption occurs.
to the issue raised at paragraph 69 above, namely which of prescribed terms 44
or 46 applies in the present case. Prescribed
term 44 speaks of charges
“associated with the supply” of water; whereas prescribed term 46
speaks of charges “associated
with the consumption” of water. The
terms “associated with” are vague and broad in nature. It could
fairly be said
that the abstraction charge is “associated with” both
the supply and consumption of water. Obviously it is not possible
water that is not first supplied.
does the Tribunal reconcile this second level of ambiguity now arising from the
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
In terms of public policy considerations,
it is not apparent that the public interest is better serve by imposing the
abstraction
charge on either the lessor or the tenant. There are considerations
which favour both possibilities. The lessor may be better able
to bear the cost
and may be able to seek some tax deductibility for the cost. On the other hand
it is tenant who is responsible for
the environmental effects of consumption and
to whom the environmental price signal is best addressed.
short the Tribunal simply does not know what the legislature intended in the
present context when it created the abstraction charge.
Frankly the Tribunal
suspects that the legislature also had no clear idea of its implications in the
context of the present legislative
schemes in the
Utilities Act 2000
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
the Tribunal is forced to come to some decision on the point, then the Tribunal
falls back upon the principle of statutory interpretation
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
is a species of beneficial legislation
designed to regulate the relationship between lessors and tenants, and further
designed to
provide a measure of security and protection to tenants from
exploitation; and as such any ambiguity should be resolved in favour
interpretation that is most beneficial to the tenant.
Accordingly
the Tribunal determines that prescribed term 44 applies and the abstraction
charge is one for the lessor.
issue of the network facilities tax is much clearer.
(Network Facilities Tax) Act 2006
imposes on ActewAGL a “tax”.
The ICRC Declaration No 1 of 2006 made pursuant to section
4C ICRC Act
describes the network tax as being “a tax on a network facility on land in
the ACT” and permits ActewAGL to pass on this
“consumers” of utility services. This then raises the same issue as
above concerning who is the “consumer”.
unlike the case of the abstraction charge, it is sufficiently clear to the
Tribunal that the water network facility tax is
a “tax” and
accordingly prescribed term 42(a) applies and the lessor cannot pass on this tax
to the tenant.
Conclusion:
tenant is to pay the lessor the sum of $1609.16 being:
(a) $97.14 for
(b) $162.00 for
carpet cleaning
(c) $250.00 for
damage to the kitchen cabinet
(d) $311.22 for
water consumption
(e) $285.00 for
repairs to locks
(f) $200.00 for
repair to the hole in the living room wall
(g) $303.80 for
repairs to the back door and bedroom door
lessor is to pay the tenant the sum of $1195.90 being:
(a) $160.60 of
abstraction charges previously paid by the tenant
(b) $15.30 for
network facilities tax previously paid by the tenant
(c) $1020.00
for breach of the duty to provide an exclusive right of occupancy
tenant is not required to pay the outstanding water abstraction charge or the
network facilities tax.
RTF format (491 KB)
Signed PDF/A format