McGarvey v Mulino [2017] ACTSCFC 1 (30 March 2017)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
McGarvey v Mulino
[2017] ACTSCFC 1
Hearing Date:
Murrell CJ, Elkaim and Rangiah JJ
Appeal allowed. Conviction set aside.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– APPEAL – Appeal against conviction
– Driving offences – Refusing to permit blood sample to be taken by
nurse – Appellant convicted under incorrect section –Statutory
interpretation – Lack of legislative clarity –
Appeal allowed
– Conviction set aside
Legislation Cited:
Legislation Act 2001
Road Transport (Alcohol and
Drugs) Act 1977
Supreme Court Act 1933
Cases Cited:
Hall v Vucak
[2012] ACTMC 6
Project Blue Sky v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
194 CLR 355
Martyn v Cooper
[2013] ACTSC 85
276 FLR 152
Patrick Joseph McGarvey (Appellant)
Nadia Mulino (Respondent)
Representation:
Mr R Davies (Appellant)
Ms M Jones (Respondent)
Legal Aid ACT (Appellant)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
File Number:
SCA 40 of 2016
Decision under appeal:
Court/Tribunal: Magistrates Court of the ACT
Before: Magistrate Boss
Date of Decision: 10 May 2016
Case Title: Mulino v McGarvey
Court File Number: CC 1919 of 2016
MURRELL CJ and RANGIAH J:
1. A nurse at the Canberra Hospital, acting pursuant to
Road Transport (Alcohol and Drugs) Act 1977
(ACT) (the Act),
requested that the appellant permit a sample of his blood to be taken. The
appellant refused the request. The
appellant pleaded guilty to, and was
convicted of, an offence under
of the Act. In our opinion, the
appellant committed an offence against
of the Act, not
follows that he was wrongly convicted.
2. We have had the considerable
advantage of reading the judgment of Elkaim J in draft. We readily
acknowledge that his Honour’s
construction of the relevant provisions of
the Act is open and persuasive, but we believe it is not the preferable
construction.
We respectfully disagree with Elkaim J’s opinion that where
a person verbally fails or refuses a request made by a doctor
or nurse under
of the Act, the offence is against
We consider that
of the Act operates only where a police officer requires the person
to permit a sample of his or her blood to be taken pursuant to
3. The main reason for our disagreement with the opinion expressed by Elkaim
J may be shortly stated. Unlike his Honour, we consider
that, in the statutory
context, the words “make it impossible or impractical for the sample to be
have the same meaning as the words “fails or
refuses to permit a sample to be taken” in
conclusion is reached,
would have no purpose if a failure or refusal to
permit a sample to be taken following a request under
is an offence
The significance is that a statute must usually be interpreted
such that no provision is superfluous: Project Blue Sky v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
194 CLR 355
4. In contrast,
Elkaim J notes that there is an overlap between
and (2), but
states that there are factual circumstances which may come within
sub-s (2), but not sub-s (1). His Honour gives an
example of a person
who fills out a form indicating his or her consent to have a sample of blood
taken pursuant to
of the Act, but then resists the actual taking of
the blood. His Honour says that the person’s initial consent prevents a
charge under
, but his or her subsequent behaviour allows a charge
to be brought under
By that reasoning, it must also follow that
where a police officer requires a person to permit a sample of his or her blood
taken pursuant to
and the person initially consents but later
resists, the person does not commit an offence against
of the Act.
We respectfully disagree with the proposition that initial consent followed by
refusal means that the person commits
no offence against
construction of
in that way would have far-reaching consequences,
as we will explain.
5. The long title of the Act indicates that its
purposes include detection of people who drive motor vehicles after consuming
or drugs, and the creation of offences for such people.
creates an offence where the driver of a motor vehicle on a road or road related
area has, within the relevant period, the prescribed
concentration of alcohol in
the person’s blood or breath.
creates a corresponding offence
where a driver has a prescribed drug in the person’s blood or oral fluid.
6. The detection of offences against
of the Act requires
testing of drivers’ breath, blood or saliva. This is facilitated by
allowing doctors or nurses to take
blood samples for analysis in the
circumstances described in
. It is also facilitated by allowing
police officers to require drivers to undertake breath tests (called
“alcohol screening
tests”) under
, and drug tests under
7. If a driver fails or refuses to give a sample, the driver cannot
be convicted of an offence against
of the Act. Police
officers, doctors or nurses are not given statutory power to physically compel
drivers to give samples of blood,
breath or saliva. Instead, such failure or
refusal is itself made an offence. Thus,
provides, relevantly, that a
person who “has, in accordance with the provisions specified in this Act,
been required to provide
a sample of breath for breath analysis” commits
an offence if “the person fails or refuses to provide a sample of
for analysis. There are corresponding offences where a person is
required to, but fails or refuses to, provide an oral fluid sample
for analysis
, or a person fails or refuses to undergo an alcohol screening test or
drug screening test
of the Act is to be
construed such that a person who initially consents to provide a sample of
breath but later resists, commits
no offence against the provision, logically,
should be construed in the same way. However,
there are no provisions equivalent to
that create offences of making it
“impossible or impractical” for a breath or saliva sample to be
taken. The result
would be that a person who initially consents to providing a
breath or saliva sample but later resists, commits no offence at all.
construction would undermine the purposes of the Act and should be
9. In our opinion,
of the Act applies even where there has
been initial consent followed by a subsequent failure or refusal. Further,
should be construed to refer to any form of failure or refusal, whether
verbal, written, or by conduct.
10. Contrary to the view expressed by
Elkaim J, we do not accept that the words “fails or refuses to permit a
sample to be taken”
of the Act have a narrower, or
different, scope of operation than the words “make it impossible or
impractical for the sample
to be taken” in
While different words
are used, in our opinion, they mean the same thing. As we have said, the Act
does not allow a police officer,
doctor or nurse to take a sample of blood
against the will of the person; that is why offences are created under
and (2). A failure or refusal to permit a sample to be taken,
therefore, is also behaviour that makes it impossible or impractical
sample to be taken. Behaviour that makes it impossible or impractical for a
sample to be taken amounts to a failure or refusal
to permit a sample to be
taken. A person’s verbal or written interactions with others are part of
the person’s behaviour.
For the purposes of both
and (2), it
does not matter whether the failure or refusal is manifested verbally, or in
writing, or by behaviour such as physically
resisting the taking of a sample.
11. We accept that where two statutory provisions use quite different words,
they are usually taken to mean different things, or at
least to not have exactly
the same meaning. In this case, we think that the difference in language is
simply a product of poor drafting
which does not accurately reflect the
legislative intention that emerges from consideration of the statutory scheme as
As we have said, if a failure or refusal in response to a request
is an offence against
, that would leave
purpose. That result should be avoided.
12. There are also other reasons for
construction of
of the Act in the manner we favour.
Section 15(1)
empowers a police officer to “require the person to permit a
sample of his or her blood to be taken” (emphasis added).
Section 23(1)
applies to a person who “has, in accordance with the provisions specified
in this Act, been required to permit a sample of
blood to be taken for
analysis” (emphasis added). In this way,
‘paired’ with
We have also referred to
which use the word “require” to create
‘pairings’ of sections of the Act in relation to other forms of
13. In contrast,
of the Act does not use the word
“require”. This suggests that
is not intended to be
‘paired’ with
Instead, it is expressly
‘paired’ with
, which was introduced at the same time as
makes it an offence for a doctor or nurse to fail to take
a sample of blood in the circumstances set out in the provision, but
provides a defence where the doctor or nurse satisfies the Court that
“because of the behaviour of the person”, the doctor
or nurse was
unable to take the sample. The use of the word “behaviour” in
suggests that the same conduct is intended to inform the offence in
of “behav[ing] in such a manner as to make it impossible or
impractical for the sample to be taken.” That emphasises
the connection
(2) and suggests that the connection is exclusive of
, which uses different language.
14. In Martyn v Cooper
[2013] ACTSC 85
276 FLR 152
, the appellant had attended a hospital after a motor vehicle
accident and was asked by a doctor acting under
of the Act to permit
a sample of blood to be taken. The respondent refused and was charged with an
offence under
Penfold J held that as there was no requirement by a
police officer under
of the Act to permit a sample of blood to be taken,
there was no offence under
of the Act. We respectfully concur with that
conclusion.
15. However, Penfold J went on to conclude that the respondent
had also committed no offence against
Her Honour said:
Section 23(2)
, in my view deals with the situation where a person does not
refuse or fail to give consent to the procedure (thus avoiding any prosecution
but does not co-operate in the physical processes of taking a
blood sample – for instance, by refusing to keep still while
the doctor or
nurse finds a vein and inserts a needle.
[32] Nor in my view did Mr Martyn commit an offence under
Certainly he refused to consent to the taking of blood, but under
, the effect of that refusal was to free the doctor from the
obligation under
to take a blood sample; thus there was no
continuing requirement under
for the sample to be taken, and no
possible offence under
16. We respectfully disagree with these aspects of Penfold
J’s opinion. It seems most unlikely that the legislature intended
person who consents to the taking of blood, and then by physical action refuses,
commits an offence, while a person who consents
and then verbally refuses, or
verbally refuses from the outset, commits no offence. Further, it does not
follow from the fact that
refusal of consent by a person frees the doctor or
nurse from the obligation of taking a sample of blood that there are no
consequences
to the person from his or her refusal. As we have pointed out, the
purpose of detection of people who drive after drinking alcohol
and taking drugs
is facilitated by a statutory scheme which creates offences where people fail or
refuse to provide samples for testing.
Section 15AA
construed consistently with that scheme.
17. To make it clear, we consider
that where a nurse or doctor requests, pursuant to
of the Act, that
a person permit a sample of blood to be taken, and the person fails or refuses
(whether verbally, in writing, or
by conduct),
applies and the
charge must be brought under that section.
Section 23(1)
applies only where there has been a requirement made by a police officer under
As there was no such requirement, the appellant should not have been
convicted of an offence against
The respondent accepts that if the
charge ought to have been brought under
of the Act, a verdict of
acquittal should be entered. In our opinion, the appeal should be allowed and a
verdict of acquittal should
be entered.
Sections 15AA
Act are badly drafted. For example,
fails to specify whether a
doctor or nurse must request that a person permit a sample of blood to be taken,
or whether a sample may
only be taken with the consent of the person.
contains no equivalent of
, leaving it unclear as to what a
doctor or nurse is to do when a person is incapable of giving consent. This is
unsatisfactory where
a doctor or nurse is burdened with criminal responsibility
for a failure to take a blood sample. Further, as has been demonstrated
appeal, the task of a police officer in deciding under which provision to lay a
charge is made difficult by poor drafting.
More generally, a number of
provisions of the Act are lengthy and perhaps unnecessarily complex. The
detection and punishment of
driving under the influence of alcohol and drugs is
a matter of high public importance. Accordingly, we recommend that
consideration
be given to statutory reform in this area.
certify that the preceding nineteen [19] numbered paragraphs are a true copy of
the Reasons for * Judgment of their Honours Chief
Justice Murrell and Justice
Date: 30 March 2017
Introduction
20. On 23 January 2016 a Toyota sedan, owned by the appellant,
collided with a tree. After a short investigation, the police concluded
the car had been driven by the appellant.
21. The police attended the home of
the appellant where they found him bleeding from large lacerations on his face.
The appellant
was taken to Canberra Hospital because of his apparent head
22. Once at the hospital, to quote the statement of facts:
nurse Samantha Hall, spoke to the male and requested he provide a sample of his
blood. In the presence of police the male
refused to provide a sample of his
blood. Ms Hall made the request several more times and informed the male it was
an offence not
to provide a sample of his blood. The male continuously refused
the request.
23. On the following day, the appellant was charged with
contravention of
Road Transport (Alcohol and Drugs) Act 1977
(ACT) in that “he in the Australian Capital Territory on 23 January 2016,
a repeat offender, having been the driver of a motor
vehicle on a road, did
refuse to permit a blood sample to be taken from him.”
24. On 10 May
2016 the appellant appeared before Magistrate Boss in respect of the above
charge. He had the benefit of legal representation.
25. Following the plea of guilty, the appellant was convicted and
sentenced to one month’s imprisonment fully suspended upon
his signing an
undertaking to be of good behaviour for two years with two years supervision.
He was disqualified from holding or
obtaining a drivers licence for two
26. The appellant initially only appealed against the sentence that
had been imposed. He said it was manifestly excessive. On 17
November 2016 the
appeal was listed for hearing in the Supreme Court. It came before Burns J.
After some discussion his Honour
permitted the appellant to amend his Notice of
Appeal so as to include an appeal against conviction. The only ground of
to the conviction was that the admitted facts could not support a
finding of guilt of an offence under
27. Burns J referred the
appeal, limited to the conviction ground, to the Full Court pursuant to
Supreme Court Act 1933
28. The appeal raises questions regarding
the interpretation of the
Road Transport (Alcohol and Drugs) Act 1977
Section 196
Legislation Act 2001
also relevant.
The legislation
Transport (Alcohol and Drugs) Act 1977
blood samples from people in custody
police officer does not, because of
(3) (a) or (b) require a person
to undergo a screening test or to provide a sample of breath or oral fluid for
analysis; or
not practicable to carry out a breath or oral fluid analysis because –
breath analysis, a breath analysis instrument is not available or an available
breath analysis instrument is not in working
oral fluid analysis, an oral fluid analysis instrument is not available or an
available oral fluid analysis instrument is not
in working order; or
person is unable to provide a sufficient sample of oral fluid for analysis;
the police officer may require the person to
permit a sample of his or her blood to be taken by a doctor or nurse for
analysis and,
if the person is not in hospital, may take the person into custody
and take the person, or place the person in the custody of another
officer who must take the person, as soon as practicable, to a hospital or
sampling facility for that purpose.
requirement must not be made under subsection (1) after the end of whichever the
periods specified in
(1) or (2) applies in relation to the
this section –
reference to the taking of a blood sample is a reference to the taking of a
blood sample under a requirement under subsection (1);
reference to an analysis of a blood sample is a reference to an analysis of the
sample to detect alcohol, or a prescribed drug,
sample of a person’s blood must be taken as soon as practicable after the
arrival of the person at hospital or at the sampling
facility and must not be
taken more than 2 hours after the arrival of the person at hospital or at the
doctor or nurse must not refuse to take a sample of a person’s blood for
permitted to do so by the person under subsection (1); or
the doctor or nurse is of the opinion that the person is, because of his or her
medical opinion, incapable of giving or refusing
permission to the taking of
such a sample – if requested to do so by a police officer under this
Maximum penalty: 10 penalty units.
police officer must not make a request under subsection (5) after the end of
whichever of the periods specified in
(1) or (2) applies in relation
to the person.
doctor or nurse (the
sample taker)
taking a sample of blood from
the person (the “tested person”) must –
the sample in the presence of a police officer; and
the sample into a container; and
a label to the container that includes the following information:
sample taker’s name;
tested person’s name;
date and time the sample was taken; and
that the container is sampled with a tamper-evident seal that has a unique
identifying number marked on it; and
the sealed container into a one-way box.
chief police officer must, as soon as practicable, arrange for the container to
be collected from the one-way box by an analyst.
15AA Taking
blood samples from people in hospital
person commits an offence if –
person is a doctor or nurse; and
person attends to a person (the
in hospital; and
person believes, on reasonable grounds, that –
patient was a driver or driver trainer involved in an accident; and
accident happened not longer than 6 hours before the patient arrived at the
hospital; and
person does not take a sample of the patient’s blood for analysis within 2
hours after the time the patient arrives at the
Maximum penalty units: 10 penalty units.
person (the
sample taker
) taking a sample of blood from a patient
the sample into a container; and
a label to the container that includes the following information:
sample taker’s name;
patient’s name;
date and time the sample was taken; and
that the container is sealed with tamper-evident seal that has a unique
identifying number marked on it; and
the sealed container into a one-way box.
chief police officer must, as soon as practicable, arrange for the container to
be collected from the one-way box by an analyst.
blood test etc.
person who –
driver of a motor vehicle on a road or road related area; or
driver trainer in a motor vehicle on a road or road related area; and
in accordance with the provisions specified in this Act, been required to permit
a sample of blood to be taken for
commits an offence punishable, on
conviction, by a maximum fine of 30 penalty units if the person fails or refuses
to permit the sample
to be taken for that purpose.
person from whom a blood sample is required to be taken under
section 15AA
must not behave in such a manner as to make it impossible or impracticable for
the sample to be taken.
Maximum penalty: 30 penalty units.
person who is required under
to undergo a medical examination commits
an offence punishable, on conviction, by a maximum fine of 30 penalty units if
person fails or refuses to submit to the medical examination; or
person fails or refuses, when required by the doctor or authorised nurse
practitioner conducting the examination, to give or permit
the taking of a
sample from his or her body for analysis.
is a defence to a prosecution for an offence against subsection (1), (3) or (3)
if the person charged establishes that the failure,
refusal or behaviour (as the
case requires) was based on religious or other conscientious grounds or on
medical grounds.
Legislation Act 2001
Provision giving function gives power to exercise function
provision of a law that gives a function to an entity also gives the entity the
powers necessary and convenient to exercise the
– see the dictionary,
powers given to entity under subsection (1) are in addition to any other powers
of the entity under the law.
The appellant’s argument
29. The appellant submitted that because he had not been
required by a police officer to provide a sample of his blood he could not
guilty of an offence under
30. A request from a nurse did not
suffice. The “provisions” referred to in
were limited to
the power of a police officer acting under the authority given to him by
31. Therefore, said the appellant, an offence under
arise from a requirement “to permit a sample of blood to be taken for
analysis” which had been made by a police
officer exercising his powers
32. Consistently, said the appellant, an offence under
was limited to circumstances that had arisen from the implementation of s
33. The appellant pointed out that his interpretation was in accordance
with the decision of Penfold J in Martyn v Cooper
[2013] ACTSC 85
276 FLR 152
34. Her Honour reached the following conclusion in her analysis of
the relevant sections:
The only provision of the Act that expressly provides for a person to be
required to provide a blood sample is
which, in the circumstances described
at [14] above, empowers a police officer to “require the person to permit
a sample of
his or her blood to be taken by a doctor or nurse for
does not purport to empower a doctor or nurse to
require a person to permit a sample to be taken.
Section 23(2)
, however, refers to “[a] person from whom a blood
sample is required to be taken under section 15AA(1).” At first glance,
this provision might be read as implying that a person can be required under
15AA(1) to provide a blood sample. However, as already
noted, s 15AA(1) does not
in fact deal with requiring a person to permit a blood sample to be taken. As
is not apt given its structure to refer to a
required to do something; rather, it refers to a
blood sample
required to be taken. For both these reasons, I cannot see that
read as suggesting that s 15AA contains an implied power for a doctor or nurse
to require a person to permit a blood sample
to be taken.
35. Her Honour summarised her view in paragraph [26]:
In summary, police officers
have the power to require people to provide blood samples. People who refuse to
do so commit an offence,
but doctors and nurses do not commit an offence by
failing to take a blood sample if consent is refused or the procedure is
to. Doctors and nurses are obliged to perform such procedures where a
police officer has make a requirement and consent has been
obtained, and they
have a role in explaining to people the possible consequences of refusing to
consent, but they do not themselves
have a role in insisting that people submit
to the taking of blood samples, or a role in forcibly taking blood samples from
The respondent’s argument
36. The respondent submitted that Martyn had been wrongly
decided. The respondent said that the ‘provisions’ referred
could also include circumstances arising from s 15AA. The respondent
submitted that a nurse or doctor did have the power to require
a person to
provide a sample of blood and that the source of this power lay in the
application of
Legislation Act 2001
37. The respondent made the
following points in aid of her submission:
only applied in the circumstances dictated by sub-ss (a), (b) and (c) of
did not have the same ‘gateway’ provisions so
that its application could be wider than circumstances arising from
Section 23(1)
does not mention
; there is no stipulated requirement that
the offence only arises from circumstances covered by the latter section.
(c) There was no reason why s 15AA could not be linked with
the relationship was both practical and consistent with the legislative intent
of the Act, namely to ensure that intoxicated
drivers did not escape punishment
by refusing to provide blood samples.
(d) Once s 15AA was permitted to be a “provision” for the purposes
, it is but a short step for
to provide the doctor or nurse
with the power to require a person, in appropriate circumstances, to provide a
blood sample.
(e) On the appellant’s interpretation of
no offence could arise in
the absence of a police officer. If, for example, a person was taken to
hospital not accompanied by a
police officer, and then refused to provide a
blood sample when requested by a nurse or doctor, that person could not
subsequently
be charged with a breach of
This would lead to an
unintended consequence of the legislation and would place significant practical
difficulties on the police,
who would be required to attend at a hospital every
time a person refused to provide a blood sample to a doctor or
38. The respondent referred to the decision of Magistrate
Mossop (as he then was) in Hall v Vucak
[2012] ACTMC 6
I do not accept the submission
is designed to cover the field in relation to persons who are in
custody and hence exclude the operation of s 15AA. There is nothing
in the text
of s 15AA that indicates that it is not to apply in circumstances where a person
is in custody in hospital. The two provisions
cover different situations.
permits a person to be taken into custody and taken to hospital for
the purposes of blood sampling where for medical or technical
reasons breath
analysis is not possible. It is a provision which dates back to the original
Motor Traffic (Alcohol and Drugs) Ordinance
1977. In contrast, s 15AA was
inserted in 1997 to provide a completely “separate and distinct
Rollings v Barter
at [72]. It applies whenever a person is
in hospital and the conditions in the section are satisfied. Those conditions do
not include
a condition that the person is not in custody. Further, there is
nothing in the relationship between s 15 and s 15AA or their context
in that Act
as a whole that indicates that one provision is intended to qualify the other.
Consideration
39. The appellant submitted that the offences created by sub-ss
(1) and (2) of s 23 were distinct from each other and respectively
linked to s
15(1) and s 15AA. I disagree. In my view there is an overlap between the
offences, consistent with each carrying the
same penalty, which allows a refusal
to provide a blood sample requested by a doctor or nurse to generate a
prosecution under s 23(1).
40. I accept that on one reading of s 23 it could
be said that the two sub-ss refer to a similar act so there would be no need to
have two separate offences. This was consistent with an offence under s 23(2)
being restricted to circumstances arising from s 15AA.
For example, a person
who makes it “impossible or impractical” for a sample to be taken is
also a person who “fails
or refuses to permit the sample to be
41. It can also be argued, in favour of the appellant’s
position, that it is inappropriate for doctors and nurses to be forced
role of law enforcement officers. It might even be said that their respective
roles could, in certain circumstances, be
in conflict with each
42. Section 23(2) relates only to an offence arising from s 15AA.
This is uncontroversial, but it does not necessarily follow that
facts arising
from section 15AA cannot give rise to a prosecution under s 23(1).
the overlap between ss 23(1) and (2), there are equally factual circumstances in
which each subsection would have a separate
place. For example, a person who
attended a hospital and filled out a form indicating his consent to have a
sample of blood taken,
but then resisted the actual taking of the blood, could
be charged under s 23(2). His consent prevents the charge under s 23(1)
behaviour allows a charge under s 23(2).
44. In my view, the approach taken
by Penfold J is too narrow. In paragraph [16] of her judgment her Honour said:
15AA does not confer any power to require patients to provide
blood samples. Nor is there any explicit conferral of such a power
and nurses elsewhere in the Act”. It is clear from the judgment that s
196 was not mentioned and argued to produce
a different result to that just
45. It is correct that the Act does not, in terms, confer upon
doctors and nurses the power to require patients to provide blood samples.
However if they are to exercise the function of obtaining blood samples they
must have the means to do so. In other words they
must be in a position to
require the patient to provide the sample. This power is provided by s 196. It
is regrettable that her
Honour did not have the benefit of argument to this
46. It follows that I think Martyn is incorrect and that I agree with
the observations of Magistrate Mossop (as he then was) in Hall.
I think that a
prosecution may be brought under s 23(1) in circumstances such as the present
because the request by the nurse was
equivalent to the exercise of a power
sufficient to qualify as a “provision” under s
47. Notwithstanding that I have reached a different conclusion to
the majority, I do agree with their Honours on the following point:
the relevant
sections are not well drafted and require an amendment. Even on my conclusion
the power that I have drawn from s 196
would be better stated in the
Transport (Alcohol and Drugs) Act 1977
48. I would dismiss the appeal.
It follows that it is not necessary to examine the consequences, if any, of the
appellant having entered
a plea of guilty before the Magistrate.
49. I would
propose the following orders:
(b) The matter is remitted to Burns J to hear the appeal on
I certify that the preceding thirty [30] paragraphs numbered
[20]–[49] are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of His Honour
Justice Elkaim.
Date: 30 March 2017
RTF format (251 KB)
Signed PDF/A format