BL and Education Directorate [2021] ACTOFOI 13 (29 October 2021)
‘BL’ and Education Directorate
[2021] ACTOFOI 13
October 2021)
Decision and reasons for decision of Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
Symone Andersen
Application number
AFOI-RR/21/10024
Education Directorate
Decision Date
Freedom of Information Act 2016
deciding access – whether disclosure of information is contrary to the
public interest – contribute to positive
and informed debate on important
issues or matters of public interest – ensure effective oversight of
expenditure of public
funds – trade secrets, business affairs or
1. I am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman for the purposes of
Freedom of Information Act 2016
2. Under s 82(2)(c), I have decided to
the decision of the
Education Directorate (
my decision that
the applicant should be given access to the information at issue.
Background of Ombudsman review
3. On 5 July 2021, the applicant made an access application under the FOI
Act. The applicant applied to Education for access to:
(1) Annual Financial Reports and Statements [of Brindabella Christian
College] provided to the Education Directorate since 1 January
(2) Any explanatory notes or additional correspondence between the
Directorate and [Brindabella Christian] College (or its representatives)
regarding (1).
4. On 29 July 2021, Education’s Information Officer decided to refuse
access to 3 documents.
5. On 1 August 2021, the applicant applied for Ombudsman review of
Education’s decision under s 73 of the FOI Act.
6. On 8 September 2021, Brindabella Christian College applied to be a
participant in this review under s 77(2) of the FOI Act.
7. On 15 September 2021, a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman decided to allow
Brindabella Christian College to participate in this review.
8. On 15 October 2021, I provided the 3 parties with my draft consideration.
My draft consideration set out my preliminary view, which
Education’s decision of 29 July 2021 should be set aside and
substituted for a decision to give access to the information
9. On 20 October 2021, Brindabella Christian College wrote to notify me that
it did not wish to make any further submissions. The
correspondence noted
Brindabella Christian College’s view that Education’s decision 29
July 2021 was the correct and
preferable decision.
10. On 22 October 2021, Education wrote to me to notify me that it did not
wish to make any further submissions. The correspondence
noted that Brindabella
Christian College did not wish to make any more submissions.
11. On 22 October 2021, the applicant wrote to me agreeing with my draft
consideration and providing additional submissions to support
the view I had
taken in it.
Information at issue
12. The information at issue in this Ombudsman review is the information
contained in all 3 documents to which access was refused.
13. The issue to be decided in this review is whether giving the applicant
access to the information at issue would be contrary to
the public interest.
14. In making my decision, I had regard to:
applicant’s original application and application for Ombudsman review
Education’s
decision letter
Education’s
submissions, provided to me after it was notified of the commencement of this
the FOI Act,
particularly ss 7, 16, 17, 35, 72 and Schedule 2, ss 2.1(a)(ii), 2.1(a)(iv) and
Relevant law
15. Every person enjoys an enforceable right of access to government
information.
However, the FOI Act
creates an exception to this right by allowing for refusal of access to
information that is ‘contrary
to the public interest information’.
16. Contrary to the public interest information is defined in s 16 of the FOI
information—
(a) that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
schedule 1; or
(b) the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
interest under the test set out in section 17
17. Section 17 of the FOI Act sets out the test that must be used to balance
public interest factors favouring disclosure and non-disclosure
respectively.
This test required me to:
identify any
factor favouring disclosure that applies in relation to the information (a
relevant factor favouring disclosure), including
any factor mentioned in
Schedule 2, s 2.1
identify any
factor favouring non-disclosure that applies in relation to the information (a
relevant factor favouring non-disclosure),
including any factor mentioned in
Schedule 2, s 2.2
balance any
relevant factor or factors favouring disclosure against any relevant factor or
factors favouring non-disclosure
decide whether,
on balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public
balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public interest,
allow access to the information
18. Any party seeking to prevent disclosure of government information bears
the onus of establishing that information is contrary
to the public interest
information.
The contentions of the parties
19. Education’s decision notice stated:
I place significant weight on an organisation’s right to have their
business affairs, trade secrets, confidential information
and commercial
interests protected, particularly in situations where confidentiality is
expressly addressed and agreed between the
20. The applicant contends that:
[m]atters concerning Brindabella Christian College and in particular its
governance and operations have been the subject of widespread
and continuing
media and public interest.
In particular, public interest concerns the use of public monies and
accountability in regards to its operations and governance. The
school is a
registered charity. It receives $10,000,000 pa in public funds.
The school’s failure to publicly report to the Australian Charities and
Not-for-Profits Commission (two years in arrears), in
my opinion, also speaks to
an unwillingness to be publicly accountable and is concerning.
21. After being notified about this review, Education provided additional
submissions. Relevantly, Education submitted that:
...an organisation’s financial statements are considered sensitive by
the organisation, particularly where they operate in a
competitive environment,
regardless of their income source. This is evidenced by the
‘non-disclosure of confidential information’
clause contained in the
Deeds of Grant... The fact that the information sought is covered by a
confidentiality clause is indicative
that disclosure could reasonably be
expected to be prejudicial to [Brindabella Christian College’s] business
affairs and would
be of concern to them.
22. I considered these submissions as I explain in the reasons below.
Considerations
23. I carefully considered an unredacted copy of the information at issue.
Information taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
24. I am satisfied that none of the information at issue is information that
is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose
under Schedule 1 of
the FOI Act.
Irrelevant factors
25. I am satisfied that none of the irrelevant factors listed in s 17(2) were
raised by any of the parties or have influenced my decision
in any way.
Factors favouring disclosure
26. Two factors favouring disclosure are relevant in this review.
Contribute to positive and informed debate on important issues or matters
of public interest
27. A reasonable expectation that disclosure could contribute to positive and
informed debate on important issues or matters of public
interest favours
disclosure under the FOI Act.
28. Education’s Information Officer decided that:
As the education of children is a matter of broad public interest, I have
decided that the factor favouring disclosure is that disclosure
information could reasonably be expected to contribute to positive and informed
debate on important issues or matters of public
29. I consider this finding was correct. Transparency about the financial
affairs of schools does contribute to positive and informed
debate on the
education of children, which is a matter of considerable public interest. The
information at issue, which concerns
the finances of Brindabella Christian
College and terms agreed on with the ACT Government, could reasonably be
expected to promote
this factor to a significant extent.
Ensure effective oversight of expenditure of public funds
30. A reasonable expectation that disclosure could ensure effective oversight
of expenditure of public funds favours disclosure under
31. Brindabella Christian College receives funding from the ACT Government.
The information at issue could reasonably be expected
to ensure effective
oversight of this expenditure by revealing the terms on which the ACT Government
agreed to grant funding to Brindabella
Christian College between 2015-2020 and
2020-2025 and financial information about Brindabella Christian College which is
published on the Australian Charities and Not-for-Profits Commission
32. While the Deed of Grant for 2015-2020 is no longer current, the oversight
of expenditure of public funds remains relevant after
funds are spent for the
purposes of government transparency and accountability. Moreover, the ability to
compare the 2015-2020 and
2020-2025 grants is useful for this purpose.
33. For these reasons, I consider that the information at issue could
reasonably be expected to promote this public interest factor
to a significant
Factors favouring non-disclosure
Trade secrets, business affairs and research
34. A reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice the trade
secrets, business affairs or research of a person weighs against
under the FOI Act.
35. Education’s Information Officer decided this factor was applicable
and gave it overriding weight. However, the reasons given
in the decision letter
were unclear about how disclosing it would affect Brindabella Christian
College’s business affairs.
The reasons addressed a sensitivity among
organisations generally to the disclosure of information of this nature.
However, as the
applicant rightly noted in their submissions, Brindabella
Christian College can be distinguished by the fact that it reports publicly
the Australian Charities and Not-for-Profits Commission
36. Brindabella Christian College’s Financial Reports for previous
years are published on that web page. Indeed, Brindabella
College’s Financial Reports for 2019 and 2020 are overdue. The relevance
is not that they are overdue, per se, but
rather, that Brindabella Christian
College’s Financial Reports are prepared in the knowledge that they are
routinely and indeed,
mandatorily, published.
37. I therefore did not accept the contention that disclosing the information
at issue could reasonably be expected to prejudice Brindabella
College’s business affairs.
Balancing the factors
38. I identified two factors favouring disclosure which the information at
issue could reasonably be expected to promote to a significant
extent. I decided
to afford each of these factors considerable weight.
39. On the other hand, I was not satisfied that disclosing the information at
issue could reasonably be expected to prejudice the
trade secrets, business
affairs and research of Brindabella Christian College.
40. For these reasons, under s
of the FOI Act, I decided to
the decision of the Education Directorate dated 29 July 2021
my decision that the applicant should be given access to
the information at issue.
Symone Andersen
Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
October 2021
Section 7 of the FOI
Section 35(1)(c) of the
Section 72 of the FOI
Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(ii)
of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(iv) of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(xi) of the FOI Act.
RTF format (805 KB)
Signed PDF/A format