Inquiry into the Orroral Valley Fire [2025] ACTCD 4 (13 June 2025)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Matter Title:
Inquiry into the Orroral Valley Fire
[2025] ACTCD 4
Hearing Date:
14 November 2022, 6 June 2023 - 9 June 2023
Decision Date:
Chief Coroner Walker
[36]-39], [189]-[198], [226]-[227], [238]-[246]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– bushfire – scope of inquiry – cause
and origin of the fire – circumstances in which the fire happened –
Defence Assistance to the Civil Community – interagency communications and
operations – delay in reporting a bushfire
– risk management
planning and processes – reporting obligations – matters of public
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
Emergencies Act 2004
Case Cited:
R v Doogan; Ex parte Lucas-Smith
[2005] ACTSC 74
Representation:
Counsel Assisting the Coroner
K Nomchong SC (instructed by S Richards)
Counsel for the Commonwealth
of Australia
M Fordham SC and S McCarthy (instructed by Clayton Utz)
Counsel for
the Australian Capital Territory
M Jones SC and K Weir (instructed by ACT
Government Solicitor)
Counsel for the Affected Residents
P Tierney (instructed by Ken Cush & Associates)
File Number:
CF 1 of 2021
CHIEF CORONER WALKER:
summer of 2019/2020 saw a particularly catastrophic bushfire season in the
south-east of Australia. Bushfires were raging between
Canberra in the
Australian Capital Territory and the South Coast of New South Wales.
the season, the Australian Defence Force (“ADF”) provided aid to
civil authorities upon request in a number of
locations and capacities, through
the Defence Assistance to the Civil Community Initiative (“DACC”).
January 2020 in the ACT was, according to the Bureau of Meteorology, a hot day
with gusting winds and very high fire danger.
that day, in the course of providing assistance, a fire was ignited (“the
incident”) by the searchlight of an Australian
Regular Army helicopter, a
Multi-Role Helicopter 90 Taipan (“MRH-90”). This occurred at the
head of the Orroral Valley
in the Namadgi National Park in the ACT. It came to
be known as the Orroral Valley Fire (“OVF”).
OVF burned for over five weeks. Thankfully, no human life was lost. There was,
however, very significant loss of domestic and
wild flora and fauna, wide
environmental damage, damage to Indigenous and other sites of cultural
significance and significant property
damage to landholdings. Affected persons
suffered emotionally and financially.
Procedural History
question of an inquiry into the fire arose as the result of a request made to me
as Chief Coroner on 29 March 2021, on behalf
of the residents of Bumbalong in
New South Wales. Those residents had suffered property damage from the fire,
which commenced in
the Orroral Valley, but in NSW became known as the Clear
Range Fire. The correspondence caused me to consider the circumstances in
the OVF had begun.
Coroners Act 1997
(ACT) (“the Act”) provides:
(2) A coroner may
(at the request of the owner or occupier of destroyed or damaged property or on
the coroner’s own initiative)
hold an inquiry into the cause and origin of
a fire if the coroner considers that an inquiry should be held.
was satisfied that an “own motion” inquiry was warranted.
initially declined to grant leave to the Bumbalong residents to appear, as I
considered that the property damage suffered by them,
being in NSW, did not
afford them a sufficient interest in the ACT fire inquiry. My determination was
subject to an appeal to the
ACT Supreme Court. In light of the observations made
by the Chief Justice in that successful appeal, I received further submissions
and granted leave to a group of both ACT and NSW
Residents”) to appear under a single representation.
parties granted leave to appear were the Australian Capital Territory
(“the Territory”), on behalf of the ACT Emergency
(“ESA”), the ACT Parks and Conservation Service (“PCS”)
and ACT Rural Fire Service (“ACTRFS”)
(together, “ESA”),
and the Commonwealth, representing the interests of members of the Australian
Defence Force (“ADF”).
first directions hearing in this matter was held on 30 November 2021. On 9 May
2022, orders were made to anonymise the names of
personnel who were on board ADF
Multi-Role Helicopter 90 Taipan (call sign ANGEL21 (“ANGEL21”)) and
to prohibit the publication
of those names.
hearing proper commenced on 14 November 2022. Due to a number of factors
unrelated to the inquiry itself, the matter was adjourned
and unable to resume
until 6 June 2023. It was completed on 9 June 2023. Additional records were
obtained under subpoena. Final submissions
were received on 20 October
copy of my provisional findings was provided to parties on 20 December 2024.
notices were also directed to the Commonwealth and Witnesses D1 and
D2 on this same day.
for the Affected Residents made no further comments in relation to the factual
matters contained in the provisional findings.
28 January 2025, the Territory offered two factual/typographical
suggestions.
notices were received on 14 February 2025.
have considered these in relation to my findings and recommendations at
[228]-[237].
consultation amongst the parties, prior to the hearing, an agreed list of issues
was arrived at:
(i) The cause of the ignition or start of the fire on 27 January 2020.
(ii) The time at which the ignition of the fire occurred.
(iii) The location of the ignition site of the fire.
(iv) The purpose of the activities being conducted on 27 January 2020
(“the Activities”) in Namadgi National Park involving
the ADF and
(v) The nature and scope of the operations (including communications) of the ADF
Multi-Role Helicopter 90 Taipan (call sign ANGEL21
(“ANGEL21”))
during the Activities.
(vi) The nature and scope of interagency communications between the ADF, the ESA
and the PCS in preparation for and during the Activities,
(i) any risk assessments as to the operation of the ADF helicopters in proposed
or actual landing zones within the Namadgi National
Park during the Activities;
(ii) protocols in relation to communications between the agencies during the
Activities.
(vii) The nature and scope of any reporting undertaken by ADF personnel in
relation to the cause, ignition and location of the fire.
(viii) The circumstances surrounding the time and the means by which the ESA
became aware of the fire, and its immediate response
in terms of notifications
both internally and with other agencies.
(ix) The effect of any delay in the reporting of the ignition of the fire to the
Scope – Preliminary Consideration
its written closing submissions, the Commonwealth raised the question of the
scope of a Coroner’s inquiry into a fire, submitting,
in essence, that any
acts or omissions of ADF members after the fire ignited were not amenable to the
Coroner’s findings or
recommendations, because they did not relate to the
cause and origin or circumstances of the fire. It was submitted that
the circumstances which led up to the ignition/origin of the fire
(whether causally connected or contextual) are circumstances in
which the fire
happened, circumstances that happened after the ignition of the fire are less
readily describable as circumstances
in which the fire happened, viewed in light
of the statutory context”. It follows, as submitted by the Commonwealth,
(a) if it is found that the time taken by the aircrew of ANGEL21 to report the
fact and the location of the fire had no effect on
the spread of the fire, then
the circumstances post ignition which relate to why there was such a delay are
not properly describable
as circumstances in which the fire happened, but are
rather circumstances arising from the fire and without factual nexus to the
causal origin of the fire; and
(b) in any event, circumstances arising after 1420 hours on 27 January 2020,
including internal ADF communications and communications
between the ADF and the
ESA, are “sufficiently temporally removed from the ignition of the fire
such that they cannot be properly
described as circumstances in which the fire
was also submitted, correctly, that the Coroner’s power to make
recommendations, which arises from
of the Act, does not operate to enlarge
the Court’s jurisdiction. Recommendations must relate to the findings.
support of these submissions, the Commonwealth relies on the decision in
R v Doogan; ex parte Lucas-Smith
[2005] ACTSC
”), a decision in which the approach taken, or
expected to be taken, by former Coroner Doogan in the inquiry into the 2003
in the ACT was subject to appellate scrutiny.
the Territory nor the Bumbalong residents addressed this issue in their
submissions.
Determination
of the proper scope of a coronial inquiry is rarely lit with a “bright
dividing line” of certainty; the
task must always be approached with
regard to the particular factual matrix and the public interest, but also with
appropriate judicial
the reasons which follow, I consider that
supports the approach
that factual findings relevant not only to the ignition of a fire but to the
antecedent causal factors, and
the response to and spread of the fire, are
properly within the scope of this Inquiry.
of the Act provides, relevantly:
(2) A coroner holding an inquiry must find,
if possible—
(a) the cause and origin of the fire or disaster; and
(b) the circumstances in which the fire or disaster happened.
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
(i) state whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection with
the inquest or inquiry; and
(ii) if a matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the matter
of the Act provides, relevantly:
after inquest or inquiry
(1) A coroner may report to
the Attorney-General on an inquest or an inquiry into a fire held by the
(2) A coroner must report to the Attorney-General on an inquiry into a
(3) A report by a coroner to the Attorney-General—
(a) must be in writing; and
(b) must set out the coroner's findings about any serious risks to public safety
that were revealed in the inquest or inquiry to
which the report relates; and
(c) may make recommendations about matters of public safety if the
recommendations—
(i) relate to the coroner's findings about a cause of death, fire or disaster;
(ii) would, in the coroner's opinion, improve public safety.
respect to the scope of inquiry into a fire, Higgins CJ, Crispin and Bennett JJ
noted at [39] of
The word ‘circumstances’
has a wide meaning and the concept referred to in
of the Act is
broader than that referred to in
of the Act. Nonetheless, the word
must be construed by reference to the statutory context within which it appears.
A coroner is not
authorised to make findings in relation to any circumstances
arising from the fire, but only in relation to the circumstances in
fire occurred. The distinction between a cause and circumstances may essentially
be one of degree.
Honours also state at [20]:
If the concept of ‘the
fire’ were to be interpreted narrowly, the jurisdiction might be confined
to determining whether
the initial ignition was due to arson or is caused by
some accident or natural phenomenon such as a lightning strike. The most obvious
impediment to such a construction is that, unlike a death, a fire is not a
one-off event but a process that develops over time. The
process may have been
initiated by a single event such as ignition due to a lightning strike, or as in
the present case, by ignition
due to lightning strikes at four separate places.
However, when the concept of causation is applied to a process that has
over a period of several days, it must extend beyond such origins to
embrace those factors that had a causal effect on development
or continuance
(my italics) of the process. It would be quite unrealistic to regard a fire
that had travelled long distances and/or burnt out vast
areas of bushland as
coextensive with a fire that had been smouldering on the end of a cigarette and
negligently thrown from a car
window and, then to dismiss from consideration any
intervening or contributing events.
process required is one of identifying causation of a fire in which factors that
are proximate rather than remote are appropriately
considered. Again, as
observed by their Honours in
The point where
such a line is to be drawn must be determined not by the application of some
concrete rule, but by what is described
as the ‘common sense’ test
of causation affirmed by the High Court of Australia in
March v E & MH
Stramare Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 12
(1991) 171 CLR 506.
example given by their Honours at [39] in relation to the distinction between a
cause and a circumstance is elucidating:
For example, had the fires
reached Canberra eight days later, the deployment of fire fighting units could
conceivably have been hampered
by additional traffic due to Australia Day
celebrations. It would have been somewhat fanciful to regard the celebration of
anniversary as a ‘cause’ of the fire but it might well have
been a circumstance that could have been alluded to in the
to the power to make comments, provided for in
of the Act, their Honours
noted at [41]:
Comments may obviously extend beyond the scope of
‘findings’. The latter term refers to judicial satisfaction that
have been proven to the requisite standard or that legal principles have
been established. The former refers to observations about
the relevant issues,
and may extend to recommendations intended to reduce the risk of similar fires,
deaths or disasters occurring
in the future. However, conferral of the power to
make comments does not enlarge the scope of the coroner’s jurisdiction to
conduct an inquiry.
am mindful of this guidance in considering the evidence received in the inquiry
and in making the findings and comments below.
of the voluminous evidence was in the form of transcripts of interviews or
statements from witnesses, as well as other documentary
evidence filed by the
Commonwealth and the Territory.
the ADF, the Director General of Aviation appointed an Headquarters Forces
Command Aviation Safety Investigation Team on 29
January 2020. That Team
provided a comprehensive report, dated 29 September 2020, regarding the incident
and the role of the aircraft
and aircrew in it. I have been assisted by the
Team’s comprehensive findings in respect to what occurred in the incident,
factors which contributed to the incident and recommended remediation. I
have adopted aspects of those findings where pertinent and
consistent with the
evidence received in this inquiry. However, the report dealt with matters
internal to ADF, as is consistent with
its purpose; it does not address the
significance of the incident to the broader community, in particular interagency
operations.
31 October 2022, by letter, and prior to evidence being called, the Commonwealth
made the following concession, consistent with
[97] of the Aviation Safety
Investigation Report:
...the Commonwealth does not dispute that the
heat from the search light of ANGEL21 caused ignition of the Orroral Valley Fire
27 January 2020.
is now uncontentious that the fire ignited at 1338 hours on 27 January
21’s flight data recorder establishes the location of fire ignition,
namely GPS co-ordinates 35.5847 latitude and 148.9162
longitude by reference to
the point at which the aircraft had “weight on wheels”. This
location is at the head of the
Orroral Valley in the Namadgi National Park, 35
kilometres southwest of Canberra.
location of the fire at ignition was available both from the flight data
recorder but also from photographs taken by one of the
passengers aboard
ANGEL21, a soldier of the 7
Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment
issues 1, 2 and 3, that are the immediate cause, time of ignition and location
of the fire, are resolved.
the remaining issues are somewhat more complicated, the factual matrix is
largely uncontentious. I was greatly assisted, and
have in parts adopted and
adapted below, factual summaries provided in submissions by Senior Counsel
Assisting, Counsel for the Commonwealth
and Counsel for the Territory. I note
that Counsel for the Residents adopted Senior Counsel Assisting’s summary
of the evidence.
The Territory’s Bushfire Response
Arrangements and Request for Assistance from the Commonwealth
relation to preparation for the 2019/2020 fire season, and particularly in
response to the OVF, the following ACT government agencies
were prime actors:
ESA, ACTRF, and PCS, the latter of which falls under the Environment, Planning
and Sustainable Development Directorate.
The roles of these agencies in bushfire
planning are contained in the Strategic Bushfire Management Plan, which is
created under
Emergencies Act 2004
response to an actual or anticipated emergency, the Chief Minister of the ACT
may appoint an Emergency Controller pursuant to the
Emergencies Act 2004
(ACT). Ms Georgina Whelan, ESA Commissioner at the relevant time, was
appointed as Emergency Controller on 2 January 2020 in response
to concerns
ESA headquarters was at Fairbairn, adjacent to the Canberra Airport.
significant incidents, such as on days of elevated fire danger, an Emergency
Coordination Centre is established in a room adjoining
the ESA headquarters
(including its communication centre), hosting a multi-agency Incident Management
Team (“IMT”) comprised
of relevant stakeholders who need information
from the ESA in support of their own operations, including other ACT government
civilian agencies and the ADF. That team is responsible for
coordinating emergency responses, including the deployment and management
resources for the incident. The team is headed by an Incident Controller.
27 January 2020, the Incident Controller was Mr Rohan Scott, who was otherwise
the Director of Operations of the ACT Rural Fire
Service at that time. The
Incident Controller, as the head of the Incident Management Team, reports to the
Emergency Controller.
On the day of the incident, Mr Scott reported to Ms
27 January 2020, the IMT, which had been stood up earlier in the month because
of threats to the ACT from fires to the west, was
operating at a scaled-down
level, as there were no active fires in the ACT at that time.
ADF liaison officers were embedded in the Emergency Coordination Centre and
operated as the point of contact between the
ADF and the ACT Fire authorities.
The liaison officer could speak directly with an ESA staff member in the
Emergency Coordination
Centre or with a member of the IMT next door. The ADF
liaison officers participated in daily planning meetings of the IMT.
requests were relayed from the IMT to the ADF liaison officer, who was able to
both provide guidance as to what the ADF could
do to assist with the objective
and liaise with the ADF Joint Task Force Headquarters for approval and
allocation of the requested
7 January 2020, Ms Whelan made a request to the Commonwealth for assistance
“to support efforts to maintain and expand containment
including “all weather reconnaissance aircraft capability”. That
request was answered.
particular request was made by the IMT to the ADF on 15 January 2020 to provide
a helicopter and crew to conduct aerial reconnaissance
of a network of remote
helipads or helicopter landing zones across the ACT which needed to be assessed
as to whether they were safe
for landing. The request was for photographs and
observation notes in respect to the identified landing zones. This would
the triage of potential work required, namely for assistance to clear
and remediate the landing zones as required.
proposal was that the aerial reconnaissance be undertaken solely by ADF
personnel. The remediation work, however, was to be performed
by ADF personnel
accompanied by a PCS officer equipped with a handheld radio, water and handheld
clearing equipment suitable for
remote area dry firefighting. It was recognised
that the work was to be undertaken in an area of high fire danger; the PCS
being present with appropriate fire-fighting equipment operated as a
safety strategy.
The ADF Response – Operation Bushfire
late October 2019, the ADF provided DACC to assist the State of New South Wales
in its bushfire response.
Bushfire Assist (“Op BFA”) was the DACC response to the request for
assistance from the State and Territory
Emergency Services in the 2019-2020 fire
season. It was stood up in late December 2019.
BFA was headquartered at Joint Operations Command (“HQJOC”) in
Bungendore, NSW. It was delivered by Joint Task Force
629, commanded by
Major-General Justin Ellwood.
8 January 2020, the ADF formed the Multinational Rotary Wing Task Group
(“MNRWTG”) to establish command arrangements
for the ADF, the Royal
Singapore Airforce (“RSAF”) and the Royal New Zealand Airforce
(“RNZAF”) rotary wing
assets provided in support of Op BFA.
Lieutenant Colonel Jamie Martin commanded the MNRWTG with Major Patrick Rodis as
Chief of Staff.
Lieutenant Colonel Martin reported to Major-General
Element Commanders (“AECs”) with tactical command of rotary air
assets of the MNRWTG were co-located within State
and Territory coordination
centres, supported by ADF liaison officers. The AEC embedded in the relevant
State or Territory Emergency
Control Centre received tasking requests from
personnel in the Emergency Control Centre. The relevant AEC, in planning the
would communicate directly with the Operations Officer
(“OPSO”) or Operations Cell of the Task Unit (“TU”)
likely to undertake that task. Sometimes, Major Rodis, in his capacity as the
Chief of Staff of the MNRWTG HQ, would participate
in those conversations.
AEC informed the MNRWTG HQ of the proposed taskings at a daily 1100 hours
meeting. At this time, the OPSO of the MNRWTG HQ gathered
all the tasks received
from the various AECs and allocated them to a TU. The AEC and TU then continued
to plan the task to be executed
within the next 24 hours.
was expected that whilst a task was being executed, the pilots on a particular
task would be in contact with their TU Ops Cell,
who would monitor the task.
That Ops Cell would communicate with the AEC embedded within the Emergency
Control Centre and with the
MNRWTG HQ if necessary.
AEC located at ESA Command Centre on 27 January 2020 was Lieutenant Commander
Stuart Withers.
MNRWTG was given command of several task units and associated rotary wing
assets, including TU Taipan. From 8 January 2020, TU
Taipan was constituted by 4
Australian Regular Army MRH90 helicopters, crewed by members of the
Aviation Regiment.
16 January 2020, TU Taipan operated from RAAF Base Richmond, NSW.
Officer Commanding (“OC”) TU Taipan was Witness D1. He reported to
the CO of the MNRWTG, Lieutenant Colonel Martin.
Communication between Witness
D1 and Lieutenant Colonel Martin was sometimes facilitated by Major Rodis.
Taipan included the following roles and individuals:
(a) Operations Officer – Captain Andrew Bryson
was the Operations Officer (“OPSO TU Taipan”) on the relevant day.
As OPSO, Captain Bryson's role included liaising with internal and external
operatives to ensure that required helicopter assets
from TU Taipan were
available and efficiently tasked;
(b) TU Taipan Ops Cell (call sign "2-Alpha" or “2A”) – on 27
January 2020, this included Captain Bryson and two
other ADF personnel
monitoring communications from TU Taipan helicopters;
(c) Authorisation Officer(s) – Witness D7 was the Authorisation Officer
for the sortie conducted by ANGEL21 on 27 January 2020.
Witness D7 was qualified
as both a pilot and flying instructor. Coincidentally, he had been involved in a
Blackhawk incident in 2013
in which the landing light of that aircraft had
ignited a grass fire;
(d) Troop Commander/Aircrew Detachment Commander – Witness D2 was the
Troop Commander/Aircrew Detachment Commander. This role
included preparing
Standard Operating Procedures (“SOPs”) for TU Taipan;
(e) Pilots – which included Witness D1,
Witness D2, Witness D7. The pilots of ANGEL21 on 27 January 2020 were Witness D1
Witness D2;
(f) Aircrewmen – which included Witness D4 and Witness D6.
The MRH-90 Helicopter
MRH-90 is a multi-role twin engine utility lift helicopter, which was acquired
by the ADF to provide conventional and special
forces combat troop lift
capability or medical evacuation. It is painted in camouflage colours, which
make it difficult to see against
the Australian landscape.
operates on a "fly-by-wire" system, whereby the controls are connected via an
electrical wiring system, rather than mechanical
MRH-90 is primarily constructed with modern composite materials that are lighter
and stronger than aircraft aluminium, which is
historically used in aircraft
structures. The composite structure can continue to burn and degrade after being
in contact with fire.
fuel bladder for the MRH-90 is located under the floor of the helicopter.
MRH-90 is normally flown with an aircrew consisting of:
(a) the aircraft captain – the pilot who has total responsibility for the
safe and effective operation of the aircraft and
for supervising their crew. The
aircraft captain has authority over all persons on board, irrespective of rank,
for the period of
the operation of the aircraft;
(b) a co-pilot – a qualified pilot available to perform that role as
required in the aircraft;
(c) two aircrewman, whose role includes:
(i) pre-flight – weight and balance of the aircraft, briefing passengers,
loading/unloading of passengers and cargo; and
(ii) during flight – providing clearance information to the captain and
co-pilot, monitoring any aircraft systems, looking
after the welfare of
passengers and cargo in the rear.
MRH-90 Searchlight
MRH-90 has a landing light and a searchlight. The landing light is an infrared
light that is not visible to the naked eye, located
at the front of the MRH-90.
The searchlight contains both an infrared lamp and a white light (halogen) lamp
and is located towards
the rear of the MRH-90 near the left sponson. The
from the ground (albeit this height varies depending on fuel loads and cabin
weight). When extended, with the aircraft fully fuelled,
and configured for Air
Mobile Operations, the searchlight sits a mere 15 cm above the ground.
Unit and can be activated (turned on and off and
dimmed/brightened) by the
pilots via a button on the collective.
testing, it was found that after operating for 10 minutes, the centre of the
glass lens of the searchlight has a temperature range
of 340 to 546 degrees
Celsius. This is, unsurprisingly, sufficient to ignite grass. The Aviation
Safety Investigation Report addresses
this in detail. Exact conditions are not
known in this incident, but, by way of indication, at 500 degrees with a
windspeed of just
4 kph, the time to glowing ignition is only 16 seconds.
Engineering Change Proposal to modify the landing and search lights to LED (to
reduce visibility and to increase both illumination
and controllability of the
light beam) was rejected within the ADF following a cost/benefit analysis, after
the OVF, in August 2020.
MRH-90 Communications
Arrangements
the time of the incident, the MRH-90 was equipped with the following external
communication systems:
(a) Satcom radio;
(b) HF (high-frequency) radio;
(c) VHF (very-high frequency) radio;
(d) UHF (ultra-high frequency) radio; and
(e) an encrypted FM radio.
addition to the above, text messages could be exchanged using the Variable
Message Format function, being a secure data communication
capability through
V/UHF and HF radios.
Individuals
also carried personal mobile phones, through which they could communicate,
though not verbally due to aircraft noise,
but by text on the encrypted message
application, “Signal”. The use of Signal was unexceptional. It was
even included
as a third level communication option in the SOP applied to this
aircrew gave evidence that SATCOM and radio were intermittently unreliable in
areas of operation during Op BFA.
radios on the MRH-90 are able to communicate with other aircraft on the Common
Traffic Advisory Frequency and the Fire Common
Traffic Advisory Frequency, with
the relevant Ops Cell monitoring the flight and with Air Traffic Control over
MRH-90 also has an internal communication system, which enables the pilots,
aircrewman and passengers to talk to and hear each
other. This system can be
configured to connect to only some, or all, aircrewman and passengers. Audible
communication without the
aid of the internal communication system is very
difficult because of aircraft noise.
Commonwealth submits that there is no capacity within the MRH-90 to connect a
mobile phone into the communications systems or
to make a phone call.
the first part of that assertion is unchallenged. There was however an
understanding, indeed expectation, reflected in
the applicable SOP that personal
mobile phones could be used for communications in the event of the
unavailability of other communications
systems. In that event,
“Signal”, a secure encrypted application, was to be used. Whilst the
ability to make a voice
call would have been severely impeded by aircraft noise,
the text message function of the application was both generally available
Current ADF Utilisation of MRH-90
note that the MRH-90 was permanently grounded by the ADF this year due to
factors unrelated to this inquiry. That fact does not
derogate from the purpose
of this inquiry, in which the particular type of aircraft ultimately became less
significant than other
factors in Op BFA.
Documentation Relating
to Risk Management and Reporting in the Performance of Tasks by TU Taipan in Op
Kim Gilfillan, Director of Operational Airworthiness for the ADF, gave evidence
regarding the ADF’s four tier risk management
system. In summary, he
described it as:
(a) The top tier of risk control is a systems level arrangement, reflected in
the ADF’s standing instructions, flight manuals
and standardisation
manual, which is necessarily broad because of the range of operations they may
apply to. I note that in this
respect, the flight manual for the MRH-90, which
is the working guideline for pilots in respect to a particular aircraft, did not
identify the risk relating to heat emanating from the searchlight on the
aircraft. This failure was subject to criticism in the Aviation
Investigation Team’s report.
(b) The second tier of risk management is that undertaken to support a
particular activity which may reflect hazards specific to
it, environmental or
otherwise, such as in a SOP.
(c) The third tier of risk control is the flight planning conducted prior to a
particular mission, captured in a local pre-flight
authorisation brief.
(d) The fourth tier of risk management is that exercised by an aircraft captain
and crew during a mission.
Aviation Safety Investigation Team’s report was critical of the risk
management planning for Op BFA, stating at [5](d) of
the Executive Summary:
Risks associated with the potential for this event (the fire damage
to MRH-90) were not identified in any planning or risk management
process. The
development of risk management plans by TU Taipan did not follow the RM process
in accordance with the Defence Aviation
Safety Manual. No overarching RMP
existed for Op BA 19 Multinational Rotary Wing Task Group as this was delegated
to the respective
task units due to different risks in each state.
Aviation Safety Investigation Team concluded that the risk management process
was not properly understood across elements of the
Army aviation
Unlearned Lesson – the Blackhawk and Other
Aviation Safety Investigation Team’s report disclosed that on 13 January
2013, a Blackhawk landing light ignited a grass
fire on a civilian property. The
investigation report which followed that incident revealed that the heat from
the landing light
had ignited long grass. The remedial actions arising out of
the 2013 event included the addition of a “Caution” in the
Procedure for the Blackhawk, which stated that:
The aircraft
landing light generates significant heat when illuminated. When operating in
close proximity to foliage, the heat generation
may be sufficient to start a
warning was included in the maintenance publications for the MRH-90 about
exposing flammable materials within three metres of a
warning was added to the Blackhawk flight manuals, but such a warning was not
replicated for the flight manuals
for other types of aircraft, including the
that warning was not replicated in the flight manuals, which are an essential
working document for aircrew, that information
was not made readily available to
them. Members of TU Taipan were being required to operate in a highly volatile
fire-risk environment,
yet a foreseeable risk had not been identified for them
despite past organisational experience.
D4, left-side aircrewman/loadmaster, had also witnessed an MRH-90 landing on
grass with the searchlight on, causing the grass
to smoulder, but not ignite, on
a previous occasion. He recalled that this happened a couple of years prior to
the incident. There
is no evidence as to what, if any, follow-up there was on
that occasion. Witness D4 stated that when aboard ANGEL21 on 27 January
was unaware of the fact that the searchlight was on as they went into land. His
prior experience did, however, translate
into an immediate recognition when the
OVF ignited, the searchlight may well have been responsible.
Management Processes Adopted in Op BFA
is a plethora of documentation regarding the ADF’s operations, which
provide the backdrop to all military aviation activities,
including Land Warfare
Doctrine 3-3-1 Employment of Army Aviation, the Army Military Air Operator
Operational Airworthiness Management
Plan, Standing Instructions (Aviation)
Operations and Standing Instructions (Aviation) Safety. There is little utility
in considering
those high-level documents in detail here. That is because, as
found in the Aviation Safety Investigation Team’s report, the
which eventuated in this incident was the risk of ignition of grass by the
activated MRH-90 searchlight, and that risk
had not been identified and captured
for the MRH-90 aircraft, and had not therefore filtered down as a risk
management consideration
at the operational level, particularly in the MRH-90
flight manual.
task-specific processes and documents are more relevant in this inquiry to
elucidate the factors that were considered in TU
Taipan’s risk management
Op BFA, risk management planning was delegated from the MNRWTG to the individual
TU’s in light of the disparate work that
was being engaged in by the
various units.
14 January 2020, Witness D1, in his capacity as OC of TU Taipan, approved an
Aviation Risk Management Plan prepared by the previous
TU Taipan OPSO in
connection with Op BFA. It identified a number of environmental and operational
risks. It did not identify the
risk of fire relating to the activated
or around 15 January 2020, TU Taipan circulated a document titled “Task
Unit Taipan – MRH-90 SOP – OP Bushfire
Assist”, its standing
operation procedure for Op BFA (“the SOP”). This SOP was prepared
(at least, in part) by
Witness D2 in his role as Troop Commander/Aircrew
Detachment Commander. The SOP was marked “correct as at 14 Jan 2020”
on each of the four versions in evidence. It was, however, revised on 18 January
2020, 22 January 2020 and 31 January 2020. The SOP
did not identify the risk
associated with the searchlight until after the incident, even though the
question of use of the searchlight
for deconfliction was addressed.
14 January 2020 version of the SOP provided:
10. Searchlights - due
to very poor visibility and dense traffic within the AO, searchlights are to be
switched on and extended.
revised version of the SOP on 31 January 2020, now paragraph 11,
11. Searchlights - due to very poor visibility and dense
traffic within the AO, searchlights are to be switched on and extended.
Due to the heightened risk of unintended fire ignition, ensure the
feet of the
ground or any vegetation.
Consideration should be given to the residual heat that will remain post
turning the searchlight off. No data is available that outlines
the level of
heat on a recently used searchlight, or on the heat required to cause an
unintended fire.
failure to address the fire risk associated with the searchlight reflects the
fact that the risk had not been identified organisationally
within the ADF prior
to the incident.
relation to communications, the SOP provided the following:
Reports back to Ops-Aircraft are to flight follow with 2A. SATCOM is the primary
method of communication followed by FM and then
Signal. The following reports
must be communicated to the 2A:
(i) Call sign
(iii) Where heels up and wheels down times and locations
(iv) ETA on tasks and RTB
23 – to facilitate current and future Ops, aircrew are to pass back as
much information as possible to 2A regarding current
weather conditions and
pertinent information regarding evacuees, cargo etc. All reports are to be sent
in the ‘at at what what
what’ format on SATCOM or Signal.
formulation of paragraphs 7 and 23 was retained through the four versions of the
is apparent from the evidence that there was uncertainty on the part of the ADF
personnel as to whether the obligation to report
“wheels up, wheels
down” was intended to apply to only mission-specific landings or to any
landings during the flight.
It is also unclear whether this notice was expected
to be conveyed before the landing (“wheels down”) or at some later
unspecified point in time. Witness D7 stated that the obligation to report
“wheels up, wheels down” only arose at the
start and the end of a
mission, with no obligation to advise of any landing in between. Given the
evidence (addressed below) regarding
the pilot’s discretion to land as
deemed necessary, even outside the mission objectives, this lack of clarity was
significant.
If there was no obligation to report the intention to land before
actually landing, then the question of risk assessment for any
decision to land
lay squarely and solely with the aircraft captain.
fact that there was no reformulation or refinement of this aspect of the SOP
after the incident suggests that it was the ADF’s
intent that risk
management as to whether and where to land was indeed to remain squarely and
solely with the aircraft captain. That
is not problematic if the captain is
properly armed with information as to known and relevant risk factors. Here,
however, the knowledge
of the danger associated with the searchlight was not
either known or understood at Joint Task Force (“JTF”) or TU level.
Further, none of the aircrew in TU Taipan had been fully briefed about the risks
associated with operating in a bushfire-prone environment.
the CO of the MNRWTG, Lieutenant Colonel Martin issued a Minute detailing his
Critical Information Reporting Requirements (“CCIR”)
in relation to
Op BFA on 15 January 2020. That document required accurate and timely reporting
of all incidents which may impact
“our people, the execution of our
mission, our reputation, or achievement of our directed objectives or
tasks”. Specifically,
an aircraft accident, incident or maintenance event
that impacts or undermines ADF personnel safety or the ability to provide
lines of effort were to be reported to the CO immediately.
Minute provided that:
The primary point of contact should always be
the immediate supervisor up through the applicable TU COMD and AEC, who will
to the CO by phone in the first instance. Where either the immediate
supervisor or AEC are unavailable, notification should be directed
Where the CO is unavailable, the incident should be notified (in order) to the
COFS, OPSO or S33... Most of these CCIR’s
will be incidents that require
external reporting within specified timelines. All external reporting will be
managed by the CO and/or
nominated delegate. Reporting of CCIR’s does not
negate extant requirements to report ASR’s, SENTINEL events, etc.
D2 attempted, at least in part, to comply with the CCIR Minute, in communicating
early with the OPSO by text message (see
below). However, there was no attempt
to follow up on early reporting with others in the chain of command until after
Canberra Airport. Witnesses D1 and D2 gave evidence that attending to
the immediate operational challenges precluded them from considering
alternative reporting of this critical incident, despite the CCIR Minute.
Lieutenant Colonel Martin endorsed their conduct as
CCIR Minute did not anticipate the need to notify the relevant civilian fire
authority if a fire was spotted (let alone caused),
even though the very purpose
of the ADF’s involvement was to assist in reducing the risk, or respond to
the sequelae, of bushfires.
Ordinarily, such a response would be expected as
common sense. Perhaps because this was so obvious, it did not occur to
Colonel Martin to include it in the CCIR Minute
Arrangements between JTF/Op BFA and ESA
Coordination of taskings between AECs, MNRWTG HQ and Task Units
13 January 2020, prior to any tasking being provided, ESA staff provided a
general briefing to MNRWTG personnel, including TU Taipan
Adam Atkinson was a member of the NSW Rural Fire Service (“RFS”)
assisting in the pre-emptive IMT on 13 and 14 January
2020. Having worked with
the RFS in various capacities for many years, he was at that time a qualified
aircraft officer, whose role
involved planning aircraft missions in conjunction
with operations personnel within an incident management team.
that stage, the MRH-90 aircraft had been allocated to Op BFA, but the ESA had
not determined how best to use them, largely due
to a lack of familiarity with
the aircraft.
Atkinson was involved in the initial briefing of the MRH-90 crew who attended
from Holsworthy on 13 January 2020. He was aware
of the difficulty regarding
communication between ADF aircrafts and the IMT, as the ADF had no agency radio
they could be contacted
on. Mr Atkinson also noted that the areas of operation
in which they would be functioning were too far out to allow contact on air
Atkinson understood that the ADF liaison officer was embedded in the IMT to
facilitate communications. He noted, however, “that
was a little bit of a
slower process than what we would have liked at that point in time. Hmmm, that
was probably one of the major
risks that we sort of captured on the
is not apparent who from TU Taipan was at this briefing when the issue was
identified. No resolution was arrived at. Clearly, having
to communicate via an
ADF liaison officer, particularly where the aircrew were not in a position to
was an inadequate way of communicating urgent
information.
Tasking of ANGEL21 on 27 January 2020
undated ADF task request headed “Remediation of HLZ in Namadgi National
Park” was issued by the IMT. This tasking required
insertion of crews to
various helicopter landing zones for remediation and clearance of sites. It also
noted that “further
aerial recon will be conducted to identify additional
Prophetically,
the request included the following statement:
Remote area access
within the ACT is difficult with current access via 4WD fire trail. Dismounted
movement through the park is constrained
by the significant amount of
undergrowth and high fuel loads. These areas have not had fire since 2003 and
due to high fuel loads
and low moisture content, if the ACT is unable to respond
to new ignitions quickly and safely, it is highly likely fires will grow
causing significant damage to ACT water catchment areas, sensitive ecological
zones, rural properties and the potential to
impact urban Canberra.
particular task given to ANGEL21 was to undertake aerial reconnaissance of
helicopter landing zones (“HLZs”) and report
back any observations.
teams were tasked to be on the ground that day in various locations, carrying
out HLZ and firebreak clearance work.
noted in the Territory’s submissions, the key difference between the two
tasks was that the reconnaissance task was to be
undertaken by ADF personnel
alone, whilst the clearance, or “remediation”, task was to be
undertaken by ADF personnel
accompanied by a PCS officer. The PCS officer was
equipped for remote area dry firefighting with a handheld radio, water and
clearing equipment due to the recognised high fire
Execution of Task by ANGEL21 on 27 January 2020
to commencing flight for the day, the aircraft captain, Witness D2, was required
to obtain authorisation from the authorising
officer, Witness D7.
written record of the authorisation brief was entered into a system called
“Patriot Excalibur”. The authorising officer
also had a handwritten
note relating to the briefing. The plan that was agreed was departure from
Richmond at 0830 hours, with anticipated
return between 1730 hours and 1800
hours. There was to be a planned landing at Canberra with engine shutdown,
followed by a second
landing without shutdown for hot refuel (that is, engine on
and rotors spinning during fuelling) at Majura. There would be a second
refuel at Majura before returning to Richmond. A 30% probability of decreased
visibility due to smoke in the Canberra aerodrome
was noted. Risks associated
with hot refuelling, passenger management, instrument flying, traffic,
visibility cloud, possible storms
and mountainous terrain were identified. The
authorising officer was satisfied that the sortie was appropriately planned, and
appropriate risk mitigation was in place. There was no discussion regarding
the possibility of other landings or any risks that might
be associated with
0700 hours on 27 January 2020, the two pilots (Witnesses D1 and D2) and two
crewmen, both Corporal Loadmasters (Witnesses D4 and
D6), commenced work and
preparations for their task in Op BFA that day. Witness D1 was the senior
ranking officer, with the rank
of Major. He was also the OC of TU Taipan. His
non-flying pilot on this mission, Witness D2, holding the rank of Captain, was
assigned aircraft captain for the mission and was therefore primarily
responsible for all operational decisions during the flight.
departed RAAF Richmond at 0835 hours and landed at 34 Squadron at the Canberra
Airport at 0948 hours.
two members of 7RAR, Witness D3, holding the rank of Corporal and having the
role of photographer, along with Witness D5, holding
the rank of Private and
assigned as notetaker, boarded the aircraft.
1109 hours, ANGEL21 lifted off from the Canberra Airport and landed to refuel at
nearby Majura.
1133 hours, ANGEL21 lifted off from Majura and made its way to the Namadgi
National Park.
accordance with its tasking, ANGEL21 flew to a number of the identified HLZs and
circuited at each whilst the 7RAR personnel completed
their roles.
mission proceeded according to plan, until an issue arose regarding a request
for landing.
Discretion to Land
1333 hours, one of the aircrewmen asked if there was any chance of a toilet
break. This is contrary to the Aviation Safety Investigation
report, which stated that the reason for the break was because one of the
passengers (inherently a reference to one
of the 7RAR personnel) was
experiencing motion sickness. The evidence does not support that finding. On the
contrary, a transcript
of the flight recording reflects that someone enquired as
to the chances of a “whizz break”. The timing coincided with
opportunity for a meal break. Ultimately, the reason for the landing, apart from
noting it was not an emergency landing, is less
important in the circumstances
of this particular case, than the fact of the landing and its location.
Consideration
of the flight recording discloses that there was some reticence about the
appropriateness of landing at all. After the
request was made for a “whizz
break”, the following exchange took place:
Unidentified male:
Oh, we could put down somewhere.
Unidentified male: Are we, like, authorised to land in some of these areas
for the guys to get out and have a piss?
Unidentified male: Um, on the nose. Just down at-like, it is not, are, near
the car park, but on the nose up there at about a mile.
Unidentified male: (indistinct) I did not brief them (indistinct)
Unidentified male: Oh, just wait for the, um-the (indistinct) fuel
Unidentified male: Yeah. We have got-probably another hour left, man I will
shoot them a message with an update. The fact that we
have-that it is a recce
position. You know what I mean? Like, it is our-it is an LZ, in my opinion.
Unidentified male: That is right.
Unidentified male: Oh, will prove that its, ah, a good landing spot.
exchange reflects the evidence that the general expectation was that the
reconnaissance mission would take place without a landing,
other than for the
purpose of refuelling. However, it appears that the decision-maker determined
that because: the reconnaissance
was of helicopter landing zones; and a message
was to be sent to 2-Alpha to advise “with an update”; and that it
be some time (another hour) before a scheduled landing, it was appropriate
to undertake the landing.
overarching consensus of the ADF aviation witnesses, maintained under
cross-examination, was that an aircraft captain has a discretion
Indeed, this point was made in the Aviation Safety Investigation Team’s
report, which found:
The aircraft captain’s decision to land
in the valley for an airsick passenger and a lunch and toilet break was
reasonable and
permissible within the OIP.
Colonel Gilfillan recognised that the general discretion to land could be
subject to restrictions in certain circumstances and
that it may have been
appropriate for some engagement between the ADF and the ESA in respect to
landings, having regard to the particular
environment the TU was operating in.
This was a reasonable and proper concession, made with the benefit of
had the possibility of an unscheduled landing in the combination of conditions
as now known (that is, a tinder dry, high
fuel load location, adverse weather
conditions and an activated and very hot searchlight) been known and fully
appreciated, the decision
to land, particularly without prior consultation with
the ESA, would have been extremely foolhardy.
noting that the aircrew were unaware of the risk associated with use of an
activated searchlight on the MRH-90, I make no
criticism of the decision to
land. This is distinguished from the organisational failure to recognise that
risk based on the Blackhawk
experience, and the failure to assess and document
that risk in the MRH-90 flight manual.
having regard to the uncertainty of the ADF witnesses as to whether there was an
obligation to report “wheels down”
before landing, I make no
criticism of the failure of the aircrew to obtain approval prior to the landing.
Indeed, Witness D1 gave
evidence that he had intended to report a “wheels
down” once the landing had been effected. Of course, events quickly
overtook that possibility on this occasion.
the situation is unlikely to have arisen had the aircrew been made aware through
the MRH-90 flight manual of the risk of
fire associated with landing lights.
This failure reflects a systemic failure to apply the lesson learned in one
context, that is,
the Blackhawk experience, to the broader yet patently like
context of another aircraft utilising similar technology.
and the Decision to Land
Rohan Scott, Incident Controller, gave evidence that had he been made aware that
a TU Taipan aircraft engaged in reconnaissance,
such as ANGEL21, had intended to
land as part of their mission, he would have questioned the need to do so or,
depending on why they
needed to land, given them other options, which would have
been safe having regard to his knowledge of ground
conditions.
The Ignition
landed at 1338 hours. Witness D6 got out of the aircraft straight away in order
to take the comfort break that he had requested.
Witnesses D1 and D2 remained in
the cockpit. Witnesses D3, D4 and D5 remained in the rear of the helicopter.
There was discussion
50 seconds after landing, Witness D4, one of the aircrewmen, noticed fire in the
region of the left sponson of the helicopter.
The following conversation was
captured on the flight recording:
Unidentified male: We started the
fire. We started a fire.
Unidentified male: Turn the searchlight off now.
Unidentified male: Come up. Come up. Come up.
Unidentified male: Come up. Come up.
Unidentified male: Just-just wait, wait, wait, wait guys. Just wait.
Unidentified male: We have got a fire under the aircraft.
Unidentified male: We have got a fire.
Unidentified male: Are you-are you set? Take it over. All right. Control.
Are you set in the back? Are you set in the back?
Unidentified male: Yes.
unidentified male: (indistinct) set the back. Clear up. come up straight.
Unidentified male: Fuck me, that’s....
Unidentified male: (indistinct) backup.
Unidentified male: And that is quite large.
Unidentified male: Yep fucking searchlight. Dammit. (Indistinct)
conversation continued; it was noted that the wind was coming from the northwest
and “pushing it” (referring to the
fire). Someone identified that
the fire was directly under the aircraft and “spreading fast under the
this was an emergency, in which there was a real risk to the safety of the
aircraft and those on board.
1339 hours, one minute and four seconds after landing, ANGEL21 took off again.
D2 took control of the aircraft and ensured all were on board. The aircraft then
hovered briefly over the initial ignition
point at about 10 to 20 feet. The
downdraught from the aircraft served to accelerate the fire.
D2 handed control of the aircraft to Witness D1, who circled the valley in order
to assess the airworthiness of the aircraft
and whether it was necessary to land
somewhere else.
two aircrewmen were leaning out of the rear doors of the helicopter, face down,
making a visual assessment of the underside of
the helicopter. They observed
blistering paint and burning on the composite material. This information was
relayed to Witness D1
and D2, the former who stated in evidence that “we
were very unsure as to the state of the aircraft, we didn’t know if
were going to fall out of the sky at any second”
location of the fire was recorded by Witness D2 by pressing a button on the
instrument panel which served to mark the GPS location
on the database, allowing
it to be stored. That point was identified as “Waypoint 304”.
D2 applied the “CANCA” process, that is:
(a) Communicate (internally);
(b) Aviate;
(c) Navigate;
(d) Communicate (externally); and
(e) Administrate.
Witness D3, one of the 7RAR personnel, took photographs of the fire on the army
issued camera. Metadata from these photographs
was used to provide GPS
coordinates when the fire was ultimately reported.
ANGEL21 left the Orroral Valley, the fire was estimated to be approximately 200
x 200 m in area and spreading quickly.
Action Following
decision was made to return to the Canberra Airport. As to what was occurring
during the flight, Witness D1 stated that:
At every point throughout
this sortie – sorry, this orbit and every minute afterwards we were
constantly assessing – not
only was I assessing the aircraft’s
viability but Witness D2 was conducting systems assessments every step of the
were reviewing in our mind (sic) if there was anything else we could
be doing. We had continual in-feed, inputs from my aircrewmen
situational awareness if anything degraded further, so it was a-it was quite
busy and we were also very-we were in a position
where we were uncertain as to
the aircraft’s state. So as I was flying back, every step of the way I was
identifying not only
where I was going but potential crash landing sites that if
we did start to fall out of the sky that I would at least try and put
minimise impact upon not only ourselves as humans but the aircraft if there was
any chance of saving it.
“PAN-PAN” emergency call was made at 1345 hours, 6 minutes and 50
seconds after the ignition of the fire.
D1 was asked why he did not direct Witness D2 to tell air traffic control during
the flight back to the Canberra Airport that
their aircraft had started a fire.
He replied: “because I didn’t think of it at the time”. He
denied that the failure
to report the fire was out of concern for reputational
damage to the squadron or the Regiment.
landed at the Canberra Airport at 1358 hours.
Communications during Task
Arrangements
were in place for “flight-following” during the flight. 2-Alpha
maintained a flight log, which demonstrated
that ANGEL21, consistent with the TU
Taipan SOP, was reporting in approximately every 30 minutes. The last check-in
by ANGEL21 to
2-Alpha prior to the ignition of the fire was at 1326 hours.
D1 gave evidence that it was not practical to make mobile phone calls from the
aircraft. This is because they had close-fitting
helmets and were
“hard-wired” to the aircraft. Additionally, it was too noisy on the
aircraft to be heard on a mobile
subpoenaed records establish that Witness D2 called Witness D7 at approximately
1334 hours from his mobile phone, that is
some minutes before the landing of
ANGEL21 in the Orroral Valley. That call was not answered and no text message
1354 hours, Witness D2 sent a text message to 2-Alpha as
A21 Pan pan. Enroure (sic) cb in contact with atc.
External fire damage to. Landing cb in 2.... No cas or anything.
response was “2A ack”, which I take to be a simple acknowledgement
of the message.
is apparent that a personal mobile phone could be used to communicate, via text
message, from the aircraft.
communication by the aircraft captain with the AEC fell within the CCIR made by
Lieutenant Colonel Martin. There was no provision
in place for direct
communications between ANGEL21 and the ESA. Witness D1 (at least) had the
liaison officers embedded in the ESA. He
had the capacity to contact them via text using the Signal application on his
mobile phone,
but did not consider that communication to the ESA via this route
was a priority, despite the obvious significance of igniting a
fire at this
External Communications during Task – the Canberra
Airport / the ESA
the 17-minute trip from the site of the ignition of the fire by ANGEL21 back to
the Canberra Airport, Witness D2 was in regular
communication with the Canberra
Airport’s Air Traffic Control (“ATC”).
oral communications commenced at 1345 hours:
D2: Canberra
approach, ANGEL21. Pan pan, pan pan, pan pan stop we are currently 17 miles to
the south-west, 4800 inbound to the field.
Ah, we have had a smoke and fumes
incident and potential fire damage to the aircraft. Request clearance for
ATC: ANGEL21, Roger
D2: ANGEL21 (indistinct) 6000
ATC: ANGEL21 (indistinct) observed. Are you able to maintain altitude?
D2: ANGEL21. Affirmed. Both engines and everything is currently operating
fine. Just, ah, fire damage with potential, ah, damage
to the outside of the
ATC: ANGEL21 stop and you are clear direct to Canberra at 4500.
D2: Clear direct to Canberra, 4500, ANGEL21 and...
ATC: ANGEL21, advise your POB [persons on board].
D2: Ah, POB is six. ANGEL21
ATC: Just confirming...
D2: ANGEL21
ATC: Anything else that required any sort of fighting fire staff. Was there
any smouldering?
D2: No, nothing smouldering. Just looked like I could see-yeah, look like it
was, are...
ATC: All right
D2: (indistinct) cabling and there is-rubber had-had melted around it
(indistinct)
ATC: ANGEL21, what services would you like at the field?
D2: ANGEL21. Just as a precautionary request, ah, fire services. No issue
with fuel. Ah, just as a standby, please.
ATC: ANGEL21, thanks. And at this stage are expecting a normal approach on
D2: ANGEL21. Affirm.
second conversation took place at 1348 hours:
ATC: ANGEL21, are you
familiar with Canberra aerodrome?
D2: ANGEL21. Affirm.
ATC: And the Canberra area generally?
D2: (indistinct)
D2: ANGEL21. Relatively. We have been operating in the (indistinct) for the
last (indistinct)
1349 hours:
ATC: ANGEL21, when ready, track directly final to
runway 35, then you are cleared for a visual approach.
D2: Yep. Sweet. Track final. We are ready, 35 visual approach. ANGEL21
D2: 12 miles to run. About six minutes.
ATC: ANGEL21 I cannot (indistinct) did you have any dangerous cargo on
D2: ANGEL21. Negative.
1351 hours:
ATC: ANGEL21, do you currently have any smoke or fumes
in the cockpit?...
D2: ANGEL21. Ah, there is some smoke and fumes due to potential burning of
external part of the aircraft. None from the aircraft
(indistinct) at this
ATC: ANGEL21, Roger
D2: ANGEL21. I’ll pass those details to the tower and just confirm you
are clear for a visual approach and contact our 118-47
ATC: Tower 118, just confirming. ANGEL21.
1354 hours:
D2: Canberra tower, ANGEL21
ATC: ANGEL21, Canberra tower. Confirm clear visual approach, straight in
runway 3-5. And advise if you have any dangerous cargo on
D2: Clear visual approach, straight to runway 3-5. Negative, ANGEL21.
ATC: ANGEL21. And, for your information, the firies are in their standby
positions shortly.
D2: ANGEL21. Just confirming, once on the ground, where they’re gonna
want us to be. Are we just going to be on the runway or
somewhere else?
ATC: ANGEL21, I got you planned for landing runway 3-5. What’s your
(indistinct)
D2: We’re happy to vacate off, ah, the right‑hand side
(indistinct) Alpha. There’s nothing, ah, outstanding at this
stage which I
think is going to prevent us from doing that for, ah, pad Alpha.
ATC: Are you happy to go direct pad Alpha then?
D2: ANGEL21. Affirm.
ATC: ANGEL21, clear visual. Go straight into pad Alpha.
note that “PAN PAN” is the international standard acronym indicating
an urgent situation that does not pose an immediate
danger to life or a vessel.
This is to be distinguished from a “MAYDAY” signal, which indicates
imminent danger to life
or a vessel.
is evident from the extracted conversations, at no stage was any notification
provided to the ATC that a fire had been ignited,
that it was ANGEL21 that had
caused the ignition, the location of the fire and/or that the fire was burning
vigorously in the Orroral
Rationale for Not Reporting the
that stage, as far as the occupants of ANGEL21 knew, they were the only people
aware of the ignition and the location of the fire.
questioned as to why the fire was not reported by anyone on ANGEL21 to Canberra
ATC, 2-Alpha, the ADF liaison officer in the
ESA Command Centre, or indeed to
anyone prior to landing at the Canberra Airport, the following responses were
who was the pilot of the aircraft at the relevant time, accepted that
there was an opportunity to convey the fact that the fire had
been ignited by
the aircraft both in the exchanges with ATC and in the text which Witness D2
sent to 2-Alpha. He also agreed that
he could have required one of the 7RAR
personnel on flight to make contact with the regiment or otherwise to report the
explanation for not doing so was that “from the time that I left the
Orroral Valley to the time I landed in Canberra, I
was considering what is an
emergency state. As soon as I completed the emergency state aspect of the
aircraft functions, I reported
the incident.” He said that he was
concerned that the helicopter “could fall from the sky at any
further by Senior Counsel Assisting, the following exchange took place:
SCA: I want to ask you: that would you now agree sitting where you
are that the failure to communicate with anyone outside ANGEL21
as to the fact
you had started the fire and the location of the fire was an error in terms of
the consequences?
D1: At the time the prioritisation was my crew and my aircraft.
Communication subsequently were informing ATC of the state of the
Outside of that your point is valid.
SCA: Would you do the same again?
D1: I am very satisfied with the actions of my crew that day. If there was
an opportunity with which to communicate directly to RFS
or AEC or ESA, yes, I
would have taken it.
SCA: You did have the opportunity to communicate directly with 2-Alpha and
with the air traffic control. Would you do that differently?
Would you convey
to, you know either 2-Alpha or - either by text message Signal group chat or
would you do it again differently by
telling the ATC that you had started the
fire and the GPS location?-
D2: We could improve our communication with ATC yes.
D1 confirmed in his evidence that he did in fact have the contact details of the
ADF liaison officer within the ESA Command
Centre. Whilst piloting ANGEL21 on
the flight back to Canberra may have impeded his ability to make a call himself
or send a text
message, it appears that he gave no consideration to asking
anyone else on the aircraft to do so.
D2 was the non-flying pilot on the flight back from the Orroral Valley to the
Canberra Airport. He accepted that he could
have delegated the task of having
somebody on the aircraft report the ignition and the location of the fire, for
example, by using
their personal mobile phones, but stated that in the context
of what was occurring, that was not his priority.
D2 was questioned as to why he did not report the fire when speaking with
SCA: You could have told them at that point that you had
started a fire and given them the GPS coordinates at that time, couldn’t
D2: I was physically capable of, yes.
SCA: Right, and you chose not to do that?
D2: It was not a conscious decision not to. It was in the triage of things I
had going on, which was basically dealing with the aircraft
emergency. It was
lower on my I suppose considerations than the immediate safety of the crew and
passengers...
SCA: And I think you said it was not fine but was flyable?
D2: At that immediate point in time, yes. But I was very conscious that the
aircraft was not in a stable state and I was dealing
with something that could
not (sic) potentially become catastrophic in a very short period of time.
SCA: So, it would be fair to say that no part of your thinking from the time
that ANGEL21 started the fire, to when you landed there,
had anything to do with
the fire that you had started, everything was about the aircraft? You were not
giving any thought to that
D2: That is correct, and that was not a conscious decision, it was just
simply that I perceived, as the aircraft captain, in what
was a potentially
life-and-death situation, and that is where my attention was directed.
further, the following exchange took place:
SCA: So, surely at the
point in time where ANGEL21 ignited the fire, it must have occurred to you that
the fact that you had ignited
the fire was a very, very serious thing?
SCA: And it must have occurred to you that it should have been reported
immediately?
D2: At that period of time, with what else was going on, I would agree that
it was extremely important, and the reporting of that
would be extremely
important, but I was managing an aircraft emergency, where there was an
immediate potential at risk to life in
the aircraft, to the crew and passengers,
and as such the reporting of the fire became second priority to that.
D4, an aircrewman/loadmaster on ANGEL21, confirmed that he had his personal
mobile phone with him on the mission and that
the Signal application was on it.
He stated that there was no prohibition on any person on ANGEL21 communicating
outside of the aircraft,
but stated that if outside communication was to be
undertaken, the aircraft captain would do that, unless someone else was
specifically
tasked to do so.
following exchange took place with Senior Counsel Assisting in relation to
reporting of the fire:
SCA: Given the circumstances that prevailed,
and I’ve described them to you -that is, a drought, very high
temperatures, bushfires
coming in from all sides, and that the very purpose of
the Operation Bushfire Assist was to try and prevent fires or to contain them
the fact that ANGEL21 had ignited this fire and that it had spread so rapidly,
did you think that it was an important thing to
do to report that immediately?
D4: At the time, no.
SCA: And why was that?
D4: At the time, as I am - as I was a member of the crew, we were, I - to my
recollection, we were then heading back to-directly
to Canberra at the time.
SCA: So the travel time between ignition of the fire and getting back to
Canberra was 17 minutes, and I can tell you that because
we’ve listened to
the flight recording. After getting away from the ignition of the fire itself
and as you headed off, do you
believe that there was time to report the fact
that you had ignited the fire and the location of the fire? Was there time?
D4: There possibly could have been time, yes.
SCA: Did you assume that the air captain, which is Witness D2, or the pilot,
Witness D1, had already done that? Did you assume that
they had done it?
D4: I cannot recall if I made that assumption at the time.
SCA: Can you agree with me that, having started the fire in those
circumstances, it was pretty important to tell someone as soon
as possible?
D4: In hindsight, yes.
confirmed with Senior Counsel Assisting that he did not take any action to
report the fire to anyone, Witness D4 was asked
personnel were on the ground that day:
SCA: Now, you were aware
that on that day, there were personnel on the ground, both Army and Emergency
Services personnel. That is
D4: I was aware that people were being served -serve and extracted, yes.
SCA: Did you know where they were relative to where the fire had
D4: Exact location? That they were in the Orroral Valley area, but not the
exact location. Another aircraft was looking after that.
SCA: All right. So you knew that there were personnel on the ground in the
Orroral Valley. Is that correct?
SCA: And you had seen the fire go from quite a small fire underneath the
size of the helicopter to one which was quite large in a
matter of minutes.
That’s correct, isn’t it?
SCA: Did any part of your thinking engage the fact that those people on the
ground should be warned that a fire had been ignited
and it might be coming
toward them?
SCA: You knew after taking off that there was nothing to stop that fire
growing and spreading. That is correct, isn’t it?
SCA: And given the conditions and the high state of alert, this was really a
pretty terrible situation. You had ignited a fire in
circumstances where you
were there to do the opposite?
D4: Well, at the time, yes. It did – it- it could have - it was a bad
situation, yes, in hindsight looking back.
SCA: Well, not just in hindsight. At the time, it must have occurred to you,
“Oh my God, we’ve started a fire”.
Isn’t that what you
SCA: But no part of your thinking was to tell anyone that you had started a
fire or to warn the people on the ground. Is that right?
his interview with the police investigators on 3 June 2022, Witness D4 agreed
that he and his fellow aircrewman were monitoring
the aircraft, conversing with
the pilots and looking out of the aircraft for a possible emergency landing site
during the entirety
of the return trip.
D5 gave evidence that he had his personal mobile phone with him and that he had
used the Signal application for communication
whilst on the helicopter. He was
part of a Signal group created to discuss taskings, but the pilots were not part
of that group.
Witness D5 stated that it was possible for him to use the Signal
application to communicate back to his line of command and he had
prohibited from using his phone for that purpose or at all.
acknowledged the fire which had been started by the aircraft and the potential
for it to spread quickly, Witness D5 was asked:
SCA: So in those
circumstances, did you make any decision to contact your line of command through
your Signal app?
SCA: Why not?
D5: Put simply, the thought just did not occur at the time.
D5 maintained that he gave no thought to reporting the fire during the 17-minute
flight back to Canberra. He was asked:
SCA: Did you think that the
pilot or the co-pilot would have radioed that in, would have communicated that
the fire had been ignited
and the coordinates? Did you think that was their
7RAR allocated photographer, was not called to give evidence in
person at the Inquiry. However, in an interview with police investigators
assisting the inquiry on 4 February 2022, he was asked what form of
communication was available to him on the aircraft. He stated
that he had his
mobile phone with him, but he had no radio. He recollected the pilot checking
with the loadmaster the condition of
the helicopter whilst they returned to the
airport. Specifically, he was asked whether there was any conversation whilst on
the helicopter
recorded or anything like that. He responded “Ah, not between
from [Witness D5]. Um, but, yeah, like I said, I think the-the pilots and the
loadies, they have their-their own, like,
internal channel for comms. So it was,
it was my impression that they-they had been-or they would reported”.
did not recall having been spoken to directly about the fire other than for the
aircrew to ensure that he was okay.
summary, the two aircrewmen and the two 7RAR personnel on board ANGEL21 appear
to have assumed or expected that the aircraft captain
would take responsibility
for reporting of the fire. The aircraft captain was not the senior officer on
board that day, but was the
person engaged in communicating both with ATC and
Further Communications – after Return to the
Canberra Airport
landing, Witness D2 told Mr Russell Mealy, Fire Commander of the Aviation Rescue
and Fire Fighting Service at the Canberra Airport,
that ANGEL21 had started a
fire. However, Witness D2 did not give the GPS co-ordinates of the fire to Mr
Mealy then despatched a team member to open his Service’s fire control
centre at the Canberra Airport in order to notify
ACT Fire and Rescue, including
providing the location of the fire. Mr Mealy followed this up at 1419 hours with
a call to the ESA
1406 hours, Witness D1 called Captain Bryson, OPSO of TU Taipan, and informed
him of the GPS coordinates of the fire captured from
the meta data of a
photograph taken by Witness D5 when the helicopter was orbiting the site of the
fire before departing for the
Canberra Airport.
Reasonableness of
the Failure to Report the Fire before Landing at the Canberra Airport
is no doubt that the situation in which the occupants of ANGEL21 found
themselves was extremely concerning and likely very frightening.
monitoring the aircraft and its occupants and ensuring their safety was quite
properly front of mind for the aircraft captain
and the pilot, as well as all on
board. I accept that this was, as described by Colonel Gilfillan, “a novel
emergency”,
and one which would have required significant cognitive
effort. It was entirely proper that Witnesses D1 and D2 focussed on assessing
the state of the aircraft, determining whether to attempt to return to the
Canberra Airport, and continually monitoring these factors
throughout the return
flight. They are both to be commended for their professionalism in doing so. The
fact that Witness D2 presented
as calm in his communications with ATC also
speaks to his competence and professionalism.
just as one would expect any ordinary citizen to report a significant fire to
the relevant authorities, particularly in a
time of heightened risk, as
participants in Op BFA it was incumbent on all ADF personnel to do so.
aircraft captain and those aboard ANGEL21 also had an obligation to consider the
risk to the Army and the ESA personnel on the
ground, in circumstances where
ANGEL21 knew that they were working in the area and there was a real possibility
that the fire could
progress and endanger those persons.
must have been obvious to any thinking person that a delay in reporting the fire
could potentially impact the capacity of the relevant
organisations to respond
to it with all the obvious risks and actual consequences which may, and in this
case did, flow from an uncontrolled
is not plausible, despite the highly stressful situation, that no consideration
was given to the significance of the fact that
the actions of this crew,
inadvertent and unanticipated though they were, had just caused a major fire. It
is implausible that those
engaged in this mission did not appreciate the need to
bring that fire to the attention of those who may be able to control it. It
absolutely within their means to do so by simply stating to the ATC words along
the lines of “fire started in Orroral Valley;
failure of anyone on board ANGEL21 to report the OVF at the earliest opportunity
was an error of judgment. This was generally
acknowledged by the ANGEL21 crew
and other ADF members who gave evidence in this inquiry. Whilst soldiers might
reasonably have relied
on the officers present to make this decision, Witnesses
D1 and D2 must shoulder the responsibility for the error.
Colonel Martin maintained that no criticism could be made of Witnesses D1 or D2
for not reporting the ignition of the OVF
at the earliest opportunity. Rather
colourfully, he stated that: “So it’s really easy to sit in a 1G
armchair and criticise
a crew but when – you need to – you need to
understand how busy they are and what they’re trying to do in the
cockpit...when
you’re in the heat of it, you have to make
decisions”. Lieutenant Colonel Martin was an outlier in failing to
the fact that the OVF could and should have been reported via ATC or
otherwise during ANGEL21’s 17-minute flight back to the
Canberra Airport.
I am unpersuaded by his evidence.
am unable to conclude what factors contributed to this error of judgment.
Feasible factors include:
(a) the crew’s intense focus on the risk to the aircraft and crew;
(b) an inability to appreciate the magnitude of the catastrophe about to unfold,
including the risk to the people on the ground in
(c) despite the witnesses’ refutation of it being a conscious factor, a
subliminal desire to avoid reputational damage to the
Army (see Lieutenant
Colonel Martin’s “Critical Information Reporting Requirement
Minute” calling for timely reporting
as a factor which may impact on
“our reputation”);
(d) or some other undiscernible reason.
whatever the reason, the failure to advise any relevant authority of the
ignition and location of the fire at the earliest
possible opportunity is
properly characterised as an error of judgment.
Commonwealth submits that this finding cannot be made absent expert evidence.
This is not a matter requiring expert evidence;
it is a matter involving an
assessment of the facts, the witnesses and common sense.
communication of the fire emergency would have been facilitated by a clearer
directive to communicate directly to the AEC
in the event of an emergency
requiring action by the civilian authorities. Such communication could have been
better facilitated
by the provision of the direct contact number for the AEC,
although the evidence is that contact was to be made on numbers specific
individual AEC, which would require knowledge of roster changes in order for the
caller to know whom to contact. A direct
readily facilitated early reporting of the fire.
Identification
and Location of the OVF by the ESA and Others
respectfully, obvious starting point for the Territory’s submissions in
relation to reporting of the OVF is as follows:
Fundamentally, the
Territory expects ADF personnel, in the same way as any member of the public, to
report any fire ignited or sighted,
as soon as possible.
that the fire commenced at 1338 hours, the first observation by anyone other
than those on board ANGEL21 was an observer at
the Mount Tennent Fire Tower, who
called in his observations of a large column of smoke at bearing 245, and 5 km
from the tower.
This call was made at 1347 hours 58 seconds, nine minutes after
the fire was ignited.
seconds thereafter, at 1348 hours 31 seconds, a concerned resident in the
Canberra suburb of Kambah called 000, reporting a
plume of smoke rising in the
Brindabella mountains.
Mount Tennent Fire Tower officer called the ESA Communications Centre again at
1350 hours 17 seconds, estimating the fire being
at a distance of 24 kilometres
from the tower.
1352 hours 16 seconds, the ESA dispatched RFS resources to the Booroomba Rocks
area. Further RFS units were dispatched at 1353,
1354 and 1356 hours. At that
time, the ESA Communications Centre was still speculating as to the location of
the fire, at this point
estimating its location at the Mount Franklin Road and
Leura Gap fire trail.
1357 hours, the ESA Communication Centre contacted the attending fire crews on
the ground, requesting that they stop at the Namadgi
Visitors Centre to await
further instructions.
1358 hours, the observer from the Mount Tennent Fire Tower called again, noting
that the fire appeared to be in the Bramina area.
1359 hours, Army personnel from 3RAR called for their scheduled welfare check.
They reported that they could not see any smoke
or fire at that stage.
1404 hours, the observer from the Mount Tennent Fire Tower called in, confirming
the fire location at 245° and 6 km from his
30 seconds later within the minute, members of the PCS reported during a call
smoke coming from the
Orroral Valley and, on close approach, observed flames in an area behind the
Orroral Valley Tracking Station.
1406 hours, the ESA broadcasted the fire location to all attending units.
was at about the same time that the grid reference was provided by the OPSO of
TU Taipan to the Chief of Staff of the MNRWTG,
Major Rodis. He reported by email
to the Commanding Officer of the Task group and also to Op BFA.
1408 hours, one of the PCS crew members attending the fire requested aerial
support and was advised that the IMT was actioning
the same time, the IMT contacted 2RAR and 3RAR Army crew members, who were on
the ground, informing them that they were to be extracted
and that the estimated
time of arrival for assistance was about 40 minutes.
1410 hours, Firebird 100, an intelligence-gathering helicopter supporting the
civilian bushfire operation, contacted the ESA to
advise that they were airborne
and en route to the fire.
1411 hours, attending fire crews requested additional resources, including a
bulk water tank.
1415 hours, 37 minutes after the ignition, Lieutenant Colonel Martin contacted
the ACT AEC to advise him of the fire. The AEC advised
Lieutenant Colonel Martin
that the ESA was aware of the fire and was addressing it.
1419 hours, on his own initiative, Mr Mealy advised the ESA of the report from
ANGEL21 of having instigated the OVF.
1437 hours, 59 minutes after ignition, Captain Bethany Gallagher, intelligence
officer at the JOC, sent grid references via email
to ADF personnel, including
Lieutenant Commander Withers, AEC.
2245 hours, 9 hours and 9 minutes after the ignition, Ms Whelan became aware of
the cause of the fire, with this information having
been communicated to her by
Lieutenant Colonel Martin.
Impact of the Delay in Reporting the OVF by the ANGEL 21 Crew
the time ANGEL21 left the Orroral Valley, based on photographs taken by Witness
D3, the fire was estimated to be approximately
200m by 200m in size and
spreading quickly.
the first 24 hours, it spread across approximately 2,600 hectares. It grew by
approximately 5,000 to 8,000 hectares per day over
the next three days.
Unfavourable conditions saw the fire grow by approximately 26,000 hectares on 1
February 2020, on which date
it also spread over the southeastern border of the
ACT at Clear Range, and thereafter becoming known as the Clear Range Fire in
total, 78% of the Namadgi National Park was burnt, that is, 82,700 hectares.
Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve was also affected with
1,400 hectares, or 22%, burnt.
The Cotter River catchment area, the ACT’s primary water supply, was also
adversely affected
by the fire. Extensive remediation work has been
the evidence from Mr Scott as to the failure of the occupants of ANGEL21 to
report the OVF’s ignition in a timely manner
was, “I don’t
think it would have made any difference with the – it definitely
wouldn’t change our response,
but I don’t think we would’ve
had any opportunity to put the fire out easier”.
by Senior Counsel Assisting, “Notwithstanding that, you’d agree with
me that in normal circumstances, the earlier
that the location of a fire is
identified, the better chance that you have of dealing with it?”, Mr Scott
responded, “Definitely...
any information we can get as soon as possible,
does assist”.
the flight records and the photographs taken by Witness D3, crew members of
ANGEL21 were able to identify the exact grid point
at which the fire ignited.
This information was not relayed to Major Rodis, embedded in the ESA, until
at the earliest. Logically, the capability to report
vital information in an emergency directly to those needing to know in order
respond is important.
Scott stated that the situation highlighted the need for there to be
communication between all “resources”, that is,
civilian and
military, back into the incident management room.
evidence before me is that the unfortunate delay in reporting ignition of the
fire had no significant impact on the response to
it, and I so find. The spread
of the fire was exponential because of the location of its ignition and
difficulty responding quickly
to that location.
evidence is that early reporting of any fire is beneficial. Again, that accords
with common sense. Failure to report the fire
earlier, and failure of the
Commonwealth to accept the overarching need to do so, does raise an issue of
public safety.
Submissions in Reply to Draft Findings and
Recommendations
Counsel Assisting made a number of recommendations, each of which was supported
by the Bumbalong residents. I have considered
the submissions of the
Commonwealth, the Territory and Witnesses D1 and D2 as to Senior Counsel
Assisting’s proposed recommendations.
Territory made no substantive submissions other than seeking greater specificity
in the description of Territory agencies involved
in the OVF response. These
suggestions were incorporated.
Commonwealth submitted that characterising TU Taipan’s communication
through an ADF liaison officer as an “inadequate”
arrangement to
communicate “urgent information” in [110] lacked contextuality and
could not be supported by the evidence
before the Court.
submissions on behalf of Witnesses D1 and D2 detailed similar concerns, and it
is thus appropriate to summarise them together.
Utz, on behalf of both witnesses, submitted that it was not open to the Chief
Coroner to describe the failure of crew to report
the OVF at the earliest
opportunity as an “error of judgment” in [193].
a finding, it was submitted, could not reasonably be made without explicit
evidence from witnesses to that effect, expert evidence
in support of the
finding, or more detailed evidence regarding the practicalities of reporting the
incident from within the aircraft
at the time.
was submitted by Witnesses D1 and D2 that the evidence supported alternative
findings. First, that the crew had complied and acted
in accordance with ADF
policies and procedures in their handling of the emergency, and second, that
there was no opportunity to report
OVF in the flight back to Canberra Airport.
D1 and D2 also submitted that the characterisation of reporting the incident to
civilian fire authorities as one “expected
as common sense” in [104]
was inappropriate where each had otherwise provided honest, consistent and
considered evidence in
relation to their actions on the day.
D1 alone submitted further that the finding in [157] relating to use of the
Signal application whilst within the aircraft
did not appropriately consider the
practicalities of reporting the fire during the flight.
is evident from the findings above, I am not persuaded by these submissions
received on behalf of the Commonwealth and Witnesses
Recommendations
note in making the following recommendations that it is necessary to recognise a
number of important principles:
(a) DACC is an extremely valuable resource to the benefit of our citizenry;
(b) not every situation can be anticipated;
(c) recommendations must be sufficiently specific as to arise from the
circumstances of the inquiry, but sufficiently general, so
that they are likely
to be beneficial in future circumstances, which will almost never be identical;
(d) recommendations intended to address issues of public safety must be capable
of practical implementation.
(i) Risk Assessments
DACC is sought by the ACT, the ACT should provide the ADF, in an accessible and
reproducible format, a briefing as to particular
known risks associated with the
planned operation, which should be incorporated into mission-level risk
assessments.
In particular, risk assessments for unplanned landing in
bushfire-prone zones should be provided and incorporated as part of the
authorisation process. Those risk assessments should include ground
and environmental conditions provided by the local emergency
services agencies.
Consideration should be given to the frequency with which these risk assessments
should be updated.
Consideration
should be given to incorporating a procedure for reporting unplanned aircraft
landings during DACC operations internally
to the ADF and concurrently to the
relevant civilian authorities, including whether prior approval is required, by
whom and in what
circumstances.
Consideration
should be given by the ACT and the ADF to embedding civilian subject matter
experts within the ADF mission crew, where
resourcing, safety and space
(ii) Communication
providing DACC, consideration should be given by the ADF to including an
emergency procedure protocol in the operation’s
SOP, which incorporates
arrangements for the direct reporting of incidents that create an immediate and
obvious risk to the public
and to civilian authorities, such as a fire. This may
be through an embedded ADF liaison officer (such as the AEC) or to a nominated
civilian counterpart or, if unable to contact those identified persons, any
person with whom they are able to communicate who is
able to relay the
information to the emergency services promptly (such as airport ATCs).
part of any fire-related DACC operation SOPs, aircraft captains should be
directed to provide the GPS location of any fire that
they ignite or observe, in
accordance with the above protocol as soon as practicable.
facilitate efficient communications between operational and embedded ADF members
during DACC, consideration should be given to
establishing a “duty
role, not the person.
ADF and the ACT should liaise regarding the most effective direct line
communication system to implement between ADF aircraft
and civilian authorities,
whether that be the Signal application or some other
arrangement.
(iii) Systemic
ADF should create, or if it exists, ensure implementation of, a process, whereby
learnings from review of incidents relating to
a particular resource be
considered in a service wide context as to whether the learnings have, or are
likely to have, application
in respect to other resources. If so, those
learnings should be incorporated into relevant training or risk assessment
documentation.
matter has taken far too long to be finalised. Without demur, I offer my
apologies to those affected by the fire and its aftermath,
in the various ways
in which that has occurred.
note that much consideration has been given by those involved in our
community’s response to bushfires as to how to address
this challenging
phenomenon in the future. It is evident that our best response can only be
achieved by a united community effort.
As a community, we must, and rightly do,
have confidence in the excellent and necessary co-operation between the
Commonwealth, our
dedicated military personnel and ACT administrative and
fire-fighting personnel. Nothing in these findings should be interpreted
I certify that the preceding two-hundred-and-forty-eight [248] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Findings of
her Honour Chief
Coroner Walker.
Associate: Maddy Holloway
Date: 13 June 2025
Karen Gallagher, Michael
Gallagher, Nicole Small, Nina Clarke, Tony Weston, Annika Safe, Stephen
Littlehales, Judy Eagle, Peter Bottomley,
Stephen Angus and Julia Angus.
RTF format (660 KB)
Signed PDF/A format