Shearman v Classic Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd [2025] ACTCA 33 (11 August 2025)
Shearman v Classic Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd [2025] ACTCA 33 (11 August 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
Shearman v Classic Constructions (Aust) Pty
[2025] ACTCA 33
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Catchwords:
APPEAL FROM THE SUPREME COURT – Civil law
– application for leave to appeal – appeal from three separate
interlocutory
decisions – appeal to set aside judgments – leave
Legislation Cited:
Building Act 2004
Court Procedures Act 2004
Court Procedures Rules
(ACT) rr 5312, 6604
Supreme Court Act
Cases Cited:
Asset Building Certifiers Pty Ltd v Hyblewski
[2020] ACTCA 21
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v O’Neill
[2006] HCA 46
Brisciani v Piscioneri (No 2)
[2016] ACTCA 24
Castlemaine Tooheys Ltd v South Australia
[1986] HCA 58
Construction Occupations Register v Bates
[2017] ACTCA 15
Décor Corporation Pty Ltd v Dart Industries Inc
Donohue v Volanne Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2021] ACTCA 11
Findex Group Pty Limited v McKay
[2023] ACTCA 36
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
Hyblewski v Bellerive Homes Pty Ltd
[2019] ACTSC 44
Kelly v Director of Public Prosecutions (ACT)
[2015] ACTCA 55
Kenny v Ritter
[2009] SASC 139
Manny v Commonwealth of Australia; Manny v University of
[2023] ACTSC 160
McKay v Paule
[2022] ACTCA 72
Mulley v Manifold
[1959] HCA 23
103 CLR 341
Piscioneri v Brisciani & Reardon
[2017] ACTSC 237
R v Meyboom
[2012] ACTCA 2
256 FLR 450
Sun v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1997) 81 FCR
Talada Investments v Rovera Scaffolding
[2017] ACTSC 160
Debra Shearman (First Appellant)
Leigh Shearman (Second Appellant)
Classic Constructions Pty Ltd (Respondent)
CBS Residential (Interested Party)
Representation:
Self-represented (Appellant)
WDB Buckland (Respondent)
S Onitiri (Interested Party)
Self-represented (Appellant)
MV Law (Respondent)
Lander & Rogers (Interested Party)
File Number:
ACTCA 39 of 2024
Decisions Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal:
Supreme Court of the ACT
McCallum CJ
Date of Decision:
Case Title:
Classic Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shearman (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 374
Court File Number(s):
SC 417 of 2022
Court/Tribunal:
Supreme Court of the ACT
McCallum CJ
Date of Decision:
Case Title:
Classic Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shearman (No 3)
[2024] ACTSC 282
Court File Number(s):
SC 417 of 2022
Court/Tribunal:
Supreme Court of the ACT
McCallum CJ
Date of Decision:
Case Title:
Classic Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shearman (No 4)
[2024] ACTSC 289
Court File Number(s):
SC 417 of 2022
Introduction
is an application to the Court of Appeal for leave to appeal from a series of
interlocutory decisions made by a single Judge
(the primary judge).
appellants in these proceedings are the defendants in the substantive
proceedings, Debra Shearman (the first appellant), and Leigh
Shearman (the
second appellant) (together, the appellants). The respondent in these
proceedings is the plaintiff in the substantive
proceedings, Classic
Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd (the respondent). The second appellant did not make
an appearance at the hearing
of the application. On this occasion, the first
appellant sought to appear for both appellants.
decisions under appeal are:
a) Classic Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shearman (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC
b) Classic Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shearman (No 3)
[2024] ACTSC
c) Classic Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shearman (No 4)
[2024] ACTSC
ease I will refer to them as ‘
’. The orders appealed from in each
matter are set out below.
, as set out at [60]:
to the application in proceeding dated 3 May 2024 filed by the second defendant
seeking leave to file a counter claim against CBS
Residential Certifiers, order
the second defendant to pay the plaintiff’s costs.
to the application in proceeding dated 3 May 2024 filed by the second defendant
seeking leave to file a counterclaim against CBS
Residential Certifiers, order
the second defendant to pay the costs of CBS Residential Certifiers.
leave to the second defendant to apply to vary that order in the event that the
counterclaim is served on CBS Residential Certifiers.
to the plaintiff’s further amended application in proceeding filed in
court on 6 May 2024 concerning non-party production
notices, each party is to
bear its or her costs.
to the amended application in proceeding filed by the 2nd defendant on 10 May
2024 seeking access to her property, order the second
defendant to pay the
plaintiff’s costs.
as set out at [26]:
to file the two applications referred to me by the Registrar on 26 July 2024 is
as set out at [15]:
make orders 1, 2 and 3 in the application in proceeding dated 21 August 2024:
a) Pursuant to r 6604 of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
subpoena issued to Jefferson Godfrey Architects Pty Ltd dated 7 August 2024 is
b) Pursuant to section 20 of the
Supreme Court Act
1993 (ACT) the Notice
to Produce issued to Classic Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd dated 13 June 2024 is
c) The second defendant is to pay the plaintiffs costs of this application.
second defendant is to pay the plaintiffs costs of the undated application
determined on 12 September 2024.
direct the costs of the application in proceeding dated 21 August 2024 and the
costs of the undated application determined on 12
September 2024 not be payable
until the conclusion of the proceedings.
the 10 orders appealed from, seven relate to costs and are by their nature
discretionary. The balance of the orders are clearly
interlocutory.
to appeal is therefore required: s 37E(4)
Supreme Court Act
An extension of the time within which to bring the application for leave is also
sought, given that the subject orders were
made on 22 November 2024 and the
application for leave to appeal was filed on 20 December 2024: r 5312
Procedures Rules
extension of time application and the leave application were both heard
concurrently with the appeal.
after the commencement of the hearing the appellants sought to file in Court a
further affidavit of the first appellant. The
document was only provided to the
responding parties very shortly prior to the hearing commencement and, noting
that it comprised
in excess of 100 pages, there had not been an opportunity for
them to closely consider its contents.
review of the affidavit demonstrated that it was in substance simply annexing
some additional and lengthy written submissions. Notwithstanding
the previous
orders made for the filing and service of written submissions by each of the
parties, I received the document as further
written submissions of the
appellants and I allowed each of the responding parties until 8 July 2025 to
provide any further written
submissions in reply and also to address an oral
submission made by the first appellant to the effect that there were other
applications
in proceeding that had been filed by her and not determined by the
substantive proceedings arise out of a building contract entered into between
the appellants and the respondent for building works
on residential land owned
by the appellants. Those works were completed to a stage whereby the respondent
asserts that “practical
completion” was, within the contractual
meaning of that term, achieved, and possession of the property was subsequently
to the appellants.
appellants dispute that practical completion was achieved, and they assert that
the building works were either incomplete or were
performed defectively, such
that they were non-compliant. A range of other allegations are made in respect
of the adequacy of the
building works, and in respect of the certifiers who
approved those works at various stages of the build. At hearing before me in
course of oral submissions, the first appellant indicated that her investigation
into the certification process since the time
of the hearings before the primary
judge had revealed that a number of different certifiers had been involved in
the process of approving
the building works, and that prospective actionable
rights may lie against one, or all of them. One of the certifying entities, CBS
Residential Certifiers Pty Ltd (CBS) was represented at the hearings before the
primary judge as an interested party and appeared
and made submissions on the
application and appeal hearing before me.
any view of the material before the Court the dispute is attended with some
considerable complexity. The complexity is accentuated
by the fact that the
first appellant is conducting the proceeding, and attempting to articulate at
times complex legal propositions,
as a self-represented party. Whilst it is
appropriate in those circumstances to approach her conduct of the proceeding
with greater
flexibility than might otherwise be the case, the Court retains its
duty of impartiality: see
Manny v Commonwealth of Australia; Manny v
University of Canberra
[2023] ACTSC 160
[2009] SASC 139
Grounds for seeking
extension of time
primary reasons relied upon by the appellants in seeking an extension of the
time within which to bring the application for leave
to appeal may be summarised
as follows:
a) The extension sought is minimal being a matter of weeks from the date upon
which the decisions were handed down.
b) There were extenuating circumstances including the securing of new rental
accommodation.
c) There was a significant delay between the hearing of the various applications
and the delivery of the subject decisions.
d) The number and scope of the judgments required the devotion of a significant
amount of time to prepare the necessary documentation
to be lodged.
e) The first appellant is a self-represented litigant who suffers from a
disability.
f) The first appellant was distracted with the need to deal with and respond to
other applications filed in the same proceedings.
g) There were challenges in securing some of the documentation sought to be
relied upon for the purposes of the appeal.
h) There were issues in gaining access to relevant court files.
Respondent’s
submissions on extension of time
respondent contended that there was no proper basis for granting an extension of
time. They highlighted the failure of the submissions
and material relied upon
to squarely address the relevant criteria including:
a) the history of the proceedings;
b) the conduct of the parties;
c) the nature of the litigation;
d) the consequences of granting or refusing leave; and
e) the explanation for the delay.
relation to those criteria the respondent identified the lengthy and convoluted
history of the matter with multiple interlocutory
steps, the failure of the
appellants to conduct the matter with efficiency, the lack of any special or
general importance attaching
to the matter or the application and the failure of
the appellants to provide any compelling explanation for the delay in filing
application.
that the orders appealed from, insofar as they were referrable to CBS, dealt
only with issues of costs, CBS did not specifically
address the extension of
time issue in its submissions.
Whether to grant leave to
appeal out of time
approach to be taken in respect of an application seeking leave to appeal out of
time was summarised by Refshauge ACJ in
Kelly v Director of Public
Prosecutions (ACT)
[2015] ACTCA 55
That approach may be summarised as follows:
limits are important and must, prima facie, be obeyed.
order to justify a court acceding to an application to extend time, there must
be some material on which the court can exercise
its discretion.
an application should only be granted if, having regard to the important value
of finality in litigation and the need for time
limits to be respected, it is
proper to do so.
should be an explanation for the delay, and as to any action (other than to
appeal) that has been taken by the applicant which
is relevant.
court must consider any prejudice to the respondent in defending the proceedings
as caused by the delay and any such prejudice
will tell against the extension.
mere absence of prejudice is not enough to justify the extension of time.
merits of the appeal itself must be taken into account in deciding whether an
extension of time should be granted.
court, on considering an application for an extension of time within which to
appeal, should not decide the appeal and, in an
appropriate circumstance, an
arguable case may be sufficient, though in the case of long delay it may be
necessary to show that the
applicant has a strong case.
Nevertheless,
the application is to be determined by the court’s view of the demands of
justice in accordance with broad judicial
discretion and not by the mere
application of the verbal formula.
particular, the court will look, above all else, to determine whether there has
not been and will not be, if the application is
refused, a miscarriage of
justice which will always be an overriding consideration.
Honour was there referring to his analysis of the approach to be taken that was
R v Meyboom
[2012] ACTCA 2
256 FLR 450.
Although both
of those decisions were in the context of criminal proceedings, Refshauge ACJ
observed that the authorities relied
upon were largely drawn from the
consideration of extension of time matters in the civil jurisdiction of the
Refshauge ACJ observed, the overriding consideration for the Court in whether to
grant leave to appeal out of time is whether the
refusal to do so will result in
a miscarriage of justice.
accept in this case that the failure of the appellants to file documentation in
a timely manner was in part due to a lack of understanding
of the applicable
court procedure. I accept also that there were pressures upon the first
appellant in dealing with the matter as
a self-represented litigant that made it
difficult to comply with the short time frame for lodgement of an application
in the context of an interlocutory matter.
therefore make no criticism of the appellants for the delay in lodgement.
However, an important consideration in whether to grant
leave to appeal out of
time is whether the appeal itself has merit, and viewed as a whole, whether a
miscarriage of justice follows
from the refusal. For the reasons that are
developed below I have reached the view that it does not.
Proposed grounds of appeal
grounds of appeal relied upon in the draft notice of appeal are set out at [9]
of that document, and are as follows:
a) There has been an error of law and that the decision made was not based on
the available evidence and/or that evidence was not
considered by her Honour at
the time the decision was made.
b) There has been an error of fact and law and the decision made was based on
the available evidence but the conclusion reached was
incorrect in the face of
the evidence.
c) That ‘fresh evidence’ that was not available at the time, is now
available and as such was not relied on but would
have affected the outcome of
the decision made. The applicants seek leave to rely on this fresh evidence.
d) That the respondent failed to adhere to the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
and serve all sealed documents on the applicants.
Building Act 2004
and all associated legislation.
Court Procedures Rules 2006
Court Procedures Act 2004
h) Relevant case law.
Submissions of the
grounds are further developed in the draft notice of appeal, the application for
leave to appeal, and in the appellants’
various written submissions
including the lengthy written submissions handed up in court on the day of the
hearing. The totality
of the argument contained in those documents extends to
some hundreds of pages, includes very high levels of repetition, and is at
very difficult to follow. I have therefore endeavoured below to summarise the
substantive grounds relied upon.
relation to
, the appellants contend:
a) There was a failure by the primary judge to consider all of the available
b) Fresh evidence is now available (and more is anticipated) which bears on the
determination of the applications, and on the determination
of the substantive
c) Additional evidence has identified inconsistencies in documentation relevant
to the substantive hearing;
d) Additional evidence raises the prospect of instituting proceedings against at
least one “Certifier” entity that may
not be CBS, the party
previously nominated;
e) Expert and other evidence relied upon by the appellants is supportive of
their case in the substantive proceedings;
f) That in respect of the Jefferson Godfrey subpoena, excessive weight was
placed on the letter written by the respondent to the
subpoena. The appellants
were not afforded the opportunity to object to the letter;
g) That the inability to produce documents responsive to a subpoena ought not to
have led to the conclusion that the documents were
not available;
h) That the architectural plans which were the approved plans are pivotal in the
dispute and must be in the possession of the respondent
and therefore ought to
be discoverable;
the failure to award the appellants costs in respect of other applications was a
breach of procedural fairness and natural justice
in the context of the
willingness to award costs to parties in respect of these
applications;
j) That the appellants are now aware that deficiencies in respect of the
building works were known to her previous legal representatives
communicated to her;
k) That there have been non-compliances by the respondents in respect of court
orders for the service of expert evidence; and
primary judge should have found that in view of the inability of the respondent
to secure practical completion of the works that
the status quo should have
remained and the respondent should have been found to remain in possession of
relation to
the appellants contend:
a) The availability of fresh evidence ought to have resulted in a different
outcome on the question of orders for enforcement of
31 notices for non-party
production previously served;
b) The prior orders of the Senior Deputy Registrar on 21 June 2024 in respect of
the filing and service of notices for non-party
production ought to have led to
a different outcome on the applications relating to leave to issue notices;
c) The primary judge’s approach to the notice for non-party production
issue reflected pre-judgment; and
d) Fresh evidence now available demonstrates that multiple certifiers were
involved in the building works and had that evidence been
available at the time
it would have affected the outcome of the decision and allowed for orders
facilitating issue of new proceedings
against the identified certifiers.
relation to
the appellants contend:
a) The failure to engage certifiers in writing in compliance with the
requirements of the
Building Act 2004
was a matter that
should have been taken into consideration;
b) The evidence from ACAT proceeding XD935 of 2022 that was not available at the
time of the hearing, but is now available, should
have been considered,
including admissions made by the respondent in the course of those
proceedings;
c) It was not reasonably open to conclude on the evidence that practical
completion of the works had been achieved;
d) The lack of compliance of the building works was a matter that should have
been taken into account in assessing whether practical
completion had in fact
been reached;
e) The primary judge should have taken into account documentation released from
the Construction Occupations Registrar on 30 August
2024 and the appellants
expert reports obtained in October 2024 together with FOI documentation obtained
in January 2025 (all being
material not available at the time of the relevant
f) The reports of Peak Consulting that are relied upon by the respondent to
support their contention that practical completion was
achieved, were not
reports prepared in accordance with the
Court Procedures Rules
g) Pre-judgment was displayed by the primary judge in dealing with the
consequences of taking possession of the property;
h) The fresh evidence now available from the Construction Occupations Registrar
identifies that the requirement to issue notices
for non-party production was
legitimate, targeted and necessary;
overlap in the cause of action against the respondent and the foreshadowed
action against the certifier or certifiers was such
that it was appropriate that
both matters be heard together;
j) The primary judge erred in concluding that the appellants were not pressing
the application in respect of orders regarding possession
of the property, in
relation to which the appellants contend that there was simply agreement offered
reluctantly to access the site
for the specific purpose of compiling expert
k) The primary judge should have identified that deferral of the filing of a
counter claim against the certifier was due to the appellants
waiting for the
judgment to be handed down; and
primary judge’s related finding that the application was a waste of time
was not reasonably open on the whole of the evidence.
following authorities were cited:
a) Australian Broadcasting Corporation v O’Neill
[2006] HCA 46
This decision of the High Court was the result of an appeal of an
interlocutory decision granting an injunction to prevent the ABC
broadcasting a
television program that contained potentially defamatory imputations. The
decision to grant the interlocutory injunction
was overturned on appeal.
The passage pointed to by the appellants at [65] sets out the relevant
principles that apply to a consideration of whether to grant
an interlocutory
injunction, namely that the applicant has identified a prima facie case, and
whether the injury or inconvenience
to be suffered by the plaintiff outweighs
that to be suffered by the subject of the injunction.
b) Castlemaine Tooheys Ltd v South Australia
[1986] HCA 58
161 CLR 148
This decision of a single judge of the High Court exercising the original
of the 15-cent
container deposit refund in South Australia on interstate trade. This case set
out a three-part test for the imposition
of an interlocutory injunction, namely
that there is a serious question to be tried, that the plaintiff will suffer
irreparable injury
for which damages will not be an adequate remedy and that the
balance of convenience favours the granting of an injunction.
Construction
Occupations Register v Bates
[2017] ACTCA 15
This Court of
Appeal decision is an appeal of a decision of Burns J, which was itself an
appeal of a decision of the Appeal Tribunal
in ACAT regarding the appointment of
a building certifier. Ultimately, the appeal of the decision of Burns J was
upheld on the basis
that his Honour had made his decision using an erroneous
interpretation of
Building Act
which relates to the ability
of a land owner to appoint a certifier after the commencement of construction of
a building, and whether
such an appointment requires compliance with the balance
Building Act
d) Hyblewski v Bellerive Homes Pty Ltd
[2019] ACTSC 44
This is a decision of Mossop J in relation to an action brought by a land
owner against a builder and certifier. The dispute between
the plaintiff and the
builder was settled prior to the commencement of the hearing of this matter.
In relation to the claim against the certifier, Mossop J found that the
certifier was liable to the landowner on the basis that they
had breached their
contractual duty by failing to exercise reasonable care and skill in issuing a
certificate following various inspections
at various times during the build. The
decision was subsequently appealed, with the appeal dismissed in
Building Certifiers Pty Ltd v Hyblewski
[2020] ACTCA 21.
e) Piscioneri v Brisciani & Reardon
[2017] ACTSC 237
This is a decision of McWilliam AsJ (as her Honour then was), in relation to
various applications filed by both the plaintiff and
the defendants to a
defamation proceeding. The issues subject of the judgment were applications for
the strikeout of the defences,
a plaintiff application for default judgment, the
failure of the defendant to respond to interrogatories filed by the plaintiff,
an application for the plaintiff to be compelled to answer a request for further
and better particulars, and the defendants’
application for either summary
judgment or summary dismissal.
Ultimately, her Honour deemed that the applications for summary dismissal or
judgment were made good on the facts as an Anshun estoppel
arose due to previous
proceedings in the Court.
Submissions of the
respondent on leave to appeal and the appeal
making reference to the relevant principles in respect of an appeal from
interlocutory orders the respondent addressed the following
a) The appellants had not demonstrated that the reasons of the primary judge
were attended by sufficient doubt to warrant the grant
of leave. Rather, the
appellants were simply seeking different orders.
b) No relevant error is identified.
c) The orders made were discretionary necessitating an error of the kind stated
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
to sustain an appeal.
d) Prejudice must be established in a referrable way, not simply prejudice at
large. The only relevant prejudice identified was in
respect of costs which are
an incident of participation in legal proceedings.
e) The orders do not involve matters of general public importance.
f) The particular errors of law complained of have not been clearly
articulated.
g) The fresh evidence relied upon has not been clearly identified.
h) Submissions in respect of expert evidence are not articulated in a way to
identify how expert reports would have affected the
outcome of the decision
asserted to have not been served upon the appellants have not been precisely
identified.
j) The appellants seek to agitate the substantive issues in the proceedings
rather than those addressing the criteria for leave.
Submissions of CBS
Residential Certifiers
made the following submissions:
a) The only orders of the primary judge that are relevant to the position of CBS
are orders 2 and 3 of the
b) The appellants are at liberty to commence separate proceedings against CBS
(and any other relevant entity) at any time.
c) In respect of the order as to costs, the appellants have not demonstrated a
basis upon which the exercise of discretion by the
primary judge can be
questioned.
d) In essence, the contention of the appellants is that in making the costs
order the primary judge was not aware of all of the evidence
in the proceedings.
However, in making the order as an interlocutory decision, it was not necessary
for the primary judge to consider
all evidence in the proceeding.
e) There is no evidence of any error of law or fact as alleged.
f) No doubt arises from the primary judge’s decision.
g) Despite the effluxion of time, no counter claim has been served, and no
proceedings have been commenced against CBS or its related
h) There is no new evidence as it pertains to the costs order.
received further written submissions from the respondent and CBS in accordance
with the order I made on 24 June 2025 granting leave
to each of those parties to
file any submissions in reply to the applicant’s further submissions
received on the day of hearing.
I have taken those further submissions into
account. I also received a document purporting to be further lengthy submissions
of the appellants. I have not had regard to that document.
Relevant principles
governing grant of leave
McKay v Paule
[2022] ACTCA 72
, Mossop J summarised the principles
to be applied by the Court of Appeal in determining whether or not to grant
leave to appeal from
an interlocutory decision:
Adopting and consolidating the summaries of the principles upon which the Court
of Appeal approaches a decision as to whether or
not to grant leave to appeal
from an interlocutory decision identified by Refshauge J in
Capital Property
Projects (ACT) Pty Ltd v Australian Capital Territory Planning & Land
[2008] ACTCA 9
and the additional
principles identified by his Honour in
Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd v
[2012] ACTCA 36
269 FLR 182
, a summary of the principles
to be applied is as follows:
a) Leave will be granted sparingly to avoid delaying and fragmenting the hearing
b) A court will be particularly hesitant to grant leave where the decision is
one in respect of practice and procedure or is made
in the exercise of a
discretion.
c) Decisions which, though interlocutory, determine substantive rights will more
readily be the subject of the grant of leave.
d) The party seeking leave bears the onus of satisfying the court of the
necessary criteria to justify the grant of leave.
e) The court will ordinarily grant leave where the decision is wrong and
prejudice (sometimes referred to as “substantial prejudice”)
suffered by the appellant.
f) Leave may also be granted where the decision is attended with sufficient
doubt to warrant its reconsideration or, to put it another
way, where the
decision is “attended with difficulty and [its] correctness is open to
dispute” (Decor Corporation Pty
Ltd v Dart Industries Inc
(1991) 33 FCR
at 400) and, if it is wrong, significant consequences will be suffered by
the applicants.
g) It may be a factor favouring the grant of leave that:
decision involves a matter of public importance; or
decision may affect the fairness of the trial, a consideration under
Human Rights Act 2004
(ACT), though this can also weigh against the decision if
the appeal results in unfair delay or fragmentation of the trial.
observation of the Court of Appeal in
Findex Group Pty Limited v McKay
[2023] ACTCA 36
is apposite to this appeal:
The application before the court is an application for leave to appeal from an
interlocutory judgment on a discretionary matter involving
a question of
practice and procedure. Each of the integers of this concept mean that the court
should be reluctant to grant leave:
a) the decision is interlocutory;
b) the decision is on a matter of practice and procedure; and
c) the decision involves the exercise of discretion.
In re the will of FB Gilbert (deceased)
[1946] NSWStRp 24
(1946) 46 SR (NSW) 318
Should leave be
is little utility in seeking to address the 9 specific grounds of appeal set out
at [9] of the appellants’ draft notice
of appeal. The sheer breadth of the
matters raised by the appellants on appeal, and the form in which they are
raised, renders that
exercise nugatory. An attempt to discern the import of not
only the draft notice of appeal but the range of different documents relied
by the appellants, often involving extensive repetition, requires the Court to
engage in an exercise of distillation to identify
the important or essential
arguments that the appellants seek to make. Each of the arguments I have
identified through that process
are dealt with below.
consider all of the available evidence
substantive proceedings were commenced on 2 November 2022. From the commencement
of the proceedings up until the date of determination
of the subject
applications there had been no less than 11 separate applications in proceeding
filed in this matter. In support of
those applications some 36 affidavits had
been filed by the appellants. The contention of the appellants appear to be that
that enormous body of material there are matters that ought to have been
taken into account by the Court in the determination of
the subject
applications. The difficulty for the appellants is that notwithstanding the
prolix written submissions relied upon in
this appeal, there has been a failure
to identify with any specificity the particular evidence that it is asserted was
Court at the time of the hearing of the subject applications, was
relevant to the determination of those applications and was not
considered by
those circumstances the appellants have failed to establish that there was
particular evidence available to the Court at that time
that was relevant and,
after due consideration, should have altered the outcome of the subject
applications.
is a different matter when the Court comes to consider evidence that the
appellants now seek to rely upon that has come into the
possession of the
appellants since the time of the hearing of the subject applications. That issue
is dealt with below.
Evidence now
available that was not available at the time of
critical evidence identified by the appellants comprises the expert opinions now
relied upon by them in the substantive proceeding,
being those contained in the
expert reports of CGS Engineers dated 18 October 2024 and 21 October 2024, and
documentation produced
by the Construction Occupations Registrar. That material
in concert is asserted to be supportive of the proposition that the subject
building works were completed in a defective manner and the improvements on the
land are presently in a form where they are not compliant
with relevant
regulations so as to enable a “certificate of occupancy and use” to
is no contest that the material in question was not available at the time of the
hearings of the subject applications and was
therefore not available to be
considered by the Court in the determination of those applications. That is of
significant relevance
in assessing this aspect of the appeal. Even accepting,
for the purposes of the argument, that the additional material now sought
relied upon might have changed the outcome of the subject applications, there is
no evidence to suggest that the substantive
rights of the appellants have been
affected as a result of the interlocutory decisions that have been made by the
primary judge.
application was made, despite the availability of some of the evidence relied
upon, to present further evidence to the Court, after
the hearing dates and
prior to the delivery of the subject decisions.
fresh evidence may well be relevant to the capacity of the appellants to now
seek by way of further application some greater access
to documentation relevant
to the substantive proceeding, but the interlocutory decisions made by the
primary judge present no obstacle
to that occurring. More importantly, in
respect of the issuing of subpoenas for production, leave was required at the
time of the
hearing of the subject applications because no hearing date had been
set. A hearing date having now been allocated in this matter,
means that the
appellants are at liberty to proceed to issue subpoenas for production in the
substantive proceeding without the leave
of the Court. It is therefore difficult
to see what if any disadvantage accrues to the appellants as a consequence of
the prior decisions
refusing leave in respect of the issuing of the subpoenas
for production.
appellants have not established that the fresh evidence could not, with
reasonable diligence, have been obtained prior to the
handing down of the
judgments under consideration. Some of the evidence was obtained before the date
of judgment but not made available
le to the Court. In the circumstances the
appellants have not demonstrated a proper basis for review of the decisions of
the primary
judge with reference to the fresh evidence; see
Wilson v Official
Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] FCA 304
any event, given the interlocutory nature of the decisions, the fresh evidence
only has relevance where it leads to a conclusion
that the subject decisions are
attended with sufficient doubt to require reconsideration, and substantial
injustice would result
if leave was refused
: Décor Corporation Pty Ltd
v Dart Industries Inc
[1991] FCA 844
v Volanne Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2021] ACTCA 11
. The appellants have
not established this to be the case.
ground is therefore not made out.
Evidence now
available identifies inconsistencies that bear on issues in the substantive
existence of evidence of inconsistency between documents, that are now available
and were not available at the time of hearing
of the subject applications, and
that are intended to be relied upon by the appellants at the hearing of the
substantive proceeding
is not a matter that casts doubt on the decisions of the
primary judge so as to require reconsideration.
Godfrey subpoena
- excessive weight placed on
argument relates to the reliance that the primary judge placed on a letter
provided by the proposed recipient of a subpoena to
the effect that they had no
further documents to produce. The appellants contend that excessive weight was
placed on the correspondence
in the decision made by the primary judge to set
aside the subpoena pursuant to
Court Procedures Rules
That occurred in circumstances where the appellants assert that there were
serious unanswered and unresolved inconsistencies in regard to the
architectural plans and associated documentation in which Jefferson
architects were responsible for compiling
”: (p2 DS01, annexure to
affidavit of Debra Shearman affirmed on 23 June 2025). In short, the appellants
contend there are plans
which are missing, and the plans executed and approved
by them are different to the plans that were lodged with the Construction
Occupations Registrar in the context of gaining approval for the subject
building works. The primary judge was not satisfied that
the failure of
Jefferson Godfrey to produce the documents that the appellants contended
” demonstrated the fact of their existence such
that leave should be granted to pursue the subpoena for production directed
that entity. On the material before the Court at the time there was no
reasonable basis to conclude otherwise.
reference to the current pleadings in the substantive proceeding, and the
documentation available to the court at the time of
the subject hearings, there
is no reasonable basis on which to conclude that the decision to set aside the
subpoena to Jefferson
Godfrey is attended with sufficient doubt to require
reconsideration.
the event that the appellants consider the additional documentation now
produced, and falling within the category described in
the appellants’
submissions as fresh evidence, provides a reasonable basis to conclude that
there are documents that have been
excluded from production by Jefferson
Godfrey, there is no obstacle to the appellants now proceeding by way of further
subpoena for
production.
completion and possession issues
significant part of the appellants submissions was directed to the issue of
practical completion and legal possession of the land.
The appellants contend
that practical completion was never reached and, as a consequence, in accordance
with the terms of the building
contract the respondent remains in possession of
the property. In contrast, it is the position of the respondent that practical
was achieved and in those circumstances possession of the land (and
improvements) reverts to the appellants as owners without further
order of the
Court. It is apparent from the exchange that occurred on the hearing dates
before the primary judge and in oral submissions
that both parties accept that
practical completion remains very much a live issue in the substantive
proceedings. The first appellant
expressed concern in the hearings before the
primary judge about gaining access to the property for the purposes of securing
evidence and also in terms of the impact of such access on insurance
arrangements. The respondent maintains that there is no restriction
appellants having access to the property, but the appellants have reasons for
maintaining the position that they do not wish
to assume occupation of the
property until the matters the subject of the proceedings are determined.
primary judge ultimately made no order for the appellants to have access to the
property on the basis that the application in
that regard was not pressed by the
appellants. At the hearing before me, the first appellant appeared to contend
that she felt pressured
to take that course.
review of the transcript reveals the following exchange:
HER HONOUR: Has the expert attended site yet?
MS SHEARMAN: He has. One expert has attended site, and he has advised me that
the list is - he needs other experts to attend. He’s
got significant
HER HONOUR: Does that follow that you no longer require a judgment in respect of
the application seeking access to the site? Are
you now accepting that you can
access the site?
MS SHEARMAN: I took your advice. As soon as you said to me last hearing
‘you have access to the site,’ that’s the
second I said
HER HONOUR: So you’ve acted on that. All right.
MS SHEARMAN: Yes. Yes, I’ve acted on that.
reference to the exchange extracted above I am not satisfied that the appellants
have demonstrated any proper basis for reconsideration
of the decision of the
primary judge in respect of possession of, and access to, the land.
ground of appeal is not made out.
Fresh evidence
establishes need to join at least one
appellants contend that the evidence now available demonstrates that
certification of the subject building works was carried out
by a number of
different certifiers. As a consequence, it is asserted as a possibility that
there will be a need to institute proceedings
against one or more of the
identified certifiers. It was not entirely clear from the oral submissions of
the appellants before me,
whether the state of the evidence was such that the
appellants had now determined that there remained a need to institute
proceedings,
by way of counterclaim or otherwise, against CBS residential
certifiers as one of the identified entities and the one that has played
in the proceeding to date as an interested party.
14 June 2024 leave was granted to the appellants to file a counter claim against
a) Leave is granted to the second defendant to file the counterclaim against CBS
Residential Certifiers.
b) Pursuant to
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), I order that
there be a separate trial of that counterclaim.
objection by the appellants an order was also made that the counterclaim be
tried separately. It is self-evident that at the
time of the hearing of the
appeal no counter claim had been filed against CBS or against any other
certifying entity.
only relevance of the prospect of further litigation against certifiers now
identified, is to the part of this appeal that is
concerned with the costs
order that followed the order giving leave for a counter claim to be filed, as
opposed to the order giving
leave itself.
that the primary judge, in making the order for costs in respect of the
application seeking leave to file the counterclaim,
qualified that order by
giving leave to the appellants to revisit it should a counterclaim be filed, it
is difficult to identify
any proper basis on which it could be asserted that the
Court’s exercise of discretion in respect of costs miscarried. That
particularly so when, on any view of the decision to grant leave to introduce a
counter claim at this stage of the proceeding,
it constituted the provision of
some indulgence to the appellants.
ground is not made out.
Appropriate
for claim against certifier/s to be heard together with substantive
order of the primary judge resulting in the separation of the hearing of the
prospective counterclaim from the hearing of the
substantive proceeding does not
form part of the orders appealed from. To the extent that the submissions of the
appellants seek
to ventilate the issue of a separate hearing the point is moot.
In any event, the appellants remain at liberty under the present
proceed by way of counterclaim, without restriction as to the timing of the
lodgement of such a claim.
Fresh evidence
establishes basis for further subpoena/non-party production
to this appeal, the evidence relied upon as fresh evidence was not before the
primary judge at the time of hearing of the
various applications, nor was it
placed before her at any time prior to the delivery of the decisions under
appeal. To the extent
that the additional evidence now relied upon provides a
basis for the issuing of subpoenas for production, or notices for non-party
production, there is, in the context of a hearing date now set, no barrier to
the appellants proceeding to issue further subpoenas
or notices, perhaps with
the capacity to be more directed in the information now sought.
existence of a residual capacity to pursue further requests for documents
nullifies any prejudice to the appellants as a consequence
of the orders
previously made. That is, with the exception of the costs orders. In that regard
the orders involved an exercise of
discretion in the context of the material
that was then before the Court, that did not include the “fresh
is no utility in the context of this appeal to assess whether, armed with that
evidence, the Court may have reached a different
decision as to further
to costs, the Court exercised its discretion in the context of the evidence that
was before it at the time, and there is nothing
arising from the ”
” to indicate that the exercise of the discretion by the
primary judge miscarried in any way.
reflected pre-judgment
appellants additionally contended that the primary judge’s approach to the
notice for non-party production issue reflected
pre-judgment. To show such bias
or pre-judgment, a party must show that a judicial officer has an antagonism or
pre-judgment which
prevents a fair hearing of a case. In
Sun v Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1997) 81 FCR 71 at 134, North J set out that
actual bias exists:
where the decision-maker has prejudged the case against the applicant, or acted
with such partisanship or hostility as to show that
the decision-maker had a
mind made up against the applicant and was not open to persuasion in favour of
the applicant.
Brisciani v Piscioneri (No 2)
[2016] ACTCA
is no basis upon which to conclude that any of the decisions of the primary
judge under appeal reflected pre-judgment.
ground is not made out.
procedural fairness/denial of natural justice regarding costs
argument put by the appellants was that in respect of other applications in this
proceeding where the appellants had been successful,
or at least partially
successful, the Court had declined to make, or had failed to make, any orders in
respect of costs. Issues arising
out of costs orders in respect of other
applications in this proceeding were not matters before the Court in the context
appeal. Nor could the decisions in respect of those other matters have
any relevance in the determination of whether there was any
unfairness or denial of natural justice in the approach taken by the primary
judge to the exercise of her discretion in
respect of the awarding of costs on
the subject applications.
is no indication in the material before me that the exercise of the discretion
in respect of the costs of the subject applications
was undertaken in such a way
as to warrant interference on appeal. On the contrary, the orders appear to have
been made after careful
consideration of the material that was then before the
Court, and were consistent with the success or otherwise of the various
applications
that were made.
reference to the conclusions I have reached as to the merits of the appeal it is
appropriate to refuse an extension of time within
which to bring the
orders of the Court are as follows:
a) The application for leave to appeal from the
interlocutory judgments in:
Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shearman (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 374
Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shearman (No 3)
[2024] ACTSC 282
Constructions (Aust) Pty Ltd v Shearman (No 4)
[2024] ACTSC 289.
is dismissed.
b) The appellants are to pay the respondent’s costs of the application.
I certify that the preceding 70 [seventy]
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of his Honour
Acting Justice
Date: 11 August 2025
RTF format (399 KB)
Signed PDF/A format