King v The Heat Group Pty Ltd [2018] ACTIC 2 (12 July 2018)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
King v The Heat Group Pty Ltd
[2018] ACTIC 2
Hearing Date:
Magistrate Theakston
The Australian Capital Territory is the Territory or State of Connection
for the applicant.
Catchwords:
WORKERS COMPENSATION – Territory or State of connection –
meaning of ‘usually based’ – whether or not
Applicant was
usually based from home office
Legislation Cited:
Workers Compensation Act 1951
Cases Cited:
Avon Products Pty Ltd v Falls
[2018] ACTCA 21
Carrodus v Total State Food Brokers Pty Ltd
(Unreported, ACT
Magistrates Court, Walker CM, 2 September 2016)
Ferguson v WorkCover Queensland
[2013] QSC 78
Fisher v Tony Innaimo Transport Pty Ltd
[2015] ACTSC 1
Rahimi v MDS Tiling Pty Ltd & Ors
[2018] ACTIC 1
Sharon Leanne King (Appellant)
The Heat Group Pty Ltd (Respondent)
Representation:
Mr A Anforth (Applicant)
Mr S Whybrow (Respondent)
Elringtons Lawyers (Appellant)
King & Wood Mallesons (Respondent)
File Number:
WC 334 of 2017
MAGISTRATE THEAKSTON:
1. Distributors of goods often employ staff to manage the
supply, display and promotion of their products within merchants’
Ms King was employed by The Heat Group Pty Ltd for that purpose. In late 2015,
she developed an injury to her right hand
and wrist as a result of her work. Ms
King has made an application for arbitration under the
Workers Compensation Act
2. The single issue to be resolved is which jurisdiction is
connected to Ms King’s employment, and more precisely where, if
was Ms King usually based when employed by The Heat Group.
Facts not in dispute
3. The evidence in this matter was consistent and not
challenged. I summarise the same below and make findings accordingly:
all material times, Ms King’s home was within the Australian Capital
Territory. Ms King moved between homes, but remained
living in the ACT.
(b) In 2012, Ms King commenced working for The Heat Group as a merchandiser.
She worked four days a week on a casual basis. That
role involved attending
various stores, in which The Heat Group’s cosmetic products were offered
for sale. At the stores she
would assemble and maintain stands of merchandise,
including the prominent promotional paraphernalia. That was done in accordance
with detailed directions from her manager.
(c) The stores included Priceline Pharmacies, Kmart, Target, Big W, Myer, David
Jones, and Coles and Woolworths Supermarkets. The
vast majority of these stores
were located in the ACT, but some were located in NSW at Queanbeyan, Goulburn
(d) Every four to six weeks, The Heat Group would send to Ms King’s home,
directions about changes to the stands and new promotions.
Those directions
would be in a hardcopy form of ‘planograms’ on A3 paper. For a
brief period those directions were
sent by email.
(e) The Heat Group also sent to Ms King’s home a range of other material
that related to her role. That material included
product teasers, stripping for
store stands, parts for cosmetic stands, replacement parts for stands, graphic
panelling for stands,
promotional items and sample stock.
(f) The scale of the material was such that early in her employment Ms King
requested that The Heat Group provide warehouse storage.
That was not provided
on the basis that it was ‘not in the budget’. At times there was so
much material that it could
not fit within the room set aside as a home office
within Ms King’s home. The material was stored, in part, in an external
shed, sunroom or storage area under Ms King’s house. I infer from these
facts that The Heat Group was aware that this material
was being stored at Ms
King’s house and that it was a necessary part of her role to have
somewhere to receive, store and sort
that material.
(g) All stock for sale was delivered directly to stores. Ms King also arranged,
from time to time, for some of the material described
above to be delivered
directly to the relevant stores.
(h) Ms King would also receive ad hoc directions by phone or email. Those
directions would arrive while she was away from home during
the working day, or
at home before and after the working day.
(i) Ms King planned and arranged her attendances at the various stores from her
(j) Ms King prepared and transmitted detailed reports to her manager. Those
reports were ordinarily prepared and transmitted after
hours from her home.
(k) Ms King travelled to the stores with the necessary material using her own
car. She received an allowance for using her car and
(l) In late 2013, The Heat Group employed Ms King for additional duties on a
fifth day each week. That role involved pharmacies,
and included selling
products to those pharmacies, as well as assembling and maintaining merchandise
stands. The product range was
more extensive than her other role and included
sunglasses, reading glasses, cosmetics, perfumes and soaps.
(m) The vast majority of pharmacies were located in the ACT. Others were
located in NSW at Queanbeyan, Goulburn and Bega.
(n) In August 2015, Ms King was made an ongoing full time employee of The Heat
Group. Her duties and the arrangements for the delivery
of material remained
the same. Most of the stores still remained within the ACT. However the NSW
stores were now also located in
Merimbula, Tathra, Eden, Murrumbateman, Wagga
Wagga, Griffith, Temora, Leeton and Narrandera.
(o) The frequency of the trips to the individual NSW regions was approximately
once every four to six weeks. There was only one
trip to the Riverina area
before Ms King stopped working.
(p) In late 2015, Ms King started experiencing pain and swelling in her right
hand and wrist. In early 2016, she was diagnosed with
tenosynovitis in her
right hand with ganglion cysts.
Which jurisdiction is connected to the employment of Ms
4. As I observed in Rahimi v MDS Tiling Pty Ltd & Ors
[2018] ACTIC 1 at [27]:
State of Connection or Employment Connection test is provided at
Act. The test is a precondition for compensation to be awarded under
the Act. It is a cascading test with three steps.
second step need only be considered if the answer is not provided by the first
step. Similarly, the third step need only be considered
if the second step is
considered and does not yield an answer.
5. The first step relates to where the worker ‘usually
works in the employment’. It was agreed between the parties that
usually worked in both the ACT and NSW. Accordingly that step does not yield an
answer to the question.
6. The third step relates to ‘where the
employer’s principal place of business is Australia is located’.
The parties
agreed that was in Victoria.
7. The second step relates to
‘where the worker is usually based for the purposes of the
employment’. As indicated above,
it is this question that is in
Where was Ms King usually based?
Subsection 36B(7)
of the Act provides a number of relevant
considerations for the question about ‘usually based for the purposes of
employment’
deciding whether a worker is usually based in a Territory or State regard must
be had to the following:
(a) the employer provides a place from which the worker is expected to
operate—that place;
(b) if a place is stated in the worker's contract of employment with the
employer—that place;
(c) place from which the worker routinely receives day-to-day instructions
from the employer;
(d) place where the worker attends to collect material for the purposes of
their employment;
(e) place where the worker reports for administrative, human resource and
other issues related to the workers' employment with the
9. I was referred to the decision of Avon Products Pty Ltd v
[2018] ACTCA 21
that describes what may be insufficient to establish a
involved the worker being employed as a District Sales Manager for Avon and
responsible for an area wholly within the ACT. Her duties
included recruiting,
training and motivating sellers, running sales meetings and promotions in
shopping centres and making home visits
and training calls. Her duties also
involved performing paper and book work, which was performed either in the ACT
or at her home
office in NSW. Avon provided her with a fax machine for that
10. At [32] the court concluded:
evidence before the Court shows no particular usual base. The fact that Ms Falls
did some work from home does not necessarily
constitute that place as her base
for the purposes of her employment. Something more than a convenient place for
part of her duties
to be carried out is required before it can be said that her
residence was her base in an employment sense. In the same way it might
that while working in her sales district in the ACT her vehicle was her base.
What would have particular relevance is the
provision by the employer of a place
from which the employee is expected to operate.
11. Earlier the court expressly rejected the placing of a gloss
on the first step question and observed at [30]:
We also have no doubt that a
requirement or the absence of a requirement as to where work is performed is not
relevant; the test is
where the work is done, rather than where it is required
to be done or whether it is required to be done anywhere in
particular.
12. That observation in relation to the first step appears to
be based on the construction of the provision, and similar reasoning
would apply
equally to the second step. That is, the second step is a question of fact
the purposes of the employment, and
not a question about if or where the worker was required by the employer to be
13. These two extracts from Avon may be reconciled by observing that
the relevant test is the ‘usual base’, without any
additional gloss,
and the provision by the employer of a place from which the employee is expected
to operate would be a relevant
consideration for the purpose of determining the
test. This approach is reinforced by the
considerations.
also referred to Ferguson v WorkCover Queensland
[2013] QSC 78.
decision Applegarth J considered a number of authorities and distilled the
following principles:
a worker is usually based is a question of fact: at [38].
(b) The ordinary meaning of the terms ‘usually’ and
‘based’ should be adopted, namely ‘customarily,
commonly or
habitually’ for the former and a place where ‘operations are
conducted and where stores and supporting facilities
are concentrated; a centre
of operations, a headquarters’ for the latter: at [32], [35], [38] and
(c) Where the worker is usually based may be different from where the employer
is usually based: at [36].
(d) Where a worker is usually based need not coincide with where the worker
usually works: at [36].
(e) The location where a worker routinely attended to receive directions or
collect materials or equipment may be highly relevant:
(f) The place where a worker returned to collect products, where a vehicle used
for employment was based, where the worker planned
daily runs, where the worker
worked while awaiting delivery jobs, where wages are paid or where described
within the contract of
employment may all be relevant: at [29] and [39].
(g) Where a worker started and finished work each day is relevant, but it may be
inappropriate to place undue weight on this consideration:
(h) The place where a worker is usually based may be a place where the worker
spent a small proportion of his or her working day:
(i) There may be no place where a worker is usually based: [43].
(j) If multiple bases are identified, it would be necessary to ascertain if one
can be found to be where the worker was usually based:
15. I note out of completeness that I was also referred to the
decisions of Burns J in Fisher v Tony Innaimo Transport Pty Ltd
[2015] ACTSC 1
and the Chief Magistrate in Carrodus v Total State Food Brokers Pty Ltd
(Unreported, ACT Magistrates Court, Walker CM, 2 September
2016). I note the
facts found, principles applied and outcomes of those decisions.
submission was made on behalf of the respondent that the second step test
envisaged someone starting and finishing at a particular
location and who has
all of the base functions of their employment located in a particular place and
who, for the purposes of their
work, travelled across state borders each day
such that they do not work in one place, but there is a clear location to which
can be made, as that is the place from which their work emanates.
This submission describes a potential archetype. While the description
archetypal scenario may be of assistance in certain circumstances, for example
to underscore a particular point, the exercise
has limitations. I accept the
archetype proffered could describe a usual base. However, it is not the only
scenario that could
amount to a usual base when the relevant considerations are
Consideration
17. In the instant case there was no place provided by the The
Heat Group from which Ms King was expected to operate, other than the
party stores she visited. As those stores were numerous and offered no staging
facilities for her role generally, they could
not be bases for the purpose of
her employment. There was also no place stated in Ms King’s contract of
employment. Those
considerations from s 36B(7) are therefore of no
assistance.
18. There are a number of features of the present case that point
towards Ms King’s home being a base for the purposes of her
employment.
was from that location she usually started and finished her working days.
However, as that location was her home, the mere
fact that she started and
finished her working days there is less remarkable. I also note the caution
suggested in
and I consequently place very little weight on this
consideration.
(b) The Heat Group regularly sent hardcopy ‘planogram’ directions
for Ms King’s attention to that address. Tempering
this feature to a
limited degree, The Heat Group also provided ad hoc directions by phone and
email, and they may have been received
by Ms King while she was away from her
(c) The Heat Group consistently transported a significant amount of material to
that location for the purpose of Ms King’s
employment. While that did not
include sales stock, it was significant in quantity and essential to her role.
Ms King stored that
material at her home, and that was done with the knowledge
of The Heat Group. Ms King had requested that material be stored elsewhere,
that was refused by The Heat Group. Ms King would collect that material, for
the purposes of employment, from her home and transport
it to the relevant
stores. I place significant weight on this consideration.
(d) Ms King performed a range of employment activities at that location, in
between her daily travels to various stores. Those activities
(i) receiving
instructions from The Heat Group;
(ii) receiving,
storing, sorting and loading the above material;
(iii) planning
and arranging her attendances at stores; and
(iv) preparing
and transmitting detailed reports to her manager.
also place significant weight on this consideration.
(e) The vehicle Ms King used, which was essential for her role, was based at her
personal car and
would be expected to be based at her home in any event. Accordingly, I place
little weight on this consideration.
(f) Ms King spent the vast majority of her working time in the ACT.
19. On the other side of the scales there are a number of
features of the present case that weigh against Ms King’s home being
base for the purpose of her employment. They are:
(a) The location was not provided by The Heat Group.
Tempering this to a substantial degree, is that The Heat Group were aware that
Ms King was working from home and using that location as a staging point for her
role. The role required such a staging point, one
was not provided by The Heat
Group, and it could not be conducted within a vehicle alone. I accordingly
place little weight on this
consideration.
(b) Ms King did not receive directions from The Heat Group personally at that
(c) Ms King did not report to her home for the purposes administrative, human
resources or other issues related to her employment,
although she may have
communicated about such issues while she was present there.
(d) Ms King spent a large part of her working day away from her
20. Submissions adopted on behalf of the respondent suggested
that Ms King had no particular office that she attended on a day-to-day
her work varied day-to-day and she worked across two jurisdictions. For those
reasons it was submitted that there was no
usual base. While it is true there
was no office provided by The Heat Group for Ms King to attend, she worked in
her home office
daily and the balance of her duties did not involve office work.
No doubt there would be some variation in her day-to-day work, but
unchallenged evidence was that her role involved performing the same types of
functions at various stores on a regular and repeated
basis. More importantly,
these submissions do not directly address the fundamental considerations for the
second step test.
21. It is clear from the facts that Ms King’s home
was more than a convenient place for her to carry out part of her duties.
use of a place, not provided by The Heat Group was necessary for staging
purposes. Ms King requested a separate venue, but
that was not provided. She
ultimately had little choice but to use her home, or arrange an alternative
venue, for those purposes.
She chose her home, and The Heat Group sent
directions and materials there. To illustrate the distinction between simply
at home and using the residence as a base, I note that had Ms King, for
whatever reason, elected not to stay overnight at her home,
as people do from
time to time, it may be necessary, in order to perform her role, for her to
attend her home before making her way
to the various stores.
22. When I weigh
the above considerations, while applying the above principles, I am satisfied
that Ms King was based at her home
for the purposes of her employment.
am not satisfied Ms King was also based somewhere else for the purpose of her
employment. No other site was realistically identified,
save her car. It is
clear that her car would be insufficient to provide an adequate staging point,
particularly in relation to being
able to receive and store the
24. Accordingly I find that the ACT was where Ms King was usually
based for the purpose of her employment, and therefore the ACT is
the Territory
or State of connection.
25. I make the following declaration: The Australian Capital
Territory is the Territory or State of Connection for the applicant.
certify that the preceding twenty-five [25] numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Judgment of his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Sam Lynch
Date: 12 July 2018
RTF format (180 KB)
Signed PDF/A format