'BH' and Transport Canberra and City Services [2021] ACTOFOI 8 (26 August 2021)
‘BH’ and Transport Canberra and City Services
Decision and reasons for decision of Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
Symone Andersen
Respondent:
Transport Canberra and City Services
Application number:
AFOI-RR/21/10015
Decision date:
Catchwords:
Freedom of Information Act 2016
deciding access –
information is not held by respondent
1. I am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman for the purposes of
Freedom of Information Act 2016
of the FOI Act, I have decided to
the decision of
Transport Canberra and City Services (
), dated 25
March 2021 and
my decision that TCCS does not hold information
of the FOI Act.
Background of Ombudsman review
3. On 18 February 2021, the applicant applied to TCCS seeking access to:
The outward, forward-facing camera of BUS 384 on 5 February 2021.
For the period immediately prior to BUS 384 entering the intersection of
Bindubi and Redfern Streets (in between Cook and Aranda)
on 5 February 2021,
until BUS 384 exits the same intersection; and
If BUS 384 went through the above intersection on multiple occasions during 5
February 2021, a copy of the footage from BUS 384 immediately
prior to BUS 384
entering the above intersection until exits the same intersection around 2pm on
5 February 2021.
4. On 25 March 2021, the TCCS Information Officer decided not to disclose one
document which it considered was in the scope of the
application. In deciding to
refuse access, TCCS relied on Schedule 1, s 1.14(1)(i) of the FOI Act. While
access was formally refused,
TCCS permitted the applicant to view the
information in person and facilitated this.
5. On 22 April 2021, the applicant applied for Ombudsman review of
TCCS’ decision under s 73 of the FOI Act.
6. On 10 August 2021, I provided each party with my preliminary view, which
was that the decision should be set aside and substituted
for a decision that
TCCS does not hold information. I will address the reasons for my preliminary
view in the reasons I give in this
notice, because in this case my decision is
consistent with my preliminary view.
7. On 16 August 2021, TCCS wrote to me advising that it accepted the
preliminary view in my draft consideration.
8. The applicant did not make submissions in response to my draft
consideration.
Relevant law
9. Every person enjoys an enforceable right of access to government
information.
However, this right is
subject to provisions of the FOI Act which give grounds for refusing access to
information when it is not
in the public interest to disclose
10. Section 35(1)(b) applies when a respondent does not hold any information
within the scope of an access application.
11. When conducting a review, the Ombudsman may set aside and substitute the
decision made by the
respondent.
Contentions of the parties
12. TCCS decided that information fitting the description in the access
application would be contrary to the public interest information
under Schedule
1, s 1.14(1)(i) of the FOI Act.
13. The effect of this provision is to say that information that could
reasonably be expected to prejudice a system or procedure for
the protection of
people, property, or the environment is taken to be contrary to the public
interest information.
14. The applicant’s application for Ombudsman review contended
We were told the front facing CCTV capturing the critical moment of impact
was non-operational at the time of the incident. The missing
recording is
especially concerning given the accident could have resulted in a double
fatality or serious injury...
The reasoning of the decision-maker is flawed, and the current explanations
for the camera not being operational is not technically
credible. I doubt the
camera would spontaneously automatically resume operation immediately after a
serious accident while being
non-operational immediately prior to the
15. On 28 April 2021, TCCS was notified this review had commenced. On 5 May
2021, TCCS submitted that:
... the failure... in this instance, was not identified until after the
incident when the bus had returned to the depot and footage
was retrieved. While
the cause of the failure was unknown, I can confirm that the error can only be
corrected at a depot and not
by the driver on board. It appears that the error
was temporarily resolved on its own shortly after the incident. Despite recovery
attempts, no footage from the camera in issue was captured.
16. On 21 May 2021, two ACT Ombudsman staff inspected the footage recorded by
all of the bus’ cameras before, during and after
the period in question.
They observed that there was no recording made by the forward facing camera
while the bus was in the intersection
of Bindubi Street and Redfern Street.
17. On 24 May 2021, the case officer managing this review wrote to the
applicant advising that there was no information within the
scope of the access
application and that it was therefore unlikely that a review would lead to
information being disclosed.
18. The applicant corresponded with the case officer in writing and by
telephone on
28 May 2021. Essentially, the applicant maintains that I should
find that the camera was operational or, alternatively, that TCCS
should explain
why it was not.
19. On 6 June 2021, the applicant wrote to our Office again. On this
occasion, the applicant contended:
Based on our viewing of the footage, it is clear that the outward forward
facing camera was displaying images after the impact, and
it is also clear that
the same camera was not displaying images prior to impact. In light of this
inconsistent display of images
from the relevant camera, in my view, it would be
reasonable to interpret the word ‘immediately’ in my FOI request to
mean 5 minutes before, and 5 minutes after, impact.
Relevant considerations
20. Section 34(1) of the FOI Act requires:
An agency or Minister deciding an access application must take all reasonable
steps to identify all government information within
the scope of the
application.
21. The applicant’s contentions ask me to go beyond the remit of the
FOI Act. The assessment under the FOI Act is, firstly,
what information does the
agency hold, and secondly, is there any good reason why the information should
not be disclosed. I am not
tasked with forming a view on
should have been
it was not working except
where this is relevant for evidentiary purposes.
22. As I have noted, the evidence before me is the formal correspondence from
TCCS and the observations of ACT Ombudsman staff who
conducted an inspection of
the footage. I also had regard to the absence of any other contradictory
evidence. On the balance of probabilities,
I am satisfied that the fair
conclusion for me to draw is that the camera was not operational and did not
record any information
while the bus was in the intersection of Bindubi Street
and Redfern Street.
23. As for the applicant’s submission that the word
‘immediately’ was too narrowly construed by TCCS’ Information
Officer, I am not persuaded. To begin with the application is unambiguous about
where the scope ends because it says ‘until
BUS 384 exits’ the
intersection.
24. The word ‘immediately’ is defined in the Macquarie Dictionary
as ‘without lapse of time, or without delay; instantly;
at once’. I
consider that in this context the appropriate approach is to consider perhaps
ten or twenty seconds prior to entering
the intersection but not five minutes.
In any event, the technical failure means that there was no footage recorded in
the several
minutes prior to the bus entering the intersection.
25. The applicant may well believe that they meant five minutes, but the
meaning of the word as it shapes a respondent’s obligations
under the FOI
Act is a question of law and not fact. The applicant cannot retrospectively
amend the meaning of the application.
26. TCCS ought to have decided it did not hold any information within the
scope of the access application. By considering other footage
from different
cameras, and by allowing the applicant to view that footage, TCCS went beyond
the formal requirements of the FOI Act.
This reflects considerable effort on the
part of TCCS to promote the broader objects of the FOI Act and is commendable.
27. However, separately from that, the applicant applied for an Ombudsman
review and I am tasked with re-making the decision anew.
The appropriate
decision is that TCCS does not hold any information within the scope of the
application.
Symone Andersen
Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
Section 7 of the FOI
Section 35(1)(c) of the
Section 82(2)(c) of
the FOI Act.
RTF format (825 KB)
Signed PDF/A format