BF and Canberra Health Services [2021] ACTOFOI 4 (6 May 2021)
BF and Canberra Health Services
(6 May 2021)
Decision and reasons for decision of Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman,
Symone Andersen
Application Number
AFOI-RR/21/10006
Decision Reference
[2021] ACTOFOI 4
Canberra Health Services
Decision Date
Freedom of Information Act 2016
(ACT) – deciding access
– whether disclosure of information is contrary to the public interest
– allow or assist
inquiry into possible deficiencies in the administration
of an agency – an individual’s right to privacy – an
ability to obtain confidential information – the management
function of an agency or the conduct of industrial relations
am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman for the purposes of
Freedom of Information Act 2016
of the FOI Act, I
the decision of Canberra
Health Services (
) dated 1 February 2021.
Background of Ombudsman review
5 January 2021, the applicant applied for access to information described as the
‘2018 ACT Physicians network’s Clinical
Examination
identified one document fitting this description and decided to give partial
access to the information it contained on 1 February
deciding to give partial access, CHS relied on s 17 of the FOI Act as well as
Schedule 2, ss 2.2(a)(ii), (vii), (xv) and (xvii).
That is, CHS decided
some of the information was contrary to the public interest to disclose because,
variously, it could reasonably
be expected to prejudice, an individual’s
right to privacy under the
Human Rights Act 2004
Human Rights
); CHS’ ability to obtain confidential information; CHS’
management function and conduct of industrial relations; and
the effectiveness
of teaching or auditing procedures.
4 February 2021, the applicant applied for an Ombudsman review of CHS’
decision under s 74 of the FOI Act.
provided the parties with my preliminary views in a draft consideration on 1
April 2021. I asked that any further submissions the
parties wished to make
be submitted to me by 14 April 2021.
responded to my draft consideration on 13 April 2021. I address CHS’
submissions in this notice along with the other contentions
of the parties.
reviewing the submissions CHS made in response to my draft consideration, I
to respond. I took this step
because I was persuaded by CHS’ submissions about the names of persons who
delivered training,
which appear in questions 12 and 14. The applicant did not
respond within four working days either to lodge submissions or to request
time to lodge submissions. Accordingly, I proceeded to make my final decision.
Information at issue
information at issue in this review is the information that CHS redacted from
the document it provided to the applicant.
issue to be decided by me is whether the information at issue is contrary to the
public interest information.
deciding this matter, I have had regard to:
applicant’s original access application and their application for
Ombudsman review
decision letter
letter to the Ombudsman in response to the review application
submissions in response to my draft consideration
the FOI Act, in
particular Schedule 2, ss 2.2(a)(xii) and (xv)
FOI Act gives every person an enforceable right of access to government
information, subject to any provisions of the Act providing
a basis on which
access can be refused.
to the public interest information is defined in s 16 of the FOI Act
information—
(a) that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
schedule 1; or
(b) the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
interest under the test set out in section 17
FOI Act permits refusal of access to information where the information sought is
contrary to the public interest
information.
public interest test provided for in s 17 sets out a process for balancing
public interest factors favouring disclosure and nondisclosure
respectively.
This balancing test must be used to determine whether disclosure would be
contrary to the public interest.
a record contains some information that is contrary to the public interest, as
well as information that is in the public interest
to disclose, the contrary to
the public interest information should be deleted, where
practicable.
onus of establishing information should not be disclosed rests with the party
seeking to prevent disclosure.
2 of the FOI Act sets out public interest factors to be balanced when conducting
the s 17 test to determine the public interest.
The contentions
of the parties
its decision notice, CHS said:
Partial redactions have been made to
the teaching contributors names contained on pages 13-14 and 16-17 and to
participants verbatim
comments on pages 22-23 as I believe this constituted
(sic) an unreasonable disclosure of individuals’ personal information.
balance, the factors favouring disclosure did not outweigh the factors favouring
disclosure as the substantive information has
been provided. The release of this
information would or could reasonably be expected to have a detrimental effect
for the agency’s
ability to conduct future reviews within the organisation
as it may reduce engagement and diminish the honest and truthful participation
of staff members completing these feedback requests and the volunteers providing
their educational resources.
the application for Ombudsman review, the applicant said:
decision maker has used no basis for invocation of Section 17... Some of the
information... which has been withheld does not identify
individuals, nor could
it lead to identification of individuals.
its response to my draft consideration, CHS said:
CHS routinely
discloses the names of ACT Government staff engaged in the business of
government under the FOI Act and agrees this
promotes transparency and
accountability. On this occasion, CHS outlined that one of the factors that
weighed heavily in its decision
not to release the identity of volunteer staff
specialists who deliver training, is specific to CHS duty of care and protection
personal information towards its employees.
address these contentions in my reasons below.
Considerations
Information taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
party to this Ombudsman review suggested the information sought contains
information that is taken to be contrary to the public
interest to disclose
under Schedule 1 of the FOI Act. Therefore, for the information at issue to be
contrary to the public interest
information disclosure, it must, on balance, be
contrary to the public interest under the test set out in s 17 of the FOI
Public interest test
determine whether disclosure is contrary to the public interest, the FOI Act
prescribes the following five
identify any
factor favouring disclosure that applies in relation to the information
(a relevant factor favouring disclosure), including
any factor mentioned in
schedule 2, section 2.1
identify any
factor favouring nondisclosure that applies in relation to the information
(a relevant factor favouring nondisclosure),
including any factor mentioned
in schedule 2, section 2.1
balance any
relevant factor or factors favouring disclosure against any relevant factor or
factors favouring nondisclosure
decide whether,
on balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public
balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public interest,
allow access to the information
do not consider any irrelevant factors I am prohibited from considering arise in
this review.
Factors favouring disclosure
decided that three public interest factors favouring disclosure were relevant.
These were Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(i): promote open
discussion of public affairs
and enhance the government’s accountability, Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(ii):
contribute to positive
and informed debate on important issues or matters of
public interest and Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(iv): ensure effective oversight of
expenditure of public funds.
decision letter did not expand on how these factors were relevant. I disagree
with the view that they are relevant. I do
not think there is sufficient
evidence on which to form a view that the survey is of any real interest to the
public such that it
is a matter of public discussion or debate. The information
at issue is not financial information so I do not agree that disclosing
assist oversight of public monies.
Allow or assist inquiry into
possible deficiencies in the administration of an agency
reasonable expectation that disclosure could allow or assist inquiry into
possible deficiencies in government administration is
a factor favouring
disclosure under the FOI Act.
general, the results of a survey conducted to ascertain whether government
administration has operated effectively could reasonably
be expected to promote
this public interest factor. The transparency which enables members of the
public to access information increases
the scrutiny on which public confidence
relies. The wording in the FOI Act uses the verb ‘inquiry’ rather
than ‘exposure’
to emphasise that it is the opportunity to
scrutinise in case there may be deficiencies that is in the public
a review where the information at issue revealed serious deficiency, I may be
inclined to afford this factor more weight. In this
case, the opportunity to
inquire is only generally relevant. Accordingly, I have afforded a moderate
amount of weight to this factor.
Pro-disclosure bias
Additionally,
the FOI Act has an express pro-disclosure bias which reflects the importance of
access to government information for
the proper working of representative
This is promoted in the
objects of the FOI Act.
these reasons, my preliminary view is the information at issue could reasonably
be expected to promote the objects of the FOI
Act and two public interest
Factors favouring nondisclosure
factors favouring non-disclosure are relevant to the information at issue.
An individual’s right to privacy
reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice an individual’s
right to privacy under the
Human Rights
weighs against disclosure
under the FOI Act.
Human Rights Act
Everyone has the
(a) not to have his or her privacy, family, home or correspondence interfered
with unlawfully or arbitrarily; and
(b) not to have his or her reputation unlawfully attacked.
are two types of information in this review which CHS decided could prejudice
individual privacy. The first category is the
names of staff who deliver
training. The second category is commentary and feedback provided by respondents
to the survey.
preliminary view, which I set out in my draft consideration, was that the names
of the volunteer staff specialists who deliver
training is not information that
could reasonably be expected to prejudice the right to privacy under
Human Rights Act
response to my draft consideration, CHS submitted that:
identity of staff specialists providing training modules does not provide better
oversight of the success of students.
submission does not address the issue of whether a right to privacy under
Human Rights Act
is applicable in the present matter. The fact that a
person delivers training to students is not a secret or private matter. Any
number of people might be aware that a person delivers training.
relation to the second category of information, I accept that the right to
Human Rights Act
could reasonably be expected to
suffer prejudice from the disclosure of the information. A written response to a
confidential survey
is private correspondence and therefore within the scope of
the right to privacy protected by
The fundamental difference is that
a person’s comments in an anonymous survey are private and reasonably
likely to remain so.
A person can control the privacy of their feedback by
opting not to disclose to any other person what they said. A person cannot
however control other people publishing the fact that they deliver training,
unless that training is subject to formal secrecy of
a special nature that is
lacking here.
An agency’s ability to obtain confidential
information
reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice an agency’s ability
to obtain confidential information weighs against
disclosure under the FOI
public interest factor reflects the fact that an agency may find it difficult to
obtain information if people are unwilling to
provide it other than
confidentially. Where a person is free to choose whether or not to provide
confidential information, the FOI
Act attempts to safeguard the information they
share so that a person is less likely to be impeded from sharing by concern that
disclosure will be published. As it is a Schedule 2 factor it must be
balanced against other public interest factors when considering
interest test.
information at issue includes responses to a survey in which participation was
optional. Respondents were told that their comments
would be anonymous. It is
reasonable to expect that a person considering whether to opt in and what to say
rely significantly on
the understanding that their comments are confidential.
CHS’ decision letter states this and I concur with it. I consider the
participants’ survey responses could reasonably be expected to prejudice
CHS’ ability to obtain confidential information
to a significant degree.
The management function of an agency or the conduct of
industrial relations
reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice the management function
or industrial relations of an agency weighs against
disclosure under the FOI
my draft consideration, I commented that I was not satisfied CHS has discharged
the onus it bears under s 72 of the FOI Act. As
the party seeking to prevent
disclosure, CHS must establish that it is contrary to the public interest
information.
response to my draft consideration, CHS submitted:
It is foreseeable
that the possibility of perceived reputational damage, reliant on the successful
pass rates of students, would provide
a significant impediment to recruiting
future volunteers
was not entirely clear to me whether CHS’ response to my draft
consideration submitted that this factor weighed against disclosure
of the names
of those delivering training or whether it was referring to the individual
have been more clearly directed
towards relevant public interest factors in the FOI Act.
submission may be interpreted as invoking the public interest factor which has
regard to the management function of an
agency or the conduct of industrial
relations. In this respect, I accept the information at issue could reasonably
be expected to
cause prejudice if disclosed. The identities of persons who
delivered particular training may be information that circulates publicly,
accept that releasing a document placing individual names adjacent to survey
results which are apparently meant to reflect
their performance could prejudice
the management function or industrial relations of CHS.
effectiveness of testing or auditing procedures
reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice the effectiveness of
testing or auditing procedures weighs against disclosure
under the FOI
decision letter stated that this factor was weighed against disclosure. In my
draft consideration, I commented that I was
not satisfied CHS has discharged the
onus it bears under s 72 of the FOI Act. CHS did not direct any of its
submissions in response
to my draft consideration to this factor. I maintain the
view I expressed in my draft consideration that the onus imposed by s 72
been discharged.
Balancing the factors
FOI Act requires me to balance the factors favouring disclosure against that
favouring non-disclosure.
have decided that one factor favours disclosure and three factors favour
non-disclosure. I am not satisfied that any weight should
be given to the
effectiveness of testing or auditing procedures because CHS did not establish
this should be a basis for refusal
Written responses
in questions 17 and 18
my view, the information at issue could reasonably be expected to promote
inquiry into possible deficiencies in the administration
of CHS. My decision is
to afford this factor a medium amount of weight.
the other hand, I am satisfied disclosing this information could prejudice
CHS’ ability to obtain confidential information
significantly and afford
this factor favouring nondisclosure considerable weight. I also accept that
disclosing this information
could reasonably be expected to prejudice the right
to privacy enjoyed by the individual authors under
Human Rights
balance, my decision is that the written responses in questions 17 and 18 are
contrary to the public interest information and should
not be disclosed to the
Trainer names in questions 12 and 14
the fields of study are identified in questions 12 and 14, I accept the names of
individual trainers do not promote the inquiry
into possible deficiencies in
CHS’ training to a considerable degree. I afford the pro-disclosure factor
a medium amount of
weight in relation to this information because there may be a
connection between the effectiveness of training and the person delivering
but there may be other deficiencies in training which are broader than the
individual delivering it.
am satisfied that disclosure of the names of the CHS staff adjacent to what may
be interpreted (rightly or wrongly) as appraisals
of their performance as
trainers could reasonably be expected to prejudice CHS’ management
function and conduct of industrial
relations. This factor weighs heavily against
disclosure, although the evidence from CHS could have been clearer on this
do not accept that the status of these individuals as trainers is
private and do not afford any weight to the protection of individual
Human Rights Act
. The decisive weight is in preventing
prejudice to the management function and conduct of industrial relations by CHS.
My decision
is that the names redacted from questions 12 and 14 are contrary to
the public interest information.
Pro-disclosure bias
FOI Act has a pro-disclosure bias. The public interest test and weighing of
factors is approached as though the scales are ‘laden
in favour of
disclosure’.
this review, however, I am satisfied that on balance, the public interest is
weighed persuasively against disclosure.
I agree with CHS’ decision to give partial access to the information, I
have come to this conclusion based on different
these reasons, my decision is to
the decision of CHS under s
82(2)(a) of the FOI Act, albeit for different reasons I have given above.
information at issue is contrary to the public interest information to which the
applicant should be refused access.
Symone Andersen
Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
Section 7 of the FOI
Section 35(1)(c) of the
Section 50 of the FOI
Section 72 of the FOI
Section 17(1) of the FOI
Section 17(2) of the FOI
Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(v)
of the FOI Act.
Section 17 of
the FOI Act.
Section 6(b) of
the FOI Act.
Rights Act 2004
Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(ii) of the FOI
Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(xii) of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(xv) of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(xvii)
of the FOI Act.
Explanatory
Statement, Freedom of Information Bill 2016
RTF format (866 KB)
Signed PDF/A format