Moon, McInnes, Walker& Dale v Murray [2008] ACTRTT 9 (24 June 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: MOON, MCINNES, WALKER & DALE V MURRAY
[2008] ACTRTT 9
Catchwords:
Residential Tenancy Agreement as a partly oral, partly
written agreement.
Failure by lessor to comply with terms of agreement.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT
269 of 2008
RE: Tristan MOON, Robert MCINNES, Jason WALKER & Andrew DALE
(Applicant/Tenant)
Robert & Michelle MURRAY
(Respondent/Lessor)
J. Lennard, Member
the lessors are to pay the tenants the sum of
compensation.
the abovementioned amount is to be paid by the
of June, 2008.
..................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT
269 of 2008
RE: Tristan MOON, Robert MCINNES, Jason WALKER & Andrew DALE
(Applicant/Tenant)
Robert & Michelle MURRAY
(Respondent/Lessor)
REASONS FOR DECISION
24 June 2008 J. Lennard, Member
parties entered in to a Residential Tenancy Agreement in relation to the
premises at 22 Mary Gillespie Avenue, Gungahlin ACT for
a fixed term of 24
months from 12 January 2007.
James Folk was the builder of the premises and other houses in the same street.
He acted as the lessors’ agent and conducted
the pre-contractual
negotiations with the tenants.
the time the tenants viewed the premises, they were newly constructed and some
landscaping work was being undertaken. HiClass Gardening
has completed the
landscaping at other premises, built and managed by Mr Folk, in the same
tenants allege that those pre-contractual negotiations included a promise that
the landscaping of the gardens in the premises
would be completed in the very
near future. The tenants gave evidence that the landscaping had not been
completed, despite complaints
to, and promises from, the lessor through Mr Folk
that the landscaping would be completed as soon as possible. At the date of the
hearing (28 May 2008) it was not contested by either party that there had been a
promise to complete the landscaping and that it
had not yet been completed.
content of the representation made in relation to the landscaping and the issue
of whether it had become a term of the contract
was the issue before the
Folk gave evidence that he had indicated to the tenants prior to the entering
into of the tenancy agreement that the landscaping
would be completed as soon as
possible and that he told the tenants that he was obtaining quotes from HiClass
Gardening. Mr Folk
told the Tribunal that he had indicated to the tenants at the
time of entering into the agreement that he was ‘sorting out’
issue of the landscaping.
Tribunal heard evidence form the tenants, Mr Folk that the tenants had raised
the issue of the failure to complete the landscaping
on a number of occasions
since the commencement of the tenancy. The tenants explained that they had not
made application to the Tribunal
prior to this because they were continually
promised that the work would be completed ‘soon’. The Tribunal also
written evidence that the lessor and Mr Folk had been endeavouring to
arrange the completion of the landscaping but that HiClass
had proved extremely
unreliable. In a letter dated 20 February 2008 Mr Folk stated that ‘ We
are profoundly sorry that our
tenants are upset with us as landlords, it was
never our intention to have the landscaping take so long to start, but this was
due to lack of trying on our behalf’.
hearing the tenants and Mr Lester, solicitor for the lessor, and taking into
account the evidence of the tenants and Mr Folk
the Tribunal concludes:
the representation as to the landscaping being completed was a term of the
contract. That is that the agreement consisted of
the express written terms
contained in the Standard Residential Tenancy terms and the express oral promise
that the landscaping would
be completed as soon as possible. It matters not
whether the agreement is characterised as partly oral and partly written, or, as
two contracts: one in writing and the other an oral contract collateral to the
main contract.
this representation was a key factor in inducing the tenants to enter the
agreement. This was a promissory statement, intended
to be binding and operative
in inducing the tenants to contract.
to the content and meaning to be given to the representation the tenants say
they understood the promise to be that the landscaping
would be completed as
soon as possible, the lessor agrees with the content but argues that they have
not been able to complete the
landscaping prior to this and that therefore they
are completing the work ‘as soon as possible’. The term must be
interpreted
in the context of the contract as a whole and in all the relevant
circumstances.
fact is the lessor endeavoured to have the landscaping done on several occasions
throughout the tenancy but has not been successful
in keeping HiClass to its
promises. The meaning pressed by the lessor would make the promise empty and
worthless. The fixed term
agreement was for 24 months. The Tribunal does not
accept that a promise to do something ‘as soon as possible’ is
by completing that work more than 75% of the way through the contract
period. The requirement is that the promise be fulfilled within
a reasonable
time. This promise has not been fulfilled within a reasonable time, and probably
would not have fulfilled at all but
for the application to the Residential
Tenancies Tribunal.
Residential Tenancies Tribunal finds that the lessor has breached the agreement
by failing to complete the landscaping in a manner
that complies with their
tenants gave evidence that as a result of this breach they suffered the
following damage:
reduction in use of the premises. There was no use to be made of a bare, dry and
dusty exterior yard. The tenants were denied
the use of the yard for
entertainment, relaxation and privacy.
dust and dirt from the yard increased the need for and frequency of cleaning of
the interior of the premises.
reduction in security and privacy within the premises.
significant reduction in quiet enjoyment. A garden is an integral part of
premises consisting of a house and a yard, the enjoyment,
relaxation and well
being that comes from having a garden has been lost.
into account the damages suffered, the length of time since the promise was
made, and the rent paid for the premises the Residential
Tenancies Tribunal
assesses the damages to be $4,750.
lessors have informed the Tribunal that work on the garden will be completed by
the end of June and that arrangement are in place
to ensure this. Therefore the
Tribunal makes no order for specific performance of the promise. Section 104(d)
provides that the Tribunal
may make an order for compensation for any loss
caused by a breach of the tenancy agreement. The Residential Tenancies Tribunal
orders that an amount of $4,750.00 be paid by way of compensation by the
lessors to the tenants, such payment to be made prior to
11 June 2008.
RTF format (30.9 KB)
Signed PDF/A format