Road Transport Authority v Candy [2025] ACTMC 5 (24 February 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Road Transport Authority v Candy
[2025] ACTMC 5
Hearing Dates:
Decision Date:
Magistrate Temby
The Defendant is not guilty of the offence charged
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
exceed speed limit – validity, effect and admissibility of evidentiary
certificate issued pursuant to
Road Transport (Safety and Traffic
Management) Act 1999
Legislation Cited:
Road Transport (Road Rules) Regulation 2017, s 13, 20
Road Transport (Safety and Traffic Management) Act 1999
Road Transport (General) Act 1999
Road Transport (Safety and Traffic Management) Regulation 2017
Legislation Act 200,1 s 40,104, 242
Public Sector Management Act 1999, s 21, 21(5), 21(7)
Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
(2), Schedule 4
Cases Cited:
[2016] NSWCCA 185
Thomas v The Queen
[1960] HCA 2
(1960) 102 CLR 584
Gibbons v Perkins
[2021] ACTSC 254
Pappas v Mirenda
[2021] ACTSC 329
Hijazi v Orr
(1997) 26 MVR 26
Clark v Bluett
[2016] ACTSC 312
Burridge v Chief Magistrate of the Magistrates Court of the Australian
Capital Territory (No 2)
[2018] ACTCA 43
Lewis v Chief Executive Department of Justice and Community Safety &
[2013] ACTSC 198
Text Cited:
Administrative Arrangements 2016 (No 3),
Schedule 2,
Public Sector Management (Head of Access Canberra Functions) Declaration
Road Transport Legislation (Access Canberra) Delegation 2017 (No 1)
Administrative Arrangements 2016 (No 3),
Schedule 2, Part 2.4
Road Transport (Safety and Traffic Management) Traffic Offence Detection
Device Approval 2023 (No 1)
Constitution
of the Australian Capital Territory
(Federation
Press, 2021), Mossop J
Breeze Mojel (Informant)
Chantelle Candy (Defendant)
Representation:
Director of Public Prosecutions
(Defendant self-represented)
File Numbers:
CC 40715/ 2024
31 December 2023, the Defendant and her partner drove their cars along
Ginninderra Drive, through the intersection with Aikman
Drive in Belconnen
the Intersection
). Ginninderra Drive is a road in the Australian Capital
Territory. The speed limit on Ginninderra Drive through the Intersection
(and remains) 80 km per hour.
speed measurement device recorded the speed of the Defendant’s car as it
drove through the Intersection as being 98 km per
hour. As a result, the
Defendant was issued with a traffic infringement notice. The Defendant disputed
liability and she was subsequently
charged with exceeding the speed limit,
contrary to s 20 of the
Road Transport (Road Rules) Regulation 2017
Road Rules Regulation
What is in issue?
The parties’ positions
Defendant does not dispute that she was the driver of a motor vehicle on a road.
Accordingly, the first two elements of the offence
with which she is charged are
not in issue. The Defendant disputes the allegation that she exceeded the speed
limit that applied
to Ginninderra Drive at the Intersection.
Defendant says that, despite the recording of the speed measurement device, she
was in fact travelling at or below 80 km per hour.
She gave evidence to that
effect, noting that she is very conscious of the speed at which she drives and
knew that double demerits
were applicable to driving offences at the relevant
Defendant and her partner also gave evidence that the Defendant was driving
behind her partner at the time, maintaining a constant
distance behind him. The
Defendant’s partner said that he did not receive a traffic infringement
notice, and was not prosecuted,
for speeding through the Intersection on 31
December 2023.
Prosecution submits that the Court would have difficulty accepting that the
Defendant or her partner could know, after the event,
how fast they were driving
at the relevant time. More fundamentally, the Prosecution says that the Court
should accept a certificate
issued by the Informant under
Transport (Safety and Traffic Management) Act 1999
Safety & Traffic
Management Act
the s 25 Certificate
as conclusive proof of
the speed at which the Defendant was travelling.
Defendant submits that the s 25 Certificate is invalid and should not be
admitted into evidence. Specifically, the Defendant submits
(a) the relevant speed measurement device was not an approved traffic offence
(b) the testing of the device did not comply with the Safety & Traffic
Management Act; and
(c) the Informant did not have authority to issue a certificate under s 25 of
the Safety & Traffic Management Act (
a s 25 certificate
admissibility and effect of the s 25 Certificate are thus key issues in these
proceedings.
Decision making principles
are a number of decision-making principles that are relevant to the
determination of criminal proceedings.
Onus and standard of
Prosecution of course bears the onus of proving the guilt of the Defendant. The
Defendant does not have to prove that she did
not commit the offence with which
she is charged. The standard of proof the Prosecution must meet is proof beyond
reasonable doubt
and the Defendant cannot be found guilty unless the evidence
which I accept satisfies me beyond reasonable doubt of her guilt. If
satisfied that there may be an explanation consistent with the innocence of the
Defendant, or I am unsure of where the truth
lies, then I must find that the
charge has not been proved to the standard of proof required by law.
this respect, I note that proof of a matter beyond reasonable doubt requires the
Prosecution to exclude all reasonable hypotheses
or any reasonable possibility
inconsistent with the Prosecution case or with the Defendant’s innocence.
That is because a reasonable
doubt will necessarily arise where any hypothesis
or possibility consistent with innocence is reasonably open on the
Reliability of
must determine whether each of the witnesses is a reliable witness. That is,
whether I can rely on the evidence that the witness
gives and so find the facts
witness’s evidence
and reject part of that evidence or accept or reject it
all. The law does not require me to give all evidence the same
Determination of facts in accordance with the
must determine the facts in accordance with the evidence, considering it
logically and rationally, without acting capriciously or
irrationally. I must
not let emotion enter into the decision-making process. I must bring an open and
unbiased mind to the evidence
but I may use my common sense and experience in
assessing it. Both the Prosecution and the Defendant are entitled to my verdict
of partiality, prejudice, favour or ill-will.
must, of course, deliver my decision according to the
Drawing of inferences
may draw reasonable inferences from the facts that I find are established. I
must consider any possible inference to ensure that
it is a justifiable
inference, and I must not draw an inference from the direct evidence unless it
is a rational inference in all
the circumstances. It is permissible for the
court to rely on an inference, of which the court is satisfied should be drawn
reasonable doubt, as proof of an element of an
Defendant’s evidence
Defendant gave evidence at the hearing. She was not required to do so. She could
have elected not to give evidence. She thereby
became a witness in the hearing
and I must approach her evidence in the same way that I approach the evidence of
any other witness.
Her evidence is no better or worse, because she is the
Defendant, than the evidence of any other witness in the hearing and must
considered in the same way as the evidence of other witnesses. However, by
giving evidence, the Defendant did not assume any onus
to prove anything at the
remind myself that a preference for the Prosecution’s evidence is not
enough. I must not find the Defendant guilty unless
I am satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt of the truth of that evidence. Similarly, even if the evidence
relied upon by the Defendant
is not positively believed, I must not find the
Defendant guilty if that evidence gives rise to a reasonable doubt about the
Defendant’s
(a) if I believe the Defendant’s evidence, or if I think it might be true,
I must find her not guilty;
(b) if I do not believe the account relied on by the Defendant, I should put it
to one side. The question remaining is, has the Prosecution,
on the basis of the
evidence that I do accept, proved the Defendant’s guilt beyond reasonable
the avoidance of doubt, I note that this direction does not require me to first
consider the Defendant’s evidence in isolation
and then, only if I reject
that evidence, to consider the Prosecution’s evidence. I am required to
consider the whole of the
evidence before making my
Assessment of credibility of witnesses’
noted earlier in these reasons, the Defendant and her partner both gave
evidence, the latter through the tender of an affidavit
of evidence. While the
Prosecution submitted that the Court would have difficulty accepting the
evidence of the Defendant’s
partner that he could recall how fast he was
driving at the relevant time, the Prosecution did not cross-examine the
Defendant’s
partner on that evidence, leaving it unchallenged.
reservations that I have in relation to the evidence of the Defendant and her
partner principally arise from contradictory information
that is contained in
the s 25 Certificate. However, for the reasons which are set out later in these
reasons, I have ruled that the
s 25 Certificate is inadmissible. As I have also
found, even if the s 25 Certificate had been admissible, I would have concluded
that the evidence of the Defendant and her partner might be true.
Ee Chiang Sim, a Senior Calibration Engineer with SGS Australia Pty Ltd
also gave evidence. Mr Sim tested the speed measurement device that captured
the speed of the Defendant’s car through the Intersection
on the relevant
the Defendant did cross-examine Mr Sim, she did not challenge the credibility of
any of Mr Sim’s evidence. There is no
reason to question the credibility
of Mr Sim’s evidence and I accept that it is reliable.
Summary of decision
the reasons which follow, I find the Defendant not guilty of the offence charged
because the Informant had no power to issue the
s 25 Certificate. It is
therefore inadmissible in the proceeding. Without the s 25 Certificate, there is
no evidence that the Defendant
sped through the Intersection on 31 December
if the s 25 Certificate was admissible, I would have found that it is possible
that the Defendant did not speed through the Intersection.
That is because it is
possible that the Defendant’s partner was not speeding when he drove
through the Intersection and the
uncontested evidence of both he and the
Defendant was that the Defendant was travelling at a constant distance behind
him (and, therefore,
at a consistent speed) through the
Intersection.
The road transport legislation certificates
tendered by the Prosecution
Prosecution sought to tender three certificates purportedly issued by the
Informant under the road transport legislation, namely:
(a) a certificate issued under
Road Transport (General) Act 1999
the General Act
), certifying that the Defendant was the registered
operator of the car which she drove through the Intersection;
(b) a certificate issued under s 56 of the General Act, setting out the
procedural history of the matter prior to proceedings being
commenced; and
(c) the s 25 Certificate.
Defendant objected to those certificates being admitted into evidence.
is not necessary to determine the Defendant’s objection in relation to the
certificates issued under ss 56 and 72 of the
General Act. The Defendant admits
that she was driving her car through the Intersection at the relevant time and
admits that she
disputed liability for the offence identified in the
infringement notice (which is not now relevant in any event, given that criminal
proceedings were commenced).
have considered the admissibility and effect of the s 25 Certificate below. As I
have noted earlier in these reasons, while the
Defendant admits that she drove
through the Intersection at the relevant time, and admits that the applicable
speed limit was 80
km per hour, she disputes the accuracy of the speed
measurement produced by the device.
The effect of a certificate
issued under s 25 of the Safety & Traffic Management Act
A s 25 certificate applies to a proceeding involving an alleged
contravention of s 20 of the Road Rules Regulation
25 of the Safety & Traffic Management Act provides that it applies to a
proceeding against a person for an offence against
that Act involving a vehicle.
While the alleged offence raised in these proceedings is an offence contrary to
s 20 of the Road Rules
Regulation, it was accepted in
Pappas v Mirenda
[2021] ACTSC 329
that a s 25 certificate provided evidence of the matters
stated in the certificate for the purposes of proceedings involving an alleged
contravention of s 20 of the Road Rules Regulation.
Legislation Act 2001
Legislation
states that a reference that is made in legislation to a law
includes a reference to the statutory instruments made or in force under
law. Relevantly, the Road Rules Regulation was made under s 33 of the Safety
& Traffic Management Act. Accordingly, the reference
in s 25 of the Safety
& Traffic Management Act to an offence against that Act includes offences
against the Road Rules Regulation
and s 25 of the Safety & Traffic
Management Act therefore applies to these proceedings.
effect of a s 25 certificate
effect of s 25 of the Safety & Traffic Management Act, relevantly for
present purposes, is that a certificate that appears
to be signed by the Road
Transport Authority (
) is evidence of the following matters in
relation to a traffic offence detection device:
(a) that a stated image, or series of images, is an accurate copy of an image,
or series of images, taken by the device; and
(b) a measurement of speed obtained by the use of the device (if the device is a
speed measuring device).
Subsections
25(4) and (5) of the Safety & Traffic Management Act state that an image (or
series of images) certified in a certificate
is evidence of everything indicated
on, or shown by, the image, including that:
(a) the vehicle shown in the image was being driven when and where the image was
taken by the device;
(b) the speed limit indicated applied to the driver of the vehicle for the
length of road where the driver was driving at the relevant
time and place;
(c) the driver was driving at the indicated speed at the relevant time and
the Prosecution submitted that the matters set out in the s 25 Certificate are
conclusive evidence of the matters set out in
it, I do not accept that
submission.
25 of the Safety & Traffic Management Act provides that a certificate issued
under that section is ‘evidence’
of the matters contained in it, not
proof. Further, subsection 25(9) states that the section ‘
limit evidence that can be presented apart from this section
wording may be contrasted with, for example, ss 56 and 72 of the General Act
(under which the other certificates upon which the
Prosecution relied were
issued), which provide that a court ‘
must accept a certificate given
[each of those sections]
as proof of the matters stated in it if
there is no evidence to the contrary
Higgins J said in
Hijazi v Orr
(1997) 26 MVR 266
, at 271, commenting in
relation to the effect of a certificate of a similar kind that could be issued
Motor Traffic Act 1936
To say that the statement
in the certificate is “evidence” means that it is prima facie
evidence of the fact stated. That
is, it is sufficient evidence for a court to
find that fact proved. But the court is not obliged so to find, even in the
of acceptable evidence of some specific malfunction, see
Pohla-Murray
(1983) 51 ACTR 3
The court must still be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt on all the evidence that the offence has been proved. Of
course, in the
absence of some relevant contradictory evidence, it would be
unlikely that a court would not be so satisfied. It depends on the nature
quality of the evidence adduced to contradict the speed reading, while
recognising that the prosecution bears the onus of proving
the offence beyond
reasonable doubt ...
It should be observed that evidence given by certificate has no inherent
weight. To raise a doubt, it is not necessary for a defendant
to prove some
specific failure of the instrument or its operation ...
therefore proceed on the basis that the evidence that the
Certificate
provides for is prima facie evidence only, and is to be weighed against the
other evidence that was received at the hearing,
rather than being conclusive
proof of the matters set out in the certificate.
Certificate
images attached to the
Certificate relevantly indicate that:
(a) the images were taken at 1.27pm on 31 December 2023;
(b) they were taken of the Intersection;
(c) they captured a car driving at 98 km per hour through the Intersection;
(d) the speed limit at the Intersection was 80 km per hour.
noted earlier in these reasons, the Defendant admits that the car that is
captured in the images is her car and that she was driving
Consistently
with the images attached to the certificate, the
Certificate itself states
(amongst other things) that:
(a) the speed limit at the Intersection was 80 km per hour; and
(b) the Defendant’s car was captured to be travelling through the
Intersection at 98 km per hour.
Accordingly,
Certificate, if admissible, is prima facie evidence that the Defendant
drove through the Intersection at 98 km per hour at 1.27pm
on 31 December 2023,
being 18 km per hour over the applicable speed limit.
Certificate also identified the relevant speed measurement device, noting
that it was an approved device which had been tested in
accordance with the
Road Transport (Safety and Traffic Management) Regulation 2017
& Traffic Management Regulation
) and found to meet the
manufacturer’s specifications, with all readings for speeds of 100 km per
hour and under being accurate
within a tolerance of 2 km per
Admissibility of the s 25 Certificate
Defendant submits that the Informant did not have authority to issue a s 25
certificate and it is therefore inadmissible in the
proceeding.
the Defendant identifies, and as I have noted earlier in these reasons, for a s
25 certificate to have the evidentiary effect provided
for by s 25, it must be
signed (or at least appear to be signed) by the RTA (or a police officer,
although that alternative is not
relevant here). The s 25 Certificate was signed
by the Informant, purportedly as a delegate of the RTA.
RTA’s power to issue a s 25 certificate could be exercised by
RTA is created by s 16 of the General Act. Subsections 16(2) and (3) state
(2) The director-general is the road transport
(3) For this section, in relation to the exercise of a function
under a provision of the road transport legislation [which includes
& Traffic Management Act], the
director-general
the director-general of the administrative unit responsible for the
17(1) of the General Act provides (and has at all relevant times provided) that
the RTA can delegate the authority’s
functions under the road transport
legislation to the chief police officer, a public employee or a person
prescribed by regulation.
However, the directors-general for the relevant
administrative units (which have changed over time) have not exercised this
in relation to s 25 of the Safety & Traffic Management Act.
Public Sector Management Act 1999
(and provided) an alternative way in which the RTA’s power to issue a s 25
certificate could be exercised by someone
else. This power was relied on by the
Chief Minister when he made the
Public Sector Management (Head of Access
Canberra Functions) Declaration 2016
Chief Minister’s
Declaration
s 21 of the PSM Act, as in force on 20 September 2016, the Chief Minister could
declare that a function given to a director-general
under a territory law
dealing with a relevant matter could be exercised by the head of Access Canberra
(a declared function).
written submissions filed by the Prosecution, the Prosecution submitted that s
21 of the PSM Act gave the power of declaration
to the ‘responsible
Minister’, however that is how s 21 of the current version of the Act is
worded. The relevant version
of the Act is the version in force at the time the
power was exercised by the Chief Minister when he made the Chief
Declaration, being 20 September 2016. Having said that, there
is no material difference between the two versions as the ‘responsible
Minister’ for the purposes of the current version of the legislation is
the Chief Minister, as the Minister responsible for
Access Canberra.
relevant version was published on 1 September 2016 and was in force between 1
September 2016 and 8 March 2017. It stated:
(1) The Chief Minister may declare that a function given to a
director‑general under a territory law dealing with a relevant
be exercised by the head of Access Canberra (a
declared function
includes authority, duty and power (see
Legislation Act
, dict, pt 1).
A provision of a law that gives an entity (including a person)
a function also gives the entity powers necessary and convenient to
exercise the
function (see
Legislation Act
, s 196 and dict, pt 1, def
(2) A declaration is a notifiable instrument.
A notifiable instrument must be notified under the
Legislation
(3) The head of Access Canberra may exercise a declared function.
(4) The head of Access Canberra may delegate a declared function to a public
servant or another person.
For the making of delegations and the exercise of delegated
functions, see the
Legislation Act
(5) However, the head of Access Canberra may only delegate a declared
function to the extent permitted by other territory laws.
Example—extent permitted
A declaration is made in relation to a function given to the director-general
under the XYZ Act. That Act states that the director‑general
delegate the function to an employee. The head of Access Canberra may also only
delegate the function to an employee.
An example is part of the Act, is not exhaustive and may extend,
but does not limit, the meaning of the provision in which it appears
Legislation
, s 126 and s 132).
(6) Nothing in this section limits the exercise of a declared function by
the director-general given the function.
(7) Anything done in the exercise of a declared function is not invalid only
because of a defect or irregularity in, or in relation
to, a declaration.
(8) In this section:
Access Canberra
means the business unit in the administrative
unit administered by the Chief Minister known as Access Canberra.
, of Access Canberra, means the person occupying the
position (however described) of head of Access Canberra.
relevant matter
means a matter mentioned in an administrative
arrangement—
(a) responsibility for which is allocated to the Chief Minister; and
(b) relating to Access Canberra.
may be seen, s 21(4) permitted the head of Access Canberra to delegate a
declared function to a public servant or another person.
While the power of
sub-delegation was only exercisable to the extent permitted by other territory
laws (s 21(5)), that does not present
an issue in the present case, given that
ss 17(2) and (3) of the General Act also permitted delegation and sub-delegation
to a public
employee (that is, a public servant).
instruments of declaration and delegation
Chief Minister’s Declaration relevantly
states that a function
provided for in s 25 of the Safety & Traffic Management Act may be exercised
by the head of Access Canberra.
On 8 August 2017, the
Road Transport
Legislation (Access Canberra) Delegation 2017 (No 1)
Access Canberra
was made by the Acting Deputy Director-General of Access
Canberra, David Snowden, relying on the authority given by the Chief
Declaration. At that time, the Acting Deputy Director-General
of Access Canberra (Mr Snowden) was the head of Access Canberra (see
the Instrument). Relevantly, the Access Canberra Delegation delegated the
function provided for in s 25 of the Safety &
Traffic Management Act to
Position Number 13861, being the Informant’s position number.
note that the Defendant raises an issue that particular instruments of
delegation that she found identified Position Number 13861
as being referrable
to the position description ‘Assistant Managers Infringements’. This
appears to be the case in relation
to the Access Canberra Delegation.
this, I note that the functions set out in the Access Canberra Delegation were
delegated ‘
to the person occupying or performing the duties of the
position specified in column 3 of schedule 1
’. Column 3 of schedule 1
identifies the relevant position number, not the position description.
position description is contained in column 4, the relevance of which is not
explained by the Instrument. Column 4 thus appears
to contain irrelevant
information which does not affect the validity of the delegation of power to the
persons occupying the position
numbers identified in column 3 from time to
the Informant occupied Position Number 13861 at the time of issuing the s 25
Certificate, she had authority to do so if the Access
Canberra Delegation was
Chief Minister’s Declaration
and the Access Canberra Delegation
are both contained in the electronic ACT Legislation Register and are
described as ‘Authorised by the ACT Parliamentary Counsel’.
satisfied that they are the authorised versions of those instruments.
Access Canberra Delegation
remains current. While the Chief
Minister’s Declaration
was repealed and replaced by the
Sector Management (Head of Access Canberra Functions) Declaration 2017 (No
, that Instrument was made on 29 August 2017, which was after the Access
Canberra Delegation
was made. The
Public Sector Management (Head of
Access Canberra Functions) Declaration 2017 (No 1)
had no effect in relation
to decisions made in reliance on the Chief Minister’s
Declaration.
Instruments are relevantly invalid
noted above, the power to issue a certificate is exercisable by the RTA, which
is statutorily defined to be the director-general
of the administrative unit
responsible for s 25 of the Safety & Traffic Management Act. I have assumed
that it does not matter,
for the purposes of s 21 of the PSM Act, that the
relevant director-general’s power to exercise the function in s 25 of the
Safety & Traffic Management Act thus arises by virtue of the fact that they
are the RTA for that purpose, rather than being directly
given to the
director-general.
is not necessary to decide this issue as I have found that, to the extent that
the Chief Minister’s Declaration purported
to declare that the function in
s 25 of the Safety & Traffic Management Act could be exercised by the head
of Access Canberra,
it is invalid regardless.
s 21 of the PSM Act, the Chief Minister could declare that a function given to a
director-general under a law dealing with a
‘relevant matter’ be
exercisable by the head of Access Canberra. A ‘relevant matter’ was
defined to mean
a matter mentioned in an administrative arrangement,
responsibility for which was allocated to the Chief Minister and relating to
Access Canberra.
for present purposes that the issuing of a s 25 certificate relates to Access
Canberra, I am nevertheless not satisfied that
that was a matter for which the
Chief Minister was responsible. Under Schedule 2, Part 2.4 of the
Administrative Arrangements 2016 (No 3)
, the Minister for Road Safety was
responsible for s 25 of the Safety & Traffic Management Act, not the Chief
Accordingly,
the Chief Minister did not have the power to declare that the issuing of a s 25
certificate was a function that could
be exercised by the head of Access
Canberra. To the extent that the Chief Minister’s Declaration
purported to do so it was invalid. That, in turn, means that the purported
delegation of authority from the head of Access Canberra
to the position numbers
identified in the Access Canberra Delegation (including to the Informant’s
position number) is also
Prosecution’s
submissions against invalidity
Submission that it does not matter that the Minister for Road Safety was
responsible for the Safety & Traffic Management Act
Prosecution submitted (at paragraph 23 of the Prosecution’s written
submissions) that:
... it is immaterial that the Minister for Road
Safety was the minister with responsibility for the [Safety & Traffic
Act] under the relevant Administrative Arrangement. The Chief
Minister was the responsible Minister for Access Canberra at the time
Chief Minister is for all intents and purposes, the Executive. Further,
Ministers are authorised to act on behalf of either
the Chief Minister or on
behalf of another Minister.
do not accept that any of these arguments have merit.
having responsibility for Access Canberra did not mean that the Chief Minister
could declare that any function relating to
Access Canberra could be exercised
by the head of Access Canberra. The functions that could be the subject of a
declaration were
limited to those matters mentioned in an administrative
arrangement for which the Chief Minister had responsibility. As I have noted,
Administrative Arrangements 2016 (No 3)
, the Minister for Road
Safety was responsible for s 25 of the Safety & Traffic Management Act, not
the Chief Minister.
I accept that the Executive is responsible for a wide range of matters under
Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
Self-Government Act
), including the responsibility of governing the
Territory with respect to the matters specified in Schedule 4 to that Act. As
Prosecution notes, this includes Law and Order, Public Safety and the Public
the Executive cannot exercise statutory powers which the legislature has given
to particular Ministers. As Justice Mossop
noted, writing extra-judicially in
Constitution
of the Australian Capital Territory
(Federation Press,
2021), at page 155:
... it is always open to the legislature to
specify that executive power under an enactment is to be exercised by a
particular person
and much legislation invests it in the allocated Minister..
‘allocated Minister’ is a reference to the allocation of
responsibility for a particular matter to a Minister under
s 43 of the
Self-Government Act. The
Administrative Arrangements 2016 (No 3)
allocated responsibility for the relevant part of the Safety & Traffic
Management Act to the Minister for Road Safety,
was made under s 43 of the
Self-Government Act.
Justice Mossop also noted, at pages 155 – 156, while ‘
the balance
between the collective decision-making by the Executive and decision making by
individual Ministers is not clear
’, one thing that is clear is that
the allocated Minister must act where an enactment expressly empowers
the Minister to act ... Examples are the many statutory instruments
power to make decisions under them in “the
I accept that Ministers were authorised to act on behalf of other Ministers,
including on the Chief Minister’s behalf
(section 5 of the
Administrative Arrangements 2016 (No 3)
, made under s 43(2) of the
Self-Government Act). However, the Chief Minister did not make the Chief
Minister’s Declaration
on behalf of the Minister for Road Safety. He made
it in his capacity as the Chief Minister. Indeed, he was required to do so as
the power in s 21 of the PSM Act was only exercisable by the Chief Minister.
Submission as to validity of statutory instruments and onus of
Prosecution relies on
Legislation Act
, which provides for a
presumption of validity of statutory instruments. The Prosecution submits that
the Defendant has not discharged
the onus that rested on her to prove that the
Informant had no authority to issue the
Certificate.
disagree. The consequence of my finding that the Chief Minister’s
Declaration and the Access Canberra Delegation are, with
respect to the power to
certificate, invalid, is that the Informant had no power to issue
Certificate (
Clark v Bluett
[2016] ACTSC 312
Chief Magistrate of the Magistrates Court of the Australian Capital Territory
[2018] ACTCA 43
that absence of power is cured by
Legislation Act
and s 21(7) of
the PSM Act
the Prosecution submits that, even if the Chief Minister did not have the power
to declare that the head of Access Canberra
could exercise the power in s 25 of
the Safety & Traffic Management Act, the action of the Informant in issuing
the s 25 Certificate
is nevertheless saved by the operation of
Legislation Act
and s 21(7) of the PSM Act.
Legislation Act
(1) A delegation,
or anything done under a delegation, is not invalid only because of a defect or
irregularity in or in relation
to the delegation.
(2) Anything done by or in relation to the delegate while the
delegate purports to exercise the delegation is not invalid only
(a) the delegation had been amended
or revoked; or
(b) the occasion for the delegate
to exercise the delegation had not arisen or had ended.
21(7) of the PSM Act is, in relation to a declaration made under s 21 of the
PSM, to similar effect as
Legislation Act
is in relation to
delegations. As set out earlier in these reasons,
states (as it stated
at the time the Chief Minister’s Declaration was
(7) Anything done in the exercise of a declared function is
not invalid only because of a defect or irregularity in, or in relation
declaration.
my view, the Chief Minister’s Declaration did not involve a delegation as
it did not give the head of Access Canberra the
authority to exercise a power
otherwise exercisable by the Chief Minister. The application of s 21(7) of the
PSM Act needs to be
considered in relation the to Chief Minister’s
Declaration.
application of
Legislation Act
needs to be considered in relation
to the Access Canberra Delegation and the Informant’s reliance on that
delegation in issuing
Certificate.
said that, given the similarity of wording used in the two provisions, there is
little difference in analysis in terms of their
application.
the Prosecution notes in its submissions,
Legislation Act
introduced by the
Statute Law Amendment Act 2001 (No 2)
included an explanatory note which stated, in relation to s
This section is intended to protect the validity of things done
under a delegation if it later appears that the delegation was ineffective
Lewis v Chief Executive Department of Justice and Community Safety & Ors
[2013] ACTSC 198
), Refshauge J made the following
observations about
Legislation Act
. Given the similarity of
language employed in s 21(7) of the PSM Act, and the obvious similarity in
purpose, the same observations
can be made in relation to that provision. His
Honour said, at [111] to [113]:
111. These provisions appear to be a
legislative expression of at least an aspect of what is known as the de facto
doctrine, namely that “[t]he acts of a de facto public
officer done in apparent execution of his office cannot be challenged
grounds that he has no title to the office” as stated by McHugh JA
G J Coles & Co Ltd v Retail Trade Industrial Tribunal
(1986) 7 NSWLR 503
at 525, and approved by
the High Court in
Cassell v The Queen
[2000] HCA 8
(2000) 201 CLR 189
112. The limits of the doctrine are said not to be clear. See E Campbell,
“De Facto Officers”
(1994) 2 Australian Journal of Administrative
; O Dixon, “De facto officers” (1938) 1
285. What limits there are, or should be, on the statutory
validation in
Legislation
are not clear. It is, for example, not limited to formal defects,
such as those which do not invalidate bankruptcy notices under
the bankruptcy
legislation:
Adams v Lambert
[2006] HCA 10
(2006) 228 CLR 409
statutory provision is cast in wide terms, using the words “anything done
under a delegation” and the broad connector
“or in relation to the
delegation”. As to the latter, an expression “of wide import”
see, inter alia,
Victoria v Commonwealth
[1971] HCA 16
(1971) 122 CLR 353
at 359 (Windeyer J).
113. The precise limits of
Legislation
must await for another day. It appears to have very wide
application. In any event, I am satisfied that it would validate any report
was made by Mr Giucci under s 59 of the
Sentence Administration
were his appointment to an office, by which he was delegated to
exercise the power under that section, to be found to be invalid
the apparent breadth of
Legislation Act
, and s 21(7) of the PSM
Act, the protection that those provisions afford does not extend to all
attempted, but ineffective, delegations
and declarations. There must be a
‘defect or irregularity’ in or in relation to the delegation or
declaration.
my view, neither the Chief Minister’s Declaration nor the Access Canberra
Delegation relevantly suffered from a defect or
irregularity and there was no
defect or irregularity in relation to either of those instruments. In
circumstances where the Minister
for Road Safety was responsible for s 25 of the
Safety and Traffic Management Act, there was no lawful way for the Chief
to declare that the power in that provision could be exercised by the
head of Access Canberra. He simply did not have the power to
declaration in that respect under s 21 of the PSM Act.
, the Court of Appeal considered the application of s 242 of the
Legislation in relation to the authority of the informant in that
case to lay
the Information. While the informant said that he was fulfilling the role of the
delegate of the Chief Police Officer
(who did have authority to lay the
Information), the informant did not hold any of the positions to whom the Chief
Police Officer
had delegated her power.
[77], the Court said:
... The Court’s conclusion is that there
has not been a delegation to Constable McCue. This is to be distinguished from a
which for some inherent reason is defective. If the latter was the
Legislation
would have come to the respondent’s aid.
cannot, however, mend a non-existent delegation.
[79] – [80], the Court said:
79. Refshauge J [in
], as can be seen above, has pointed out the width of s 242, and in
particular that it refers to “anything done under a delegation”
also extends to a defect in “relation to” the delegation. The
wording is to be distinguished from curing an absence
of a delegation. That is
the situation here. This is not a case of curing a defect in a delegation or
something done in relation
to the delegation. This is a case of there being no
delegation in the first place. There is no delegation for s 242 to cure.
80. Accordingly, the entitlement of Constable McCue
to have laid the Information in his asserted delegated capacity has been shown
to be missing.
Consistently
with the above conclusion, I am of the view that
Legislation Act
and s 21(7) of the PSM Act have no application in this case. The Chief
Minister’s Declaration, insofar as it concerned the
power to issue a s 25
certificate (and upon which the Access Canberra Delegation relied for authority
to delegate that power to the
Informant’s position number) was, at law,
never made because the Chief Minister had no power to make it (
Minister for
Immigration & Multicultural Affairs v Bhardwaj
[2002] HCA 11).
contrast to
, there was an apparent delegation to the Informant,
the validity of that delegation rested on the Chief Minister’s
Declaration,
which could not lawfully have been made.
I have noted earlier in these reasons, the Chief Minister’s Declaration
did not contain a defect in relation to the purported
declaration that the head
of Access Canberra could issue a s 25 certificate. This was not a case where the
Chief Minister could have
declared that the head of Access Canberra could
exercise that power and something was not done properly. Section 21 of the PSM
simply could not be relied on by the Chief Minister to declare that the
power to issue a s 25 certificate could be exercised by the
head of Access
Section 25 Certificate is inadmissible
the Informant had no authority to issue the s 25 Certificate, it is inadmissible
in the proceeding.
these circumstances, it is not necessary to address the Defendant’s
submission that the relevant detection device was not
an approved traffic
offence device and that the testing of the speed measuring device did not comply
with the Safety & Traffic
Management Regulation.
the s 25 Certificate, there is no evidence that the Defendant was speeding when
she drove through the Intersection on 31 December
2023 and the charge that was
brought against her must fail.
Alternative basis for finding the
Defendant not guilty of the offence charged
if the s 25 Certificate was admissible in the proceeding, I would have found the
Defendant not guilty of the offence charged.
The below analysis proceeds on the
basis that the s 25 Certificate provides evidence of the matters set out in
noted earlier in these reasons, it is not in dispute that:
(a) the Defendant and her partner drove their cars through the Intersection at
1.27 pm on 31 December 2023; and
(b) the speed limit applicable to the relevant length of road on Ginninderra
Drive was (and remains) 80 km per hour.
also note that the evidence of the Defendant and her partner, that the Defendant
travelled at a constant distance behind the Defendant’s
partner through
the Intersection, was not challenged by the Prosecution. It is plausible
Defendant and her partner were travelling together. Ordinarily, when people are
driving in convoy (as the Defendant and her partner
appeared to be driving
through the Intersection) they would maintain a constant distance (and,
therefore, a consistent speed). Even
when people are driving together otherwise
than in convoy, they would ordinarily maintain a roughly consistent speed.
find that the Defendant and her partner travelled at a constant distance between
each other, and therefore at a consistent speed,
through the
Intersection.
Evidence as to the Defendant’s
is conflicting evidence as to whether the Defendant drove through the
Intersection at more than 80 km per hour.
the one hand, a speed measurement device recorded the Defendant’s car
being driven through the Intersection at 98 km per
the other hand:
(a) the Defendant gave evidence that she was travelling at or below 80 km per
(b) the Defendant’s partner’s evidence was that he drove through the
Intersection at 80 km per hour (and that he did
not receive a traffic
infringement notice and was not prosecuted for exceeding the speed limit
applicable to Ginninderra Drive at
the Intersection); and
(c) as I have found, the Defendant travelled at a constant distance behind (and,
therefore, at a consistent speed with) the Defendant’s
partner through the
Intersection.
Evidence of the speed measurement device
speed measurement device is a scientific instrument that is calibrated to
perform within an accuracy tolerance of 2 km per hour.
It is approved in the ACT
to be used for traffic offence detection.
was tested on 22 June 2023 and found to be operating within the prescribed
accuracy tolerance of 2 km per hour. While Mr Sim accepted
in cross-examination
that he could not know that the device did not suffer a fault on the relevant
day, he also said that most devices
are pretty stable. While he has seen loop
cut failures, where a device cannot produce any readings, he has not seen faults
that result
in a device being out of calibration.
my view, the output of the speed measurement device provides good evidence of
the speed that the Defendant drove through the
Intersection.
Defendant’s evidence
examination-in-chief, the Defendant’s evidence was that she was travelling
at 80 km per hour or below when driving through
the Intersection. In
cross-examination she said that she was certain that she was travelling below 80
km per hour because she always
monitors her speed. That is, her evidence related
to a practice she says she adopts when she drives, rather than being evidence
she looked at the speedometer and noticed a particular speed as she
travelled through the Intersection.
nature of that evidence (as to her regular practice, rather than as to a
recollection) makes sense, given that the Defendant said
that she first knew of
the speeding allegation when she received the traffic infringement notice that
was sent to her. She accepted
that it was possible that that was 21 days after
the relevant day.
there was something noteworthy about the drive that caused her to reflect on her
speed at the time, it is most unlikely that
the Defendant would remember, three
weeks later, the speed at which she was travelling. I find that the Defendant
did not have any
recollection at the time she received the traffic infringement
notice (or at the hearing) as to the particular speed at which she
drove through
the Intersection.
in isolation, I would have difficulty accepting the Defendant’s evidence
that she always monitors her speed in order to
stay under the speed limit (and
therefore did so on 31 December 2023). Most people, even those who are
particularly conscious of
speed limits, will exceed them from time to time (even
if only unintentionally). It is also an easy assertion to make, even if untrue.
she was not challenged on her evidence as to her practice of monitoring her
speed. While the Prosecution did put to her that
she was travelling over the
speed limit on the relevant date (a proposition the Defendant refuted), it was
never suggested to her
that there were occasions that she had been found to have
(or accepted that she had) exceeded the speed limit. No evidence to that
was produced by the Prosecution.
and more importantly:
(a) the Defendant gave a specific reason that she was particularly conscious of
her speed at the time, being that it was a period
when double demerits applied;
(b) the proposition that she was not speeding is consistent with:
evidence of the Defendant’s partner, behind whom she was driving, that he
was driving at 80 km per hour; and
fact that the Defendant drove at a constant distance behind her partner (and,
therefore, at a consistent speed).
Defendant’s partner’s evidence that he was travelling at 80 km per
hour through the Intersection was unchallenged.
It is also consistent with the
fact that no action was taken against the Defendant’s partner (whether by
infringement notice
or prosecution, or both) for exceeding the speed limit when
he drove through the Intersection.
is possible that the speed measurement device accurately captured the speed of
the Defendant’s car, and that her partner
was also driving at around 98 km
per hour but not captured by the detection device. There may be a limit, for
example, on how many
vehicles the detection device can capture during any given
period and some vehicles will not be captured for other reasons, including
because their licence plates are blocked by other vehicles.
no evidence was led at the hearing in relation to the limitations of the speed
measurement device and Mr Sim was not asked
any questions about that issue. I do
not know what the likelihood is of a speed measurement device missing a speeding
what the factors are which impact the capacity of a speed measurement
device to identify a speeding driver.
other possibility is that the Defendant’s partner was driving at 80 km per
hour, as he said he was (consistent with him
not being the subject of any action
for speeding on the relevant day), and that the reading that the speed
measurement device produced
for the Defendant’s car was therefore
incorrect. While Mr Sim gave evidence that he has not seen faults that result in
being out of calibration, the extent of Mr Sim’s experience was
not explored in any depth.
do not know, for example, when Mr Sim says that he has not seen such faults, how
many devices he has inspected, over what period
or in what circumstances. I also
do not know whether there are circumstances in which a device that is properly
calibrated may nevertheless
produce an incorrect reading. Mr Sim was not asked
whether the accuracy of the speed measurement device that he tested under lab
conditions always reflects its performance in the field, or whether there are
environmental or other factors which can impact its
performance.
Sim gave evidence that he could not confirm that there was no error in the
reading produced by the device because that was outside
the scope of his
knowledge. He said that he was not involved in the installation and field
testing of the device.
the evidence that would have been afforded by the s 25 Certificate if it had
been admissible, it is possible that the evidence
of the Defendant and her
partner, that they were each travelling at or below 80 km per hour, might be
true. Accordingly, even if
the s 25 Certificate had been admissible, the
Prosecution would not have satisfied me, beyond reasonable doubt, that the
was travelling in excess of the speed limit applicable to the relevant
length of road on Ginninderra Drive on 31 December
Determination
find the Defendant not guilty of the offence charged.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and seventeen [117] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of his
Honour Magistrate
Associate: Niamh Dwyer
Date: 24/02/2025
RTF format (321 KB)
Signed PDF/A format