Inquest into the death of Katherine Aurelia Alexander [2024] ACTCD 2 (25 July 2024)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Matter Title:
Inquest into the death of Katherine Aurelia Alexander
[2024] ACTCD 2
Decision Date:
Coroner Archer
See [49], [87], [89], [96], [100], [103], [107]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
- mental health – death by suicide –
multiple drug toxicity – coronial proceedings – impact of delay in
of public safety issues – hospital discharge planning –
community-based care – transition of care between adult
mental health
teams – mental health policy and procedures
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
Cases Cited:
Inquest into the deaths of Bearham & Ors
[2021] ACTCD 1
v Doogan; Ex Parte Lucas Smith & Ors
[2005] ACTSC 74
Harmsworth v State Coroner
[1989] VicRp 87
[1989] VR 989
Doomadgee v Deputy
State Coroner Clements
[2006] 2 Qld R 352
Counsel Assisting:
File Number:
CD 35 of 2017
CORONER ARCHER:
Katherine Aurelia Alexander died between 7 and 8 February 2017. I respectfully
refer to her as ‘’Kath’’
in these findings. At the time
of her death, Kath was 34 years old and was receiving voluntary mental health
treatment in the Australian
Capital Territory ("ACT"). Professor Johan Duflou,
forensic pathologist, found that the cause of Kath’s death was multiple
drug toxicity. Toxicology testing revealed the presence of multiple prescription
medications at therapeutic to lethal levels. In
the last few months of her life,
Kath’s mental health had deteriorated and resulted in two inpatient
admissions to the Canberra
Hospital (“TCH”). She died shortly after
her last admission. It is clear she intended to take her own life.
– BACKGROUND
death was reported to the Coroner, in this instance, Coroner Peter Morrison, on
8 February 2017. Her death was considered
"violent" or "unnatural", for the
purposes of
Coroners Act 1997
(ACT) (“the
assumed jurisdiction, the Court was required to hold an
into the manner and cause
of her death, and make the findings required by
of the Act:
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find,
if possible—
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the person has
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
(i) state whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection with
the inquest or inquiry; and
(ii) if a matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the matter
findings are set out below.
Section 34A
arriving at the findings I am required to make, I have a discretion as to
whether to hold a hearing
of the Act). I can dispense with a hearing in
the circumstances and according to the processes set out in
34A Decision not to conduct hearing
(1) A coroner may decide not to conduct a
hearing into a death if, after consideration of information given to a coroner
to the death of a person, the coroner is satisfied that—
(a) the manner and cause of death are sufficiently disclosed; and
(b) a hearing is unnecessary.
(2) A coroner must not dispense with a hearing into a death of a person, if
the coroner has reasonable grounds for believing the death
in care or death
in custody.
(3) A coroner who decides not to conduct
a hearing into a death must give the Chief Coroner and a member of the
deceased's immediate
family written notice of the decision, including the
grounds for the decision.
the circumstances that are outlined below, I reached the view that a hearing was
not necessary and could therefore be dispensed
full coronial brief was prepared. The brief included statements from treating
clinicians, and the extensive records subpoenaed from
Canberra Health Services
(“CHS”). I was also greatly assisted by the information provided by
Kath’s friends and
hearing was convened, and appearances from those claiming to have a sufficient
interest were not sought. I acknowledge the obvious
role that the Territory
agencies had in providing for Kath’s care. Throughout the inquest process,
HD, Kath’s close friend,
advocated loyally and thoughtfully on her behalf.
HD sought through the coronial process, an examination of what she regards as
failings of the mental health system in the ACT in the context of Kath's
care. HD provided a “Background Statement” to
the Court that
provided a timeline of Kath’s treatment within the mental health system,
and a detailed analysis of Kath’s
mental illness, relationships, care
arrangements and protective structures in her life.
the time of her death, Kath was estranged from her parents, JS and TS. JS and TS
have been involved and consulted throughout the
proceedings.
correspondence with the parties, the Court has conceded that the history of the
inquest is very unfortunate. The disposition of
Kath’s inquest was
deferred pending the outcome of a series of inquests that dealt with the suicide
of inpatients at TCH. Those
deaths occurred between January 2015 and December
2016. Findings in relation to those deaths were handed down by Coroner Margaret
Hunter on 4 March 2021
: Inquest into the deaths of Bearham & Ors
matter was not advanced in any meaningful way after the hearing for that inquest
took place. As I have recorded in other
findings, I can offer no reasonable
explanation of why such a situation was permitted. Since I assumed the role of
the Territory’s
“dedicated coroner”, I have sought to address
that backlog whilst still discharging the day-to-day role of a coroner.
delay has caused distress to those who have waited so many years for the process
to complete.
Section 3BA
of the Act requires that inquests be carried out in way
that recognises that the death of a person, and an inquest into the person's
death, has a significant impact on the person's family and friends. That
statutory obligation has not been discharged in this case.
It is appropriate
that my findings record that failure, and my apology for it. I am
The Concerns of Kath’s Advocates
Background Statement
by HD, presented an analysis of the progression of
Kath's mental illness and the treatment she received. HD described the source
her information as conversations with Kath and Kath’s close friend, KW,
and access to Kath's journals from her teen years
and onwards. The
developed a narrative of Kath’s life, and the significant
and supportive relationships Kath experienced (particularly with KW
difficult relationship with her parents was described. Kath’s description
of being abused in her mid-teens was
account of Kath's work history and significant level of community involvement
was given, including her skating endeavours.
respect of Kath’s mental illness, the document traced its history from the
time of her first diagnosis of depression in 1997
until the date of her death.
The role played by clinicians and a Public Advocate was described and analysed.
Their expertise and
generosity were acknowledged.
systematic issues arising from the analysis of Kath’s interactions with
the mental health system over the period of 2013
to 2017 in the ACT were
addressed. I summarise them as:
(a) Delays in accessing appropriate care
Examples were provided of:
admissions to care facilities;
delayed access
to electroconvulsive therapy (“ECT”);
poor levels of
therapeutic contact with caregivers during inpatient admission; and
availability of psychiatrists.
(b) Disjointed care
Examples were provided of:
created by staff turnover and the lack of coverage provided during periods of
poor handover
communicating with day-to-day health care providers when an inpatient;
poor levels of
communication when appointments were cancelled; and
application of geographical allocation of patients to mental health
(c) Failure to recognise deteriorating illness and need for symptom control
Examples were provided of:
instances during
2016 and 2017 of behaviours or specific events not being considered as signs of
an overall deterioration in mental
high functioning and “presenting well” disguising the reality of
being very unwell; and
self-harming
behaviours being attributed to situational stressors rather than reflecting a
high level of suicidality.
(d) Poor communication with caregivers
Examples were provided of:
poor engagement
with friends who were in the best position to provide insights into Kath's
health; and
non-disclosure
of treatment plans or significant events (e.g. the attendance of the CATT
(e) Lack of advocacy
Examples were given of Kath being unable to effectively advocate for herself
when very unwell or when the complexities of presenting
issues were
overwhelming.
Background Statement
also made recommendations for change to the mental
health system that might address the (above) issues that Kath encountered. Those
suggestions are addressed at [112]–[116].
The Scope of the
March 2023, I determined that I would limit the scope of the inquest to a
consideration of events:
(a) during Kath’s inpatient care from 25 November 2016 until 9 December
(b) the terms of her discharge from that care and the plans for her care within
the community; and
(c) the care that was provided thereafter in the community until the time of her
reasons for doing that arise from a consideration of the terms of s 52 of the
find that s 52 of the Act constrains my capacity to investigate Kath’s
care in the mental health system in the ACT generally.
The concept of
“manner and cause” of someone’s death is not capable of
precise definition. What it does not permit,
however, is an investigation that
deals with all matters having a tangential connection to a
Concepts of
“remoteness” must be borne in mind whilst still taking into account
matters that properly contextualise the
cause of death. Similarly, my power
under s 52(4) of the Act is not a power to assume a power akin to a royal
commission to review
the ACT mental health system. Any matter of public safety
must be found to arise in "connection with" the inquest, noting that the
is constrained by the scope of the findings I am required to make as to the
manner and cause of Kath’s death.
considerations apply in relation to s 3BA of the Act. I have a responsibility to
ensure that the objects of the Act are carried
out in a way that recognises that
the family and friends of a deceased person have an interest in having all
reasonable questions
However, that responsibility does not set aside the limitations s 52 of
places on my power to investigate.
of the issues detailed in the
Background Statement,
whilst of general
relevance to the operation of the ACT mental health system, could not be said to
be relevant to the manner and cause
of Kath's death. If the matters identified
by HD are fairly characterised as public safety issues, for the reasons given
[50]–[54], my ability to comment on them is similarly
constrained.
decision regarding the scope of the inquest was communicated to the parties in a
letter dated 10 March 2023.
Included with that correspondence were:
(a) a list of the issues that were intended to generally define the parameters
of the findings that would be made as to the “manner
and cause” of
Kath’s death; and
(b) a summary of events from 25 November 2016 and 8 February 2017.
attach the summary of events as Annexure A, updated to reflect the information
subsequently received from CHS in their response.
letter also indicated a provisional intention to publish findings, and invited
parties to consider the summary document and make
submissions as to any
inaccuracies it might contain. My intention to rely on that document to make my
findings was foreshadowed.
Response of the Parties
response to the Court’s letter was received from CHS, on behalf of the
Territory, on 22 May 2023. No submissions from CHS,
HD, or Kath’s parents
were made to seek amendment to the summary of events document, other than two
typographical errors. HD
expressed her disappointment with the CHS response.
Provisional Findings and s 55 notices
Provisional
findings were sent to the parties on 18 June 2024. To the extent that they
involved findings adverse to CHS, the Territory
were given an opportunity to
make submissions to the Coroner pursuant to s 55 of the Act. On 8 July 2024, CHS
responded to the matters
raised in the s 55 notice and acknowledged, as I have
found, that aspects of the treatment and care received by Kath in the months
prior to her death were suboptimal.
PART 2 – A CHRONOLOGY
OF RELEVANT EVENTS
Kath’s Life and Mental Health
was born on 5 May 1982 to JS and TS. She had a younger brother, DS. Her
relationship with her family was complicated, and, at
the time of her death, she
chose to have minimal contact with them.
began struggling with her mental health from the young age of 16 in 1997. She
had been diagnosed with several mental illnesses,
including bipolar affective
disorder type II, borderline personality disorder, bulimia, schizophrenia,
post-traumatic stress disorder,
and major depressive disorder.
2010, Kath moved from Melbourne to Canberra. In Canberra, her mental health care
was primarily managed by the City Mental Health
Team (“City Team”)
until late 2016, when it was transferred to the Woden Mental Health Team
(“Woden Team”).
Kath also received significant mental health care
and support from her private psychologist, Mr Staniforth, and her regular
Practitioner.
Canberra, Kath was a committed member of the Canberra Roller Derby League
(“CRDL”), through which she reconnected with
her high school friend,
HD. In 2013, she sustained a head injury during a roller derby event. HD
associated that accident with the
start of a pronounced decline in Kath's mental
the years, Kath received a variety of mental health treatments, including
medication and electroconvulsive therapy (“ECT”).
HD says that while
the first course of ECT in 2014 seemed to have good results, the second course
was not successful, and that thereafter,
Kath “had poor symptom control,
and resorted to self-harming behaviours, sedation, and occasionally alcohol to
alleviate her
medical records and statements provided to the Court, Kath’s treating
clinicians described her as chronically suicidal. She
had a documented history
of inpatient admissions in Victoria, Sydney, and Canberra (addressing acute
suicidality, or related medical
issues), and attempts at taking her own life.
Her level of acute risk fluctuated, but the chronic nature of her thoughts of
was a constant background feature of her life. Kath reported to
clinicians a history of childhood sexual and emotional abuse. That
was an important factor underlying her mental health condition.
sometimes relied on friends to provide support and accommodation at times of
crisis (sometimes as an alternative to inpatient
admission). As described above
at [17], Kath expressed frustrations to her friends about what she regarded as
(at times) unstructured,
inconsistent, and unreliable mental health supports
received through the City and Woden teams, and the limitations that existed in
the ACT for supported accommodation.
her mental illness was severe and longstanding, Kath was highly intelligent and
motivated to get well. She was academically
gifted, receiving multiple academic
scholarships, and completing university degrees in computer science and
environmental sustainability.
She gained employment in youth work, and later in
policy work at the Murray Darling Basin Authority from 2013 to mid-2016. She was
described by those who knew her as clever, artistic, environmentally conscious,
and a committed member of CRDL.
and friends observed a deterioration in Kath's mental health from mid to late
2016. In the last four months of her life,
Kath presented to TCH twice with
suicidal intent (in November 2016 and February 2017) and was admitted as an
inpatient. She took
her own life following her last admission, within 27 hours
of being discharged.
detailed description of the state of her mental health and contacts with mental
health services and providers from 25 November 2016
to the time of her death is
set out in Annexure A.
Kath’s Death – 7 to 8
February 2017
7 February 2017 at 1140 hrs, Kath was discharged from the Mental Health Short
Stay Unit (‘”MHSSU”) at TCH. Following
her discharge, at
approximately 1310 hours, Kath met her friend KW for lunch, before returning
she texted KW, HD, and Mr Staniforth,
expressing her disappointment with the treatment she had just received in the
hospital, and
her intention to lodge complaints against the Crisis Assessment
Treatment Team (“CATT”) and TCH. Kath lodged those complaints
1837 and 2027 hours respectively. At 2330 hours on 7 February 2017, Kath posted
to Instagram a picture of a pot plant next to
a light. That was her last known
activity before her death.
8 February 2017, at about 1045 hours, KW texted Kath to check on her welfare.
Concerned when she did not answer, KW and her roommate
entered Kath’s
residence (Unit 8 of 30 Glenorchy Street, Lyons, ACT) with a spare key at 1415
hours. Upon entry, they noticed
a sign on the unit which said,
“Don’t come in, call someone”. They proceeded to enter the
unit and observed Kath
lying face down on the bed in the master bedroom, cold to
the touch and purple. ACT Ambulance Services (“ACTAS”) arrived
shortly after, and confirmed there were no signs of life.
Police attended the scene and found several documents in the unit which
indicated Kath's intent to end her own life. In the dining
room, there was a
blue folder containing several documents, including what appeared to be two
suicide letters, a will, and instructions
on how to look after Kath's pets. A
"post-it" note was stuck to the front of the blue folder, and stated that her
phone was unlocked,
and a video was on it. Police accessed Kath's phone, and
located a video of Kath, date and time stamped 7 February 2017 at 2122 hours.
that video, Kath looked at the camera and said, “I am at peace, love you
two suicide notes were undated. However, it is apparent that one was prepared
sometime in September 2015. The terms of the “post-it”
note, and the
video on Kath’s phone suggest that Kath considered the notes to reflect
her intent at the time of her death.
medication packets were found at the scene, including Phenergan 25 mg
(40 out of 60 left) and
Dothiepin 75 mg tablets
PART 3 – FINDINGS AS TO MANNER AND CAUSE OF
10 February 2017, Coroner Morrison directed a post-mortem examination be
conducted to the extent that is necessary to determine
the cause of Kath’s
death. That examination was conducted on 14 February 2017 by Professor Duflou.
The toxicology results revealed
the presence of:
Ethyl alcohol:
0.021 g/100mL
Promethazine:
0.6 mg/L (approx.)
11 mg/L (approx.)
Fluoxetine:
0.5 mg/L (approx.)
Quetiapine:
Metabolite detected
Lamotrigine:
Indicated but not confirmed.
Duflou prepared a post-mortem report dated 20 March 2018, and opined that:
(a) The direct cause of Kath’s death was multiple drug toxicity.
(b) Toxicology testing revealed the presence of multiple prescription
medications consistent with the medication found at the scene.
This included
promethazine, dothiepin and fluoxetine.
(c) The combination of the prescription drugs could have caused death, although
the level of dothiepin was sufficiently high to cause
death alone.
examination did not suggest another possible cause of death.
accept Professor Duflou’s opinion as to the cause of Kath’s death.
am satisfied, based on the evidence before me, that Kath ingested the
medications with the intent to end her own life.
Accordingly,
I find that Katherine Aurelia Alexander died between 7 and 8 February 2017, at
Unit 8 of 30 Glenorchy Street in the ACT,
as a result of multiple drug toxicity.
Kath ingested some or all of those drugs with the intention of taking her own
life. I do not
find that acts or omissions of particular individuals who were
involved in Kath’s care in the period leading up to her suicide
contributed to the cause of her death.
PART 4 – MATTERS OF
PUBLIC SAFETY
Introduction
terms of s 52(4) of the Act require me to consider whether a matter of
“public safety” arises from the inquest (investigation)
Kath’s death. I adopt a commonsense definition of that term as meaning the
protection of the public. The power to comment
on a matter of public safety is
set out in s 52(4), and the ability to make recommendations about the promotion
of general public
health and safety (s 3BA (1)(d) of the Act) point to the
important preventive and protective role a coroner plays in our community.
role in that regard is not without limitations. I have no power to address
public safety issues by comment or recommendation unless
“arise” from the inquest. The power to conduct an inquest is one
limited to determining the “manner and cause”
of a death, in respect
of which a coroner has jurisdiction. A coroner does not have the power to
investigate, comment and recommend
the concept of “public safety” is a forward-looking concept. The
passage of time, and, here, the 7-year gap between
the consideration of my
findings and Kath’s death, makes the process of making recommendations, or
comment about public safety
issues more complex. Governmental responses to the
care of those suffering from mental illness and the prevention of suicide are
dynamic. As a result of the Productivity Commission's
and the Victorian Royal
Commission into Mental Health,
policy framework surrounding those issues, and consideration of how optimal
outcomes for those with mental illness and chronic
suicidality are best achieved
have been significantly reviewed. Whilst the outcomes and recommendations of
that inquiry and the Victorian
Royal Commission provide conceptual insights as
to best practice around providing support to those who are chronically suicidal,
because of the significant passage of time, there is an element of artificiality
in using them to assess the practice and procedures
seen in Kath’s case.
Kath's death, there has also been an audit of the procedural guidance that was
relevant to Kath's care, and significant progress
has been made in re-writing
and consolidating that guidance for the whole of mental health services in the
ACT. I discuss this further
at [56]–[60].
changes to the mental health system since Kath’s passing imposes some
practical restraints on my ability to make recommendations
and comments in this
The Context of Kath’s Care
(a) Description of Inpatient Services at
late 2016 and early 2017, there was a range of inpatient facilities in the ACT
that addressed various specific needs. Three facilities
are relevant to these
proceedings – the Adult Mental Health Unit (“AMHU”), the
Mental Health Short Stay Unit (“MHSSU”),
and the Medical Assessment
and Planning Unit (“MAPU”). The AMHU provided short-term specialised
acute clinical intervention,
treatment and care for persons experiencing
moderate to severe mental illness or mental dysfunction, where less restrictive
have been deemed unsuitable or were unavailable. The MAPU was a
short-stay unit for patients with medical conditions likely to require
72 hours of inpatient management, or, for undifferentiated illnesses, where a
short inpatient stay to establish diagnosis
would be useful. The MHSSU, which
opened in January 2016, was an inpatient facility located adjacent to the
TCH’S Emergency
Department ("ED") to provide short-term care for someone
experiencing a mental illness or disorder, who was likely to require a mental
health admission (at that time) up to 48 hours.
(b) Relevant Policy and Procedural Guidance
response to the Court’s letter of 10 March 2023, CHS produced a
significant array of policies and procedures that were said
to be relevant to my
consideration of the governance that set the parameters of CHS’s response
to Kath’s care needs,
both in an inpatient setting, and in respect of her
discharge into the care of community-based clinicians. Some of those documents
were quite old, and pre-dated the enactment of the
Mental Health Act 2015
(ACT) in 2015. Some were not relevant to the delivery of Kath’s care.
They did not explain the principles that governed where
care should have been
provided. Collectively, they presented a disjointed picture of the principles
and procedures that purportedly
governed Kath’s care.
state of the procedural guidance that existed within those inpatient facilities
at the time of Kath’s passing has been the
subject of analysis by both
and, in more detail,
by the ACT Audit Office in its Performance Audit Report titled
Mental Health
Services – Transition from Acute Care.
of the key findings made in the audit report were:
An integrated,
comprehensive and contemporary framework, encompassing the ACT
Mental Health Act
(the Act), for managing the transition of people from acute care services
to community-based services is lacking. Not all the requirements
of the Act are
captured in policies and procedures, and many are outdated. This compromises the
ability of public health practitioners
and carers to manage a person's
transition effectively.
...........
There is a need to review, rationalise and re‐issue mental health
services policies and procedures as many are outdated or were
drafted before the
passage of the
Mental Health Act 2015
(the Act). These do not give full
effect to the Act, notably the different treatment regimes for people with
mental illnesses and
respect of record keeping, case plans, and discharge planning, the audit
In only 5 percent of cases were records found that showed
that planning commenced during the initial phase of hospitalisation for
discharge and the support required after inpatient care.
Recovery plans were found in only one third of the records examined. There is
evidence that mental health staff have not regularly
and systematically recorded
discharge and recovery planning in MHAGIC. Records have similarly not been made
of clinical meetings
that involve the sharing of information and clinical
decision making about a person’s care and treatment.
This failure of practice means that the MHAGIC records of recovery planning
are incomplete. Reliable and complete records of recovery
planning are not
available to be given to the person, their family or to other carers. Neither
are they available to other staff
or other support organisations to help in
their care of the person, including after discharge from acute care. The
responsibility
for creating, reviewing and maintaining a person’s
discharge and recovery plan is not clearly
is evident that, around the time of Kath’s death, the ACT Health
Directorate was reviewing its relevant guidance. Revised
models of care,
including those applicable to inpatient care facilities, were being rewritten
and subject to consultative processes.
Analysis of Kath’s
Mental Health Care and Treatment
(a) The 29 November to 9 December 2017 Admission
A sets out the chronology of events that describes this admission. During this
admission, Kath surrendered two Stanley blades
and a jumper cord. Staff became
aware that she had surrendered her dog on 28 November 2016.
some time overnight on 28 to 29 November 2016, while in the MHSSU, Kath
overdosed on dothiepin, an anti-depressant she was prescribed
at the time. A
suicide note addressed to her partner at the time was found. It is apparent from
the medical records that the dothiepin
she ingested was her own supply, which
she brought into the hospital, and it had not been seized by clinicians upon
admission. Following
her overdose, Kath was transferred to the MAPU for medical
management (associated with the overdose) and was placed on an Emergency
Detention Order on 30 November 2016.
called TCH at about 1000 hours on 29 November 2016, and was informed of
Kath’s overdose during that call.
being medically cleared on 2 December 2016, Kath remained in the MAPU until 9
December 2016, due to a bed not being available
within the AMHU. She was
psychiatrically reviewed during this period, and she was given her usual
prescribed medication, except dothiepin,
which was withheld. It is not clear
otherwise what the care plan was, and what clinical interventions were
undertaken to address
the acuity of her presentation.
with not being able to be admitted to the AMHU, arrangements were made between
HD and Kath for Kath to be released into
HD’s care in Sydney. As noted in
Annexure A, the documented psychiatric review on 9 December 2016 before
Kath’s discharge
did not contain any information about Kath's mental
state. The discharge plan was brief, and is extracted at [11] in Annexure A.
am not able to say whether the medical care that was provided during this
admission was consistent with the stated policy. For reasons
associated with the
availability of beds in AMHU, Kath was accommodated in the MAPU for an extended
period of time. What the consequences
were for her mental health is not clear.
It may have added to her belief that the “mental health system” was
not addressing
or responsive to her mental health needs.
respect of her discharge, the
Mental Health ACT
Discharge Policy
(“MHACT discharge policy”)
The MHACT discharge
policy sets out a structured discharge planning process involving 16 steps. Of
the treating consultant, the consumer and their family and /or primary carer in
discharge planning. Contact the consumers
family and/or primary carer to keep
them informed of the expected discharge date and times (where appropriate),
unless expressly
decline by the consumer. If consent is no authorised clinicians
just document this fact in the clinical record.
the relevant health or community support providers.
the discharge care plan in line with the recovery plan detailing:
and community support follow -up arrangements;
and community support follow -up arrangements;
management plan (including coping strategies);
referral services and programs;
Contingency
and Relapse Response plans; and
and formally contact the relevant Community Mental Health Team (General
Practitioners, private Consultant and referral services
and programs (where
appropriate) to continue treatment and provide assertive follow up care.
a Mental State Assessment immediately prior to discharge including risk of harm
to self and others and reassess discharge
decisions at that time.
medication supply and prescriptions are provided to the consumer in accordance
with the Medical Discharge Summary
discharge, book an appointment for a follow up with a relevant health provider
(i.e., GP, private Consultant, Professional, clinical
of the discharge date, ensure that the time frame for the follow up
appointment complies with the level of suicide risk determined.
Establish steps
to be taken by the General Practitioner or other health provider if the consumer
misses the appointment.
Adult Community Mental Health Teams
Transitional Clinician -
Standard Operating Procedure
also specifies prompt follow-up within seven
days after discharge, and a consultation with a clinician for psychiatric
review, ideally
within 14 days.
This follow-up timeframe is consistent with the
National Standards for Mental
Health Services 2010
Standards”).
was discharged from TCH into the care of HD on the 9 December 2016. It is not
suggested that the decision to discharge her was
inappropriate.
discharge plan placed heavy reliance on HD to monitor and support Kath’s
wellbeing in the community. Apart from the call
from the Woden team next week,
there is no reference to any other confirmed follow-up appointment or contact
from a relevant health
provider, such as Kath's GP, psychiatrist, or the CATT.
The discharge plan on 9 December 2016 was not comprehensive and did not put
place the assertive follow-up support required (particularly in the
circumstances of a recent suicide attempt) by MHJHADS policies.
(b) Care Immediately Following Discharge
Notwithstanding
the documented plan, Kath did receive follow-up support immediately after
discharge. Three days after her discharge,
on 12 December 2016, Kath called the
Woden team, and spoke to the duty officer about the status of her case
management. Records indicate
that the duty officer used that call as an
opportunity to do a welfare check on Kath.
20 December 2016, a City team clinician called Kath to advise her that a
psychiatric review appointment with Dr H (her psychiatrist
from the City team)
had been arranged for 22 December 2016 (13 days after discharge). Kath attended
this appointment.
follow-up contact set by MHJHADS and the National
(c) Care in the Community Following the
November Admission
stayed with HD in Sydney for three days after being discharged from TCH. She
returned home to Canberra alone on 12 December 2016.
At the time of her return,
many of her usual support services were not available. Her care was still in the
process of being transferred
to the Woden team, and she was on a waiting list
for a case manager. Mr Staniforth was still on leave, returning in early January
analysis of her care in the community during this period requires consideration
of how community mental health teams managed the
transition of her care between
was Kath’s regular case manager at the City team from 2014. She departed
as Kath’s case manager in early November 2016.
Prior to LP’s
departure, Kath received an intensive level of case management in the community.
In her statement, LP describes
having an “open door policy” with
Kath. She met with Kath at least once, sometimes two to three times a week, in
to phone calls throughout the week. LP says Kath viewed her as a
support person and came to her when distressed. The medical records
that LP, on her departure, recommended that Kath be assigned to a new case
manager, and that weekly reviews with Kath be
says that at the time of her departure, she was aware that there was discussion
Woden team. At [18] of her
statement, she says:
There had been some discussion about
transferring Kath to the Woden Mental Health team at the time I left to transfer
to CATT. Kath
also said to me multiple times she didn’t want to be
transferred. I made it very clear to my team leader that I wanted her
with the City team. I felt that it would be extremely disruptive to Kath’s
treatment for her to be transferred to another
team as she had a significant
trauma history particularly as she already had to change her clinical manager.
Although her new clinicians
would have read her clinical records, the general
consensus from patients who transfer clinicians is that they have to tell their
story again and feel like they are starting from scratch. I think it would have
been even worse if she had had to change clinical
manager, team and her
psychiatrist. Staying with the city team would also allow her clinical manager
to work closely with Andrew
her psychologist, as I have detailed above.
Staniforth also expressed concern about the transfer of Kath’s care. At
[67]–[68] of his statement, he says:
It was problematic when
LP no longer provided regular case management and I was going to be on leave for
all of December 2016. In
a conversation with [LC] on Thursday 1 December 2016
(as outlined above at paragraph 55), I advocated for the necessity of support
for Kath during my absence because I had grown increasingly concerned regarding
Kath's ongoing level of risk. I was informed that
due to a number of reasons,
including her changed residential address, it was unlikely they would be able to
provide support. I was
advised that Kath would need to move to a new community
mental health team (Woden Mental Health) due to a change of residential address
and I indicated that this should not occur until I had returned to work in
January 2017. I emphasised my concern regarding the deterioration
mental health and advocated for continuity of care at least until I returned to
work in early January 2017.
I was exceptionally concerned that City Mental Health would not indicate they
could or would provide case-management for the duration
of my holiday despite
Kath's suicide attempt while an inpatient a day earlier. I did not understand
why the transfer could not wait
until I returned from leave, given Kath's
address had changed around a year before this telephone call.
concerns were evident in Dr H’s statement.
30 November 2016, despite the concerns expressed by LP and Mr Staniforth, the
City team leader decided to transfer Kath's care
to the Woden team. The
documented plan was for Kath's care to be completely transferred by March 2017.
The medical records indicate
that the transfer of her care was discussed with
Kath on 28 November 2016, and that she understood the continuation of clinical
with the City team would no longer be feasible.
Territory was asked by the Coroner to explain how the transition of Kath’s
care was managed to ensure continuity of an appropriate
level of care. CHS, in
their response dated 22 May 2023, referred to a plan documented on 5 December
2016 by the City Medical Officer
to continue to see Kath for medical reviews in
the city, until she had built a relationship with the Woden team clinical
CHS said this arrangement “was in effect a warm handover, where
transfer of care would be graduated from City to Woden team’s”.
record of the plan contained in the medical records indicates the City Medical
Officer was Kath’s regular psychiatrist
from the City team, Dr H.
records confirm that, as per the plan, Kath continued to have regular
psychiatric reviews (every 2 to 3 weeks) with Dr H during
the transition of her
care. Following the November admission and before her death, Kath saw Dr H on 22
December 2016, 11 January
2017, and 25 January 2017.
16 January 2016, Kath was introduced over the phone to her new case manager from
the Woden team, HU. Kath and HU met once in-person
on 2 February 2017 before her
death. Prior to this, Kath had been without regular case management since
LP’s departure (approximately
The only interim support
Kath received from community teams following the November admission and during
the transition was the welfare
call on 12 December 2016, and the three
psychiatric reviews with Dr H.
is not to suggest that Kath was not supported otherwise.
Assessment Treatment Team (“CATT”)
was aware that she could contact the CATT for support when distressed. It is
evident from the medical records that the CATT was
not a service she found very
CATT’s role in providing
crisis intervention, rather than therapeutic
dissatisfaction with the CATT is reflected in her complaint on 7 February to
CHS, regarding the CATT call on 4 February
Psychologist – Mr Staniforth
6 January 2017, Kath’s weekly to fortnightly appointments with Mr
Staniforth had resumed. She saw him on 6 January, 27 January,
and 2 February
Conclusion Regarding Care in the Community
find that the treatment and care Kath received from the community mental health
teams in the months prior to her death was suboptimal.
The loss of her regular
case manager in early November 2016, and the approximate three months without a
case manager while being
transferred to a new team was a significant break in
the continuity of her mental health care.
is acknowledged that changes to a patient’s treating team are inevitable.
Given the importance of the therapeutic relationship
between a clinician and a
patient in mental health care, it is expected that the departure of regular
clinicians will cause some
level of distress and disruption to patients. Given
this, the issue in this inquest is not whether the decision to transfer Kath's
care to the Woden team was correct; rather, it is whether the transfer was
managed appropriately to facilitate, as far as practicable,
the continuity of
Kath’s care.
find that the fortnightly psychiatric reviews with Dr H were not on their own an
adequate level of support during the transition,
given the level of intensive
case management Kath was used to, and the increase in her acute risk of suicide
following the November
admission and suicide attempt. Despite Dr H’s
continued involvement, Kath did not receive ongoing and assertive case
from the community mental health teams for approximately three
is likely that this gap in care was disruptive to Kath’s treatment and had
a destabilising impact on her mental health. Both
the transition of care and the
loss of case manager LP were situational stressors that were documented in the
medical records of
the November and February admissions. The records from Mr
Staniforth ’s consultations reflect that Kath, in general, was
dissatisfied
with the contact and treatment she was receiving from the community
teams following the November admission.
(d) The February Admission: 5–7 February 2017
5 to 7 February 2017 admission at TCH was Kath’s last inpatient admission
before her death. On 5 February at 1827 hours,
Kath presented voluntarily to TCH
with suicidal ideation, intent, and a plan to overdose on stockpiled medication
and eucalyptus
oil at home. She was admitted to the MHSSU. On 7 February at 1140
hours, she was discharged home alone. Shortly after discharge,
complaints with the ACT Health Directorate against TCH and the CATT at 1837 and
2027 hours.
complaint against TCH was in respect to the February admission. She reported
I didn’t see a psych reg until 10:30 am Tuesday 7
February. I was discharged an hour later without even being asked if I was
to go home. That was 41 hours in hospital, 40 of them waiting to see a
psychiatrist, and then the psychiatrist didn’t
even do her job
distress regarding the delay in psychiatric review, and not being asked if she
was safe before discharge is also evident in
her text messages to HD, KW, and Mr
Staniforth following discharge.
records demonstrate that Kath was not reviewed in-person by a psychiatrist until
the morning she was discharged, approximately
42 hours after being admitted to
the MHSSU. Kath was first reviewed in the ED by the Consultant Psychologist at
2040 hours on 5 February
2017 (approximately two hours after presentation).
Later that day, at 2300 hours, the Psychiatric Registrar, Dr N, completed a
Risk Assessment. Kath was assessed as an At-Risk Category level 2
(“ARC 2”) and was admitted voluntarily to the MHSSU
at 2320 hours.
From 5 to 7 February 2017, Kath remained in the MHSSU, and was subject to ARC2
hourly observations. Nursing observations
stated that she “maintained a
low profile and was guarded in nature”. On 7 February 2017, sometime
before her discharge
at 1140 hours, Kath was reviewed first by the Psychiatric
Registrar on duty, and then by the Consultant Psychiatrist, Dr NV. Dr NV
assessed Kath as suitable for discharge, and she was discharged at 1140 hours.
delay in an in-person psychiatric assessment of Kath was not in line with
MHJHADS policy, which provided that all inpatients were
to be reviewed by a
psychiatrist daily.
find that there was no causal or contributory link between the delay in
assessing Kath and her death. The psychiatric assessments
(notwithstanding the
fact that the first was not documented), which did occur on 7 February prior to
discharge, contained a comprehensive
evaluation of her risk level and mental
initial psychiatric review by the Registrar on 7 February 2016 was not
documented. The Consultant Psychiatrist, Dr NV, who subsequently
reviewed Kath,
provided a statement, and said that the Registrar provided a handover of Kath's
presentation, which included that
she (Kath) wanted to be discharged from the
hospital to go to work the next day, and denied having imminent suicidal
NV's own review of Kath before discharge is comprehensively documented in the
medical records and addressed in her statement. During
that review, Kath again
said she wanted to go home so she could work the next day. She denied having
stockpiled medication at home.
She declined a referral to the CATT but was aware
of the service and confirmed that she would attend an appointment with her case
manager the following week. The medical records also indicate that clinicians
were aware Kath had an appointment with her psychiatrist,
Dr H, on the following
day (8 February 2017) and encouraged her to attend. Dr NV assessed Kath as
having a "currently stable mental
state and no imminent risk but the chronic
risk of DSH/suicide attempts”. Dr NV documented in the medical
discharge home
medication to
continue as is (no medication supply from the hospital, has still all her
medication at home) - no changes to her medication
management has been made
Katherine is
aware of available 24/7 community support
Is happy to
continue seeing current Woden CMHT case manager.
DBT specific or
similar psychotherapeutic interventions to continue as is
monitoring via the community team
Psych reg to
issue sickness certificate, will return to work tomorrow
Discharge letter
to GP/Community as per psych reg
[15] of her statement, Dr NV says:
Katherine's assessment by
myself, in addition to the Registrar's, medical student's and morning handover
by mental health staff, appeared
to be consistent with the view that she did not
reveal symptoms suggestive of a severe depressive, manic or psychotic episode.
was rational and reasonable, her answers were intelligent, coherent and
logical. Repeatedly she expressed her desire of wanting to
go home and even
requested a sickness certificate for her employer in order to return to work the
next day. She agreed to keep her
appointment the following week with the
treating community team and was aware of the option to contact CATT at any time
start feeling worse again. She denied any imminent self-harm/suicidal
ideation or non-compliance with treatment. Under these circumstances,
allow her to go home as there were no identifiable imminent risk factors or
non-compliance with treatments. This decision
was consistent with the
contemporary medico-legal and ethical framework and guiding principles of
patients' autonomy and providing
least restrictive care.
find that the decision to discharge Kath on 7 February 2017 was reasonable and
appropriate. Dr NV’s questions regarding Kath’s
intent, the
availability of medication at home, and her willingness to engage with support
in the community were questions about
her safety. In the absence of identifiable
imminent risk, there were no grounds for involuntary detention.
The Discharge Plan
discharge plan in respect of the last admission is recorded in Dr NV’s
review of Kath, and it is extracted above. The records
indicate that
Kath’s new treating team at Woden were appropriately informed by TCH
clinicians about her admission and were
asked to be involved in discharge
planning. Clinicians tried to contact HU, but he was on leave until 12 February.
While the documented
discharge plan does not confirm any future appointment with
the Woden team, it is apparent from the information available that TCH
clinicians were aware that Kath had an appointment with Dr H on the following
is no documentation in the discharge plan or the medical records that
Kath’s friends, carers, or advocates were involved
in her discharge
planning. Whether this reflected Kath’s wishes is unclear. The evidence
does suggest that Kath was in contact
with HD, KW, and Mr Staniforth during the
admission, and informed them of her discharge. KW, in her interview with police,
that on 7 February 2017, Kath texted her that she was being
discharged. KW, not wanting Kath to be alone after discharge, met with
approximately 1310 hours on that day for lunch. Mr Staniforth said, in his
statement, that Kath texted him that she was being
discharged from the hospital.
Mr Staniforth replied, reminding Kath that she had an appointment with him on
Friday (10 February).
Kath responded that she had an appointment with Dr H on
the following day.
find that whilst the discharge plan in respect of Kath’s last admission
was not comprehensively documented, appropriate discharge
planning at TCH did
occur. A discharge plan was in place, which involved a psychiatric review on the
discharge, Kath had supportive contact with friends and Mr Staniforth. Her text
messages from 7 February demonstrate that
she was aware of future appointments
in place and did not contain clear indicators of suicidal intent.
(e) Conclusion
deterioration of Kath’s mental health in the period before her death
occurred in the context of a lengthy mental health
history, including an
established diagnosis of complex PTSD, depression, and borderline personality
disorder. At the time of her
death, Kath had been chronically suicidal for many
Staniforth opined that since October 2016, there had been a slow deterioration
in Kath’s mental health, possibly attributable
to the challenges she was
experiencing in navigating her relationship with her parents. The medical
records demonstrate that in the
months prior to her death, she was experiencing
distress due to ongoing trauma memories, and she was dealing with multiple acute
stressors, including the loss of a close friendship, a breakup with her partner,
the loss of her pet, financial pressures, and the
loss of her usual supports
from the community teams.
I have found aspects of the hospital discharge planning and management of the
transition of Kath's care between the community
mental health teams suboptimal,
I do not find that they contributed to her death.
the documentation Kath left behind at the scene of her death, she did not
attribute her decision to end her life to a specific
event or failure of the
mental health system. Her explanation for her decision was general, that she was
in immense pain, and had
been so for a long time. She stated in her suicide
letters that she felt let down by the public mental health system, and that
had done unspeakable things to her in the past.
evidence that some of the documentation had been prepared back in September 2015
reflects that Kath had been struggling with suicidal
thoughts for some time
experiences with ACT Mental Health before her death were difficult, and I have
made findings that in some respects they were not
reasons previously indicated, I make no finding that public safety issues arise
from the inquest. For similar reasons, I do not
include information usefully
provided by CHS in my findings as to how a client in circumstances similar to
Kath would be treated
today. As I have indicated, the mental health system has
changed significantly since Kath's passing. The statutory and practical
restraints that confront me do not permit me to assess whether those changes, if
in place at the time, would have changed the outcome
PART 5 – SUGGESTIONS MADE BY KATH’S
Background Statement
, advanced some ideas as to how to address the
difficulties Kath found in dealing with her mental health providers.
suggested that CHS should aim to improve communication with caregivers
throughout the care process, subject to appropriate consents
being in place.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Act 2022
, enacted in light of the
Victorian Royal Commission, may encapsulate the reform that HD envisages in
recognising a non-legal advocacy
service provider for mental health clients. As
HD acknowledged, the Human Rights Commission in the ACT, through the Public
discharges a similar responsibility and provides a similar service. HD
advocated for an increase of funding for that office.
also urged greater flexibility in geographical divisions to maintain continuity
in care, and to ensure that staff movements or
shortages do not create issues
similar to what Kath experienced.
I do not make any formal recommendations arising from the identification of a
matter of public safety, I acknowledge that HD's
suggestions reflect matters
that have been raised in previous inquests, as well as common sense. They
reflect the consideration and
care she has brought to her advocacy, and
reflection in respect of Kath's life and death.
express my sincere condolences to Kath’s family and friends.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and seventeen [117] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for findings of his
Honour Coroner
Counsel Assisting: Xiao Lin King
Date: 25 July 2024
In the Act, an "inquest" is an
investigation.
The analysis
below also involves a consideration of the quality of Kath’s care during
the February 2017 hospital admission.
R v Doogan; Ex Parte
Lucas Smith & Ors
[2005] ACTSC
The correspondence was
directed at Canberra Health Services, but sent through and addressed to the ACT
Government Solicitors Office.
Phenergan is an antihistamine. It contains the active ingredient Promethazine.
Dotheipin is an antidepressant
used in the treatment of depression. It can be fatal at relatively low doses.
Kath was prescribed
Dotheipin until late 2016 by her psychiatrist. The medical
records indicate that Dothiepin prescriptions were ceased following her
in hospital in November.
Harmsworth v State Coroner
[1989] VicRp 87
[1989] VR 989
at 997 per Nathan J, Doomadgee v Deputy State Coroner
[2006] 2 Qld R 352.
Commonwealth Productivity
Commission,
Mental Health Inquiry
(Report No 95,
Royal Commission into
Victoria’s Mental Health System
(Final Report, February 2021).
Inquest into the deaths
of Bearham & Ors
[2021] ACTCD 1
ACT Audit Office,
Auditor-General’s Report: Mental Health Services-Transition from Acute
, (report no 6, 2017)
Ibid 5. MHAGIC was the
shared digital integrated patient record system within mental health
Mental Health
Discharge Policy
(Issued June 2008, Reviewed June 2012).
Mental Health, Justice
Health, Alcohol and Drugs Services (“MHJHADS”),
Adult Community
Mental Health Teams - Transitional Clinician – Standard Operating
(Issued November 2013, Review December 2018).
Standards for Mental Health Services 2010
are a resource for all
Australian mental health care services ‘to assist in the development and
implementation of appropriate
practices and guide continuous quality improvement
in mental health services’. The National Standards were first issued in
1996 and were revised and re‐issued in 2010. The National Standards are
not mandatory, and the ACT Health Directorate has not
sought accreditation
against them. However, the ACT Health Directorate uses the standards to inform
its policies, measure performance
and the standards are extensively referenced
in policy documents.
Following LP’s departure as Kath’s case manager in early November
2016, BN stepped in as Kath’s case manager for
the week of 21 November
2016. Following this, Kath did not have a case manager until HU was assigned on
16 January 2017.
ACT, the CATT has been replaced by the “Access Mental Health Team”,
who provide a 24 hour a day crisis service
that consumers can call.
Due to Kath’s death,
MHJHADS did not provide a response to either of her complaints.
RTF format (406 KB)
Signed PDF/A format