ClubsACT and ACT Health Directorate [2021] ACTOFOI 3 (9 April 2021)
ClubsACT and ACT Health Directorate
(9 April 2021)
Decision and reasons for decision of ACT Ombudsman
Manthorpe PSM
Application Number
AFOI-RR/20/10035
Decision Reference
[2021] ACTOFOI 3
ACT Health Directorate
Decision Date
Freedom of Information Act 2016
(ACT) – deciding access
– whether disclosure of information is contrary to the public interest
– promote open discussion
of public affairs and enhance the
government’s accountability – reveal the reason for a government
decision or any background
or contextual information that informed the decision
– individual’s right to privacy – trade secrets, business
affairs and research – intergovernmental relations – a deliberative
process of government
Freedom of Information Act 2016
the decision made by the ACT Health Directorate (
21 July 2020 in respect of the applicant’s access application.
Background of Ombudsman review
29 May 2020, the applicant applied to Health for access to:
previous six weeks [commencing 17 April 2020],
(a) all correspondence, emails, briefs, and written communication from Dr
Kerryn Coleman, Chief Health Officer, ACT Health (or an
Executive Assistant or
Officer) to the Chief Minister for Health relating to restrictions on gambling
during Covid-19.
(b) all Covid-19 related re-opening plans/submissions forwarded or presented
to ACT Health made by Casino Canberra, ClubsACT, Canberra
Community Clubs, the
Australian Hotels Association and the TAB and any considerations/advice from ACT
Health provided to those organisations
or a relevant portfolio Minister e.g. the
Attorney-General, Chief Minister or Minister for Health.
(c) any advice provided to ACT Health from the Australian Health Protection
Principle Committee in relation to gambling.
21 July 2020, Health decided to grant partial access to all twelve documents it
held within the scope of the access application.
making its decision to refuse access to some of the information contained in
each of the twelve documents, Health relied on:
Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(ii): individual’s right to privacy under the Human Rights Act
Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(x) intergovernmental relations
Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(xi) trade secrets and business affairs
Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(xiii) competitive commercial activities of an agency
22 July 2020, the applicant applied for an Ombudsman review of Health’s
decision under s 73 of the FOI Act.
provided my preliminary view to the parties in my draft consideration of 10
December 2020. My preliminary view was that access should
be given to
information that was refused on the basis of prejudice to individual privacy and
some of the information about Tabcorp
venue sizes which I did not agree could
reasonably be expected to prejudice the trade secrets, business affairs or
research of a
person as Health had found.
received Health’s response to my draft consideration on 17 December 2020.
Health did not make any further submissions in response
and indicated it
accepted my view as set out in my draft consideration.
Office contacted ClubsACT on 6 January 2021, 11 January 2021 and 20 January 2021
to ensure it was aware it had an opportunity to
make further submissions and
that I would proceed to make my final decision in the absence of a
Office received a response from Mr Gwyn Rees, CEO of ClubsACT on 12 January
2020, indicating his intention to make submissions,
but I have not received any
further submissions as at the date of my decision. Accordingly, I have proceeded
to make my final decision
and it is substantially consistent with my draft
consideration. I have, however, reconsidered the applicability of the
intergovernmental
relations and deliberative process of government factors which
weigh, to varying degrees, against disclosure.
Information at
information at issue in this review is all the information Health redacted from
the twelve documents. Relevantly:
: one email and an attached summary of public health directions.
: two emails and attachments including a brief for the Chief Minister of
the ACT, with information relating to community compliance
with social
distancing rules and information relating to the economic impact of public
health measures.
: one email from the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee
(AHPPC) to the ACT’s Chief Medical Officer, one email
from the ACT’s
Chief Medical Officer to the ACT Minister of Health and two attachments relating
to recommendations to be considered
by the National Cabinet.
: one email which refers to an agenda item for a National Cabinet meeting.
: an email from the AHPPC and an attached submission to the National
: an email from the CEO of ClubsACT and an attachment regarding proposed
arrangements for the operation of gambling facilities.
: an email from the ACT Attorney-General to the ACT Minister of Health
forwarding correspondence from Tabcorp to the ACT Government.
Documents 8
: emails from the AHPPC sent to the ACT’s Chief Medical Officer
and an attached submission to the National Cabinet.
2, 4, 6 and 12 contain redactions that Health advised are personal information,
the disclosure of which could reasonably
be expected to prejudice an
individual’s right to privacy under the
Human Rights Act 2004
(Human Rights Act).
1, 3, 4 and 5 contain redactions that Health decided could reasonably be
expected to prejudice intergovernmental relations.
7 contains redactions that Health consider would prejudice the trade secrets,
business affairs or research of a person.
issue to be decided in this review is whether the information that Health
refused to give access to is in fact contrary to the
public interest
information.
deciding this matter, I had regard to:
applicant’s access application and review application
decision notice
the FOI Act, in
particular ss 7, 9, 17, 50, Schedule 2, s 2.1 and 2.2
FOI processing file in relation to the access application
an unedited copy
of the information at issue
relevant cases,
Taggart and Queensland Police
MBA Group Training
Limited and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate
Peter Gerard
Cannon and Australian Quality Egg Farms
Cockroft and
Attorney-General’s Department and Australian Iron and Steel Pty
Alistair Coe and Chief
Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate
Newspapers and Department of Justice and Attorney-General; Carmody (Third
Eccleston and
Department of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander
’VT’ and Commonwealth
7 of the FOI Act provides every person with an enforceable right of access to
government information. This right is subject
to other provisions of the FOI
Act, including grounds on which access may be refused.
to the public interest information is defined in s 16 of the FOI Act
information-
(a) that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
schedule 1; or
(b) the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
interest under the test set out in s 17.
public interest test set out in s 17 involves a process of balancing public
interest factors favouring disclosure against factors
favouring nondisclosure to
decide whether, on balance, disclosure would be contrary to the public interest.
50 of the FOI Act provides that, where practicable, access to information within
a record containing some contrary to the
public interest information should be
given with contrary to the public interest information deleted.
72 of the FOI Act provides that a party seeking to prevent disclosure of
government information bears the onus of establishing
that information is
contrary to the public interest information.
2 of the FOI Act sets out the public interest factors that must be considered,
where relevant, when determining the public
contentions of the parties
its decision notice, Health said:
The information that has been
redacted in documents at reference 2-12 are related to a staff contact details
of non-government third
parties. On balance, I determined the information
identified is contrary to the public interest and I have decided not to disclose
this information.
Document at reference 7 includes information related to business affairs and
competitive commercial activity of a non-government third
party and I determined
the information identified is contrary to the public interest and I have decided
not to disclose this information.
Document at reference 1, 3-5 and 8-12 include information that was considered
as part of a deliberative process of the Australian
Health Protection Principal
Committee and the release of this information would prejudice the
intergovernmental relationship between
the ACT Government and the Department of
applicant did not make submissions relating to particular sections of the
documents, but contended that, broadly, the public interest
was best-served by
access to government information illuminating the reasons for government
decision-making and enhancing transparency
where decisions are made in relation
to public health issues.
have addressed these submissions in greater detail in my considerations.
Considerations
Information taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
party to this Ombudsman review submitted that the information sought contains
information that is taken to be contrary to
the public interest to disclose
under Schedule 1 of the FOI Act. Therefore, for the information at issue to be
contrary to the public
interest information disclosure, it must, on balance, be
contrary to the public interest under the test set out in s 17 of the FOI
Public interest test
determine whether disclosure is contrary to the public interest, s 17 FOI Act
prescribes the following five steps:
identify any
factor favouring disclosure that applies in relation to the information (a
relevant factor favouring disclosure), including
any factor mentioned in
Schedule 2, section 2.1
identify any
factor favouring nondisclosure that applies in relation to the information (a
relevant factor favouring nondisclosure),
including any factor mentioned in
Schedule 2, section 2.1
balance any
relevant factor or factors favouring disclosure against any relevant factor or
factors favouring nondisclosure
decide whether,
on balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public
balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public interest,
allow access to the information...
do not consider any irrelevant factors I am prohibited from considering arise in
this review.
Factors favouring disclosure
2, 2.1 of the FOI Act contains a non-exhaustive list of public interest factors
favouring disclosure.
have decided that two of the factors favouring disclosure listed in Schedule 2,
2.1 of the FOI Act are relevant.
Promote open discussion of
public affairs and enhance the government’s accountability
2, 2.1(a)(i) provides that a factor favouring the disclosure is if the
information would promote open discussion of public
affairs and enhance the
government’s accountability.
parties to this review advised this a relevant factor favouring disclosure in
this review.
agree it is a relevant factor. I note there has been discussion of the impact of
public health restrictions on gaming facilities
in the ACT and coverage of the
issue in the media,
disclosure of the information at issue could reasonably be expected to promote
and better inform this discussion.
Reveal the reason for a
government decision and any background or contextual information that informed
the decision
2, 2.1(a)(vii) provides that a factor favouring disclosure is if the information
would reveal the reason for a government
decision and any background or
contextual information that informed the decision.
parties to this review advised this a relevant factor favouring disclosure in
this review. I agree this is a relevant factor,
as the information at issue
provides background and contextual information relating to the ACT
Government’s decision to impose
restrictions on gambling venues, including
ClubsACT venues.
Pro-disclosure bias
FOI Act also requires that I observe a pro-disclosure bias in administering the
Act. This bias reflects the importance of public
access to government
information for the proper working of representative
This concept is
promoted through the objects of the FOI
these reasons, I am satisfied that disclosure of the information at issue could
reasonably be expected to promote the objects
of the FOI Act and the two
relevant factors favouring disclosure in this review.
favouring nondisclosure
factors favouring nondisclosure are relevant in this review. Disclosing the
information at issue could reasonably be expected
to prejudice an
individual’s right to privacy, the trade secrets, business affairs and
research of an agency or person and
a deliberative process of government. I have
also considered the applicability of the intergovernmental relations factor.
An individual’s right to privacy
that disclosure could reasonably be expected to prejudice an individual’s
right to privacy under the
Human Rights Act 2004
(ACT) (Human Rights Act)
weighs against disclosure under the FOI Act.
Human Rights Act
protects individuals’ privacy insofar
Everyone has the right not to have his or her privacy, family,
arbitrarily.
made redactions in all documents (except for document 1) which relied on it
finding that disclosure could reasonably be expected
to prejudice an
individual’s right to privacy.
2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 contain personal information of individuals
mobile numbers
of ACT Government staff
names and phone
numbers of non-government staff, and
information
Taggart and Queensland Police Service
, the Queensland Information
Commissioner found that disclosing names and day-to-day work duties of public
servants could not reasonably
be expected to prejudice an individual’s
right to privacy.
Individuals
are acting in the public rather than the private sphere when they are employed
as public servants.
disclosing a person’s mobile telephone number could reasonably be expected
to enable intrusion upon their privacy,
for instance by contacting them outside
their place of work. I therefore accept that the factor in Schedule 2,
weighs against the disclosure of mobile telephone numbers.
Taggart and Queensland Police Service
was decided having regard to public
employees, I do not accept that disclosing the names of private individuals
inherently prejudices
their right to privacy under the
Human Rights Act
instance, a private individual who is identifiable to the public at large or a
section thereof will probably not suffer prejudice
to their privacy merely by
disclosure of their name and place of employment being disclosed. In
Group Training Ltd and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate
, I decided that an employee of MBA Group Training whose
day-to-day duties involved promoting apprenticeship opportunities to members
the public could not reasonably be expected to experience interference with
their right to privacy merely by having their name
and employment by MBA Group
Training published in documents subject to an access
application.
do not think it reasonable to expect that Tabcorp employees responsible for
liaising with government on social distancing restrictions
could reasonably be
expected to have their right to privacy interfered with because their personal
information is disclosed. By participating
in discussion with the government
the Covid-19 pandemic,
I consider those individuals are participating in a
public matter that is outside the private sphere.
identities of recipients of AHPPC emails who are not ACT government officials
are out of scope and should therefore be redacted,
so I do not need to consider
whether this factor applies to their names.
Trade secrets and
business affairs
that disclosure of information could reasonably be expected to prejudice the
trade secrets or business affairs of Tabcorp
would weigh against the disclosure
of that information under Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(xi) of the FOI Act.
previous decisions, I interpreted the term ‘trade secrets’ to apply
A substantial element of secrecy... exist[s], so that, except
by the use of improper means, there would be difficulty in acquiring
information.
previous decisions, the term ‘business affairs’ has been interpreted
the totality of the money-making affairs of an organisation
or undertaking as distinct from its private or internal
submitted this factor applies to document 7. Document 7 comprises an email from
the ACT Attorney-General to the ACT Health
Minister. This includes an attachment
of correspondence from Tabcorp to the ACT Government titled
‘Tabcorp’s protocols
and plan for the safe re-opening of ACT TAB
information at issue, being the redacted sections of this document, can be
divided into two categories. The first category is
information relating to the
size of Tabcorp venues. The second category is information about Tabcorp’s
financial arrangements,
strategies, perceptions of the gambling industry and
related industries and employee duties in the management of Tabcorp venues.
the first category, I am not satisfied the disclosure of information about the
size and layout of Tabcorp venues could reasonably
be expected to prejudice
Tabcorp’s trade secrets or business affairs. Tabcorp is a third party
which Health consulted under
s 38 of the FOI Act. I reviewed Tabcorp’s
submissions to Health. I am not satisfied that disclosing information about the
and capacity of Tabcorp venues would disadvantage Tabcorp over its
competitors. I consider the size and layout of venues may be ascertained
person attending a venue. The features of a venue are too overt to be a trade
secret. Insofar as they may relate to the money-making
enterprise, I am not
satisfied that disclosure of this information would prejudice Tabcorp.
second category of information includes Tabcorp’s observations about the
gambling market, revenues, retail venues, fee arrangements
with pubs and clubs,
as well as its security arrangements. I find that disclosure of this information
could potentially prejudice
Tabcorp’s money-making affairs.
find the trade secrets and business affairs factor is relevant to the redacted
sections of document 7. I afford it significant weight,
as it relates to the
second category of information, being information that could potentially
prejudice Tabcorp’s money-making
affairs. However, I find this factor does
not apply to the first category of information, being information relating to
the physical
size and layout of Tabcorp venues.
Intergovernmental relations
reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice intergovernmental
relations weighs against disclosure.
previous decisions,
interpreted this factor to mean:
the public interest in protecting
confidential communications between State and another government where
disclosure could reasonably
be expected to prejudice relations between the two
governments.
submitted prejudice to intergovernmental relations could reasonably be expected
to flow from the disclosure of documents 3,
4, 5 and 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12.
considered the information at issue and the response provided by the
Commonwealth Department of Health (the Department), a third
party consulted
Department responded to this invitation with the view that:
documents contain information which, if disclosed, would prejudice
intergovernmental relations. The release of this information
could reasonably be
expected to cause damage... as the information would disclose confidential
communications... Release of the documents
could also adversely affect the
ability for the ACT and Commonwealth to participation (sic) in important
channels like the AHPPC,
and to negotiate and communicate in the future.
Department submitted the documents they were consulted about were drafted for
submission to National Cabinet on 6 May 2020. The
Department’s assertion
appears to be that disclosing the information at issue in documents 3, 4, 5, 8,
9, 10, 11 and 12 could
effectively disclose confidential communications between
the Commonwealth and the ACT Government and this could detrimentally affect
their ability to negotiate and communicate in future.
preliminary view was to accept this assertion and afford considerable weight to
this factor in relation to documents 8, 9, 10,
11 and 12. I did not consider it
should be afforded weight in relation to documents 3, 4 and 5 because the
communications are intragovernmental
in nature. Given that Health accepted my
draft consideration, I am satisfied documents 3, 4 and 5 could not reasonably be
to prejudice intergovernmental relations.
find the Department’s response overstates the effect on the public
interest that can reasonably be expected to flow from disclosure.
prejudice to flow from disclosure, but I disagree about how much prejudice is
reasonable to expect in this matter. I accept
that disclosure of the information
could reasonably be expected to displease the Commonwealth and in doing so I
rely on the evidence
before me that the Department objected to disclosure. On
the other hand, I do not accept that it is reasonable to expect that the
would not be able to participate in the AHPPC in the future or negotiate or
communicate with the Commonwealth on other, unrelated
matters. On balance, I
find it is reasonable for me to expect that disclosure of information in
documents 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 is
likely to affect relations between the
governments to a moderate extent. Accordingly, I have reduced the amount of
weight I have
afforded to this factor from the amount of weight I gave it in my
draft consideration, in relation to documents 8, 9, 10, 11 and
12. My decision
is that I should place more moderate weighting on this factor.
A deliberative process of government
factor favouring nondisclosure is that information could reasonably be expected
to prejudice a deliberative process of government.
This factor refers to:
thinking processes- the process of reflection, for example, upon
the wisdom or expediency of a proposal, a particular decision or
a course of
one to five includes communication between the ACT’s Chief Medical Officer
and ACT Health Minister regarding restrictions
on gambling. As these
restrictions are one subset of broader restrictions contemplated or implemented
by the ACT Government in response
to the COVID-19 pandemic, most of the
information in these documents is out of scope of the initial access
application.
the information that related to gambling restrictions, I accept that the purpose
of each communication is to advise the
ACT Health Minister on possible courses
of action in response to the public health risk posed by the pandemic.
agree with the Australian Information Commissioner’s view with respect to
deliberative processes of government:
[a] document must be
considered in the context in which it was
‘VT’ and Commonwealth Ombudsman
this reasoning contributed to the
Information Commissioner’s finding that a document recommending multiple
options for the
Ombudsman’s consideration, but which ‘did not
constitute the Ombudsman’s final view’, may fall under the
deliberative process factor.
question is whether the disclosure of the information at issue could reasonably
be expected to prejudice a deliberative process
of the ACT Government. The
relevant deliberative process being the ACT’s Chief Medical
Officer’s suggestions on possible
courses of action for determination by
the ACT Health Minister.
8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 are documents which have come within the scope of the
request because they were provided to the ACT
Government for consideration and
policy advice. They do not constitute the government’s final view. I find
the information
at issue in those documents could therefore reasonably be
expected to prejudice the ACT government’s deliberative process as
continues to manage and deliberate about the Territory’s response to the
pandemic. I have decided that such prejudice could
reasonably be expected to
have a considerable effect on that deliberative process.
Balancing the factors
identified two public interest factors favouring disclosure and having regard to
pro-disclosure bias that I am required to administer the Act with, I
have considered the balancing of the public interest in relation
information at issue.
this review, I have identified two public interest factors favouring disclosure
and four public interest factors favouring nondisclosure.
note that balancing public interest factors is not simply a case of quantifying
the number of relevant factors for disclosure and
nondisclosure, with the higher
quantity being considered to represent the public interest. My task as the
decision-maker is to consider
the relative importance and weight of each factor
they have identified. The weight given to a factor will depend on the effect
disclosure could reasonably be expected to have on the public interest.
FOI Act also has a pro-disclosure bias, and as a result, the public interest
test should not be approached on the basis that there
are empty scales in
equilibrium, waiting for arguments to be put on each side, rather the scales are
‘laden in favour of
disclosure’.
Information
that was redacted on the basis of a reasonably expectation of prejudice to an
individual’s right to privacy
personal information contained in the information at issue could reasonably be
expected to promote both factors favouring disclosure.
I find I should afford
these factors significant weight with respect to the names and work contact
details of both public officials
and officials of private companies having
dealings with the government. I find I should afford this factor little weight
with respect
to the mobile telephone numbers of individuals, because I do not
consider mobile telephone numbers could reasonably be expected to
promote open
discussion, enhance government’s accountability or reveal the reasons for
a government decision or any background
or contextual information regarding a
afford the protection of an individual’s right to privacy little weight
with respect to the names and work contact details
of public officials and
officials of private companies having dealings with the government. The
identities of persons providing information
to government about gambling
venues’ abilities to comply with social-distancing restrictions is
information the disclosure
of which could not reasonably be expected to
prejudice the right to privacy those persons enjoy under the
Human Rights Act
An open source search identifies relevant individuals as employees of relevant
companies, which suggests their names and employers
is information already in
the public domain.
my discussion of this factor in this review, I pointed out the similarity with
my decision in MBA.
afforded no weight to the protection of personal privacy in respect of the
individual’s name in that review, I do not
consider I should afford any
weight to the names of individual employees shown to be liaising with government
by the information
at issue in this review. However, I find that disclosing
individuals’ mobile telephone numbers could reasonably be expected
prejudice their right not to have their privacy interfered with unlawfully or
arbitrarily.
this reason, I find the names and work contact details of all individuals in the
information at issue should be disclosed in the
public interest, but that all
mobile telephone numbers are contrary to the public interest information and
should not be disclosed.
Information that was redacted on the
basis of a reasonable expectation of prejudice to trade secrets and business
find the information at issue in document 7, relating to the size and layout of
Tabcorp venues, could not reasonably be expected
to promote the factors
favouring disclosure. As I noted, these features are overt and ascertainable by
members of the public. I do
not afford the factors favouring disclosure any
weight in respect of this information.
I also do not accept that disclosing the information could reasonably be
expected to prejudice Tabcorp’s business affairs.
Given s 72 places the
onus on Tabcorp to demonstrate why this information is contrary to the public
interest information and I am
not satisfied the onus has been discharged, I
propose this information should be disclosed.
have decided the other information at issue in document 7, relating to the
gambling market, revenues, fee arrangements and security
arrangements of Tabcorp
could reasonably be expected to promote the two pro-disclosure factors I have
identified to a moderate extent.
I therefore afford each factor moderate weight.
I also accept that disclosing this information could reasonably be expected to
harm Tabcorp’s business affairs. Accordingly,
I afford greater and
overriding weight to the factor favouring nondisclosure in Schedule 2,
2.2(a)(xi).
I propose this information should remain redacted.
Information that was redacted on the basis of a reasonable
expectation of prejudice to intergovernmental relations
Documents 1, 3, 4 and 5
information at issue in these documents, could reasonably be expected to promote
both public interest factors favouring disclosure
which I have identified in
this review.
I stated in my preliminary view, I do not find it reasonable for me to expect
this information to prejudice intergovernmental relations.
Health has not
presented additional evidence in response. The documents are
-governmental communications.
do however, find that the information in these documents could reasonably be
expected to prejudice a deliberative process of government.
I am satisfied that
the prejudice could be real and serious, although probably not severe. On
balance, I find that the extent to
which it could reasonably be expected to
prejudice a deliberative process of government means it is contrary to the
public interest
to disclose.
Documents 8, 9, 10, 11 and
information at issue in these documents, could reasonably be expected to promote
both public interest factors favouring disclosure,
that I have identified in
this review.
find that disclosure of the information at issue could reasonably be expected to
prejudice a deliberative process of government,
by exposing suggested policy
approaches put to government for consideration. I consider that I should afford
this factor a medium
amount of weight.
also accepted that disclosure of the information at issue could reasonably be
expected to prejudice intergovernmental relations
to a moderate degree. I have
decided that the information at issue in documents, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 could
reasonably be expected
to prejudice a deliberative process of government to such
a degree that I should afford this factor considerable weight.
balance, I find that the public interest in preventing prejudice to a
deliberative process and intergovernmental relations outweighs
interest factors that I can reasonably expect disclosure to promote. My decision
is that the information at issue in documents
8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 is contrary to
the public interest to disclose.
of the FOI Act, I
Health’s decision to
refuse access to the information at issue under s
dial-in details on any meeting invitations are out of scope and do not need to
be disclosed to the applicant. I have also already
determined that the names of
other recipients of emails from the AHPPC are out of scope.
applicant should be given access to:
information that
was refused on the basis of prejudice to an individual’s right to privacy,
except for any mobile telephone
numbers regardless of whom they belong to, and
information
relating to the physical size and layout of Tabcorp venues.
find that all other refusal of access was correctly decided upon by Health, but
that the decisive factor weighing against disclosure
is prejudice to a
deliberative process of government rather than prejudice to intergovernmental
Michael Manthorpe PSM
[2015] QICmr
[2020] ACTOFOI 19.
[1994] QICmr 9
(1994) 1 QAR
[1986] FCA 35
(1986) 64 ALR 97.
[2018] ACTOFOI 3.
[2016] QICmr
[1993] QICmr 2
(1993) 1 QAR 60.
[2020] AICmr
Section 17(2) of the FOI
See for example
reporting in the
Broadcasting Corporation
Section 17 of the
Section 6(b) of the FOI Act.
[2015] QICmr 16
Training Ltd and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate
[2020] ACTOFOI 19
Peter Gerard Cannon
and Australian Quality Egg Farms Limited
[1994] QICmr 9
(1994) 1 QAR 491
Ansell Rubber Co Pty Ltd v Allied Rubber Industries Pty
[1967] VicRp 7
[1967] VR 37.
Cockroft and
Attorney-General’s Department and Australian Iron Steel Pty Ltd
[1986] FCA 35
Coe and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
Queensland Newspapers and Department of Justice and Attorney-General; Carmody
(Third Party)
[2016] QICmr 23
Eccleston and Department
of Family Services and Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
[1993] QICmr 2
(1993) 1 QAR 60
‘VT’ and Commonwealth Ombudsman
[2020] AICmr 51
Commonwealth Ombudsman
[2020] AICmr 51
Explanatory Statement,
of Information Bill 2016
MBA Group Training
Limited and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
[2020] ACTOFOI 19.
RTF format (912 KB)
Signed PDF/A format