ACT Nursing Services Pty Ltd and Commissioner for ACT Revenue [2008] ACTAAT 29 (3 November 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: ACT NURSING
SERVICES PTY LTD AND COMMISSIONER
[2008] ACTAAT 29
(3 NOVEMBER
Catchwords:
Payroll tax – review of decision disallowing
objection to assessment of payroll tax, penalty and interest – exemption
from tax where wages paid for work for “not more than 8 days in any
month” – whether “day” is 8 hour
working day or calendar
day – purposive interpretation of legislation – use of extrinsic
aids to interpretation –
remission of penalty and interest.
Legislation Act 2001
Payroll Tax Act 1987,
ss 6, 9, 14, 16, 32
Payroll Tax (Amendment) Act 1999
Taxation Administration Act 1999
Burt v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1912] HCA 74
(1912) 15 CLR 469
CPS Credit Union Co-operative (ACT) Ltd and Commissioner for ACT
[1994] ACTAAT 87
(12 September 1994))
Federal Commissioner
of Taxation v Murry
[1998] HCA 42
(1998) 155 ALR 67
Khoury (Mrs) v Government Insurance Office of NSW
[1984] HCA 55
(1984) 54 ALR
State Chamber of Commerce and Industry & Ors v The Commonwealth of
[1987] HCA 38
(1987) 163 CLR 329
Tracy v Repatriation Commission
[2000] FCA 779
(2000) 61 ALD 361
Mr M H Peedom, President
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/54
GENERAL DIVISION )
ACT NURSING
SERVICES PTY LTD
COMMISSIONER FOR
ACT REVENUE
Mr M H Peedom, President
The decision under review is varied:
(i) by remitting 50% of the penalty payable by the applicant pursuant to
section 31(1)
Taxation Administration Act 1999
(ii) by remitting 50% of the premium component of interest payable pursuant
section 25(1)
Taxation Administration Act 1999
.................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/54
GENERAL DIVISION )
ACT NURSING
SERVICES PTY LTD
COMMISSIONER FOR
ACT REVENUE
REASONS FOR DECISION
3 November 2008 Mr M H Peedom, President
The decision under review
This is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the
respondent to disallow an objection made by the applicant
to an assessment of
payroll tax levied on the applicant for the period 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2006.
The decision, dated 26 May 2008,
was made pursuant to
section 104(1)
Taxation Administration Act 1999
). Jurisdiction
to review the decision is conferred on the Tribunal by
section 107(1)(a)
2. The applicant carries on a business in the ACT which involves the
placement of nurses and carers with persons who require their
services. The
services are provided to persons who are clients of the applicant’s
business in both the private and public
sectors. The applicant has individual
contracts with each person procured to provide the relevant part of the services
to the clients
of the applicant’s business.
3. Some of the services of the applicant may be delivered to each end user
of the services for only a handful of hours per day.
This is particularly the
case where the end user is in the private sector and the people to whom the
services are provided are disabled,
convalescing or are aged and, as a result,
may only require limited care but do not require care for a whole day. Where
only a handful
hours of service are delivered the client is not charged for a
whole day. Rather the client is charged by the applicant for the
services on an
hourly basis. After procuring the person, and assigning the person that
requisite part of the services, the applicant
does not generally supervise or
control the activities of that person.
4. Provision of the relevant services between 1 July 2000 and 30 June 2006
involved the performance of work by individuals who worked
and provided the
services for 64 hours per month or less per individual in any month in which the
services were provided. In some
instances provision of the relevant services
involved the performance of work by the individuals on less than 8 dates in any
month in the relevant tax years. However, regardless of the number of
dates in any given month in which the services were provided,
the provision of
the services in every case involved the performance of work by the individuals
for 64 hours per month or less in
any given month in which the services were
5. In respect of the period 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2006 the applicant did
not lodge a monthly return pursuant to section 16 of the
Payroll Tax Act 1987
) in relation to those individual employees who
worked for 64 hours per month or less in any given month.
The respondent’s assessment
6. On or about 26 November 2007 the respondent issued an assessment to the
applicant in respect of the applicant’s alleged
payroll tax liability
“the assessment”
) under section 14 of the TAA.
7. In the assessment the respondent assessed payroll tax on
“wages” (as that term is defined in section 32(2)(h) of the
its application to payments made for services rendered under an employment
agency contract) paid to the subcontractors by
the applicant in the 6 financial
years commencing on 1 July 2000 and ending on 30 June 2006.
8. The payroll tax assessed in the assessment related only to wages paid to
individuals who provided the services under the employment
contracts for no more
than 64 hours in any one month in the relevant tax years. Some of the
individuals who provided the services
in respect of which wages were paid by the
applicant which are the subject of the assessment worked on fewer than 8 dates
whilst other individuals worked on more than 8 dates per month but
none of the individuals concerned worked for more than 64 hours
in any month.
The respondent excluded from the assessment of taxable wages all of the wages
paid to individuals who worked on 8
dates or less per month regardless of the
number of hours worked on each of those dates.
9. In addition to making an assessment of the tax payable in respect of the
applicant’s employees, the respondent imposed a
penalty tax of 25% of the
amount assessed and unpaid pursuant to section 31(1) of the TAA and interest at
the rate calculated in
accordance with section 26 of the TAA, pursuant to
section 25 of the TAA.
The legislation
10. The PTA is a tax law for the purposes of the TAA and therefore falls
under its provisions relating to the payment of tax and
the imposition of
interest and penalty tax (see section 4(h) TAA).
11. Section 6 of the PTA imposes a liability to pay tax “in respect of
wages to which this Act applies”.
12. A number of exemptions from the liability imposed by section 6 are
specified in section 9 of the PTA. Relevantly to the circumstances
case, section 9(3)(f) provides:
(3) Section 6 does not apply to wages paid or payable by an employment
agent to a person (the
subcontractor
) under a contract between the agent
and the subcontractor for work performed by the subcontractor for a client of
the agent in any
of the following cases:
...........
(f) the individuals who perform the work for which the wages are paid or
payable together work for not more than 8 days in any month
under a contract
with the agent;
13. Section 25(1) of the TAA provides for the payment of interest in
relation to a default.
14. A “tax default” is defined by the Dictionary of the TAA to
tax default
means a failure by a taxpayer to pay, in
accordance with a tax law, the whole or part of tax that the taxpayer is liable
15. Section 25(1) of the TAA provides:
25 Interest in relation to tax defaults
(1) If a tax default happens, the taxpayer is liable to pay interest on
the amount of tax unpaid calculated on a daily basis from
the end of the last
day for payment until the day it is paid at the interest rate from time to time
applying under this division.
16. Section 26 of the TAA contains a formula for the calculation of the rate
of interest payable pursuant to section 25.
17. Section 29 provides for the remission of interest in certain
circumstances.
18. Section 30 of the TAA imposes a penalty tax in relation to certain tax
defaults as follows:
30 Penalty tax in relation to certain tax defaults
(1) If a tax default happens, the taxpayer is liable to pay penalty tax in
addition to the amount of tax unpaid.
Note A taxpayer may also be liable to pay penalty tax under the
(5) (Interest and penalty tax payable on land tax if no
disclosure).
(2) Penalty tax imposed under this division is in addition to
(3) Penalty tax is not payable in relation to a tax default that consists
of a failure to pay—
(a) interest under division 5.1; or
(b) penalty tax previously imposed under this division.
19. Division 5.2 of the TAA contains provisions which specify the amount of
penalty tax payable; the circumstances in which the penalty
tax may be increased
or reduced; the time for payment of penalty tax and the remission of penalty
20. In a notice of determination of the objection which provided an
explanation for disallowing the applicant’s objection,
the respondent gave
consideration as to whether
section 9(3)(f)
applied to wages paid or payable to
subcontractors where they performed work together for not more than 8 days in
any month. The
respondent concluded that
section 9(3)(f)
did so apply. At the
hearing of the appeal, however, Mr D Mossop, of counsel, who represented the
respondent, informed the Tribunal
that the respondent’s assessment was
made on an individual rather than an aggregated basis and, accordingly, it was
unnecessary
for that issue to be resolved by the Tribunal.
21. On behalf of the applicant, Mr C Bevan, of counsel, submitted that the
applicant was not liable for the payroll tax assessed
by the respondent on the
ground that the wages paid to the contractors satisfied the terms of the
exemption from payroll tax in
section 9(3)(f).
He contended that the words in
section 9(3)(f)
“not more than 8 days in any month” meant not more
than 8 working days each, of 48 hours, in any month, that is, 64 hours
month. As the wages in respect of which the assessment was made were paid to
the contractors who worked for less than this
period they were exempt pursuant
section 9(3)(f).
22. Mr Mossop submitted that the term “not more than 8 days in any
month” meant not more than 8 calendar days in any
month irrespective as to
the period of time worked on any of those days. Accordingly, he submitted the
exemption did not apply.
23. It was agreed by the parties that the primary issue to be resolved by
the Tribunal is what is the correct interpretation of the
expression “not
more than 8 days in any month”.
Reasons for decision
24. In support of his submission Mr Bevan referred to the definition of
“day” in the Macquarie Dictionary (Third Edition).
defined means is:
“4. the portion of a day allotted to working
: an eight-hour
25. He also referred to the definition of the word “date” in the
Macquarie Dictionary as:
“1. a particular point or period of time when something happens or
26. Had the meaning contended for by the respondent been intended, he
contended, the word “date” would have been used
section 9(3)(f)
rather than the word “day”, so as to make it clear that work on a
particular day was to be included in any calculation
of the number of days
worked without regard to the duration of time worked on that particular day.
27. Mr Bevan relied upon the decision of the High Court of Australia in
State Chamber of Commerce and Industry & Ors v The Commonwealth of
[1987] HCA 38
(1987) 163 CLR 329
in support of his submission that, in the
absence of a statutory definition, the use of the Macquarie Dictionary was an
appropriate
source by reference to which the ordinary meaning of a word in
Australia could be ascertained.
Legislation Act 2001
contains provisions as to the approach to be
taken in resolving any ambiguity or obscurity of meaning of a provision in
legislation.
Those provisions also have broader scope of application than
merely resolving issues of ambiguity or obscurity. They are to be
circumstances where it becomes necessary to work out the meaning of an Act. The
expression “working out the meaning
of an Act” is defined in
Legislation Act
as follows:
138 Meaning of working out the meaning of an Act
In this part:
working out the meaning of an Act
(a) resolving an ambiguous or obscure provision of the Act; or
(b) confirming or displacing the apparent meaning of the Act; or
(c) finding the meaning of the Act when its apparent meaning leads to a
result that is manifestly absurd or is unreasonable; or
(d) finding the meaning of the Act in any other case.
Sections 139
Legislation Act
139 Interpretation best achieving Act’s purpose
(1) In working out the meaning of an Act, the interpretation that would
best achieve the purpose of the Act is to be preferred to
interpretation.
(2) This section applies whether or not the Act’s purpose is
expressly stated in the Act.
Human Rights Act 2004
(1) (which is about interpreting
legislation to be consistent with human rights) is also relevant to interpreting
territory laws.
140 Legislative context
In working out the meaning of an Act, the provisions of the Act
must be read in the context of the Act as a whole.
long title of an Act provides that it is an Act to give certain benefits to the
holders of pensioner cards. Section 4 provides
‘This Act applies to a
holder of a pensioner card’. Section 22 provides that the commissioner may
grant ‘a person’
an exemption from payment of rates. The Act does
not contain a definition of ‘person’. Section 22 must be read in the
context of the Act as a whole so that the commissioner may only grant exemptions
to people who are holders of pensioner cards.
Drug Testing Regulation 2001 (made under the Drug Testing Act 2000
(hypothetical)), section 6 contains the following heading:
6 Corresponding law—Act, s 100, def corresponding
The heading indicates that the section has been made for the definition of
corresponding law
in the Drug Testing Act 2000, section 100.
12 (1) of a subordinate law refers to ‘a non-conviction order under the
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
’. No other kind of order is mentioned in the
section and the word ‘order’ is not otherwise defined in the
subordinate
law. Subsections (2), (4), (7) and (9) of the same section, which
only refer to ‘the order’, are to be understood as
referring to the
order mentioned in subsection (1).
for material that is, or is not,
part of an Act or statutory instrument.
Note 2 An example is part of the Act, is not exhaustive and may extend,
but does not limit, the meaning of the provision in which
it appears (see s 126
and s 132).
141 Non-legislative context generally
(1) In working out the meaning of an Act, material not forming part of the
Act may be considered.
Note 1 See s 146 for the meaning of
Note 2 See s 126 and s 127 for material that is, or is not, part of an Act
or statutory instrument.
Note 3 See s 142 for material that may be considered in working out the
meaning of an Act or statutory instrument.
(2) In deciding whether material not forming part of an Act should be
considered in working out the meaning of the Act, and the weight
to be given to
the material, the following matters must be taken into account:
(a) the desirability of being able to rely on the ordinary meaning of the
Act, having regard to the purpose of the Act and the provisions
of the Act read
in the context of the Act as a whole;
(b) the undesirability of prolonging proceedings without compensating
(c) the accessibility of the material to the public.
(3) Subsection (2) does not limit the matters that may be taken into
(4) For subsection (2) (c), material in the register is taken to be
accessible to the public.
Note The register is the ACT legislation register (see dict, pt 2, def
Section 142
Legislation Act
further provides that in working out
the meaning of an Act certain specified materials may be considered. Those
materials include:
explanatory statement (however described) for the bill that became the Act, or
any other relevant document, that was presented
to the Legislative Assembly
before the Act was passed.
presentation speech made to the Legislative Assembly during the passage of the
bill that became the Act.
31. In her presentation of the Payroll Tax (Amendment) Bill 1999
) which included, inter alia, the current
exemptions from payroll tax, the Chief Minister and Treasurer stated:
Mr Speaker, this Bill amends the Payroll Tax Act 1987 to provide ACT
employment agencies with a more objective regime of exemptions
to determine
their liability for payroll tax purposes.
The current legislation provides certain exemptions from payroll tax for
employment agents. These include an exemption requiring
the Commissioner for
ACT Revenue to be satisfied that the agent has procured the services of a person
who is bona fide rendering
services to the public generally. Under current
arrangements, Mr Speaker, employment agents have often expressed their concern
the difficulties they face in obtaining information to satisfy these
exemptions and/or complying with the requirements of the tests,
particularly in
relation to the aggregation of 90 days employment in a financial year.
Following recent Victorian Supreme Court decisions, most recently in 1998,
the scope of the exemption has been broadened to such an
extent that it could
undermine the entire employment agent provisions. In addition, the commissioner
is burdened in determining
exemptions in each individual case.
Mr Speaker, this Bill moves the guidelines currently contained in the
relevant revenue circulars into the Payroll Tax Act itself and
makes further
amendment to clarify other exemption provisions for employment agents.
Essentially, Mr Speaker, the Bill makes wages
paid by employment agents to their
contractors exempt from ACT payroll tax where the supply of goods or equipment
is more than 50
per cent of the value of the contract; the person engaged to
perform the work provides services which are not of a type ordinarily
the agent, and those services are provided by persons who normally render those
services to the general public; the person
engaged to perform the work is an
employer in their own right; and the person engaged to perform the work does so
for less than eight
days in each month.
Mr Speaker, in response to the Victorian Supreme Court decision, both New
South Wales and Victoria will provide for employment agent
exemptions separate
from their service contractor provisions. This reflects more closely the
current ACT payroll tax guidelines
and the provisions to be included in the Act.
The New South Wales and Victorian employment agent regimes provide an exemption
employment agents who contract to exempt bodies such as the Commonwealth.
This exemption is not included in existing ACT legislation
contemplated because of the significant loss of revenue to the ACT.
In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I wish to point out that the Bill imposes no
overall additional regulatory or financial burden on the ACT’s
agents. If this Bill is not introduced, however, the ACT could potentially be
exposed to substantial revenue loss. This
Bill will address the Victorian
Supreme Court decision, provide greater certainty for ACT taxpayers, and will
also reduce the cost
of compliance to business.
32. The Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill contained the following
The Payroll Tax (Amendment) Bill 1999 provides ACT employment agents with
a more objective regime of exemptions to determine their
liability for payroll
tax purposes.
2 From 1 November 1989 the Payroll Tax Act 1987 provided that
payments made to a person engaged under an agency arrangement through an
employment agent, irrespective of who makes the payments
(ie. employment agent
or client) were subject to payroll tax. This is the case whether or not the
person supplying the services
or labour does so as a natural person, a
partnership or through a company or trust.
3 In 1993 amendments were made to the Act effective from 17 September
1991, to provide certain exemptions from payroll tax including
an exemption
requiring the Commissioner for ACT Revenue to be satisfied that the agent has
procured the services of a person who
is bona fide rendering services to the
public generally.
4 To assist employment agents to determine whether or not particular
contracts would satisfy the exemption criteria, including those
granted under
the commissioner’s discretion, Revenue Circular No. 39 (RC 39) was issued
on 27 August 1993.
5 Despite RC 39, employment agents have often expressed their concern at
the difficulties they face in obtaining information to satisfy
these exemptions
and/or complying with the requirements of the tests, particularly in relation to
the aggregation of 90 days employment
in a financial year.
7 In addition, the Commissioner is burdened in determining exemptions in
each individual case. Accordingly it is proposed to move
the guidelines from RC
39 into the Act, making amendments as appropriate to clarify provisions. This
will provide greater certainty
for taxpayers and reduce the cost of compliance
to business and government.
33. Revenue Circular 39 (
) dated 27 August 1993,
which was referred to in the Explanatory Memorandum, contained the explanation
that the provisions of the
PTA then in force would:
allow employment agents to exclude from payroll tax payments made to
persons supplying the services where it can be established that
the contractor
is truly independent.
34. It contained the following outline of the exemptions then
applicable:
Outline of Exemptions
12. Where an employment agent engages a person for the performance of
work in order to satisfy a contract between the agent and a
client, the payments
to the person engaged to perform the work would be exempt from payroll tax
the work is
ancillary to the goods or equipment supplied by the person under the
performed by the person for the client are not ordinarily the type of services
that would be provided by the agent to a client
in the course of the mainstream
of the agent’s business
the person supplying the services is
bona fide rendering services of that type to the public generally.
Commissioner is satisfied that the agent has procured the services of a person
who is bona fide rendering services to the public
13. Only one of the foregoing provisions has to be satisfied in
order for the exemption to apply.
35. RC 39 also contained the following statement:
To assist employment agents in determining whether such arrangements would
be excluded, payments made to the person performing the
work, irrespective of
who makes the payments, need not be included by the employment agent for the
purposes of payroll tax where:
..............
the nature of
the agreement or agreements between the person/s engaged to perform the work and
the employment agent does not require
the person to perform the work, which is
the object of the agreement/s, for a period in excess of an aggregate of 90
working days
or 120 calendar days in any financial year.
36. RC 39 contained the following explanation of the 90/120 day
26. Paragraph 14(a) of revenue circular No. 8 of 22 March 1990 provided
that payments made to a contractor by the taxpayer in respect
of services
provided for a period of 90 days or less on any financial year need not be
included for the purposes of payroll tax.
27. By way of clarification:
(a) the 90 day period means 90 working days and is the aggregate of days a
contractor is engaged by the taxpayer in a financial year,
irrespective of the
number of individual contracts under which he or she is engaged, and
(b) it is accepted that 90 working days may be interpreted as 120 calendar
days where it is a more appropriate method of recording
a contractors
37. Mr Bevan submitted that the new test for exemption introduced by section
9(3)(f) would, if the interpretation for which he contended
was accepted, amount
to a test of not more than 96 working days per year, which was the nearest
approximation to the former 90 working
days per year test simply because 90 days
was not readily divisible by 12 months in a year but 96 days was. The adoption
hour working day test would most nearly approximate the former 90
working day test and was supported, in his submission, by the absence
suggestion in the extrinsic material that the amendments were intended to change
the amount of revenue payable in consequence
of the amendments.
38. Mr Bevan also relied upon the principle of interpretation of legislation
that a liberal approach is to be taken to the interpretation
of legislation
particularly amendments that extended benefits conferred by remedial legislation
Tracy v Repatriation Commission
[2000] FCA 779
(2000) 61 ALD 361
at 368) and that
an Act intended to benefit a person or class of persons should preferably
resolve any ambiguity in favour of the
intended beneficiary (see
Khoury (Mrs)
v Government Insurance Office of NSW
[1984] HCA 55
(1984) 54 ALR 639).
He also relied
upon the approach of courts to the interpretation of exemption and exception
sections of taxing Acts where doubts
should be resolved by favouring those whose claims were based on the exceptions
Burt v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1912] HCA 74
(1912) 15 CLR 469
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Murry
[1998] HCA 42
(1998) 155 ALR 67
39. I also note that in enacting similar amendments to those contained in
section 9 of the PTA the Victorian Legislature adopted
a formula of words in the
equivalent provision to section 9(3)(f) that referred to “
more than 8 days per month” as distinct from section 9(3)(f) which
referred to “
not more than 8 days per month” (emphasis
40. The word “for” includes within its ordinary meanings
“during the continuance of:
for a long time
” (see Macquarie
Dictionary). It more readily connotes a continuation of activity during the
period of a day whereas an event
occurring “on” a particular day
does not necessarily entail any period of duration of the event.
41. There is, it seems to me, considerable force in the submissions made on
behalf of the applicant. There are difficulties, however,
in accepting the
interpretation propounded by the applicant.
42. While it is to be accepted that the context of the section (section
9(3)(f)) is the performance of work and that the defined
meaning identified in
the Macquarie Dictionary is apposite, it does not follow that that defined
meaning requires the adoption of
a day which is fixed at a specified duration of
work of 8 hours. As Mr Mossop’s submission pointed out, the explanatory
for the explanation of terms contained in the Key to Structure of Entries
in the Macquarie Dictionary identifies that italicised
words following a defined
meaning of a word are illustrative of that meaning and not part of the defined
43. Mr Bevan submitted that the 90/120 day rule gave recognition to the fact
that a working day is longer than a calendar day. Accepting
that is so such
recognition does not, by itself, resolve what is the period of time that is
required to be worked on any particular
day or cumulatively over a number of
days to satisfy the definition of “day” relied upon by the
applicant. Contrary
to the suggested objective of the Payroll Tax (Amendment)
Act 1999 of codifying the existing (RC 39) guidelines into the PTA, the
interpretation propounded by the applicant would require the making of an
assumption about a matter external to the PTA.
44. No basis, other than the illustration of the defined meaning of the word
“day” was identified for confining its meaning
to an 8 hour period.
Although it is to be accepted that 8 hours is not an uncommon period for a work
day, there is no reason that
I can find to justify the exclusion from the
calculation of a day some portion of a day allotted to working other than an 8
period. Irrespective as to the length of the time worked on a particular
day, whether it is greater, equal to or less than 8 hours,
the work performed is
that portion of the day allotted to working.
45. In the application of the purposive test required by
section 139(1)
Legislation Act
, I accept that the extrinsic material shows that
was enacted to reduce the difficulties for employment agents in
obtaining information; to reduce the scope of exemptions; to avoid
the necessity
of the respondent to determine individual cases; and to provide greater
certainty for taxpayers. Those objectives
would be achieved by the
interpretation contended for by the respondent. Nor, does it seem to me, that a
person working up to 64
hours per month is, as Mr Bevan contended, more likely
to be independent of the person by whom he/she was engaged to perform the
than a person who works for a shorter period of time so as to achieve the
expressed objective of confining the application of
the exemption to persons who
are truly independent.
46. I conclude that, when correctly interpreted, the word “day”
section 9(3)(f)
of the PTA is not confined to a period of 8 hours but that it
applies to any day on which a particular worker works, irrespective
length of time worked. I therefore conclude that, in relation to the assessment
of payroll tax, the decision of the respondent
should be affirmed.
Penalty tax
Section 31(1)
of the TAA specifies the amount of tax payable in relation
to a tax default as 25% of the amount of tax unpaid.
Section 31(1)
expressed to operate subject to Division 5.2 of the TAA.
, contained
within Division 5.2, provides for remission of penalty tax as follows:
37 Remission of penalty tax
The commissioner may remit all or part of an amount of penalty tax
payable by a person if satisfied that—
(a) either—
(i) the person has taken reasonable steps to mitigate, or to mitigate the
effects of, the circumstances that resulted in the liability
for penalty tax;
(ii) the circumstances that resulted in the liability for penalty tax were
exceptional; and
(b) it would be fair and reasonable to remit all or part of the penalty
48. It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that, in the event that the
Tribunal found that a tax default had happened, it should
remit all or part of
the penalty tax imposed by
section 31(1).
49. There are, as I have outlined above, strong arguments in support of the
interpretation of
section 9(3)(f)
for which the applicant contended. The fact
that the section was ambiguous was acknowledged by the respondent’s
officer who
investigated the applicant’s tax default according to a record
of his conversation with the applicant’s representative
on 26 September
2007. Account should also be taken of the fact that no further Revenue Circular
or other publication was provided
to explain the position taken by the
respondent in relation to the interpretation of
section 9(3)(f)
publication of a circular on 30 June 2008. The publication of that circular
(No. PTX014) gives some recognition of the
need for it, albeit belatedly.
50. Against the background of this uncertainty of meaning of the relevant
statutory provision and the absence of any attempt to clarify
an acknowledged
ambiguity, the circumstances that resulted in the liability to a penalty tax
were unusual and to be regarded as exceptional
within the meaning of
51. The Tribunal has previously taken the view that although problems of
interpretation of the PTA would not ordinarily justify remitting
penalty tax involved except perhaps where the taxpayer had acted in good faith
upon competent legal advice, the failure
of a relevant Revenue Circular to make
clear the respondent’s view of the scope of the legislation is a
mitigating circumstance
that justified remission of the penalty tax involved
CPS Credit Union Co-operative (ACT) Ltd and Commissioner for ACT
[1994] ACTAAT 87
(12 September 1994)).
52. In this case the applicant’s representative accepted that he had
not taken advice about section 9(3)(f) but had made his
own “common
sense” interpretation of it. In circumstances where lack of clarity in
tax legislation exists there is a
burden imposed upon taxpayers, including a
financial burden, in obtaining professional legal advice. In some cases that
unavoidable burden due to the complexity of the issue involved. This,
however, is not such a case.
53. In my opinion, the lack of clarity of the obligation imposed by section
9(3)(f) of the PTA and the absence of any information
being made available to
enable it to be resolved are matters that are to be taken into account in
determining whether the penalty
tax or part of it should be remitted. In my
view, it would be fair and reasonable to remit 50% of the penalty tax.
54. Section 29(1)(c) and section 29(2) of the TAA provides:
29 Remission of interest
(1) The commissioner may remit all or part of the market rate component or
the premium component of interest, or both, if—
(c) penalty tax has been remitted in whole or in part under section
(2) The commissioner must not remit the market rate component unless the
commissioner is also satisfied that the circumstances are
exceptional and
justify the remission.
55. During the period of the tax default the applicant has had the use of
the money that should have been paid to the respondent.
The circumstances, in
my view, although exceptional do not justify remission of the market rate
component of interest. In view
of the conclusion which I have reached in
relation to the penalty, I consider that 50% of the premium component of
interest should
be remitted.
PUBLICATION DETAILS
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by Member's
________________________________________________________________________
ACT NURSING SERVICES PTY
RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER
PARTY JOINED:
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANT:
MR C J BEVAN
RESPONDENT:
MR D MOSSOP
PARTY JOINED:
SOLICITORS: APPLICANT:
TRINITY LAW
RESPONDENT:
ACT GOVERNMENT
PARTY JOINED:
OTHER: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
PARTY JOINED:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
MR M H PEEDOM, PRESIDENT
DATE/S OF HEARING:
DATE OF DECISION:
_______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (135 KB)
Signed PDF/A format