DPP v Smith (a pseudonym) [2025] ACTSC 500 (14 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
DPP v Smith (a pseudonym)
[2025] ACTSC 500
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Catchwords:
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION
– CRIMINAL OFFENCE PROVISIONS –
Maximum penalty under
Crimes Act 1900
latest instalment in history of construction of
– where maximum
penalty for pre‑2018 offending defined by 1991 maximum penalty (which
ranges from seven years to life
imprisonment) – where 1991 maximum penalty
defined by reference to whether “another offence” was committed
relationship – where offender pleaded guilty to one count of
persistent sexual abuse – court must determine whether offender
offences in addition to the conduct required to enliven
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION
– CRIMINAL OFFENCE PROVISIONS –
Renumbering – where offence provision (and Part in which offence
contained) renumbered
– where it may be necessary to consider whether
offender committed offences under previous versions of
whether renumbering means that offender did not commit an offence “under
this Part” because the Part had been
renumbered – where renumbering
is routine in the ACT – offender did commit offences “under this
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Pleas – where prosecution submitted that, if the court determined a lesser
maximum penalty applied, the court should reject offender’s guilty plea
– where plea had been accepted by prosecution
– no basis for the
court to reject the plea identified
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
, 92E, 92EA,
Crimes Legislation Amendment Act 2001
(ACT), s 43
Crimes Legislation Amendment Act 2013
Crimes Legislation Amendment Act 2018
Criminal Code
Legislation Act 2001
Royal Commission Criminal Justice Legislation Amendment Act 2020
Cases Cited:
DPP v Smith (a pseudonym) (No 2)
[2025] ACTSC 501
KBT v The Queen
[1997] HCA 54
(1997) 191 CLR 417
KN v The Queen
[2019] ACTCA 37
14 ACTLR 289
(1998) 148 FLR 222
S v The Queen
[1989] HCA 66
(1989) 168 CLR 266
Director of Public Prosecutions
Jeremiah Smith (a pseudonym) (Offender)
Representation:
S McFarland (DPP)
R El-Choufani (Offender)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Hugo Law Group (Offender)
File Number:
SCC 86 of 2025
Introduction
reasons concern a sentence in relation to which I heard submissions on
1 October 2025. At that hearing, there was a dispute
between the
parties as to whether or not the maximum penalty applicable was, in the
circumstances, seven years’ or 25 years’
imprisonment. That issue
arose due to the operation of
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT), and is one necessary
to determine prior to determining the sentence itself.
issue is not straightforward. The difficult history of this offence provision
prior to its present incarnation as
is described in
KN v The Queen
[2019] ACTCA 37
14 ACTLR 289
and it is not necessary to repeat that history in full here.
decision should be read with my substantive sentencing reasons (
DPP v Smith
(a pseudonym) (No 2)
[2025] ACTSC 501)
, which contain findings of fact which
are independent of the maximum penalty issue but upon which these reasons rely.
The statutory interpretation question
offence under
identifies a maximum penalty of 25 years’
imprisonment. The section contains a complicated regime for determining whether
maximum penalty applies to offences committed at earlier times. The
provision (as in force at the time of the plea of guilty and
the sentencing
hearing) is relevantly as follows:
sexual abuse of child or young person under special
(1) A person commits an offence if the
(a) is an adult; and
(b) engages in a relationship with a child, or a young person under the special
care of the adult, that involves more than 1 sexual
Maximum penalty: imprisonment for 25 years.
(2) For subsection (1) (b)—
relationship
includes repeated contact, interaction,
engagement or association, of a sexual nature or otherwise; and
(b) the relationship may have started, or started and ended, before the
amendment day; and
(c) 1 or more of the sexual acts may have occurred before the amendment day;
(d) a sexual offence that could be charged and proved under
section 66B
of conduct charge—child sexual offences) can be 1 of the sexual acts.
(3) For a person to be convicted of an offence against subsection (1),
the trier of fact must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
relationship existed.
For circumstances in which a majority verdict is a
sufficient verdict in a proceeding for an offence against s (1), see
Juries Act 1967
(4) However, in a proceeding for an offence against subsection (1),
there is no requirement for—
(a) the prosecution to allege the particulars of a sexual act that
would be necessary if the act were charged as a separate offence;
(b) the trier of fact to be satisfied of the particulars of a sexual
act that it would need to be satisfied of if the act were charged
as a separate
offence ...
(5) In a proceeding for an offence against subsection (1)—
(a) the prosecution is required to allege the particulars of the period
of the relationship ...
(6) For an offence against this section that occurred partly or wholly
before 2 March 2018, the maximum penalty is the current maximum
however, for a relationship engaged in over the period mentioned in
table 56, column 2, the sentence imposed must not be
more than the penalty
mentioned in column 3 for that period.
period of relationship
wholly before 24 December 1991
the lesser of—
(a) the current maximum penalty; and
(b) either—
(i) if 2 or more sexual acts alleged to be involved in
the relationship are found to have occurred—the total of the maximum
penalties for each offence constituted by the sexual acts; or
(ii) in any other case—the highest maximum penalty
for the offences constituted by the sexual acts alleged to be involved
relationship
started before, on or after 24 December 1991 and ended before
the lesser of—
(a) the current maximum penalty; and
(b) the 1991 maximum penalty
started on or after 24 December 1991 and ended on or after
the current maximum penalty
started on or after 2 March 2018
the current maximum penalty
(7) A person—
(a) may be charged on a single indictment with, and convicted of and
punished for, both—
(i) an offence against subsection (1); and
(ii) 1 or more sexual offences committed by the person against the same
child or young person under the special care of the person
during the alleged
period of the relationship; but
(b) must not be required to serve the sentences for the offence against
subsection (1) and the sexual offences consecutively.
(8) Except as provided by subsection (7), a person cannot be convicted
of an offence—
(a) against subsection (1) if the person has already been convicted or acquitted
of an offence constituted by 1 or more of the sexual
acts alleged to be involved
in the relationship; or
(b) constituted by a sexual act against a child or young person under
the special care of the person if the sexual act is alleged
to have been
committed during the period for which the person has already been convicted or
acquitted of an offence against subsection
(1) in relation to the child or young
(9) For subsection (8), a person is taken not to have been convicted of
an offence if the conviction is quashed or set aside.
(10) A proceeding for a charge for an offence under this section must
not be started without the consent of the director of public
prosecutions.
(11) The Criminal Code, chapter 2 (other than the applied provisions)
does not apply to an offence against this section.
(12) In this section:
1991 maximum penalty
means the maximum penalty for this
offence applying on 24 December 1991.
This section was previously s 92EA which was inserted into
this Act by the
Crimes (Amendment) Act (No 3) 1991
(A1991-90).
See that Act for the maximum penalty for this offence applying on 24 December
amendment day
means the day the
Commission Criminal Justice Legislation Amendment Act 2020
, section 3
means a person who is under the age of 16 years.
current maximum penalty
means the maximum penalty
mentioned in subsection (1).
(i) an act that constitutes an offence against this part; or
(ii) an act that constituted an offence against a sexual offence
provision of this Act previously in force (a
(iii) an attempt to commit an act that constitutes or constituted an offence
against this part or a historical offence; or
(iv) an act that, if particulars of the time when or place where the
act took place were sufficiently particularised, would constitute
constituted an offence against this part or a historical offence at the time the
act occurred; but
(b) does not include an act referred to in—
(i) section 55 (3) (Sexual intercourse with young person) if the person
who committed the act establishes the matters referred to
in section 55 (5) that
would be a defence if the person had been charged with an offence against
section 55 (3); or
(ii) section 61 (3) (Act of indecency with young people) if
the person who committed the act establishes the matters referred to
section 61 (5) that would be a defence if the person had been charged with
an offence against section 61 (3).
special care
—see section 55A (2).
young person
means a person who is at least 16 years old,
but not yet an adult.
the circumstances of the present case, the maximum penalty against which the
sentence is to be assessed is the lesser of the “current
penalty” and the “1991 maximum penalty”. That is so because
the period of the offending to which the offender
pleaded guilty was between
March 2013 and November 2016, a period which falls within that
described in item 2 of table 56.
statutory concept of the “1991 maximum penalty” is defined as
meaning “the maximum penalty for this offence
applying on 24 December
1991”. That then requires consideration of the terms of s 92EA (as
s 56 was then numbered) as at 24
December 1991. At that time,
s 92EA(5) provided that the maximum penalty for an offence under that
section was seven years’
imprisonment, but that was qualified by
s 92EA(6), which provided that, if the offender was “found, during
the course of the
relationship, to have committed another offence under this
Part in relation to the young person”, then the offence was punishable
imprisonment for either 14 years or life, depending on the maximum penalty for
that other offence (I will refer to this as the
“higher penalty
provision”). For completeness, I set out the 1991 statutory provision
(s 92EA of the
as in force on 24 December
92EA Maintaining a sexual relationship with a young
(1) In this section—
“adult” means a person who has attained the age of 18 years;
“sexual act” means an act that constitutes an offence under this
Part but does not include an act referred to in subsection
92K (2) if the person who committed the act establishes the matters
referred to in subsection 92E (3) or 92K (3), as the
case may be, that would be
a defence if the person had been charged with an offence against subsection 92E
(2) or 92K (2), as the
case may be;
“young person” means a person who is under the age of 16
(2) A person who, being an adult, maintains a sexual relationship with a
young person is guilty of an offence.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), an adult shall be taken to have
maintained a sexual relationship with a young person if
the adult has engaged in
a sexual act in relation to the young person on 3 or more occasions.
(4) In proceedings for an offence under subsection (2), evidence of a
sexual act is not inadmissible by reason only that it does
not disclose the date
or the exact circumstances in which the act occurred.
(5) Subject to subsection (6), a person who is convicted of an offence
under subsection (2) is liable to imprisonment for 7 years.
(6) If a person convicted under subsection (2) is found, during the course
of the relationship, to have committed another offence
under this Part in
relation to the young person (whether or not the person has been convicted of
that offence), the offence under
subsection (2) is punishable by
imprisonment—
(a) if the other offence is punishable by imprisonment for less than 14
years—for 14 years; or
(b) if the other offence is punishable by imprisonment for a period of 14 years
or more—for life.
(7) Subject to subsection (8), a person may be charged in 1 indictment with
an offence under subsection (2) and with another offence
under this Part alleged
to have been committed by the person during the course of the alleged
relationship and may be convicted of
and punished for any or all of the offences
so charged.
(8) Notwithstanding
subsection 443
(3), where a person convicted of an
offence under subsection (2) is sentenced to a term of imprisonment for that
offence and a term
of imprisonment for another offence under this Part committed
during the course of the relationship, the court shall not direct that
sentences be cumulative.
(9) A prosecution for an offence under subsection (2) shall not be
commenced except by, or with the consent of, the Director of
Prosecutions.
question is how the higher penalty provision is to be applied where there is a
single charge of a contravention of
and where numerous sexual offences
are admitted but none are separately charged. Does the higher penalty provision
only apply if
there are separate offences that are charged in addition to the
offence, or does it apply where there are numerous offences disclosed
as the agreed basis for sentencing on the
The positions of the parties
offender submitted that the reference to “another offence under this
Part” in s 92EA(6) was a reference to a separately
charged offence
and not to any of the sexual acts relied on in order to establish the
maintenance of the sexual relationship. On
that submission, there would have to
be further offending conduct beyond that particularised to establish the sexual
relationship,
even if, as in the present case, the particularised conduct
involved far more than “more than 1 sexual act” as required
in its present form. Counsel submitted that this was decided by
Crispin J in
(1998) 148 FLR 222.
submissions made by the prosecution placed emphasis upon the bracketed words in
s 92EA(6), namely “whether or not the person
has been convicted of
that offence”. The prosecution submitted that s 92EA(6) will be
engaged whether or not the offender was
specifically charged with “another
offence”, so long as the court is satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
the offender
had committed “another offence”. That would have the
effect that any sexual act beyond those that were required in order
to establish
the maintenance of a sexual relationship would enliven the higher penalty
provision in s 92EA(6).
supplementary submissions of the parties also raised two other issues, which I
will deal with below.
number of cases have considered the interpretation of provisions criminalising
sexual relationships with children, and these form
part of the background
against which
in its current form was enacted. The High Court in
v The Queen
[1989] HCA 66
(1989) 168 CLR 266
emphasised that it was necessary, in cases
where there were numerous unlawful sexual acts committed against a child, for
the particular
acts the subject of the charges to be specifically identified. It
was not open to the prosecution to lead evidence that was equally
referring to a number of occasions, any one of which might constitute an offence
of the nature charged, and invite a jury
to convict on any one of them.
Subsequently,
KBT v The Queen
[1997] HCA 54
(1997) 191 CLR 417
, the High Court considered a
provision in the
Criminal Code
very similar to s 92EA, which required sexual offences to have occurred
on three or more occasions to establish that there had been
an unlawful
relationship. The court held that the jury was required to be instructed that
they must unanimously agree on the occurrence
of three particular occasions. It
was not open for different members of the jury to rely upon different occasions
to reach the conclusion
that the offender had maintained an unlawful
relationship with a child.
requirement for unanimity as to the occurrence of the same three or more acts
was removed in the version of s 56 enacted in 2018
Crimes Legislation Amendment Act 2018
which also reduced the number of occasions of sexual acts from “3 or
more” to “2 or more”: see
until the most recent iteration of s 56, the drafting of s 92EA and
s 56 maintained the position that the actus reus constituted
the commission
of a specified number of acts rather than the maintenance of a relationship. In
relation to s 92EA, Crispin J in
pointed out (at 224):
I have ultimately concluded that what is required by the terms of subs (3) is
proof of the commission of sexual acts on three or
more occasions which need not
be of the same kind so long as each would constitute an offence under
in relation to
, it was observed in
(at [66]) that the focus
is “on ‘sexual acts’ rather than on the existence of a sexual
relationship in the ordinary
current version of the provision, which commenced on 1 September 2020, was
enacted following the decision in
Royal Commission Criminal Justice Legislation
Amendment Act 2020
(ACT). While there have since been minor amendments to
the provision since the 2020 amendment, the substituted provision relevantly
made it clear that:
(a) it is the maintenance of the relationship that is the actus reus of the
offence: s 56(3); and
(b) it is not necessary for all members of the jury to agree on the same sexual
acts involved in the relationship: s 56(4)(c).
Despite continued similarity across the versions, that clarity was achieved
by omitting what had been s 56(2) in the version of that
considered in
, which had provided (quoted in
(4) For subsection (1), an adult maintains a sexual relationship with a young
person or a person under the special care of the adult
if on 2 or more occasions
and over any period the adult engages in a sexual act with that person.
amended provision rephrased the requirement that there be “2 or
more” sexual acts (as it had been under the earlier
version of s 56)
to “more than 1”. It will be recalled that, under s 92EA,
sexual acts were required to have occurred
on “3 or more
occasions”.
must be emphasised that s 56 remains the offence provision and is otherwise
the operative provision in relation to sentencing;
it is plain that s 56
expressly and exhaustively deals with its own retrospective application (albeit
in a manner which has led to
the present difficulties). The legislative history
of s 56 is important due to the operation of s 56(6), which provides
for different
maximum penalties for conduct occurring when different versions of
were in force. The changes over time are significant
because they affect the exercise that is being undertaken under the current
by reference to the terms of s 92EA as at
24 December 1991.
interpretation of s 92EA is only necessary in order to determine the
maximum penalty to be applied under
Given that s 92EA provides
different penalties in different circumstances, it is necessary to consider what
are the circumstances
to which s 92EA is to be applied in order to
determine what the maximum penalty would have been under s 92EA so as to
then, in turn,
determine the applicable maximum penalty provided by
issue is: What do the words “relationship” and “another
offence” mean in s 92EA when that provision is
referred to or picked
up as required by the present
“Relationship”
one interrogate the operation of s 92EA as if the offence provision itself
was s 92EA, or does one apply the penalty provisions
of s 92EA in a
way that picks up the amended concept of a “relationship” that
exists currently in
For the moment, for the purposes of assessing the
operation of the higher penalty provision, it is appropriate to assume that
intercourse between the offender and the victim constituted an offence
24 December 1991 and under
currently in force. That is an issue which will be returned to below.
, Crispin J was considering the more straightforward question of
the operation of s 92EA in its original form. His Honour made reference
the terms of s 92EA(7), which allowed a person to be charged on a single
indictment with “another offence under this Part”
alleged to have
been committed “during the course of the alleged relationship”. His
Honour found that, notwithstanding
the language of s 92EA(7), a person could not
be separately charged with a sexual act that was alleged to comprise one of the
or more occasions particularised for the purposes of establishing the
maintenance of a sexual relationship. That was for two reasons.
(a) Because each sexual act relied upon to establish the maintenance of a sexual
relationship would constitute an offence under the
construction for which the Crown contended in that case would have meant that
the increased penalties provided by s 92EA(6)
would always have been
applicable and the lower maximum penalty provided by s 92EA(5) could never
have applied: at 225.
(b) There is a long-standing principle that a person should not be punished
twice for what is effectively the same offence. The construction
suggested by
the Crown in that case would have had the consequence that, whenever a person
was convicted of three such offences,
“a fourth conviction under
s 92EA could be added without proof of any additional element”: at
225-226. His Honour found
that there was “nothing in the extrinsic
material to suggest that the legislature intended to create an
offence for the purpose of providing additional or
heavier penalties than might have been available following convictions for three
or more offences constituted by the constituent sexual acts”: at 228.
note that, in
at [80]-[82], the Court of Appeal concluded in relation
to the then‑current version of
open to charge
and convict a person for both a
offence and the offending relied upon
to establish the
charge. The decision in
was not referred
, if it were not open for a person to be separately convicted
in relation to an offence under s 92EA and, in addition, convicted of
separate offences based upon each of the sexual acts relied upon to establish
maintenance of the sexual relationship as defined in
that section, then the
offender in the present case contended that it would not be open to rely upon
one of those acts to trigger
the higher penalty provision. That essentially
relies upon the first of Crispin J’s reasons, namely, that if it was
rely upon the acts required to establish the offence as acts sufficient
to trigger the higher penalty provision, there would never
be a circumstance in
which the ordinary penalty provision applied.
prosecution seemed to accept the proposition derived from
that, under
s 92EA, it was not open to rely upon the three particularised sexual acts
in order to trigger the higher penalty provision.
Rather, the submission was
that, in cases where there were other offences established beyond the
particularised three, those other
offences could be relied upon in order to
trigger the higher penalty provision.
prosecution’s submission would have the consequence that, where there was
a jury trial, it would be necessary for the sentencing
judge to make findings as
to whether or not any such additional offence was established beyond reasonable
doubt. Where there was
a guilty plea, it would be necessary to make findings of
fact beyond reasonable doubt based upon evidence or an agreed statement
facts. In neither scenario would it be necessary that the offence which
triggered the higher penalty provision be separately charged.
point not fully addressed in the parties’ submissions is that, as I
observed, it is the current version of
to which regard must be had
when determining what the offence committed is. Notably, in contrast to
s 92EA, the current version of
requires only one or more sexual
acts and does not require jury unanimity as to the occurrence of the sexual acts
that make the relationship
one to which the section applies. Reference is to be
had to s 92EA only for the purpose of determining the consequence of the
against the current version of
It is not a case of assessing
all of the circumstances of the present case against all of the requirements of
s 92EA. One therefore
does not have to ask “Which are the three
occasions on which sexual acts occurred?” when determining the 1991
will be recalled that, under s 92EA, the language used had the effect that
it was the sexual acts on three or more occasions that
were deemed (“shall
be taken”) to be the maintenance of a sexual relationship with a young
person. That contrasts with
the current version of
, where it is clear
that the relationship is distinct from the sexual acts that occurred during it.
The sexual acts are relevant to
give the relationship the relevant character
required for the offence to be committed. Because the relationship under the
has an existence which is separate from the sexual
acts which it involved, the reference to “during the course of the
relationship”
in s 92EA(6) (when picked up for the purposes of
sentencing a breach of
now makes more sense than it did in
s 92EA itself, where the relationship required no more than that it be
proved beyond reasonable
doubt that there were three occasions upon which sexual
acts had occurred.
when s 92EA is picked up by
, the meaning of the term
“relationship” in s 92EA(6) is to be understood by reference to
the meaning of that term under
the current
That leaves the question
of what “another offence” (relative to the meaning of
“relationship”) means.
as it currently stands, where the actus reus is the relationship and
where jury unanimity as to the identity of the “1 or more”
acts is not required, what is to be made of the references in ss 92EA(6),
(7) and (8) to “another offence”? (As
I have noted, I will address
the words “under this Part” later).
for the bracketed words “whether or not the person has been convicted of
that offence”, the natural reading of the
references to “another
offence” would be to another charged offence of which the person had been
convicted. That would
mean that, where the evidence was sufficient to allow a
specific charge to be brought and proved beyond reasonable doubt, the higher
penalty provision would be triggered. However, the bracketed words clearly
indicate that there is no requirement that the person
be convicted of the
offence, even though ss 92EA(7) and (8) clearly indicate that the accused
may be separately charged with such
an offence. Given that there is no
requirement that the person be convicted of the other offence, it cannot be a
requirement that
they be charged. That is because it could not be concluded that
the bracketed words were only designed to accommodate a situation
where a person
was charged and acquitted or charged and no verdict was reached.
my view, those bracketed words indicate that it is not necessary for the other
offence to have been separately charged. Rather,
the focus must be upon a
finding as to the occurrence of the offence. If the offence is separately
charged, then it will depend upon
a finding by the finder of fact upon that
count. If the offence is not separately charged, then it will depend upon a
the sentencing judge based upon the evidence or admissions in the
case. If only two sexual acts are relied upon for the purposes
of establishing a
relationship of the required character, then, subject to its possible
inconsistency with the decision in
circumstances will
apply. It will not be possible to characterise that conduct as
“another” offence because it will be
inherently part of the
relationship of the required kind.
is not necessary to finally determine whether
is consistent with
. That is because in a case such as the present — where there
have been scores if not hundreds of offences committed over many
years during
the course of the relationship, and where those offences are admitted in an
agreed statement of facts so as to permit
them to be found beyond reasonable
doubt — the correct application of s 92EA(6) allows the court to find
that the offender,
“during the course of the relationship”,
“committed another offence under this Part in relation to the young
In other words, the term “another offence” is to be
read as an offence proved beyond reasonable doubt that is in addition
sexual conduct required to enliven the operation of
those reasons, subject to the remaining arguments presented by the offender and
the prosecution, I conclude that it is possible
for the higher penalty provision
to apply. As pointed out earlier in these reasons, there are numerous offences
disclosed by the
agreed statements of facts which can be found beyond reasonable
doubt to have been committed. There are examples both of specifically
occasions when an offence occurred as well as numerous other unparticularised
occasions which are admitted.
an unparticularised occasion may be insufficient to be separately charged
because the lack of particularisation would make
it unfair to an accused person,
the unparticularised occasions in the present case would be sufficient, if they
were necessary, to
provide a basis for the application of the higher penalty
provision. Because they are admitted by the offender, they can be found
reasonable doubt. These include all of the occasions on which sexual intercourse
with a person under the age of 16 occurred,
an offence which carried, at all
relevant times, a maximum penalty of 14 years’ imprisonment.
as will become apparent in the next part of these reasons, what offending may be
relied upon for the purposes of the higher
penalty provision is subject to a
further complexity.
Offender’s additional argument:
Which version of the Part?
for the offender said that the court would need to be satisfied that the
reference to “another offence under this Part”
could apply in
circumstances where
in force on 24 December 1991 “had been
replaced by [the current]
argument does not present any impediment to the application of the higher
penalty provision in the present case, as the change
is simply a renumbering exercise that occurred between Republications
8 and 9. The relevant Part remains that in which s 92EA/s
Contrary to the submissions on behalf of the offender, when s 92EA was
renumbered as
, it was not “moved to
of the Act”.
was already the third Part of the
that Part was simply renumbered to accurately reflect that fact, leaving the
text of the relevant section in the same Part of
the Act. That renumbering was
authorised by s 43 of the
Crimes Legislation
Amendment Act 2001
(ACT), which provided: “renumber provisions when
Act next republished under
Legislation Act 2001
”. Such renumbering may now
be done, and is routinely done, without specific legislative authorisation by
the parliamentary
counsel when preparing a new republication of a law: see
Legislation Act 2001
the intent behind the offender’s submission may have been to raise the
question of whether, when considering what is
referred to in s 92EA(6) as
“another offence under this Part”, what is to be considered is an
offence that existed as
at 24 December 1991 as opposed to an offence
which exists in
position in relation to victims under 16 or between 16 and 18 needs to be
considered separately.
a victim under the age of 16
: As at 1991, sexual intercourse with a person
under the age of 16 was an offence under s 92E of the
was punishable by imprisonment for 14 years. Section 92E is now
and, relevantly, the maximum penalty remains 14 years’ imprisonment
(except where the offending involves “family violence”,
case it is 18 years’ imprisonment).
a victim between 16 and 18
: As at 1991, there was no relevant provision
criminalising sexual intercourse with a person between 16 and 18 years old.
Section 55A
was introduced on
24 April 2013 by the
Crimes Legislation Amendment Act 2013
(ACT). It criminalises sexual intercourse with a young person under the
offender’s special care. The young person is under
special care if,
relevantly, the offender is their foster carer (see s 55A(2)(b)). The
maximum penalty was, and continues to be,
imprisonment for 10 years.
the potentially relevant offence provisions relating to sexual intercourse
between the offender and victim that are available
and that could constitute
“another offence under this Part”, and their maximum penalties, are
set out below:
(a) If the relevant version of the
is that in force on 24 December 1991:
(i) For sexual intercourse where the victim was 14 to 16: the penalty for each
offence (under s 92E) is 14 years’ imprisonment.
(ii) For sexual intercourse where the victim was 16 to 18: there was no offence
(b) If the relevant version of the
is that in force when the
offending was occurring (2013-2016):
(i) For sexual intercourse where the victim was 14 to 16: the penalty for each
offence (under
is 14 years’ imprisonment.
(ii) For sexual intercourse where the victim was 16 to 18: the penalty for each
offence (under
, provided the victim was under the offender’s
special care) is 10 years’ imprisonment.
(c) When the charge was laid (January 2025):
(i) For sexual intercourse where the victim was 14 to 16: the penalty for each
offence (under
is 14 years’ imprisonment.
(ii) For sexual intercourse where the victim was 16 to 18: the penalty for each
offence (under
, provided the victim was under the offender’s
special care) is 10 years’ imprisonment.
most restrictive operation of s 92EA, when picked up by
purposes of determining the maximum penalty, is that the reference to
“another offence under this Part” is to
an offence which existed as
at 24 December 1991 with the maximum penalty applicable at that time.
As described at [
s 92E was in
at that time. Given that the offender is to be
sentenced on the basis of an offence that occurred throughout the whole of the
that is, the period from when the victim was a child as well as the
period when she was a “young person”, the existence
of s 92E is
sufficient to constitute “another offence under this Part” that
occurred “during the course of the
relationship”.
the offender is to be sentenced for that whole period, it is unnecessary to
separately consider what would have been the position
in relation to the
existence of “another offence under this Part” (and hence the
application of the higher penalty provision)
if the period when the victim was a
child and the period when the victim was a “young person” had been
the subject of
separate charges under
those reasons, it is not necessary to finally determine whether a reference to
“another offence under this Part” can
be interpreted to include an
offence under the Part that came into existence after 24 December 1991 or after
the offending conduct
Prosecution’s additional
argument: “Rejecting” the plea
for the prosecution submitted that:
If the Court were to adopt the position that the maximum of 7 years applied, the
Court will be obliged to ignore the facts which
give rise to offences of sexual
intercourse without consent and the acts of indecency, which carry 14 and 10
years respectively,
consistent with the
[sic] principle. In
those circumstances, the prosecution invites the Court to reject the plea,
noting the agreed facts substantiate
more serious offending.
I reached the conclusion that the maximum penalty of seven years applied, I
would not have accepted this submission. It would
not have been necessary to
ignore the offences of sexual intercourse without consent or acts of indecency.
Rather, they would have
been taken into account as having occurred during the
relationship. Even if they could not have, there would be no basis upon which
the court could reject the plea at the urging of the prosecution, it having been
already accepted by the prosecution.
the above reasons, in the circumstances of this case, the maximum penalty is
that provided by s 92EA(6)(b), namely life imprisonment.
That penalty is,
by operation of
, item 2), reduced to 25 years’
imprisonment. It is that maximum penalty that will be applied to this
I certify that the preceding forty-nine [49] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of his Honour Justice
RTF format (306 KB)
Signed PDF/A format