DPP v Beroukas (No 3) [2025] ACTSC 475 (22 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
DPP v Beroukas (No 3)
[2025] ACTSC 475
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
McWilliam J
Offender convicted, previous good behaviour order cancelled, offender
resentenced. Total effective sentence of imprisonment for a
term of 1 year 6
months and 9 days imposed, to be served by way of an intensive correction order.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – driving offences – breach
of good behaviour order – sentence of imprisonment imposed – whether
subjective features make an intensive correction
order appropriate – where
voluntary treatment under quasi-custodial conditions undertaken – where
disproportionate hardship
to dependants would result if full-time custodial
sentence imposed – intensive correction order made
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Criminal Code 2002 (ACT)
ss 318, 321, 404(1)
Road Transport (Driver Licensing) Act 1999
Cases Cited:
Dawson v The Queen
[2019] ACTCA 9
DPP v Beroukas (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 294
DPP v Monaghan
[2024] ACTSC 183
DPP v Rohrlach (No 2)
[2025] ACTSC 192
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
Monfries v The Queen
[2014] ACTCA 46
19 ACTLR 99
MT v The Queen
[2021] ACTCA 26
17 ACTLR 22
R v Beroukas
[2021] ACTSC 172
R v Elphick
[2021] ACTSC 9
[2020] ACTSC 256
R v Massey (No 3)
[2021] ACTSC 156
R v Rosewarne
[2021] ACTSC 217
R v Slattery
[2021] ACTSC 154
Thorn v Laidlaw
[2005] ACTCA 49
Director of Public Prosecutions
Jordan Wayne Beroukas (Offender)
Representation:
J Melloy (DPP)
Z McBride (Offender)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Bevan & Co (Offender)
File Number:
SCC 28 of 2025
SCC 29 of 2025
McWILLIAM J:
Offences for Sentence
Wayne Beroukas is before the court for sentence having pleaded guilty to the
following offences:
Reference number
Max. Penalty
CAN 11991/2024
Take motor vehicle without consent, contrary to s 318(1) of the
$80,000 fine, imprisonment for five years, or both.
CAN 11992/2024
Drive motor vehicle without consent, contrary to s 318(2) of the
$80,000 fine, imprisonment for five years, or both.
CAN 11989/2024
Minor theft, contrary to s 321 of the
$8,000 fine, imprisonment for six months, or both.
CAN 11994/24
Drive unlicensed, contrary to
Road Transport (Driver
Licensing) Act 1999
$3,200 fine.
Conduct constituting the
conduct that is the subject of the four offences all occurred over the weekend
of 30 November 2024 to 1 December 2024.
minor theft occurred first, when the offender filled up a truck with fuel at an
Ampol petrol station and drove off without paying
for it. The truck broke down
50 metres from the petrol station. He then returned to the Ampol station and
took a bottle of Mountain
Dew from the store. The total value of the petrol and
the drink was $177.06. CCTV footage captured the events.
that afternoon, the offender attended a mechanic workshop in Hume. He located
the keys to a blue Mazda 323. He got into the
car and drove the vehicle out of
the vehicle yard. The following day he attended the 7-eleven service station in
Wanniassa with
the Mazda around lunchtime. Police attended shortly after and
arrested the offender. They returned to the vehicle, and the Mazda
impact smash to the front windscreen panel and paint damage to the right-hand
the time of driving the truck and the Mazda 323, the offender’s learner
licence was expired, making him an unlicensed driver.
A sentence of imprisonment will be
that imposing a term of imprisonment is a sentence of last resort, there was no
issue here that a term of imprisonment was
the appropriate sentence for the
above offending (apart from the driving while unlicensed), for reasons that are
explained below.
Consequences of conviction
conviction for these offences, the offender will be in breach of a suspended
sentence order imposed on 24 September 2024 in relation
to an offence of arson,
which was itself imposed as part of a re-sentencing exercise:
DPP v Beroukas
[2024] ACTSC 294
Beroukas (No 2)
). That suspended
sentence must now be formally cancelled under s 110 of the
Sentence Administration
(ACT), even though it has now expired.
offender will be re-sentenced for the arson offence. It is appropriate in the
circumstances here for the sentence to now be served
by way of an intensive
correction order (
), rather than to impose a full-time custodial
Applicable legal principles
that the conclusion as to the appropriate course was clear in this case, I will
deal with the established legal principles affecting
the court’s
discretion briefly. In sentencing the offender for the driving offences, the
court has, at the forefront of its
consideration, the purposes of sentencing,
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act
), which include (in summary form) making the
offender accountable and denouncing and adequately punishing his conduct,
the offender and other people from committing the same or similar
offences, recognising the harm done to the victims of the crimes
community and promoting an offender’s rehabilitation.
mandatory relevant considerations set out in s 33 of the
Sentencing Act
have also been considered below insofar as they relate to the offender’s
circumstances, and in accordance with the principle
of individualised justice:
MT v The Queen
[2021] ACTCA 26
17 ACTLR 22
court must take into account the nature and circumstances of the offence (s
33(1)(a) of the
Sentencing Act
) and ensure that the sentence is
proportionate to the gravity of the offending, with the applicable legal
principles guiding the
exercise of the sentencing discretion in that regard set
Beroukas (No 2)
at [29]-[32].
also sets out at [8]-[15] the principles applying to the question of
whether to impose the term of the suspended sentence or whether
to resentence
the offender for the previous offence of arson. A more expansive discussion of
those principles is found in
DPP v Rohrlach (No 2)
[2025] ACTSC 192
The nature and circumstances of the
offending here
relation to the theft offence, following
[2021] ACTSC 9
[2021] ACTSC 154
(both of which were cited
by Taylor J in
DPP v Monaghan
), I have taken into account as being relevant:
(a) The motive for the theft;
(b) The extent and value of the property taken; and
(c) Whether the stolen items were of sentimental value or utilitarian value,
such that they would be difficult or inconvenient to
offence itself was minor and this is a low-level example of the offence.
respect of the offence of taking a motor vehicle without consent, applying
v Rosewarne
[2021] ACTSC 217
[123], the features informing the objective seriousness include:
(a) The degree of planning;
(b) The motive for the offence, including whether it was undertaken to
facilitate another offence;
(c) Whether the taking caused damage to the vehicle (unless separately charged);
(d) Whether the vehicle was recovered.
taking of the vehicle was pre-meditated, in that the offender plainly had to
travel to the mechanic workshop in Hume. The motive
was personal use. The
vehicle was recovered. It is not clear whether the damage to the vehicle was
pre-existing (noting that the
vehicle was taken from a mechanic workshop, the
vehicle may well have been there for repairs).
at [124] and
R v Massey (No 3)
[2021] ACTSC
, the following considerations inform the objective
seriousness of the offence of driving a motor vehicle without consent:
(a) The period of driving and the length of distance driven;
(b) Whether the vehicle was used in the commission of another offence;
(c) Whether the offender was the driver and not only the passenger;
(d) The manner of driving, unless subject to a separate charge;
(e) Whether the vehicle was damaged; and
(f) Whether the vehicle was returned to the owner.
are very few aggravating features here. This was clearly a low-level example of
the offence.
driving while unlicensed is a strict liability offence. On the agreed facts,
there are no extenuating circumstances present.
Victim impact statements
33(1)(f) of the
Sentencing Act
were no victim impact statements before the Court. That does not mean that
there was no victim impact, but the court does not
speculate about the extent of
the impact.
Plea of guilty
(ss 33(1)(j) and 35
Sentencing Act
respect of the three offences where terms of imprisonment are in contemplation,
having regard to the mandatory matters for consideration
under s 35(2) of the
Sentencing Act
, I have exercised the discretion under s 35(3) of the
Sentencing Act
to reduce the sentence that would otherwise have been
imposed by 25% because:
(a) The offender has pleaded guilty.
(b) The timing of the pleas had significant utilitarian value
Monfries v The Queen
[2014] ACTCA 46
19 ACTLR 99
being entered prior to the preparation of a brief of evidence.
(c) The offences are not of such a gravity where a percentage-based approach
might be considered inappropriate.
Subjective circumstances of the
(s 33(1)(m) of the
Sentencing Act
offender’s subjective circumstances were set out in
R v Beroukas
[2021] ACTSC 172
. In summary, he has had a disadvantaged
upbringing, with schooling attendance affected and a significant period where he
was without
stable accommodation. His maternal aunt remains supportive. He has
been in a relationship for approximately three years. He and
his partner have
young twins together. Both have children from previous relationships. He has a
shared goal of working towards
restoration of care for those children. The
probable impact of any sentence on his children (s 33(1)(o) of the
), particularly those for whom he has primary carer responsibilities, is
discussed below and has been taken into account.
offender has been in stable housing since August 2022. He has capacity to work
and to gain further skills, as indicated by him
completing his year 10 at
Canberra Institute of Technology.
Criminal antecedents of the offender
(s 33(1)(m) of the
Sentencing Act
offender’s criminal history is considerable and among it are convictions
for the same type of offending. Such history disentitles
him from leniency. He
was also subject to bail conditions and multiple good behaviour orders at the
time of the offending. That
is an aggravating feature.
Financial circumstances of offender
(s 33(1)(n) of the
Sentencing Act
offender is already paying off a number of fines for unrelated conduct. He is
complying with payment plans. He is dependent
on social services for income. I
have a concern that a further fine may be too difficult for him to manage in the
short term, but
it may be achievable if a longer term for payment is permitted
by the court.
(s 33(1)(w) of the
Sentencing Act
contents of the pre-sentence report indicated that the offender has limited
memory of the offences. He acknowledged illicit substance
use (s 33(1)(p) of
Sentencing Act
), poor mental health and reduced overall wellbeing all
contributed. He did take responsibility for his actions and indicated an
awareness of the adverse impact on others. He reflected that at the time he had
limited regard for the consequences of his decisions.
Voluntary treatment for matters that
may have contributed to the offence
(s 33(1)(t) of the
offender has undertaken voluntary treatment to address his substance abuse
through the Karralika program and a letter of support
from his Alcohol and Drug
Counsellor was before the court.
Current sentencing practice
33(1)(za) of the
Sentencing Act
prosecution drew attention to cases commonly referred to in this court,
[2020] ACTSC 256
[2023] ACTSC 198
. The submissions had also earlier relied
. I have taken these cases into account to ensure
consistency in sentencing practice, accepting that the objective in doing so is
not to bind the sentencing court to achieve numerical equivalence with similar
sentences imposed in the same jurisdiction but rather
to ensure consistency in
the application of the principles: see
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
Pre-sentence custody
offender has spent 60 days in pre-sentence custody. However, he has requested
that such time not be formally taken into account
because it would destroy his
prospects of obtaining an intensive correction order here (which cannot be
imposed as part of a combination
approach to principles of concurrency and accumulation has been set out in
Dawson v The Queen
[2019] ACTCA 9
(and the cases there-cited). A degree of concurrency is appropriate because the
theft and the driving a vehicle were part of the
one incident. The driving
unlicensed was part of the same course of conduct as the driving of the truck
and the taking of the Mazda
323, but the offender is not liable to a term of
imprisonment for this offence.
Disposition
gravity of each of the conduct constituting the offences here is relatively
modest, but it nevertheless should be impressed upon
the offender that a
positive and supportive society depends fundamentally on people obeying the law.
If he wants his children to
live in a world of delight and wonder, where they
feel safe, respected and valued, then he needs to model that respect for safety,
whether that be paying for fuel, respecting the possessions of other people, or
contributing to that general safety in the community
by refraining from criminal
the variety of ways in which these offences may be sentenced, ultimately, the
outcome depends largely on the court’s finding
as to the appropriate
outcome for the breaches of the suspended sentence. For example, it is
significant that in the circumstances
here, a good behaviour order cannot be
imposed at the same time as an ICO: s 29(b) of the
Sentencing Act
(There are circumstances in s 80 of the
Sentencing Act
where an intensive
correction order can be made to be served concurrently with a good behaviour
order, but they are not enlivened
in the present case.) Accordingly, if an ICO
is imposed, then of the available options under s 30 of the
a fine becomes the appropriate sentence for the driving while
unlicensed offence.
Consequences of the offences: The
offender should be resentenced for the breach of the suspended sentence
sentence that has been tailored to an individual’s circumstances is in
accordance with the legal principle of individualised
justice discussed above.
It may result in an outcome that is more merciful or tolerant than expected.
Such a sentence may be described
as lenient but that does not mean that it is
inappropriate. Indeed, it need hardly be said that a sentence of imprisonment
never exceed the
that is necessary to accomplish relevant
sentencing objectives:
Thorn v Laidlaw
. However, where a sentencing outcome is not as expected, that
gives rise to a need for caution to be exercised, to ensure that the
though lenient, accords with proper principle.
prefatory remarks are necessary because of the offender’s history
concerning the sentence imposed for the arson offence.
He was given the benefit
of an opportunity to remain in the community by virtue of the imposition of a
suspended sentence for that
offence. Then he breached the good behaviour order
that attached to that suspended sentence and was resentenced. He was again
the opportunity to remain in the community and has now breached the
further good behaviour order that was imposed.
to that, the offending occurred just over two months into the 12-month order.
There was no rehabilitation at the time the further
offending occurred. The
conduct constituting the breach here was the same type of offending which
breached the original good behaviour
order imposed. Committing an offence is a
serious breach of a good behaviour order. The offender committed four offences
The breach conduct cannot be said to have arisen by virtue of mistake or
misunderstanding. The underlying offence of arson was
itself a serious offence,
committed while the offender was in custody at the Alexander Maconochie Centre.
would be expected in those circumstances is the imposition of the full-time
custodial sentence. I agree with the prosecution
that all of the above matters
weigh heavily in favour of imposing the previous sentence of imprisonment of 11
months and 23 days
imposed for the arson offence, which was then fully
there are two matters that speak against the imposition of full-time custody.
The first is that for the first time, he has
undergone 4 months of residential
rehabilitation and continued engagement for a short period beyond. He exited
the program voluntarily
due to the second matter, which is that he is now a
primary carer (along with his partner) for two young children who remain in his
care despite involvement with the Children, Youth and Families service
). The evidence was scant on the consequences of him being taken
into custody for almost a year at this point in the parenting journey.
common sense suggests that the already precarious family situation would
collapse. At the very least, the hardship visited
upon his partner, who has her
own challenges and would become the sole carer for young twins, would be acute.
It was unclear whether
the children would be able to remain with their mother if
the offender were to serve a full-time custodial sentence. It is often
that hardship to family is a consequence of the offender’s conduct. Even
so, there are cases where such hardship is greater
than what might be seen as
the usual corollary of a custodial sentence. The court cannot ignore that the
hardship arising from the
imposition of a full-time custodial sentence here
would be a disproportionate consequence of the offender’s breach conduct.
very fine balance and noting the offender was still a youthful offender at the
time of the breaches, the appropriate course of
action is to refrain from
imposing the full-time custodial sentence that remains hanging over his head.
That requires the court
to re-sentence the offender. I rely on my previous
consideration of the relevant circumstances in
Beroukas (No 2)
[26]-[45] but have also refreshed my memory from the documentation that was
originally before the court on the initial sentence.
addition, the offender has spent a period of time in what might be classified as
a quasi-custodial environment. I have taken that
into account in determining
the length of the sentence to be imposed and the manner in which the sentence
should be served. Those
matters explain why the sentence to be imposed is not
of an increased duration. I also consider that in the circumstances of this
offender, a longer sentence would not serve any particular deterrent purpose,
either general or specific. Either, this offender
will realise how close he is
to losing his freedom and to destroying his family unit in its current form, and
the prospect of increased
care arrangements for his other child and will focus
all his energy on putting his children first and becoming the best parent and
partner he can be, or he will continue to conduct himself in a way that brings
him into contact with the justice system, with whatever
consequences follow.
the meantime, supervision will be required as an additional measure to protect
the community. Given the breach, such supervision
must clearly be of a closer
and more targeted kind than that ordinarily arising where a sentence is
considering the manner of the sentence to be imposed, I have also given
consideration to the views expressed by those who assessed
the offender when he
was considering whether to pursue a drug and alcohol treatment order. The
offender has managed to abstain from
drugs for a period of nine months,
confirmed by regular testing with corrective services and CYF. He is a fair way
further along
the rehabilitation path than he was this time a year ago, when he
was before the court for breaching his good behaviour order. As
assessor explained, placing individuals with different levels of risk and
treatment in the same intensive program can
be counterproductive, because the
low-need participants might be adversely affected by exposure to higher-risk
consider that this offender still requires targeted intervention to cement the
path that he is now on, and this will be achieved
by an ICO. The offender has
consented to that manner of serving his sentence. He has been found eligible
and suitable for such
an order following an intensive correction assessment and
I accept the opinion of the assessing officer in both those respects.
not impose a specific rehabilitation condition because the offender has
participated in a formal rehabilitation program and
a degree of flexibility is
now required to support that progress.
I said at the outset of the discussion as to the ultimate disposition, the
consequence of that conclusion with regard to the suspended
sentence influences
the ultimate disposition in terms of the sentences for the primary offences. The
above matters and the nature
of the offending are such that an ICO is the
appropriate sentence here.
orders of the Court are:
(1) In respect of the offence of take motor vehicle without consent, contrary to
s 318(1) of the
Criminal Code 2002
) (CAN 11991/2024) the offender is convicted and sentenced to
a term of imprisonment for six months reduced to four months and 15
account of his guilty plea, to commence on 22 September 2026 and conclude on 5
February 2027.
(2) In respect of the offence of drive motor vehicle without consent, contrary
to s 318(2) of the
(CAN 11992/2024), the offender is convicted and
sentenced to a term of imprisonment for 4 months, reduced to 3 months on account
of his guilty plea, to commence on 1 January 2027 and conclude on 31 March
(3) In respect of the offence of minor theft, contrary to s 321 of the
(CAN 11989/2024), the offender is convicted and sentenced to a term
of imprisonment of 2 months reduced to 1 month and 15 days on
account of his
guilty plea, to commence on 16 March 2027 and conclude on 30 April 2027.
(4) For the offence of driving while unlicensed, contrary to
Road Transport (Driver Licensing) Act 1999
(ACT) (CAN 11994/24) the offender is convicted and fined $350 with 12 months to
(5) Pursuant to
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
), the good behaviour order in respect of Jordan
Wayne Beroukas is cancelled and the offender is resentenced for the offence of
contrary to s 404(1) of the
1240/2021) to a term of imprisonment of 11 months and 23 days (reduced from 14
months) to commence on 22 October 2025 and conclude
on 14 October 2026.
(6) The total effective sentence is 1 year 6 months and 9 days.
(7) Pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
the sentence is
to be served by intensive correction in the community, with the core conditions
contained in s 42 of the
CSA Act 2005
I certify that the preceding forty-four [44] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Sentence of her Honour Justice
RTF format (255 KB)
Signed PDF/A format