Registrar of the Magistrates Court of the Australian Capital Territory v Maunsell [2025] ACTMC 14 (24 July 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Registrar of the Magistrates Court of the Australian Capital Territory v
[2025] ACTMC 14
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Chief Magistrate Walker
See orders in [54].
Catchwords:
CONTEMPT IN THE FACE OF THE COURT
– contempt proceedings
– application to purge contempt – sincere and genuine apology
– commitment to pay
costs – explanation for contempt – limited
Magistrates
Court Act 1930
Legislation Cited:
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Court Procedure Rules 2006
2501, 2502, 2506
Cases Cited:
Jones v Toben
(2009) 255 ALR 238
Caratti v Boban Pty Ltd (Administrators Appointed) (No 2)
Parashuram Detaram Shamdasani v King-Emperor
[1945] AC 264
Stuart v Brown
Magistrates’ Court at Prahran v Murphy
[1997] 2 VR 186
Allen v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 44
(2013) 36 VR 565
Witham v Holloway
[1995] HCA 3
(1995) 183 CLR 525
Pang v Bydand Holdings Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 69
O’Connor v Hough
[2016] QSC 4
; 2 Qd R 543
Kostov v YPOL Pty Ltd
[2018] NSWCA 306
(2018) 98 NSWLR 1002
R v McDaniel (Cliff)
(1990) 12 Cr App R (S) 44
[2009] QCA 397;
[2011] 2 Qd R 350
Longhurst Homes Ltd v Killen
[2008] EWCA Civ 402
CJ v Flintshire Borough Council
[2010] EWCA Civ 393
Khoury v Kirwan (No 4)
[2021] VSC 333
Wood v Staunton (No 5)
[1995] NSWSC 61
(1996) 86 A Crim R 183
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Michalik
(2004) 52 ACSR 115
Commissioner for Fair Trading v Youngdown Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWSC
Registrar of the Court of Appeal v Maniam (No 2)
(1992) 26 NSWLR
[2013] VSC 554
Registrar of the Magistrates Court of the Australian Capital Territory
(Applicant)
Stephen Paul Maunsell (Defendant)
Representation:
Skye Jerome (Plaintiff)
John Masters (Defendant)
ACT Government Solicitor (Plaintiff)
Marjason & Marjason Solicitors (Defendant)
File Number:
AP 28 of 2025
CHIEF MAGISTRATE WALKER:
Introduction
Defendant, Stephen Maunsell, is before the Court in relation to a charge of
contempt contrary to
s 307(1)(b)
Magistrates Court Act 1930
) by his conduct on 22 February 2023, 15 June 2023 and 7
September 2023. The matter commenced by Originating Application dated 16
2025. It proceeded on the Amended Originating Application dated 13 June
found guilty, it is open to the Court to punish the Defendant by making any
sentencing order available under the
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(see r 2506(2) of the
Court Procedure Rules 2006
present question for determination is twofold:
(a) Is the contempt proved; and
(b) If so, whether to accept or reject Mr Maunsell’s application to purge
his contempt.
Is the Contempt
first of these can be disposed of uncontroversially. The Plaintiff, as the
individual asserting the contempt, bears the onus of
proof in relation to the
conduct which is said to constitute the contempt (see
Jones v Toben
[2009] FCA 354
(2009) 255 ALR 238
at p. 259 per Justice Lander;
v Boban Pty Ltd (Administrators Appointed) (No 2)
[2015] WASC 139
per Justice Mitchell). The criminal standard of proof applies.
Plaintiff relies on a bundle of transcripts and court audio excerpts from 22
February 2023, 15 June 2023 and 7 September 2023,
marked exhibit
“HB-1”. This material evidences several of Mr Maunsell’s
appearances before the ACT Magistrates
Court, as a self-represented litigant, in
relation to a family violence order application in which he was the
Respondent.
Magistrates Court Act 1930
(ACT) provides:
(1) A person is in contempt of the Magistrates Court if the person –
(a) contravenes an order of the court or an undertaking given to the court; or
(b) commits a contempt in the face or in the hearing of the court; or
(c) commits any other contempt of court.
proceedings allege contempt under
s 307(1)(b)
of the Act, namely contempt in the
face or in the hearing of the court. Such contempt may manifest in many forms.
The relevant common
law test will be made out where a person has engaged in
words or conduct which interferes, or may have the effect of interfering,
the administration of justice (see
Parashuram Detaram Shamdasani v
King-Emperor
[1945] AC 264
Stuart v Brown
(1996) 17 WAR
at p. 531 per Justice Owen). Disrespect or defiance towards the court may
have such effect (see
Magistrates’ Court at Prahran v Murphy
at p. 203 per Justice Charles;
Allen v The Queen
[2013] VSCA 44
(2013) 36 VR
at p. 574 per Justice Priest). This form of contempt is criminal in nature
Witham v Holloway
[1995] HCA 3
(1995) 183 CLR 525
at p. 530),
albeit with civil procedure rules applying (see
Pang v Bydand Holdings Pty
[2011] NSWCA 69
per Justice Beazley;
O’Connor v Hough
[2016] QSC 4
; 2 Qd R 543 at p. 547 per Justice Burns;
Kostov v YPOL Pty
[2018] NSWCA 306
(2018) 98 NSWLR 1002
at p. 1007). Central to the
development of this doctrine has been the preservation of the court’s
authority and character (see
R v McDaniel (Cliff)
(1990) 12 Cr App R (S)
the proceedings, on the three separate occasions, the Defendant is alleged to
have engaged in the following contemptuous
conduct, in summary:
(a) repeatedly interrupting and disrupting proceedings of the Court;
(b) addressing the Court in a baselessly offensive manner;
(c) impugning the integrity of the sitting Magistrates and other Magistrates by
baselessly alleging they are corrupt;
(d) baselessly impugning the integrity of officers of the Court, Counsel and
solicitor, by alleging that they are liars and corrupt;
(e) wilfully and baselessly insulting the sitting Magistrate and other
Magistrates;
(f) showing disregard for the authority of the Court;
(g) failing to comply with the court process, and
(h) refusing to cease such conduct at the Magistrate’s request.
Originating Application references excerpts of court transcripts, as set out in
exhibit HB-1, in support of each allegation. These
interactions are captured in
the relevant court audio files. The Defendant’s tone and volume are
consistent with the characterisation
of the allegations in the Grounds of the
Application.
Defendant has not challenged any of the conduct alleged by the Plaintiff. In his
Affidavit dated 25 June 2025, Mr Maunsell admits
to engaging in the conduct as
outlined and to committing contempt. The Defendant formalised this admission on
the record before the
Court on 3 July 2025.
the unduly argumentative, highly insulting and baselessly accusatory conduct
engaged in by Mr Maunsell interfered with the
proper administration of justice
and had the effect of undermining the authority of the Court.
am satisfied that the Defendant’s conduct during the proceedings amounts
to contempt in the face or in the hearing of the
court to the requisite
standard, that being, beyond a reasonable doubt (see
Witham v Holloway
[1995] HCA 3
(1995) 183 CLR 525).
contempt is proved.
leaves the second question for determination, namely, the Defendant’s
application to purge his contempt. In this context,
it is appropriate to set out
the procedural history of the matter more fulsomely.
17 October 2023, Magistrate Lawton directed Registrar Banks to apply to the
Court for Mr Stephen Maunsell to be punished for contempt,
pursuant to CPR 2502.
The Plaintiff, the Registrar of the Magistrates Court of the Australian Capital
Territory, filed an Originating
Application on 16 April 2025, alongside a
supporting Affidavit affirmed by Helen Banks on 8 April 2025, pursuant to CPR
2501(2)(b).
application sought the following orders:
(a) A declaration that the Defendant, Stephen Maunsell, is guilty of contempt of
court in contravention of
s 307(1)(b)
Magistrates Court Act 1930
conduct on 22 February 2023;
(b) A declaration that the Defendant, Stephen Maunsell, is guilty of contempt of
court in contravention of
s 307(1)(b)
Magistrates Court Act 1930
conduct on 15 June 2023;
(c) A declaration that the Defendant, Stephen Maunsell, is guilty of contempt of
court in contravention of
s 307(1)(b)
Magistrates Court Act 1930
conduct on 7 September 2023;
(d) The Defendant, Stephen Maunsell, be punished for contempt of court in
accordance with law; and
(e) Any other orders that the Court considers appropriate.
matter was first before the ACT Magistrates Court on 7 May 2025. On that
occasion, the ACT Government Solicitor (
) appeared on behalf of the
Plaintiff, the Director of Public Prosecutions having declined to prosecute the
matter. As personal service
had not been effected as required by CPR 2501(4),
the matter was adjourned.
21 May 2025, ACTGS again appeared on behalf of the Plaintiff, and Ms Natasha
Goode of Marjason & Marjason Solicitors appeared
on behalf of the Defendant,
who had been served. Ms Goode was in the process of instructing counsel and the
matter was adjourned
to 11 June 2025 by consent.
that occasion, Mr J Masters of Counsel, instructed by Ms Goode, appeared on
behalf of the Defendant. Ms Jerome, of Counsel, appeared
on behalf of the
to orders by consent, further documents were filed.
Amended Originating Application was filed with the Court on 13 June 2025 by the
Plaintiff. No substantive amendments were made
to the grounds of the application
or the particulars of the contempt alleged. The orders sought by the Plaintiff
were amended to
read as follows:
(a) A declaration that the Defendant, Stephen Maunsell, is guilty of contempt of
court in contravention of
s 307(1)(b)
Magistrates Court Act 1930
conduct on 22 February 2023, 15 June 2023, and 7 September 2023;
(b) The Defendant, Stephen Maunsell, be punished for contempt of court in
accordance with law;
(c) That the Defendant, Stephen Maunsell, pay the Plaintiff’s costs of,
and incidental to, the proceeding; and
(d) Any other orders that the Court considers appropriate.
Notice of Intention to Respond was filed with the Court on 24 June 2025. In the
Notice of Intention to Respond, the Defendant indicated
his intention to respond
to the Plaintiff’s Originating Application, as amended, in submitting to
all orders of the Court except
as to costs. The Defendant also noted his
intention to file and serve an admission of the contemptuous conduct as an
attempt to purge
his contempt.
admission in the form of an Affidavit affirmed by the Defendant was filed on 25
June 2025. In his affidavit the Defendant admits
to engaging in conduct
amounting to contempt of court on three occasions: 22 February 2023, 15 June
2023 and 7 September 2023. The
Defendant acknowledged his conduct as having
undermined both the administration of justice and authority of the Court. The
contextualised his actions as occurring amid difficult family
circumstances and relationships at the time, however, concludes his
with an apology, and a pledge to respect the Court in all future dealings.
Law of Contempt –
Purging and Apologies
found the contempt proved, it is necessary to consider whether the admission and
apology provided by Mr Maunsell should be
accepted on his application as having
effectively purged his contempt. An apology may be deemed sufficient to do so
[2009] QCA 397;
[2011] 2 Qd R 350
at p. 397 per Justice
Keane). In determining whether to accept or reject an application to purge, the
Court may have regard to the
Defendant’s sincerity and genuineness, as
demonstrated by the terms of an apology, the timing of any apology, and any
assurances regarding conduct (see
Longhurst Homes Ltd v Killen
[2008] EWCA Civ 402
per Lord Justice Hughes;
CJ v Flintshire
Borough Council
[2010] EWCA Civ 393
per Lord Justice Wilson). The
Court may be further persuaded of a contemnor’s sincerity if they have
offered to pay the aggrieved
person’s costs on an indemnity basis (see
Khoury v Kirwan (No 4)
[2021] VSC 333
per Justice Dixon). A
contemnor’s expression of remorse and contrition is relevant to penalty;
it is open to the Court to accept
an apology and take no further action (see
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Michalik
[2004] NSWSC
(2004) 52 ACSR 115
at p. 123 per Justice Palmer;
Commissioner for Fair
Trading v Youngdown Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWSC 646
Registrar of the Court of
Appeal v Maniam (No 2)
(1992) 26 NSWLR 309
at pp. 314 and 318 per President
Application to Purge
Contempt – 3 July 2025
ultimate question for determination in this matter is whether Mr
Maunsell’s apology, as set out in his Affidavit, and confirmed
was a genuine and sincere one, so as to purge him of his contemptuous acts. This
is a question to be decided on the balance
of probabilities (see
[2013] VSC 554
note that the Defendant reserves his position on the question of costs. Whilst
there may well be issues of impecuniosity behind
this which could impact on his
capacity to meet a costs order, in reserving his position, the Defendant has
failed to demonstrate
commitment to a matter commonly relied on by courts in
assessing the genuineness of a Defendant’s desire to purge their
to the genuineness of his apology, the Plaintiff required the Defendant for
cross-examination on his affidavit.
Examination in Chief
examination in chief, led by Mr Masters, Mr Maunsell affirmed the information
set out in his Affidavit as being true and correct,
without demur.
Cross-Examination
Defendant was cross-examined by Ms Jerome for over an hour, wherein the
genuineness of his apology and remorse was robustly tested.
Defendant confirmed that he did not draft his affidavit but repeatedly stated
that he adhered to its contents.
Jerome guided Mr Maunsell and the Court through various excerpts of the
transcripts from each proceeding. It was put to the Defendant
that he ought to
have known how to appropriately address judicial officers, not to answer
telephone calls in the courtroom, and not
to leave whilst a decision was being
handed down. Mr Maunsell disagreed with each of these propositions and explained
have sufficient knowledge of legal etiquette and practice at the
asked to elaborate on what Mr Maunsell meant by “I regret my
actions” in [14] of his Affidavit, the Defendant explained:
Looking at what happened, I regret my actions and I can now see that my actions
were not acceptable and those people in the courtroom
shouldn’t have been
spoken to that way. I can now look back on it and go, ‘Yes, I accept I was
wrong. I take responsibility
for that and I absolutely apologise to those people
that – that I offended during those times.’ That’s what that
asked to specify the exact actions the Defendant regretted, Mr Maunsell
answered, “[u]sing profane language, [and] not
following process”.
On several occasions throughout the cross-examination, it was put to the
Defendant that the nature of his
behaviour in the proceedings was disrespectful;
Jerome then sought to have the Defendant resile from the disrespectful
statements he made towards judicial officers and legal practitioners.
Defendant did so in full, with the exception of comments regarding Magistrate
Taylor (as Her Honour was at the time) being a
“raving feminist”,
and Mr Maher, counsel, and Ms Kennedy, solicitor, both being
“liars”. The Defendant considered
these statements to be truthful
and unable to be taken back.
Jerome questioned the Defendant as to the timing of his apology to the Court. In
[14] of Mr Maunsell’s Affidavit, he characterised
the document as being
his “first opportunity to offer a formal apology”. It was put to the
Defendant that there had been
ample opportunity to apologise during the court
proceedings after judicial officers warned him to adjust and correct his
or be in contempt. The Defendant admitted that no apology, even of an
informal kind, was offered on any of these occasions.
Jerome questioned the Defendant on when he first reflected on the nature of his
behaviour. Mr Maunsell was forthright with the
Court that those reflections came
after he had been charged with these offences. It was finally put to the
Defendant that he had
sought to diminish his behaviour during the
cross-examination to avoid prosecution and sentence. Mr Maunsell
Submissions
behalf of the Defendant, Mr Masters submitted that I ought to accept Mr
Maunsell’s apology as purging the contempt. Mr Masters
characterised Mr
Maunsell’s demeanour and evidence in cross-examination as impressive. For
well over an hour, the Defendant
had behaved respectfully towards the Court and
assisted to answer all questions, even upon being heavily pressed. The Defendant
demonstrated insight in being able to distinguish between remarks which
were contemptuous and ones which he believed to be grounded
in truth. This
behaviour, Mr Masters submitted, revealed the maturing of his client since 2023,
as well as the sincerity of his apology
before the Court.
response, Ms Jerome invited the Court to reject Mr Maunsell’s application
to purge his contempt. She submitted that the evidence
of the Defendant
regarding his remorse and insight into previous behaviour had not been genuine.
The Affidavit affirmed by the Defendant,
Ms Jerome submitted, was brief and made
general statements of apology. Further, the opportunity to apologise had
presented itself
to the Defendant on each occasion in the courtroom after a
Magistrate had communicated dissatisfaction with Mr Maunsell’s behaviour
and threatened contempt. Ms Jerome submitted that the Defendant’s refusal
to resile from some of his comments also demonstrated
limited insight and a lack
of genuine remorse. She characterised Mr Maunsell’s conduct and responses
throughout the cross-examination
as an active attempt to diminish his behaviour.
Together, Ms Jerome submitted, these reasons sufficed to refuse the application.
Evidence from
the Transcripts – 22 February 2023, 15 June 2023, 7 September
assessing Mr Maunsell’s evidence, it is prudent to closely consider his
responses to the questions posed in cross-examination
alongside his dealings
with judicial officers and court staff, as documented through
transcripts.
Explanation for Contempt
cross-examination it was put to Mr Maunsell that he ought to have been familiar
with courtroom etiquette. The Defendant disagreed
with these propositions,
instead pointing to his lack of formal legal training. The following interaction
took place:
Ms Jerome: It’s correct, isn’t it, that with your experience of
being in court, that as at 22 February 2023, you were
well aware of the formal
procedures in a courtroom?
Mr Maunsell: Yes and no. The Magistrates Court’s different – very,
very different to the Family Court.
Ms Jerome: You understand or you understood as at 22 February 2023 that when a
judge speaks to you that you are to listen?
Mr Maunsell: Yes.
Ms Jerome: And you are not to talk over the magistrate?
Mr Maunsell: I do now.
Ms Jerome: Well, I suggest that after 10 years in court, you knew on that first
occasion in the Magistrates Court, 22 February 2023,
that you knew not to speak
over the magistrate?
Mr Maunsell: No, because the large majority of time in the Family Court for
seven, eight, nine years, I was represented. I was financially
destroyed ---
Ms Jerome: Now, on 22 February 2023, you understand that you were to address the
magistrate as ‘your Honour’?
Mr Maunsell: No, because I’ve been given no formal training in courtroom
procedures or – or anything.
Ms Jerome: I suggest to you, you knew at least not to address the judge by their
first name?
Mr Maunsell: No. As I said, I’ve received no training on procedures or
what to address people by or – or anything like
that. I have –
I’ve flown by the seat of my pants.
following interactions took place in 2023 between Mr Maunsell and the Court.
10:04am, Wednesday, 22 February 2023
Mr Maunsell: The words out of her mouth last week was ‘I didn’t know
Steve had any representation’ yet she’s
confirmed to you that she
sent emails on these – in November – sorry – December,
January, February. So she’s
lied and there’s the evidence.
His Honour (Magistrate Temby): No, she hasn’t.
Mr Maunsell: Yes, she has.
His Honour: I’m going to ask you to stop arguing with me.
Mr Maunsell: Stop arguing with me.
Mr Maunsell: Fuck it, I’ll run it. You’re a bunch of corrupt cunts,
but I’ll run it.
His Honour: If you continue to use that language, I will have you removed.
Mr Maunsell: Well, if you don’t believe evidence that’s right in
front of you, you’re corrupt. I’ve provided
evidence, black and
fucking white evidence and you just disregard it. You disregard it.
His Honour: Would you like some time to calm down?
Mr Maunsell: No. Why could I calm down when I’m in front of a corrupt
judge who doesn’t believe black and white evidence.
His Honour: I’m giving you a lot of latitude, Mr Maunsell.
Mr Maunsell: Great.
His Honour: But you are testing my patience.
Mr Maunsell: Don’t speak to me like that.
His Honour: You’re coming very close to being taken out of here.
His Honour: Okay. I’ve had enough, I said, of that language.
Mr Maunsell: It’s in the English dictionary.
His Honour: Okay.
Mr Maunsell: If you don’t like words that are in the English dictionary,
go and speak to the person who writes the English
dictionary. It’s in the
English dictionary. It’s a valid word.
His Honour: You are intelligent enough to know there is a difference between
words that exist in the dictionary and words that ought
to be spoken in a
particular place.
9:15AM, Thursday, 7 September 2023
Mr Maunsell: He’s a lying piece of shit.
Deputy Registrar Marshall: Sir, you can make your point without the use of that
Deputy Registrar Marshall: I am going to give you one more warning about your
language. And if you ---
Mr Maunsell: If you don’t like the English language I suggest you take up
a new language.
Deputy Registrar Marshall: If you keep repeating derogatory language in this
courtroom I will give you a direction to leave the court
[Matter transferred to Magistrate Lawton – 10:22AM]
His Honour (Magistrate Lawton): I’m standing this matter down until 2.15
Mr Maunsell: In front of Theakston.
His Honour: No.
Mr Maunsell: Have you read my submissions?
His Honour: Before myself. Mr Maunsell, if you continue to interrupt me I will
be dealing with you for contempt.
Mr Maunsell: How about contempt for you?
His Honour: I’m going to adjourn the court. I will ask the Sheriff’s
officers to escort you from the court if you do
not leave. Otherwise, you have
the choice to leave this court freely or I will be dealing with you for
contempt. Do you understand?
Mr Maunsell: Fine. I shall come back at 2.15.
His Honour: 2.15 is what I told you to do Mr Maunsell.
Mr Maunsell: Well, you just told me to leave as well. So ---
His Honour: Yes, because you continue to interrupt and interrupt the processes
Mr Maunsell: I am asking quite legitimate questions.
His Honour: You continue to interrupt this court. That is contempt.
[Matter recalled before Magistrate Lawton]
Mr Maunsell: You showed that this morning. You showed that a couple of years
ago. So you don’t give a shit what I’ve
got to say. You don’t
His Honour: All right, just mind your language please.
Mr Maunsell: It’s in the English dictionary. If you don’t like it
His Honour: I don’t like the fact that you are using what is pejorative
terms in court. And you have been repeatedly warned
you continue to engage in offensive language ---
procedures and norms do not constitute any kind of specialised knowledge held
only by legal practitioners. Rather, accordance
with them is expected of all
courtroom participants. Upon receiving these warnings, the Defendant continued
to behave contrary to
courtroom etiquette. On multiple occasions Mr Maunsell was
warned not to use offensive language in a courtroom, not to interrupt
officer or judicial processes, not to engage in an argument with a judicial
officer, and to leave the courtroom as directed.
I thus afford little weight to
the Defendant’s claims in cross-examination that he was not aware of or
familiar with these
procedures. Whilst I accept that Mr Maunsell was emotionally
dysregulated as a result of difficult experiences with the Court system
broadly and over a number of years, I cannot accept that his conduct was the
product of ignorance as to what was appropriate.
The fact that he asserts that
he behaved so badly because he was not aware of what was expected in Court
undermines the genuineness
of his apology.
Limited Apology
Maunsell was also invited to take back the disrespectful comments he made in
relation to judicial officers and officers of the
Court. He did so, with the
exception of remarks made about Magistrate Taylor (as Her Honour then was), and
legal practitioners, Ms
Kennedy and Mr Maher. The remarks form part of the
particularised conduct relied on by the Plaintiff to establish contempt and
by the Defendant in his affidavit. I am obliged to consider the
significance of this.
relation to Magistrate Taylor, the Defendant referred to her, inter alia, as a
“raving feminist”.
cross-examination, the following interaction took place:
Ms Jerome: In regards to Magistrate Taylor, I invite you to take back the
comments as she – and I say Magistrate Taylor as
she was known then. I
invite you to take back the comments that she was a raving feminist.
Mr Maunsell: That’s in an interview from her. She quotes it herself. So
I’m quoting her in that.
Ms Jerome: Well, I’m inviting you to take back the comment. Do you take it
back or not?
Mr Maunsell: She said it herself.
Ms Jerome: So you don’t take it back?
Mr Maunsell: I can’t take back what she said.
Ms Jerome: No, I’m talking about what you said about her.
Mr Maunsell: I’m quoting her. I can give you the- I can ---
Ms Jerome: So you don’t take it back?
Mr Maunsell: I can’t take back what she said.
is important to have regard to the context in which the term was used by the
Defendant on 22 February 2023. Her Honour was not
the presiding Magistrate that
day. The Defendant’s comments were not made as part of an application for
her Honour to recuse
herself. Rather, as part of his submission to Magistrate
Temby as to why a family violence order should be amended, the Defendant
“[w]e all know who the magistrate was who signed the FVO, Louise Taylor,
raving feminist, man hater, the Duluth model,
it was a man’s fault. Always
it was a man’s fault, can never be anything else.”
Defendant fails to appreciate that his use of the phrase “raving
feminist” in a derogatory way to impugn Her Honour’s
impartiality is
entirely distinguishable from any use she may have made of the term to describe
herself in an out of court context.
It was clearly intended to support his
position that she was corrupt and had made her decision because of a
philosophical bias without
proper regard to the evidence before her. His
inability or unwillingness to appreciate the distinction is concerning.
relation to Mr Maher and Ms Kennedy being “liars”, the following
interaction took place during cross-examination:
Ms Jerome: I invite you to take back your comment about Mr James Maher, who is a
barrister who appeared against you, that he is a
corrupt liar.
Mr Maunsell: The transcripts show that he lied. I can’t take that back.
Ms Jerome: So you don’t take that back?
Mr Maunsell: It’s in the transcript that he lied.
Ms Jerome: In regards to Ms Kennedy, I invite you to take back your comment that
she was dishonest.
Mr Maunsell: It’s in the transcripts that she lied.
Ms Jerome: So you don’t take that back?
Mr Maunsell: I can’t take back the fact that she lied.
transcripts do not provide evidence that these officers of the Court lied. The
Defendant’s opinion is the product of his
particular perspective of what
had occurred and how it was being represented to the Court. The
Defendant’s adherence to these
comments is at odds with the admissions and
apology he purports to make in his Affidavit.
Masters, on behalf of the Defendant, submitted that I ought to accept these
interactions as reflective of Mr Maunsell’s insight
and maturity since the
contemptuous conduct. Mr Maunsell’s capacity to distinguish between
disrespectful comments, and those
grounded in truth, Mr Masters submitted,
demonstrate the genuineness of his apology. Respectfully, even if it were
established that
the Defendant’s opinions were “grounded in
truth”, which I do not accept, the actual truth of the aspersions cast
the defendant’s comments is not established and cannot amount to any form
of defence or mitigation of the charge.
summary, the Defendant was clearly on notice that his conduct was unacceptable
during the periods of contempt, his apology came
only after proceedings were
instituted against him, he has not adhered to the fulsome apology to all the
conduct alleged, and has
not offered to meet the costs of these proceedings in
even a limited form.
I appreciate that Mr Maunsell demonstrated significant fortitude, humility and
restraint in his evidence before me, I am not
satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that his apology is sufficiently broad to rectify the consequences
of his admitted conduct.
conclude that the contempt is not purged.
make the following orders:
(1) A declaration under
s 307(1)(b)
Magistrates Court Act 1930
(ACT) that the Defendant committed a contempt of court by his conduct and
behaviour on 22 February 2023, 15 June 2023 and 7 September
(2) I reject the Defendant’s application to purge his contempt.
(3) The Defendant is to be punished for contempt of court in accordance with
I certify that the preceding fifty-four [54] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Decision of her Honour Chief Magistrate
Associate to Chief Magistrate Walker
Date: 29 July 2025
RTF format (255 KB)
Signed PDF/A format