Police v CX [2018] ACTCC 3 (13 December 2018)
CHILDRENS COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Police v CX
[2018] ACTCC 3
Hearing Dates:
Special Magistrate Hunter OAM
See [69]-[80]
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Children – doli incapax – young person 12 years of age –
offences – offences against the person – common
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code 2002
Cases Cited:
C (a minor) v DPP
(2003) 6 VLR 276
[2007] ACTSC 51
R v M’Naghten
[1843] EngR 875
(1843) 10 Cl & F 200
(1845) 1 Cox CC 260
RP v The Queen
[2016] HCA 53
Stapleton v The Queen
[1952] HCA 56
(1952) 86 CLR 358
Constable B Vernon; Constable P McDonald (Informants)
CX (Young Person)
Representation:
Mr T Trotter (Informants)
Ms S Platis (Young Person)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Informants)
Legal Aid ACT
(Young Person)
File Numbers:
CH18/666; CH18/710; CH18/712
SPECIAL MAGISTRATE HUNTER
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
matter came on for hearing before me in relation to 3 charges. The court had
previously refused pleas of guilt and the matter
was set down for an application
that I consider the issue of Doli Incapax.
the application, the hearing of the matter was by way of documents tendered
before me. I also heard evidence from the young
person’s mother Robin
Griffin, Antoinette Carroll, who was the case worker for the young person, Luke
Glossop, the Constable
who dealt with him in the Southpoint fire. I also heard
from Constable McDonald.
(the young person) was charged on 30 July 2018 with damaging a bedroom door and
two bedroom walls belonging to the Australian Capital
CH18/666 – damage property pursuant to section
Crimes Act 1900
young person appeared in court and was charged and granted bail on several
conditions including a curfew.
Circumstances of the offending
young person’s mother asked the young person to get out of bed and get
ready for school. The young person declined and an
argument arose. The young
person said that he was tired and was not going to attend the meeting at school.
The defendant swore at
his mother using bad language. His mother hit him on the
top of the head with an open hand because of his foul language.
young person then threatened to hurt his mother and she removed herself from his
bedroom and closed the door preventing him from
leaving his bedroom.
young person then threw objects at the door causing holes in the door, the young
person also struck the walls in the bedroom causing
holes in the bedroom walls.
The young person’s mother, fearing violent escalation of the situation,
called police.
Nathan Smorhun, in a statement tendered before me, stated that when he arrived
at the young person’s home he spoke
with the young person trying to engage
with him. The young person refused to speak with him. Constable Smorhun heard
the young person
being disrespectful towards his parents.
Smorhun advised the young person that he would be handcuffed given his
aggressive and violent behaviour towards his parents.
He was taken to the
Tuggeranong Police Station. Constable Smorhun stated that he further engaged
with the young person, speaking
to him about his disrespectful and violent
behaviour. He said the young person had understood that what he had done was
that is why he was being punished for it.
speaking with the young person it was decided that he could return to his
parents’ home.
CH18/710 and CH18/712 – common
and damage property, pursuant to
sections 26
circumstances surrounding the offending behaviour of these charges are that the
young person was laying on his bed playing with
his PlayStation. His mother
asked him to clean up his room because he had a court mandated meeting with his
youth Justice worker.
Young person refused to clean his room and became
argumentative with his mother.
10 minutes or so negotiating with him, his mother took the PlayStation
controller from him. The young person then began shouting
abuse toward her using
foul language at her. He then pushed his mother with both hands and she stumbled
over a chair. She regained
her balance and moved towards the door. As she did
so, the young person threw a television remote at her, striking her on the
young person’s mother then threw his headset on the floor which enraged
him. She pulled the bedroom door closed. The young
person tried to open the door
and continued to use foul language, shouting “I’m going to rip your
fucking head off”.
He did this while attempting to pull the door open from
his side. When that was unsuccessful he struck the door at least 10 times.
young person’s mother contacted police for assistance.
waiting for police, Ms Griffin heard five or six loud bangs from inside the
room. The young person stated “you should
see my wall now it’s all
your fault and I’m going to smash the fucking window. I’m out of
here”. The young
person left his bedroom via the window, bending the fly
screen as he did so. The young person also kicked the front passenger side
of his mother’s vehicle. [damage property]
young person then left on his scooter. There was extensive damage to an already
damaged room. That damage was photographed by
federal agent
PRIOR OFFENDING BEHAVIOUR
received a statement under the hand of Mark Alexander, a Constable of police who
stated that on 24 July 2018 he attended the Southpoint
shopping centre in
Greenway in response to a property damage report. When he attended, two young
people were being detained by a
security officer, one being the young
Alexander stated that he saw in the parents’ room on level, 2 pieces of
burnt paper towel on the floor with minor
burn damage to the floorboards and
minor burn damage to a nearby couch.
interview the young person made full admissions and stated that he had set some
paper alight using his Bic lighter and it caused
some damage to the floorboards
and couch he said he regretted lighting the piece of paper. This matter was
dealt with by way of police
also received a statement from Benjamin Vernon, a federal agent. On 15
August 2018 he attended the home of the young person at 44 Heagney
Crescent, Chisholm. Agent Vernon took photographs of damage to
the bedroom wall
of the young person and also a bent fly screen as well as a dent to the young
person’s mother’s car.
damage occurred in relation to the second set of charges before the court, where
it is alleged that the young person was in breach
of his bail in relation to a
curfew. That curfew was part of his bail conditions for the earlier damage
property charge. Police
found that the young person was not at home at 8 PM
when he had a curfew to be home by 6 pm. The young person was abusive towards
police when he was arrested.
offending behaviour is characterised as, the young person had been spoken to by
police in relation to a fire that he set, had
been spoken to by police in
relation to the first charge of damaging property, and again had been charged
and spoken to by police
in relation to a consent offending behaviour. This
behaviour is relied upon to rebut the presumption of Doli
SUMMARY OF ORAL EVIDENCE
Robin Griffin
Griffin is the young person’s mother. The young person lives with her and
his stepfather and two siblings aged three and
four years.
Griffin mother indicated that, academically, the young person is very poor with
low reading skills. He does not read books or comics
himself although she does
read to him. Ms Griffin indicated that he has had learning difficulties
throughout his schooling.
Ms Griffin’s view, the young person does not struggle verbally and does
not seem to lack comprehension because when asked
if he understands something he
will say yes.
relation to the charges, particularly damaging property, Ms Griffin said she has
never had a conversation with him in relation
to the criminality of the offences
however she said he does know it is wrong because he has said that he has to
replace it.
young person has been told that he cannot be physically or verbally abusive and
there are consequences such as being grounded
but those things do not seem to
work. Ms Griffin said the young person knew that he was in trouble when she
called police and that
is why he took off.
Griffin said the young person is very behind in school which makes him act out
so that he can be sent home. Ms Griffin said the
trouble is usually trying to
get him to go to school.
asked about the fire and being taken back to the police station Ms Griffin said
both she and the police were trying to figure
out why the young person did it.
He said he did not know why he did it and became frustrated and he was angry
because he had been
caught. When he was interviewed she said that he understood
what he had done was serious.
relation to bail, Ms Griffin said the young person was in court and signed his
bail papers. He said he understood them and court
staff explained them to him as
relation to his breach of bail Ms Griffin said she called police when the young
person came home after his curfew and was disrespectful
and intimidating to her
as a result.
relation to the August offences Ms Griffin said in cross examination that she
had never discussed the legal consequences of damaging
the property only that
they belong to someone else and he did not own it.
Griffin agreed that when dealing with him in August she had used physical
punishment by slapping him.
relation to the young person playing with his PlayStation, Ms Griffin agreed
that whilst he is playing with it he is quiet and
not violent and she does leave
him there for peace sake. Ms Griffin agreed that it is difficult managing an
older child with two
younger children. Ms Griffin agreed that the young person
plays games long into the night and early hours of the morning which results
him being quite tired.
Griffin agreed that the young person had a pretty good understanding of his
curfew obligations yet when he was only 30 minutes
late she had called
Griffin agreed that at primary school the young person thrived on a one-to-one
teaching basis.
re-examination Mr Griffin said that when she explained something to the young
person if he did not understand she could tell that
and would further explain
Antoinette Carroll
Carroll is the young person’s case manager. Ms Carroll said that she had
explained to him his bail conditions and he appeared
to understand that he was
to comply with directions in relation to bail, school, and behaviours at home.
Ms Carroll said that the
young person told her he found the curfew condition
challenging but he was trying to abide by it.
Ms Carroll’s view the young person’s understanding was at a certain
level but not a broader level in relation to his
Carroll said that she had given him strategies to cope with his anger and that
he was to respond rather than react.
Carroll said that she had discussed with the young person his offending at home
and said he had difficulty understanding the concept
of offences being criminal
when they occurred at home, as opposed to in the community. The young person did
not understand the concept
of why police were called when this behaviour
happened at home.
young person had said to Ms Carroll that he could not believe him punching a
hole in his bedroom wall could lead to him being
sent to Bimberi. (I note that
this was two weeks prior to my hearing on this matter when the comment was
Carroll indicated that there was no liaison, consultation or transfer in
relation to the young person’s transition from primary
school to secondary
school. There was no consultation in relation to his difficulties or how to
overcome them either.
Constable Glossop
Glossop questioned, searched and arrested the young person for the fire at
Southpoint. When questioned, the young person
told the officer to “fuck
off”. The officer then arrested him. After being spoken to by police, the
young person locked
himself in his mother’s car and Constable Glossop had
to go out and speak with him. The young person told the police officer
had rights but ultimately calmed down and left with his
Constable Macdonald
Macdonald could not recall whether he had explained to the young person about
the caution when interviewing him. Constable
McDonald said he did not explain
the legal position regarding the charge of damaging property. Constable McDonald
agreed that the
young person never asked why he was at the police station or
what would happen.
note that when the recorded interview was played, the young person when asked
whether he needs a lawyer looks to his mother who
said no and the interview
also note that when asked, the young person could not tell the police his exact
address. He knew what he had done was wrong but
he did not understand in my view
what that meant particularly given he said that it cannot be criminal because it
happened at home.
PRE-SENTENCE REPORT –
author of the report stated that the young person presents as a child with
significant trauma, is aggressive and angry and has
learning difficulties. It
was noted that there was no coordinated response in relation to the transition
from primary to high school.
There does not appear to be any 1:1 teaching
was noted that given there is no testing for his literacy and numeracy skills it
was estimated to be at year 2 level.
offered group and other types of support the young person stated that he did not
wish to work with retards. [I note he has been
suspended on a number of times
for various reasons which would appear to be his lack of ability in relation to
his education as well
as difficulties with learning.]
was confirmed by the pre-sentence report author who said that the young person
suffers from ADHD and needs medical intervention
in relation to his mental
health issues.
the author asked the young person whether he knew whether the offences he been
charged with was serious he said that he did not
know. He also said he did not
know his action would get him into so much trouble and if he had known that
would not have done it.
author opined that he has poor impulse control due to his age and lack of
note that exhibit P2, a letter from the high school, indicated that his literacy
and numeracy skills were at the year one level.
It was noted the young person
has a limited vocabulary, cannot write full sentences and his limited vocabulary
which may effect his
comprehension. It was the author’s view that he
appears to understand the ‘literal’ consequences of
SECTION 74D REPORT (20 AUGUST 2018)
report set out much of the material already before me but importantly opined
that it was unclear whether the young person grasped
the impact of his
behaviours or the risk to his mother and siblings.
THE LAW IN RELATION TO DOLI INCAPAX
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT) (Children 10 and over but under 14
(1) A child aged 10 years or older, but under 14 years old, can only be
criminally responsible for an offence if the child knows
that his or her conduct
(2) The question whether a child knows that his or her conduct is wrong is a
question of fact.
(3) The burden of proving that a child knows that his or her conduct is wrong
is on the prosecution.
common law position is reflected in the Code. In
[2007] ACTSC 51
his Honour Higgins CJ, citing the classic statement of JWC Turner in
Kenny’s Outlines of Criminal Law 19
ed, 1966 at
“Yet the mere commission of a criminal act is not, as
it would be in the case of an adult, sufficient prima facie proof of mens
The presumption of innocence is so strong in the case of a child under fourteen
that some clearer proof of the mental condition
is necessary. For this purpose
a necessity for special proof of a ‘mischievous discretion’ is
impressed upon the jury
to try such an infant, by their being asked not only the
ordinary question, “Did he do it?” but the additional one,
he a guilty knowledge that he was doing wrong?” [R v Owen
[1830] EngR 518
(1830) 4 C & P 236].
As with adults the ‘guilty mind’ requisite
varies with different crimes, but where the accused is a ‘child’
must probably be shown, even in the case of crimes involving absolute liability,
that as in the case of insane persons he had
knowledge that he was doing
concept of wrongness was accepted as being similar to the second limb of the
M’Naghten rules as set out in
R v M’Naghten
[1843] EngR 875
(1843) 10 Cl
test, his Honour goes on to say, is whether he knew that it was wrong according
to the ordinary principles of reasonable men,
Stapleton v The
[1952] HCA 56
(1952) 86 CLR 358
, where their Honours Dixon CJ, Webb and Kitto JJ
said in relation to that concept:
The truth perhaps is that, from
a practical point of view, it cannot offer matter a great deal whether the
capacity of the accused
person is measured by his ability to understand the
difference between right or wrong according to reasonable standards, or to
what is punishable by law, because in serious things the two ideas
are not easily separable. But in certain cases where the insane
motives of the
accused arise from complete incapacity to reason as to what is right or wrong
(his insane judgment even treating the
act as one of inexorable obligation or
inescapable necessity) he may yet have at the back of his mind an awareness that
proposes to do is punishable by law.
capacity of a child of is often determined by his or her maturity to understand
the concept of wrongness in the legal sense. The
presumption is powerful as was
(1845) 1 Cox CC 260
where his Honour Erle J said,
when dealing with a 10 year old indicted for Arson, in his directions to the
... between the ages of seven and fourteen ... that which
is termed a malicious intent – a guilty knowledge that he was doing
– must be proved by the evidence, and cannot be presumed from the mere
commission of the act. You are to determine from
a review of the evidence
whether it is satisfactorily proved that at the time he fired the rick ... he
had a guilty knowledge that
he was committing a crime ...
authorities espouse that the wrongdoing is more than attraction of disapproval
which is in keeping with the second limb in M’Naghten.
authorities also consider that
: ”the wrongness includes an appreciation
of the nature and effect of the prohibited act. It is not sufficient that the
knows that there would be ‘disapproval’ of the act by a parent
or even police”.
CJ refers to
C (a minor) v DPP
[1966] AC 1
at 39, where Lord Lowry stated
( with Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle, Lord Bridge of Harwich, Lord Ackner and
Lord Browne-Wilkinson
“The cases seem to show,
logically enough, that the older the defendant is and the more obviously wrong
the act, the easier
it will generally be to prove guilty knowledge. The
surrounding circumstances are of course relevant and what the defendant said
did before or after the act may go to prove his guilty mind. Running away is
usually equivocal ... because flight from the scene
can as easily follow a
naughty action as a wicked one ....
is clear that between the ages of 10-14, the presumption of Doli Incapax is
rebuttable. The onus is on the Crown to rebut that
presumption to the requisite
standard of beyond a reasonable
authorities also assert that adult value judgement should not be attributed to
. It is also clear that
some acts are so serious or harmful or wrong that the requisite knowledge is
inferred but that also depends
on the age and mental capacity of the child to
know, regardless of the seriousness of the offences. These are circumstances
to the overall consideration of whether the presumption has been
Honour Chief Justice Higgins in
considered there is a strong
presumption against criminal capacity and that it can only be rebutted by strong
and pregnant evidence
to the contrary referring to Lord Parker in B v The Queen
(1958) 44 Cr App R1,3.
“It is insufficient to displace the
presumption to prove that the child voluntarily and intentionally did the acts
constituting
the offence. It must be shown that the child knew that the acts or
omissions were wrong by reference to the ordinary standards of
reasonable men
and women in society generally going beyond mere disapproval or the imposition
of merely disciplinary sanctions.
That which the Crown must establish beyond
reasonable doubt is the same degree of knowledge of wrongfulness as an accused
must negative
on the balance of probabilities to attract acquittal on the ground
of mental impairment. That knowledge of wrongfulness must relate
to the offence
in question in particular not merely knowledge of right and wrong
generally.”
terms of the relevant law applicable to the issue of Doli Incapax, I note I was
not referred to the recent case of
RP v The Queen
[2016] HCA 53
Court decision decided in December 2016.
have set out below what the Court said in relation to the rationale in cases of
Doli Incapax from [8]:
The rationale for the presumption of Doli
Incapax is the view that a child under 14 years is not sufficiently
intellectually and morally
developed to appreciate the difference between right
and wrong and thus lacks the capacity for mens rea . The presumption of doli
incapax at common law is irrebuttable in the case of a child aged under seven
years. From the age of seven years until attaining
the age of 14 years it is
rebuttable: the prosecution may adduce evidence to prove that the child is doli
The age at which a child is capable of bearing criminal responsibility for
his or her acts has been raised by statute in New South
Wales. Under
Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act 1987
(NSW) ("the Act"), there is a
conclusive presumption that no child under the age of 10 years can be guilty of
an offence. The Act
does not otherwise affect the operation of the common law
presumption of doli incapax. From the age of 10 years until attaining the
14 years, the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that the child knew that
it was morally wrong to engage in the conduct
that constitutes the physical
element or elements of the offence. Knowledge of the moral wrongness of an act
or omission is to be
distinguished from the child's awareness that his or her
conduct is merely naughty or mischievous. This distinction may be captured
stating the requirement in terms of proof that the child knew the conduct was
"seriously wrong" or "gravely wrong”. No matter
how obviously wrong the
act or acts constituting the offence may be, the
presumption cannot be
rebutted merely as an inference from the doing of that act or those acts. To
the extent that the decision of the Court of Appeal of
the Supreme Court of
Victoria in R v ALH7 suggests a contrary approach, it is wrong. The prosecution
must point to evidence from
which an inference can be drawn beyond reasonable
doubt that the child's development is such that he or she knew that it was
wrong to engage in the conduct. This directs attention to the child's
education and the environment in which the child has been raised.
The history of the common law presumption is traced in C (A Minor) v
Director of Public Prosecutions. It appears to have been settled
by the first
half of the 17th century that it applied to children aged under 14 years. The
presumption served to ameliorate the harshness
of the criminal law. Its survival
in the case of children above the age of criminal responsibility but under 14
years has attracted
criticism. Writing in the middle of the last century,
Professor Glanville Williams observed that the paradoxical result of its
is that "the more warped the child's moral standards, the safer he is
from the correctional treatment of the criminal law". Putting
to one side that
the offence under
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) carried a maximum
penalty of imprisonment for 25 years, the "correctional treatment" accompanying
a conviction for the offence
includes registration for a Class 1 offence under
Child Protection (Offenders Registration) Act 2000
(NSW). In the case of an
accused who is a child at the date of the offending conduct, it is not
self-evident that the policy of the
law is outmoded in requiring that the
prosecution prove the child understood the moral wrongness of the conduct. In R
CJ commenced his analysis of the nature of the knowledge required to
rebut the presumption of doli incapax by considering whether
it is knowledge
that the act is contrary to law, or is wrong judged by the standard of the
ordinary person or is wrong according
to the child's subjective and perhaps
idiosyncratic ethical standards. His Honour drew an analogy with proof of
insanity under the
second limb of the M'Naghten Rules, which requires knowledge
that the act is wrong according to the principles of reasonable men.
The analogy
is apt insofar as the knowledge in each case is of the wrongness of the act as a
matter of morality and not law. There
is, however, in the case of the child
defendant, the further dimension of proof of knowledge of serious wrongness as
distinct from
mere naughtiness. What suffices to rebut the presumption that a
child defendant is doli incapax will vary according to the nature
allegation and the child. A child will more readily understand the seriousness
of an act if it concerns values of which he
or she has direct personal
experience. For example, a child is likely better able to understand control of
his or her own possessions
and the theft of others' property compared to
offences such as damaging public property, fare evading, receiving stolen goods,
or forgery. Answers given in the course of a police interview may serve to
prove the child possessed the requisite knowledge. In
other cases, evidence of
the child's progress at school and of the child's home life will be required. It
has been said that the
closer the child defendant is to the age of 10 the
stronger must be the evidence to rebut the presumption. Conversely, the nearer
the child is to the age of 14, the less strong need the evidence be to rebut the
presumption. The difficulty with these statements
is that they are apt to
suggest that children mature at a uniform rate.
The only presumption which
the law makes in the case of child defendants is that those aged under 14 are
doli incapax. Rebutting that
presumption directs attention to the intellectual
and moral development of the particular child
Some 10-year-old children
will possess the capacity to understand the serious wrongness of their acts
while other children aged very
nearly 14 years old will not
GAGELER J. in RP v The Queen at [38] said;
Doli incapax – incapacity for crime – is a common law
presumption in the same way as innocence is a common law presumption.
establish that a child under the age of 14 years has committed an offence in a
continues to apply, the
prosecution must prove more than the elements of the offence. The prosecution
must prove beyond reasonable
doubt that the child understood that the child's
conduct which constituted the offence was seriously wrong by normal adult
That understanding cannot be inferred from the fact that the child
engaged in the conduct which constituted the offence; it must
be proved by other
evidence. That other evidence might be or include evidence of the circumstances
or manner of the conduct. That
other evidence might also be or include evidence
of the development or disposition of the child.
v The Queen
[2016] HCA 5
is the law in Australia in relation to Doli
Incapax. I also note that much of what has been said by the High Court in that
case reflects
the position at common law which I have referred to
the time of the commission of the offences the young person was 12 years of age.
It is clear on the evidence before me that his
mental age was more likely to be
at that of a first grade student at approximately six to seven years of
Or at best grade 2 seven to
eight years.
have considered what CX’s own version as to his conduct in relation to the
three offences is. CX said that he did not know
that he could get into so much
trouble for putting a hole in his bedroom wall. Further he said that he did not
know his behaviour
could get him into such trouble and that if he had known he
would not have done it. Further he did not know that his behaviour would
him being incarcerated at Bimberi. That in my view explains just what he
understood about his behaviour.
note that he suffers from ADHD and has some other mental health issues which at
this point have not been properly identified or
treated. This is also a factor
which must be taken into account when considering Doli Incapax.
note that these are not the most serious offences on the criminal calendar. All
of the offences occurred in his home and in his
bedroom. It would appear from
the evidence before me that in his mind his bedroom was his and it appears that
he was unaware that
putting holes in it whilst wrong in the sense of the damage
to his bedroom, was not appreciated by him that indeed it was seriously
sufficient to attract a criminal sanction.
note the prosecutor referred to and has a table of incidents where he sets out
various dates where the young person went missing,
was abusive to his mother and
where police were called when he was acting aggressively and he was then taken
into custody by police.
There was also the incident about the fire in the shop
where he clearly did not identify what he was doing there as unlawful which
confirms in my view the lack of capacity to understand that what he was doing
was not just naughty but seriously morally wrong.
considered what the Authorities say as to evidence which could rebut the
presumption, it is clear that it is not enough to
say an inference could be
drawn which rebuts the presumption by looking at the conduct of the offender in
committing the offence.
One must also consider the ‘development or
disposition of the
the attention of police it would appear from what he told the authors of the
reports he clearly did not understand what he
was doing was morally wrong by
adult standards.
evidence shows that the young person can be defiant, aggressive and abusive but
that could also be explained by his mental health
issues. It does not in my
view go so far as to rebut the presumption. I am satisfied that is the case,
having considered his conduct,
what he has said about his conduct, and what he
said about the consequences of that conduct, all of which I have referred to
have considered the young person’s age, his mental age, his lack of
ability to understand complex constructs, his limited
vocabulary and possible
lack of comprehension as described by Ms Monteith, together with his own words
where he clearly did not understand
the legal consequences of his actions.
have also considered the evidence of his behaviour, particularly in relation to
the damage property and the assault upon his mother.
I have also reflected on
the Authorities in relation to Doli Incapax which I have set out above.
am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the young person had the capacity
to know that what he was doing was wrong in the
moral sense as described in
RP v The Queen
determined that view, I find that the prosecution has not rebutted the
presumption of Doli Incapax.
I certify that the preceding eighty [80] numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Decision of her Honour Special Magistrate
Hunter OAM.
Associate: Cecilia Pascoe
Date: 13 December 2018
(2003) 6 VLR
per Callaway JA.
letter from Joe Monteith
See exhibit
RP v The Queen
cited above.
RTF format (218 KB)
Signed PDF/A format