CARRON ELVIN V EFFIE MEISCHKE & STEPHANIE LEE [2008] ACTRTT 18 (8 October 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: CARRON ELVIN V EFFIE MEISCHKE & STEPHANIE LEE [2008] ACTRTT
Catchwords: Compensation for abandonment; the duty to mitigate
Date: 8 October 2008
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES
TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT 623
CARRON ELVIN
(Applicant/Landlord)
EFFIE MEISCHKE and STEPHANIE LEE
(Respondent/Tenant)
Tribunal :A. Anforth
Date :8 October 2008
tenants are to pay the landlord the sum of $377.14 for rent to 25 August 2008,
$33.13 for water and $280.40 for advertising and
reletting fee being a total of
Office of Rental Bond is to pay the landlord the sum of $690.67 and is to remit
the balance to the tenants.
landlord is not entitled to the further rent loss stemming from the
landlord’s decision to re-advertise the premises at
the same rent.
..................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
) NO: RT 623
CARRON ELVIN
(Applicant/Landlord)
EFFIE MEISCHKE and STEPHANIE LEE
(Respondent/Tenant)
REASONS FOR DECISION
parties entered a residential tenancy agreement 18 January 2008 in respect of
premises at 82 Lewin Street, Lyneham in the ACT.
The tenancy agreement provided
for a fixed term commencing on 19 January 2008 for a period of 12 months at a
rent of $880 per fortnight
and a bond of $1760. The residential tenancy
agreement was in standard form with no special clauses and no endorsed
22 July 2008 the respondent/tenants gave the landlord’s agent 28 days
notice by email of their intention to vacate the premises
for reasons associated
with their employment. The notice read as follows:
I am writing as a follow up to our telephone conversation
yesterday, regarding our unfortunate need to leave the 82 Lewin St Lyneham
property, ahead of the lease termination. The reasons for leaving relate to one
occupant moving to Melbourne for work and the rest
of the household having
changed working conditions which subsequently result in different location
Please accept this email as the 28 day-notice period required for the lease
termination (therefore up until the 19 August 2008). In
accordance with verbal
recommendations and advice of the tenancy tribunal- we are willing to pay for
reasonable advertising costs
for the weeks of our notice.
Furthermore, should new suitable tenants be found who wish to move in prior
to the end of our notice, we are very happy to vacate
the property earlier and
terminate the lease at this time (the new tenants assuming the rental costs
We would be very grateful if you would forward this notice to the owner for
their consideration at the earliest. If there should be
any concerns regarding
this matter and a decision is made to apply to the Tribunal for confirmation
and/or compensation, we would
be grateful for notification of intent to do so by
COB Friday 25 July.
Should the owner or a representative of Maloney's wish to speak to either
Effie Meiscke or myself (Stephanie Lee) in person, please
do not hesitate to
Effie Meiscke: 6234 1132
Stephanie Lee: 6206 4914 (or mobile: 0405 801 663).
letter of 23 July 2008 the landlord’s agent advised the respondent/tenants
that until specific instructions were obtained
from the landlord the tenants
should proceed on the basis that their request for an early release from the
tenancy agreement was
denied. By letter of 25 July 2008 the landlord’s
agent confirmed his instructions to the effect that the request for early
release from the tenancy agreement was denied and that the landlord would make
application to the Tribunal pursuant to prescribed
term 84(b).
29 July 2008 the landlord made application to the Tribunal for an order
requesting the confirmation of the fixed term of the agreement.
Tribunal notified the respondent/tenants of the application and asked that they
file their response to the landlord’s application
by 12 August 2008. The
matter was listed before the Tribunal on 19 August 2008.
19 August 2008 Mr Taylor, real estate agent, appeared for the landlords and
there was no appearance on behalf of the respondent/tenants
and no response had
been received from them. Mr Taylor advised the Tribunal that a new tenant had
been found at the same rent and
the new tenancy commenced from 25 August. The
respondent/tenants had paid rent to 18 August 2008. Mr Taylor said his client
compensation in two forms. The first was the advertising and reletting
costs associated with finding the new tenant.
second form of compensation sought requires some explanation. Mr Taylor informed
the Tribunal that it was his understanding that
the landlord’s duty to
mitigate her losses contained in section 38
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
precluded the landlord from re-advertising the premises at
a rent greater than the rent that apply to the respondent/tenants i.e.
week. For this reason the landlord advertised and secured a new tenant at the
problem arises for the landlord via the effect of prescribed term 35 of the Act.
Prescribed term 35 provides that the landlord
may not increase the rent in
intervals of less than 12 months starting at the commencement of the tenancy.
Thus under the original
tenancy with the respondents, the landlord was entitled
to increase the rent on 19 January 2009. But under the new tenancy the landlord
is locked into the same rent until 25 August 2009. In a rising rent market this
limitation on the landlord is likely to be productive
of a financial loss.
Mr Taylor’s assumption that
prohibit advertisement at a rent
greater than the existing rent paid by the Respondent/tenants were true, then
the consequence to
the landlord set out above follows as a matter of logic and
the potential loss of the increased rent in the period 19 January 2009-26
2009 would be a loss incurred by the landlord that arises directly from the
tenants abandonment of the premises. The Tribunal
notes in passing that one
obvious obstacle to the landlord recovering that loss is the rather large
element of speculation involved
in divining the state of the rental market in
mid January and mid August 2009, together with the other inherent uncertainties
discussion with Mr Taylor concerning the scope of the landlord’s duty to
mitigate the Tribunal adjourned the matter
and gave directions for the both
parties to file and serve further particulars of the claim and any response to
the claim by set
dates. A copy of these directions was forwarded to the parties
by the Tribunal.
21 August 2008 Mr Taylor filed and served the landlord’s submissions with
the Tribunal and served a copy on the tenants.
Those submissions read:
Further submission in relation to break lease awards of
compensation.
We are requesting that consideration in the amount of the compensation to be
awarded be given to the following points:
1. The burden of the rules governing the duty to mitigate the losses for a
tenant places the owner in the position of only requesting
the existing rental
amount for any replacement tenants. This has been the stance of some of the
Tribunal members in previous hearings.
2. Accepting that the advertised rent should be at the current rent binds the
Lessor to a 12 month rental cap as per prescribed terms
34 and 35 that reads
"Increase in rent
34. The amount of rent shall not vary from period to period except as
provided by this tenancy agreement and the
Residential Tenancies ACT
35. The rent may not be increased at intervals of less than 12 months from
either the beginning of the tenancy agreement for the first
increase, or after
that, from the date of the last increase."
and places the lessor at a financial loss for a potential rental increase for
the period of abandonment as the agreement was abandoned
5 months prior to its
rightful expiry date, this means that the rental increase period is further
extended by 5 months.
Example; The original fixed term tenancy commenced i 9/01/08 for 12 months
and was due to expire on 18/01/09 allowing a rental increase
to be made on that
date. Using the current formula approved by the Tribunal of 7.51% with a
variance of 20%, this would entitle the
lessor to a new weekly rental amount of
$479.65. The increased amount of $49.65 multiplied by the extended 22 weeks,
represents a
loss of rent of $1092.30 for the lessor.
3. The Act provides that the Lessor is entitled to compensation capped at one
week's rent for, in part "reasonable costs of giving
a right to occupy the
premises to another person."
4. The unilateral act of the tenants in abandoning their tenancy agreement
prior to the agreed fixed term date has created the loss
stated in point 2 due
to the enforced situation of giving the right to occupy to another person at the
current rental.
5. That there is a GST component that forms part of the costs incurred to the
6. That as of this date the cheapest 3 bedroom property in Lyneham is $460.00
per week representing an increase of $20.00 multiplied
by 22 weeks equals
7. We would also ask that the Tribunal accept that there has been advertising
costs in the form of internet advertising in the amount
of $40.70 (ledger
provided to the Tribunal on 19 August 200S).
We request that the tribunal awards the requested amount of $440.00 (being
one weeks rent) as compensation under section 62 of the
Act and rent until the
new tenancy commences being $251.45 and water usage in the amount of $33.15.
tenants did not comply with the orders of 19 August 2008 until 29 September 2008
when they forwarded an email to the Tribunal
which read:
I am writing on behalf of Effie Meiscke and myself, Stephanie Lee,
in regard to the termination of the lease for the property 82 Lewin
and the subsequent proceedings undertaken by Maloney's Real Estate agency to the
Tenancy Tribunals.
Effie advised me this morning that the Tenancy Tribunal had kindly delayed
handing down a decision (apologies if I misuse terms here-
not being a lawyer
myself:-) until they received our submission in our defence against Maloney's
We are very grateful for the consideration shown to us by the Tenancy
Tribunal and apologise for the delay in contact. We had understood
that, having
missed the official deadline, the matter would be resolved without our
submission.
Due to time restraints in our current positions, we haven't been able to put
together a formal submission but hoped to reiterate what
we have already
communicated to Maloney's Real Estate. That is- we apologise sincerely for our
request for early termination of the
lease, it was due entirely to unforeseen
events and we have subsequently followed all Maloney's directions.
1. provided more than adequate notice to Maloney's (as per conditions of the
lease) until the new tenants were able to move in;
2. paid all advertising costs;
3. had the carpets professionally cleaned and spent several days cleaning the
property to a better condition than on arrival (as reflected
in the original
condition report)
3. agreed to pay an additional week's rent to compensate the owner/Maloney's
for the loss of a possible rent increase (ie deferring
the possibility of a rent
increase for a further 6 months)
On satisfying all these conditions, we expected the matter was resolved and
happily awaited the notification from Maloney's of the
lease termination etc. It
was with some surprise we received notice that they would continue with
proceedings.
While fully appreciate the extra challenges posed by an early termination of
lease- given that the house was so quickly and satisfactorily
re-occupied and
that we had not only maintained the house in excellent condition throughout but
also left it in pristine condition-
we do feel that we have been more than
flexible with the matter and are looking forward to a resolution.
Having fully recompensated the owner/Maloney's for possible lost revenue and
additionally followed their instructions without delay,
we appeal to the Tenancy
Tribunal that they might resolve this matter in accordance with the actions we
have already undertaken.
Many thanks for your time with this, please don't hesitate to contact me for
further information (I haven't been involved in this
before so please let me
know if you need anything else! :)
The issues for consideration:
first issue for consideration is the role of sections 62 and 107 of the Act in
determining what is expected of a landlord in circumstances
where a tenant
abandons the premises or serves notice of intention to abandon in a fixed term
second issue concerns the prima facie level of compensation a landlord is
entitled to in the above circumstances.
third issue concerns the nature and extent of the landlord’s duty to
mitigate their losses under section 38 of the Act and
in particular whether the
landlord is restricted to advertising for a new tenant at the existing rent.
The first issue-the role of sections 62 and 107:
62 and 107 of the Act read as follows:
62(1) If a tenant abandons premises before the end of a fixed term
agreement, the former lessor may apply to the tribunal for the
compensation:
(a) compensation for the loss of the rent that the former lessor would have
received had the agreement continued to the end of its
(b) compensation for the reasonable costs of advertising the premises for
lease and of giving a right to occupy the premises to another
(2) On application, the tribunal may award compensation of the kind mentioned
in subsection (1) (a) and (b).
(3) The amount of compensation the tribunal may award—
(a) under subsection (1) (a) must not exceed an amount equal to 25 weeks
(b) under subsection (1) (b) must not exceed an amount equal to 1 week's
(4) In deciding the amount of compensation that may be awarded under
subsection (2) in relation to costs, the tribunal must have regard
apart from the abandonment of the premises—
(a) the agreement would have ended; and
(b) the lessor would have incurred the costs mentioned in subsection (1) (b).
107(1) If a lessor received a notice of intention to vacate before the
expiration of a fixed term agreement, and the date nominated
in the notice as
the date when the tenant intends to vacate is a date before the expiration of
the agreement, the lessor may—
(a) accept the notice; or
(b) apply to the tribunal for compensation for—
(i) the loss of the rent that the lessor would have received had the
agreement continued to the end of its term; and
(ii) the reasonable costs of advertising the premises for lease and of giving
a right to occupy the premises to another person.
(2) On application, the tribunal may award compensation of the kind mentioned
in subsection (1) (b).
(3) The amount of compensation the tribunal may award—
(a) under subsection (1) (b) (i) must not exceed an amount equal to—
(i) 25 weeks rent; or
(ii) rent in relation to the unexpired part of the agreement;
whichever is the lesser; and
(b) under subsection (1) (b) (ii) must not exceed an amount equal to 1 week's
(4) In deciding the amount of compensation that may be awarded in relation to
the reasonable costs of advertising, the tribunal must
have regard to when,
apart from the vacation of the premises—
(a) the agreement would have expired; and
(b) the lessor would have incurred the costs.
62 and 107 both deal with the case of an abandonment in the fixed term, albeit
in different ways, and both fix the amount
of compensation payable. The key
difference between these two sections is that section 107 explicitly deals with
the case where tenants
serve a notice of intention to vacate during the fixed
term, whereas section 62 deals with an abandonment generally i.e. where no
notice is served (
Mies v Phillips
[2006] ACTRTT 1).
Prescribed term 84 is
simply a replication of section 107.
interpretation and application of section 107 was addressed by the presently
constituted Tribunal in
Mies v Phillips
[2006] ACTRTT 1
Hutcheson and Helen Hutcheson v Baden Cameron McMaster and Sonia Mary McMaster
[2008] ACTRTT 14.
In those decisions the Tribunal rejected the construction
of section 107 which requires the landlord to make application to the Tribunal
immediately upon being served with a notice of intention to vacate by the
tenants. In stead the Tribunal took the view that the landlord
had a reasonable
time to make this application and that a reasonable time was shortly after a new
tenant had been found by the landlord.
Part of the Tribunal’s reasoning
for this conclusion given in
was as follows:
In determining what is a reasonable time it is necessary to have
regard to the following issues:
(a) If section 107(1) is read literally then a landlord must make application to
the Tribunal solely on the basis of a tenant’s
expressed intention to
vacate the premises. But until such time as the tenant does in fact vacate the
premises the fixed term tenancy
still subsists. A fixed term tenancy is not
terminated pursuant to section 36(j) unless and until the tenant vacates the
If the tenant does not in fact vacate the premises then no abandonment
has occurred and there is no breach on the tenant’s
part that gives rise
to any claim for compensation under section 107. The tenant may change his/her
mind at any time after giving
notice of intention to vacate and before actually
vacating the premises.
(b) Assuming the tenant does in fact vacate the premises in accordance with
their notice- if section 107(1) is read literally then
the landlord may be
required to apply to the Tribunal for compensation before a new tenant has been
found. The extent of the landlord’s
right to compensation depends upon how
long it takes to find a new tenant. If the landlord makes application as soon as
the existing
tenant serves notice of intention to vacate, then the
landlord’s losses will not crystallise until the existing tenant has
fact vacated the premise and a new tenant is found. Thus even if the landlord
does make application to the Tribunal immediately
following an notice of
intention to vacate, the Tribunal cannot do anything with the application which
will need to be adjourned
until the landlord’s losses have crystallised
i.e. until the existing tenant does in fact vacate and until a new tenant is
For these reasons it seems to the presently constituted Tribunal
that a reasonable time in which the landlords should make application
section 107 is at a point of time shortly after a new tenant has been found. In
the present case the landlords made their application
within such a reasonable
time after allowing for the time consumed in the negotiation between the
Tribunal is satisfied that the landlord in the present case has made his
application under section 107 or prescribed term 84 in
a reasonable time and
that the application is therefore valid.
The prima facie level of compensation the landlord is entitled
107(3) provides that the landlord is entitled to:
(a) rent loss
to the time that a new tenant is found or for 25 weeks which ever is the
(b) advertising
and reletting costs to a maximum of 1 weeks rent which is subject to the
discounting factors in section 107(4).
with the advertising and reletting costs first. The advertisement costs are self
evident. The reletting fee is the fee paid
by the landlord to the
landlord’s agent under the managing agency contract between the landlord
and her agent for the agents
work in finding and securing a new tenant. Under
most managing agency agreement in the ACT and NSW this fee is also the first
rent which is the case in the present instance.
when a fixed term tenancy comes to an end the tenant is entitled to serve notice
and vacate at which time the landlord will
be put to the cost of finding a new
tenant and will thus incur both the advertising and reletting costs. In this
sense when these
costs are incurred following an abandonment part way through
the fixed term of a tenancy, they are costs brought forward as opposed
costs. This is the issue to which section 107(4) is directed. Traditionally this
tribunal and its NSW counterpart has taken
the approach of allowing the landlord
a pro-rata of the advertising and reletting fees calculated on the basis of the
of the fixed term that had expired at the point of abandonment. In
the present case the abandonment occurred when the tenants ceased
paying rent
from 18 August 2008 which was 7 months into a 12 month tenancy. Accordingly the
landlord is entitled to 7/12
of the advertising and
reletting fee to a maximum of 1 weeks rent.
landlord is entitled to 7/12
of the sum of $40.70
(advertising) and $440 (reletting fee) which is $280.40. In addition the
landlord is entitled to the water consumed
by the tenants and not paid, being
landlord’s prima facie right to lost rent is calculated by reference to
the rent payable under the Respondent/tenants tenancy
until a new tenant is
found or to the end of the fixed term, which ever occurs first and is capped at
the monetary value of 25 weeks
rent. In the present case the new tenancy
commenced on 25 August 2008 and the Respondent/tenants rent was paid to 19
August 2008.
This leaves an amount of 6 days rent payable by the tenants to the
landlord of $377.14.
sum will be payable by the tenants to the landlord unless the tenants are able
to convince the Tribunal that:
landlord has in some way failed to mitigate her losses relating to the manner in
which the new tenant was sought; and
(b) had the
landlord not failed to mitigate her losses in the manner alleged by the tenants
then the 6 days of rent loss would not
have occurred.
The third issue- the landlord’s duty to mitigate
her losses:
onus of proof is on the Respondent/tenants to show that the landlord acted
unreasonably in failing to mitigate her loss:
TC Industrial Plant Pty Ltd v.
Robert’s Queensland Pty Ltd
[1963] HCA 57
(1963) 180 CLR 130
(1999) 46 NSWLR 502
at 520–523. A contrary conclusion appears
to have been reached by the Supreme Court of South Australia (Full Court) in
Murray-Oates v. Jjadd Pty Ltd
(1999) 76 SASR 38
at 48, relying upon
Roper v. Johnson
(1873) LR 8 CP 167.
It is respectfully suggested that
Roper v. Johnson
is not authority for the proposition suggested. The
approach of the High Court in
TC Industrial Plant
is binding.
only is the onus on the Respondent/tenants to show that the landlord acted
unreasonably, but the onus is on the Respondent/tenants
to prove the value of
what would have occurred had the landlord acted reasonably:
Karacominakis v.
Big Country Development Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWCA 313
. As was said by
Lord Denning MR in
The World Beauty
[1970] P 144
“It must be remembered too, that it is for the defendant to
prove the value of the advancement. It is he who prays it in aid
in mitigation
of damage. He must prove, therefore, the value of it.”
landlord must take all reasonable steps to mitigate the loss caused by the
Respondent/tenants abandonment and cannot recover compensation
for any loss
which she could have avoided but failed, through unreasonable action, to avoid.
Where the landlord does take reasonable
steps to mitigate the original loss
stemming from the abandonment she can recover the costs or losses incurred in
engaging in mitigation.
It does not matter that the resulting loss incurred in
attempting to mitigate the original losses is greater than would have been
case had no mitigating stops been taken—see:
Simonius Vischer & Co
[1979] 2 NSWLR 322
at 355–6 (obiter);
Lloyds and Scottish
Finance v. Modern Cars and Caravans
[1966] 1 QB 764.
is the facts of any given case which determine whether the innocent tenant or
innocent landlord acted reasonably in attempting
to mitigate loss. The question
is often phrased as it was in
Payzu Ltd v. Saunders
[1919] 2 KB 581
McCardie J:
“The question, therefore, is what a prudent person ought
reasonably to do in order to mitigate his loss arising from a breach
should not be forgotten, however, that it is the innocent party who is required
to take steps to mitigate the loss because of the
breach of the guilty party and
that the steps required of the innocent party will not generally be set too
high. Thus, in
Banco de Portugal v. Waterlow & Sons Ltd
[1932] UKHL 1
[1932] AC 452
at 506 Lord McMillan said:
“Where the sufferer from a breach of contract finds himself
in consequence of that breach placed in a position of embarrassment
the measures
which he may be driven to adopt in order to extricated himself ought not to be
weighed in nice scales at the instance
of party whose breach of contract has
occasioned the difficulty. It is often easy after an emergency has passed to
criticise the
steps which have been taken to meet it, but such criticism does
not come well from those who have themselves created the emergency.
satisfied if the party placed in a difficult situation by reason of the breach
of a duty owed to him has acted reasonably
in the adoption of remedial measures,
and he will not be held in breach cans suggest that other measures less
burdensome to him might
have been taken.”
Karacominakis v. Big Country Developments Pty Ltd
[2000] NSWCA 313
paragraph 187, the Court of Appeal of New South Wales said:
“A plaintiff who acts unreasonably in failing to minimise his
loss from the defendant’s breach of contract will have his
damages reduced
to the extent to which, had he acted reasonably, his loss would have been less.
This is often misleadingly referred
to as a duty to mitigate, although the
plaintiff is not under a positive duty. The plaintiff does not have to show that
he has fulfilled
his so-called duty, and the onus is on the defendant to show
that he has not and the extent to which (
TCN Channel 9 Pty Ltd v. Hayden
Enterprises Pty Ltd
(1989) 16 NSWLR 130).
Since the defendant is a
wrongdoer, in determining whether the plaintiff has acted unreasonably a high
standard of conduct will not
be required, and the plaintiff will not be held to
have acted unreasonably simply because the defendant can suggest other and more
beneficial conduct if it was reasonable for the plaintiff to do what he did
Banco de Portugal v. Waterlow and Sons Ltd
[1932] AC452;
[1953] Ch 770
Sacher Investments Pty Ltd v. Forma Stereo
Consultants Pty Ltd
[1976] 1 NSWLR 5).
the present case, and consistent with the above principles, the landlord was
under no duty to secure a new tenant and sign the
new tenant to a new tenancy
agreement based only on the tenants notice of intention to vacate. As indicated
the Respondent/tenants were under no duty at law to honour
their notice of intention to vacate and so could have rescinded it at any
prior to giving the landlord vacate possession. If the Respondent/tenants had
rescinded their notice of intention to vacate
and if at that time the landlord
had in fact secured a new tenant and signed a new tenancy agreement with that
new tenant, then the
landlord would have been caught in the embarrassing
position of being unable to deliver vacant possession to the new tenant. The
landlord would have been in breach with respect to the new tenant from day one
of the new tenancy.
landlord’s duty to mitigate arising from the respondent/tenants breach
does not go so far as to require the landlord to
put themself at risk of suit by
a new tenant in the manner described above. Accordingly the landlord’s
duty to mitigate does
not require the landlord to have undertaken a search for a
new tenant until such time as the existing tenants in fact deliver vacant
possession (cf
Davtron P/L v Lum and McGregor
(2005) NSWCTTT 107).
the present instance the landlord undertook the search for a new tenant prior to
receiving vacant possession which they were not
required to do. The tenants
vacated on or around 19 August 2008 and the landlord had secured a new tenant
with 6 days. A period of
6 days is not excessive, in fact it is very efficient
on the landlord’s part. There is nothing in the tenants submissions or
evidence generally that would satisfy the Tribunal that the landlord had done
anything but act reasonably in the circumstances.
Accordingly the rent for the
period of 6 days is payable.
landlord maintains the further claim set out at paragraphs 7-9 above, namely
that by virtue of her mitigation action in the form
of advertising the premises
at the same rent, she has suffered a further loss in the extended prohibition on
her right to increase
a rising rent market it is clear that the landlord has suffered a loss albeit
difficult to quantify. However the loss arises from
the landlord’s agent
own misapprehension that the property must be re-advertised at the same rent (cf
Loncar v Barkovic
1999 ACTRTT 9).
Reasonable mitigation is a matter of
degree. Clearly if the landlord took the opportunity to re-advertise the
premises at a rent
increase that was unlikely to appeal to new tenants in the
same market segment as the Respondent/tenants then a failure to mitigate
have occurred. But an increase in rent to a level consistent with market
movements for similar property is unlikely to constitute
unreasonable conduct on
the landlord’s part.
the landlord chose to re-advertise at the same rent it is now unknown whether
the landlord could have secured a tenant at
a higher rent. The landlord’s
agent contends that it is likely that a tenant had a higher rent could have been
found. The Tribunal
does not doubt this proposition given the state of the
market with which the Tribunal is familiar. But this admission by the
agent only operates to defeat the landlord’s further
claim for compensation. If it is accepted the a higher rent could readily
been obtained from the market if sought then the landlord’s decision to
settle for the lower rent does not satisfy the
landlord’s duty to mitigate
its losses.
Conversely,
in a falling rental market reasonable mitigation may require the landlord to
re-advertise at a lesser rent and the outgoing
defaulting tenants may then be
responsible to top up the rent to its former level to the extent of the 25 weeks
cap in section 107.
Conclusion:
landlord is entitled to the $377.14 for rent to 25 August 2008, $33.13 for water
and $280.40 for advertising and reletting fee.
landlord is not entitled to the further rent loss stemming from the
landlord’s decision to re-advertise the premises at
the same rent.
October 2008
RTF format (165 KB)
Signed PDF/A format