New v Havelock Housing Association Inc. [2008] ACTRTT 8 (5 June 2008)
IN THE RESIDENTIAL )
TENANCIES TRIBUNAL )
OF THE AUSTRALIAN ) RT 142 of 2008
CAPITAL TERRITORY )
Peter Barry NEW -v- Havelock Housing Association Inc. ACTRTT 8
(Occupant) (Grantor)
Termination of Agreement
Termination by implication
Termination by agreement
Termination by repudiation
LEGISLATION
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
Prescribed terms:
Tribunal: J. Lennard,
Case Reference Number: 142 OF 2008
Re: Premises at Unit 4B, Ainslie Village, Quick Street, Campbell
REASONS FOR DECISION
Barry NEW, the Applicant, has lived at Ainslie Village, Campbell since 1999.
or about 16 March 2005 the Applicant entered into an occupancy agreement in
relation to Unit 4B, Ainslie Village with Centacare.
Havelock Housing
Association Inc, (HHA) took over the Management of Ainslie Village in 2006, and
it is not disputed before this Tribunal
that the parties to the matter are the
parties to the occupancy agreement. That is HHA is the grantor and Mr New is the
Applicant asserted in his written statement of particulars that there was an
executed occupancy agreement between the parties.
This was not denied by HHA.
The Residential Tenancies Tribunal has before it a blank ‘Occupancy
Agreement’ as evidence
of the content of the agreement between the
August 2007, the Applicant expressed an interest in moving to a unit in a
complex, owned and managed by HHA at Gunghalin. It appears
correspondence between the parties that the Applicant wrote to HHA formally
requesting a move from Ainslie Village to the
Gungahlin complex in September
16 November 2007 the parties signed a Residential Tenancy Agreement in relation
to premises at 6 Newcomb, 68 Anthony Rolfe Avenue,
Gungahlin. Although the rent
was not specified on the front page of the agreement, Attachment B (1) to the
agreement calculated rebated
rent at $207.65 per fortnight and the front page
provided that market rent for the premises was $220 per week. The Residential
Tribunal notes that HHA provides rebated rent to eligible tenants and
Attachment B (1) to the agreement stated that Mr New was entitled
to a rebate.
This attachment was signed by Mr New and the lessor on 16 November 2007.
agreed to allow the Applicant to remain in his unit at Ainslie Village,
rent-free, for two weeks from 16 November 2007, to assist
in the move to
Applicant did not move to Gungahlin, and although he had keys and accessed the
premises, he did not take up occupation.
or about 26 November 2007, the Applicant returned the keys to the Unit at
Gungahlin and on 27 November 2007 he wrote to HHA stating
that “as of
today, I no longer wish to transfer out of Ainslie Village.”
29 November the Chief Executive Officer of HHA, wrote to the applicant and
stated, inter alia:
You approached me in written [sic] seeking to be transferred to
Gungahlin in early September for a number of reasons as stated in
I made every effort to meet you [sic] needs and provided you with a
tenancy at Gungahlin. You agreed and accepted the key of which
signed. I agreed for you to stay for 2 weeks at AV at no rent to help in your
move across to Gungahlin.
With regards to you now wishing to remain as a tenant of AV, it is not so
easily changed as we have confirmed your transfer to Gungahlin
and we have an
obligation to house those on the waiting list.
has been from late November to the date of the hearing a great deal of written
and verbal correspondence between the parties.
The applicant has supplied some
of this, and a copy of his submission to a meeting of the Board of Ainslie
Village. It appears from
this evidence that HHA continued to regard Mr New as a
tenant of the Gungahlin property and invoiced him for rent for those
21 December 2007 Mr New wrote to Mr Loc Luu, CEO of HHA in the following
Yesterday I received an Invoice, ANTH68/06, from HHA for the sum of
$224.95in respect of 6/68 Anthony Rolfe Avenue, Gungahlin for
rent claimed for
that property between dates of 30
November to
December 2007.
I again draw your attention to the facts that, although tenancy documents
regarding this property were signed on 16
this tenancy, had it ever existed, never took effect and I remain a resident of
Ainslie Village.
Reasons why I am not a resident at the Gungahlin address, as claimed by HHA,
are several and include the following: -
➢ I was required to sign the Tenancy Agreement on
November in circumstances which were quite
unconscionable in that I was refused the opportunity to study the terms of the
in which, inter alia, HHA were unable to indicate the rent payable.
➢ I was denied physical access to the property, even as late as Sunday
November, as the barrel to the entrance lock was
visibly missing causing the key to be totally inoperable.
➢ Paintwork was still, as noted on the condition report supplied on 16th
November to be carried out by HHA which, along with
the missing lock barrel,
meant the premises were not ready for occupation.
➢ On Tuesday 27
November I returned all the
keys to HHA and notified the fact that I no longer wished to re-locate from
Ainslie Village to Gungahlin,
a point demonstrably reinforced by the fact that
at no time did I contact the appropriate authorities to have the electricity or
water meters read & re-connected in my name.
➢ On Wednesday 28
November I delivered written
confirmation of the fact that I had returned the keys and no longer wished to
re-locate (a letter dated
November, from yourself
to Terri Stiller with cc to myself, confirms that HHA was fully aware of my
decision not to assume tenancy
of the Gungahlin property but remain a resident
of Ainslie Village).
➢ In the (highly questionable) situation that the aforementioned Tenancy
Agreement ever existed as an actionable instrument
(something which possibly
might be resolved only by a decision of the Residential Tenancies Tribunal),
then such a situation certainly
ceased to exist, under Term 84(1) of that very
same Agreement, the moment I notified HHA of my intention not to re-locate to
and returned the keys.
Reasons why I remain a lawful occupant of Unit 4, House B,
Ainslie Village include the following: -
➢ I have an Occupancy Agreement dated 5 March 2005 for this property.
➢ In November 2005 a formal Notice of Attornment was issued to me by
which HHA assumed the role and responsibilities of landlord
in regard to this
Occupancy Agreement.
➢ HHA are fully aware that I have maintained that occupancy uninterrupted
to the present day and that no residency of the
Gungahlin [premises] ever came
into effect.
➢ At no time have I submitted to HHA any Notice terminating my occupancy
of the property at Ainslie Village.
➢ I have tendered rent & service charges for this property on Tuesday
November and again on Tuesday/Wednesday
December (on each
occasion HHA declined to accept).
➢ This property is, and for the past 8 years has been, by (sic) sole home
(prior to March 2005, under a different occupancy
agreement).
➢ I therefore ask you to confirm:-
lawful occupancy of Unit4, House B, Ainslie Village,
the invoice dated 19/12/07 regarding Anthony Rolfe avenue has been
my application to transfer to another HHA property has been withdrawn.
And I ask that these be confirmed in writing at your
earliest convenience.
followed some correspondence between the parties; Mr New tendered rental
payments in relation to his premise at Ainslie Village,
this was refused by the
management. Mr New continued to reside at Ainslie Village. The management of HHA
regarded his continued occupancy
at Ainslie Village as inappropriate since they
regarded the occupancy agreement as terminated and HHA continued to levy rent at
premises at Gungahlin despite the fact that they had been informed by Mr New
that he had returned the keys and did not intend to
reside there.
is evident to the Residential Tenancies Tribunal that the parties had reached
the situation where no sensible correspondence or
negotiation was possible.
25 February 2008 Mr New made an application to the Residential Tenancies
Tribunal seeking the following orders:
lessor ...recognize my continuing occupancy of Unit B4 Ainslie Village as per my
occupancy agreement signed 16
March 2005.
tenancy Agreement signed on 16
November 2007 between
The Lessor, ... and myself and in relation to 6/68 Anthony Rolfe Avenue,
Gungahlin, ACT, was properly terminated
by written notices of termination in
accordance with s84(1) 0f the Act and which was delivered by myself to the
Lessor on 28
November 2007 and
December 2007.
regard to Ainslie Village, rent shall be deemed to have abated from
November 2007, being the approximate date when the
lessor claims to have unilaterally terminated that Agreement without valid cause
and without giving any Notice to Vacate.
Lessor pay compensation to the sum of $2,500 in respect of costs incurred and
the suffering & pain caused by the harassment
by management since
Residential Tenancies Tribunal heard the application on 26 March 2008. Mr New
represented himself and Mr Glenn Cable and Mr Nicholas
Spence represented the
Respondent.
evidence before the Residential Tenancies Tribunal indicates that between
signing the Residential Tenancy Agreement in relation
to the property at
Gungahlin and returning the keys to HHA on 27
November, Mr New did not communicate any concerns relating to inability to
access the premises at Gungahlin or any of the concerns
relating to the lack of
completeness of the Agreement executed by the paries nor the question of
unconscionable conduct by HHA in
relation to that execution. He puts these
matters to the Tribunal as ex post facto justification for his conduct.
Cable, representing HHA put to the Tribunal the explanation that Mr New changed
his mind about taking up residency at the Gungahlin
premises because he
discovered that his membership of the Board of HHA might cease upon his vacation
of Ainslie Village.
New’s aggressive, evasive and difficult manner before the Residential
Tenancies Tribunal made the task of the Tribunal difficult.
He frequently took
opportunities to attack the management and officers of HHA in a manner that was
unhelpful to the Residential Tenancies
Tribunal. Mr New’s demeanour and
conduct in the hearing of this matter were such that the Residential Tenancies
Tribunal formed
the opinion that if any of the issues now put forward as reasons
for not wanting to take up residence in the property at Gungahlin,
had exercised
his mind then he would have raised them and pressed his view forcefully at his
earliest opportunity. There was no evidence
before the Tribunal that this
happened, nor indeed that these matters actually arose at the time in
Mr Cable gave evidence to the Tribunal that HHA regarded the Occupancy Agreement
relation to Unit 4B Ainslie Village as having been
terminated by the entering
into of the Residential Tenancy Agreement in relation to premises at Gungahlin.
HHA regarded Mr New’s
right to remain as an occupant as ended but had
agreed to his occupation continuing for two weeks from the signing of the
agreement, in order to assist him in his move from one home to another.
HHA regarded the Residential Tenancy Agreement in relation
to the Gungahlin
premises as still in force, because the method by which Mr New purported to
terminate it was not in accordance with
the agreement. Nevertheless Mr Cable had
indicated that HHA was willing to enter into a new Occupancy Agreement with Mr
New in relation
to premises at Ainslie Village but Mr Cable informed the
Residential Tenancies Tribunal that Mr New consistently refused to sign
the course of the hearing there was some discussion between the Tribunal and the
parties about the conduct of Ms Leonie Bassett,
a staff member of HHA and the
content of the occupancy agreement. These arose from a previous matter: Mr Cable
informed the Tribunal
that Ms Bassett was no longer employed by HHA. Mr Cable
assured the Tribunal that the occupancy agreement had been redrafted following
comments from the Tribunal and after HHA had sought legal advice. These matters
were only indirectly related to the key issues before
the Tribunal in this
matter. Ms Bassett signed the Residential Tenancy Agreement between Mr New and
HHA in relation to the Gungahlin
premises: Mr New complains that she refused him
an opportunity to read the agreement before signing. The Tribunal has no other
that would support Mr New’s allegation of
‘unconscionable’ conduct by HHA.
Termination of the
occupancy agreement in relation to Unit 4B Ainslie Village.
occupancy agreement is defined in section 71C of the Residential tenancies Act
1997. The Residential Tenancies Tribunal is to have
regard to the occupancy
principles in determining an occupancy dispute.
The occupancy agreement between the parties was terminated on 16 November 2007
by implication from the conduct of the parties:
parties entered into a Residential Tenancy Agreement in relation to the
Gungahlin premises. This commenced on 16 November 2007.
On the evidence before
it the Tribunal concludes that both parties intended that the occupancy
agreement would end upon the commencement
of the Residential Tenancy Agreement:
Mr New was no longer liable to pay rent for the premises at Ainslie Village and
ceased doing
had given Mr New permission to use the premises at Ainslie Village for two weeks
from 16 November 2007. This was not disputed
by Mr New. This arrangement might
be characterised as a licence, which would terminate upon Mr New’s
vacation of the premises
or two weeks from 16 November
has consistently refused tendered payment of ‘rent’ by Mr
does not follow in law that, upon the termination by Mr New of the Residential
Tenancy agreement entered into between the parties
in relation to premises at
Gungahlin, the previous agreement could revive. This could only be the case if
the parties agree. It was
manifest on the evidence before the tribunal that HHA
did not agree to Mr New remaining in occupation at Ainslie Village for any
purpose other than to assist in his move, and did not ever intend that he should
be able to chose to revive the old agreement.. It
was not the intention or
understanding of either party that the termination of the first agreement was
conditional in any way.
Termination of the Residential Tenancy
Agreement in relation to the Gungahlin premises
evidence before the Tribunal establishes that on or about 27 November 2007 Mr
New returned the keys to the Gungahlin property
to HHA. on 28 November he wrote
to HHA confirming that he had returned the keys. In his application to the
Tribunal Mr New asserts
that this conduct was sufficient to terminate the
tenancy under Clause 84 of the standard residential tenancy terms. Ex post facto
written confirmation of the return of keys is not sufficient to comply with the
notice requirements of the terms. However, taking
into account all the evidence
and the decision during the course of the hearing by HHA to waive their claim in
relation to unpaid
rent due to them under the tenancy agreement, the parties
agreed and the Tribunal concluded that the Residential Tenancy Agreement
the parties was at an end.
Resolution of matter.
Tribunal had no evidence regarding Mr New’s claim for abatement of rent at
Ainslie Village from 27 November; this was not
pressed and in view of the
Tribunal’s conclusion that the Occupancy Agreement had terminated on 16
November, superfluous.
Tribunal had no evidence regarding neither the conduct of HHA nor the basis for
the monetary amount pursuant to Mr New’s
claim for damages arising from
harassment of him by HHA.
remaining issue before the Tribunal was the continued occupation of Unit 4B
Ainslie Village by Mr New. The conclusions of the
Tribunal meant that his
continued occupancy of the Unit was unlawful.
had no application for termination before the Tribunal. Section 102(f) in
relation to the procedural powers of the Tribunal provides
that the Tribunal
may, apart from exercising its specific powers take any other action it
considers that is consistent with the Act.
Taking into account the tenor of the
Act, the duty to assist parties, the desire for finality, sections 102(f) and
104(l) the Tribunal
adopted the view that it was preferable to conclude the
gave evidence that they were prepared to enter into a new occupancy agreement in
relation to Ainslie Village with Mr New, but
that he had consistently refused to
agree to this. HHA tendered a copy of a letter sent to Mr New by HHA and dated
19 March 2008.
That letter stated, inter alia that the Board [of HHA] had
determined that Mr New could remain at Ainslie village if he completed
necessary paperwork to terminate the tenancy agreement in relation to Gungahlin
premises and signed a new occupancy agreement
in relation to Unit 4B.
New indicated towards the end of the hearing that he was not unwilling to sign a
new occupancy agreement, but he wanted a chance
to read and consider it. It is
the Tribunal’s understanding that HHA had reworded their standard
occupancy agreement. Mr Cable
undertook to provide Mr New with a copy of the
agreement. There was no copy of the reworded agreement available to the
the hearing Mr New had been unco-operative and difficult. It was evident to the
Tribunal that he was under a great deal
of stress, that some of this arose from
the internal politics of Ainslie Village and the approach to him of the
management of HHA.
In a very long hearing Mr New kept changing tack and wanted
to spend time on matters not directly linked to the issues before the
Nevertheless the Tribunal allowed him some latitude in presenting his arguments.
Tribunal formed the opinion that it was more likely than not that Mr New would
sign a new occupancy agreement and that therefore
his continued occupation of
the Ainslie Village premises would be governed by that new agreement. The
Tribunal explained to Mr New
that if he chose not to sign such an agreement then
he would have to vacate the premises. Although the Residential Tenancies
expressed the hope that the signing of a new agreement would end this
dispute, the Tribunal, taking into account the relationship
between the parties
was of the opinion that it was necessary to make orders which would achieve
finality in this matter. Should the
parties be at an impasse in seven days HHA
should be given leave to bring an application for the issue of a warrant.
Residential Tenancies Tribunal made the following orders:
the occupancy agreement for Unit 4B Ainslie Village was rescinded on
November 2007.
the Residential Tenancy Agreement with respect to 6/68 Anthony Rolfe Avenue,
Gungahlin was terminated by repudiation by the tenant
November 2007.
the tenant was to vacate the premises [at 4B Ainslie Village] within 7 days of
the date of this order.
respondent has leave to apply for a warrant of eviction if default in Order
JANN LENNARD
Residential Tenancies Tribunal
RTF format (99.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format