BG and Education Directorate [2021] ACTOFOI 6 (15 June 2021)
Education Directorate
(15 June 2021)
and reasons
for decision of Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman,
Symone Andersen
Application Number
AFOI-RR/20/10030
Decision Reference
[2021] ACTOFOI 06
Education Directorate
Decision Date
Freedom of Information Act 2016
(ACT) – deciding access
– whether disclosure of information is contrary to the public interest
– existence of documents
– information subject to legal professional
privilege – Cabinet information – personal information –
trade secrets, business affairs or research – prejudice
intergovernmental relations – prejudice an agency’s ability
obtain confidential information - promote open discussion of public affairs and
enhance the government’s accountability
- contribute to the positive and
informed debate on important issues or matters of public interest - reveal the
reason for a government
decision and any background or contextual information
that informed the decision
the purposes of
Freedom of Information Act 2016
), I am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman.
s 82(2)(b) of the FOI Act, I
the decision of the Education
directorate’s (Education) dated 2 July 2020.
Background of Ombudsman review
20 April 2020, the applicant applied to Education for access
All documents and records (excluding drafts and duplicates)
that informed the 8 April 2020 announcement that ‘[a]t the start
2, ACT public schools will be moving to a remote delivery of learning’
(i.e. were in existence at the time of the announcement),
(but not limited to):
final policy
proposals in relation to both the decision and implementation considerations,
including matters such as risk assessments,
health impact assessments of
children using devices for sustained periods, legal advice, delivery model,
final briefs
to Directorate Executive Managers and/or Minister of Education
minutes and/or notes or transcripts from stakeholder discussions, meetings or
panels. Stakeholders may include unions, P&C
Council, Catholic Education,
AIS, other jurisdictions, Commonwealth Minister, Commonwealth Department of
Education, other organisations,
or individuals
agreement/s
between any union, Directorate and/or Minister of Education
relied on to inform the decision, and
between the Directorate, Minister for Education and/or stakeholders.
2 July 2020, the respondent advised Education it had identified 56 documents as
falling within the scope of the access application.
Education gave the applicant
full access to nine documents, partial access to 41 documents and refused
access to four documents.
Education withheld two documents from release, pending
further third-party consultation. In making its decision, Education relied
on ss 1.2, 1.6, 2.2(a)(ii) and 2.2(a)(xi) of the FOI Act.
27 July 2020, Education advised the applicant their decision regarding the two
documents which it had withheld, pending third party
consultation. Education
decided to give the applicant partial access to one document and refused access
to one document. In making
this decision, the respondent relied on the views of
the third parties consulted and ss 2.2(a)(ii), 2.2(a)(x), 2.2(a)(xi) and
2.2(a)(xii)
of the FOI Act.
13 July 2020, the applicant sought Ombudsman review of Education’s
decision under s 73 of the FOI Act.
24 February 2021, I provided my preliminary views about the respondent’s
decision to the parties in a draft consideration.
24 February 2021, the applicant provided the following submissions in response
to my draft consideration:
While I do not agree with all aspects of
the decision, and am deeply concerned that no more documents exist, I would
prefer to see
the decision made. I will then decide if I will take further
action with this matter.
27 April 2021, the respondent provided the following submissions in response to
my draft consideration:
Document 1, page 7: SEMC is the Security and
Emergency Management Subcommittee of Cabinet. As SEMC is a subcommittee of
Cabinet, references
to discussions to be held at, or information prepared for,
SEMC have the same protections as if they were discussed or submitted
to Cabinet. The Cabinet Handbook states “The same requirements for conduct
of meetings, preparation of advice and
security of information apply to Cabinet
subcommittees”
Document 9, page 1, para 1: The information is personal information of two
employees as its release could enable them to be identified,
based on the number
of employees involved and the school at which they are employed. The employees
have a right to privacy in relation
to their personal information.
Document 12, page 3: The information is personal information of two employees
as its release could enable them to be identified, based
on the number of
employees involved and the school at which they are employed. The employees have
a right to privacy in relation
to their personal information.
Document 16, page 2: Specifically references providing information to the
Chief Minister in advance of a Cabinet meeting, with the
inference being that it
would be discussed at Cabinet i.e. is a deliberation of Cabinet
Document 16, page 3: The identification of the school in the context of
“litigation” and “social media” could
enable a person to
be identified, which would be a disclosure of their personal information and be
prejudicial to the person’s
right to privacy
Document 21, page 2: Refers to a matter being considered by SEMC. As SEMC is
a subcommittee of Cabinet, references to discussions
to be held at, or
information prepared for, SEMC have the same protections as if they were
discussed or submitted directly to Cabinet.
will address each of the above points under the relevant sections below.
respondent agreed with the remainder of the draft consideration.
Information at issue
information at issue in this review is the information that was withheld from
disclosure under the relevant provisions of the
issues in this review are whether:
documents exist
in relation to particular parts of the applicant’s request, and
whether giving
the applicant access to the information at issue would be contrary to the public
making decision, I had regard to:
applicant’s original access application and review application
Education’s
the FOI Act, in
particular ss 1.2, 1.6, 2.1(a)(i), 2.1(a)(ii), 2.1(a)(vii
Education’s
FOI processing file relating to the access application
an unedited copy
of the information at issue
applicant’s response to my draft consideration
respondent’s response to my draft consideration
relevant case
Waterford v Commonwealth of
, Taggart and
Queensland Police Service
Mann v Carnell
, Alistair Coe
and ACT Health
Directorate
Relevant law
7 of the FOI Act provides every person with an enforceable right of access to
government information. This right is subject
to other provisions of the FOI
Act, including grounds on which access may be refused.
to the public interest information is defined in s 16 of the FOI Act
information—
(a) that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
schedule 1; or
(b) the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
interest under the test set out in section 17.
public interest test set out in s 17 of the FOI Act involves a process of
balancing public interest factors favouring disclosure
against public interest
factors favouring nondisclosure to decide whether, on balance, disclosure would
be contrary to the public
35(1)(c) of the FOI Act provides an access application may be decided by
refusing to give access to the information sought
because the information being
sought is contrary to the public interest information.
50 of the FOI Act applies if an access application is made for government
information in a record containing contrary to the
public interest information
and it is practicable to give access to a copy of the record from which contrary
to the public interest
information has been deleted.
72 of the FOI Act provides the person seeking to prevent disclosure of
government information has the onus of establishing
the information is contrary
to the public interest information.
1 of the FOI Act sets out categories of information that is taken to be contrary
to the public interest to disclose.
2 of the FOI Act sets out the public interest factors that must be considered,
where relevant, when determining the public
The contentions of the parties
its decision notice, Education said:
For some parts of your request,
there were no documents identified that contained relevant information. For
example, no information
was located that provided risk assessments, health
impact assessments of children using devices for sustained periods, or privacy
impact assessments.
I place significant weight on the right to privacy of individuals and their
right to have their personal information protected. I
have decided that their
right to privacy in relation to their personal information has a higher standing
of public interest not to
disclose, than the public interest in disclosing this
information. Accordingly, the names of third parties, and their contact details
have been deleted from the information being provided to you.
Similarly, information relating to business affairs of persons or
organisations has been deleted from the documents, as I have decided
have a right to have their business information protected, particularly names of
their employees.
their application for Ombudsman review, the applicant said:
reviewed these documents I am concerned about the advice that certain requested
documents do not exist, that there are documents
missing about the decision to
close schools, and that exemptions have been applied incorrectly.
applicant provided further submissions in support of their review application on
20 July 2020:
I am deeply concerned that documents such as risk
assessments, health impact statements or privacy impact statements do not exist
in regards to remote learning. To be clear, there was no time limit placed on
when these documents were created despite attempts
by the Directorate to have me
limit documents from 2020 onwards. To say such documents do not exist is
concerning, as they should
be a fundamental aspect of considering remote
learning for the children of the ACT.
There is a distinct lack of information from ACT Health about when or if to
close schools, despite documents alluding to the Directorate/Government
intending to follow their advice.
I was verbally advised there was a forum attended by the ACT P&C
Association, Education Union and various experts where discussion
occurred about
COVID-19 and schools, and submissions such as medical research were made.
Document 5 and the out of session paper
that I am awaiting a decision on to
finalise this request allude to such forums. However, documents such as agendas,
documents distributed
to participants, documents submitted to the forum etc -
appear to be missing from this decision.
Any documents with a public interest element should be released. The decision
to close schools during Wave 1 of this pandemic is of
immense public
significance, and any documents that sheds the smallest amount of light on how
that decision was made - whether on
the basis of medical evidence, at the behest
of a union and/or on the whims of a government - should be released in full.
response to receiving notice this review, Education advised:
comment referring to his ‘concern that certain requested documents do not
exist’ and that ‘there are documents
missing’, appears to be
in response to the paragraph in the decision letter which advised that, for some
parts of his request,
there were no documents identified that contained relevant
information. For example, no information was located that provided risk
assessments, health impact assessments of children using devices for sustained
periods, or privacy impact assessments. Assessments
of these types that were
specific to the COVID-19 situation were not undertaken when decisions were being
made to implement remote
learning in term 2 because existing policy frameworks
and systems were considered fit for purpose and therefore were relied upon.
example, the Communities Online: Acceptable Use of ICT Parents and Students
policy covers matters such as e-safety and appropriate
behaviours of students
when working online.
In addition, resources for students and families about e-safety are available
on the Directorate’s website. Similarly, the Students
with a Disability:
Meeting Their Educational Needs policy was also relevant and provided the
necessary framework. These are just
some examples of many that were considered.
However, there are no documents available that provide evidence of this
consideration
as part of the decision process.
In order to implement a sound remote learning model for Term 2, decisions had
to be made very quickly, based on the best available
information at the time and
relying on existing systems and mechanisms where possible. For example, the
deployment of Chromebook
devices and use of specific software platforms were
already embedded programs in the Directorate that are underpinned by due
considerations, including a privacy impact assessment. The Directorate
leveraged off these already successful programs to provide
remote learning for
students in Term 2.
As the Directorate had in place the policies and systems to support the
change to remote learning, priority was given, in the brief
lead time for
implementation, to areas such as staff training, technology deployment,
distribution of Chromebooks to students, considerations
for students who
required additional supports (including home internet access), preparation of
resources, etc. whilst ensuring the
safety and wellbeing of staff and students.
These were unprecedented circumstances that required an extraordinary
submissions are discussed in more detail below.
Preliminary issues
Existence of documents
the application for review, the applicant stated ‘I am concerned about the
advice that certain requested documents do not
exist, that there are documents
missing about the decision to close schools..’
34(1) of the FOI Act provides:
(1) An agency or Minister deciding
an access application must take all reasonable steps to identify all government
information within
the scope of the application.
response to this review, Education provided evidence of the document searches
conducted. This included a ‘call for documents’
to the relevant
business areas. I reviewed a copy of the document searches and I am satisfied
Education took all reasonable steps
to identify information within the scope of
the applicants request.
note Education’s submissions, in particular that ‘Assessments of
these types that were specific to the COVID-19 situation
were not undertaken
when decisions were being made to implement remote learning in term 2 because
existing policy frameworks and
systems were considered fit for purpose and
therefore were relied upon.
is apparent that much of the decision making in relation to Education’s
decision to move to online learning was done quickly
in response to Covid-19. I
am satisfied with Education’s submission that some of the specific
documents the applicant requested
do not exist, as other documents were relied
that end, I am satisfied that Education has taken all reasonable steps to
identify documents within the scope of the applicant’s
request and there
are no further documents in relation to their request, as advised by Education
in the original decision notice.
Considerations
carefully considered an unedited copy of the information at issue together with
the information provided by the applicant and Education.
Information that is taken to be contrary to the public interest
to disclose under Schedule 1
found that some of the information at issue contains information that is
contrary to the public interest information to
disclose under Schedule 1 of the
reviewed the information at issue and I am satisfied it does not fall under the
exceptions outlined in Schedule 1. That is, the
information at issue does not
identify corruption, an offence, or misuse of power in a law enforcement
investigation. As a result,
provisions of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act may be
relevant to the information at issue. Consequently, I will now proceed to
whether the information at issue is contrary to the public interest
information to disclose under Schedule 1 of the FOI
Information subject to legal professional privilege
Schedule 1, s 1.2 of the FOI Act, Legal Professional Privilege (LPP) is
information:
... that would be privileged from production or admission into
evidence in a legal proceeding on the grounds of legal professional
is not defined in the FOI Act, however,
Waterford v Commonwealth of
sets out the three
common law factors that must exist for LPP to apply:
An independent
legal practitioner and client relationship must exist,
communication (as opposed to the document per se) must have been made for the
purpose of giving or receiving legal advice, or
for use in litigation (actual or
anticipated), and
The advice must
have been confidential.
information at issue which Education advised is covered by LPP include documents
29, 30 and 38 which comprises of an email and
meeting notes discussing legal
determine whether LPP applies, I considered below whether each of the above
elements exist in this case.
Does a legal practitioner and client
relationship exist?
am satisfied the information at issue is advice provided to Education by the
Australian Government Solicitor, which is a lawyer-client
relationship.
What was the dominant purpose of the information?
sought legal advice from the Australian Government Solicitor regarding the
respondent’s duty of care. The information
at issue consists of such
reviewing this information, I consider the information was created for the
dominant purpose of providing legal advice to Education.
information communicated in confidence?
discussed above, the information at issue comprises legal advice provided by the
Australian Government Solicitor to Education and
the advice is clearly marked
‘Legal – In Confidence’.
Ombudsman Freedom of Information Guidelines provide that simply marking
documents as such is not determinative that a particular
document is
confidential.
However, having read
the un-redacted material and considering the circumstances in which the advice
was provided, I am satisfied the
information was communicated in confidence.
Was LPP waived?
is waived if the information at issue was released to the public at large, or a
third party (unless this is done on a confidential
I do not consider sharing
legal advice internally, within the one organisation, amounts to a waiver of
on the information before me, my preliminary view is the respondent has not
waived LPP.
these reasons, I consider the information in documents 29, 30 and 38 are subject
to LPP and it would be contrary to the public
interest to disclose this
information under schedule 1, 1.2 of the FOI Act.
Information
Information
that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under Schedule 1
includes Cabinet information, which is:
(a) Information
has been submitted, or that a Minister proposes to submit to Cabinet for its
consideration and that was brought into existence
for that purpose, or
is an official record of Cabinet, or
is a copy of, or part of, or contains an extract from, information mentioned in
paragraph (a) or (b), or
disclosure of which would reveal any deliberation of Cabinet (other than through
the official publication of a Cabinet decision)
(b) Subsection (1) does not apply to purely factual information that –
mentioned in subsection (1) (a), or
mentioned in subsection (1) (b) or (c) and is a copy of, or part of, or contains
an extract from, a document mentioned in subjection
information at issue which Education contends is Cabinet information include
documents 1, 2, 3, 16 and 40, and comprises emails,
briefs, strategy documents
and other informative material prepared for the Minister for Education and Early
Childhood Development
in the context of ACT school’s response to Covid-19.
has identified the information as being information that ‘was provided, or
was produced for the purpose of being provided,
to Cabinet s 1.6(1)(a)’.
applicant does not contend the information is Cabinet information, rather, that
the ‘exemption was applied incorrectly’.
Accordingly,
the issue is whether schedule 1, s 1.6(1)(a) does apply to the information at
issue, and whether one of the exceptions
in schedule 1, 1.6 (2) is relevant or
reviewed a copy of the un-redacted information. Regarding documents 2, 3 and 40,
based on the nature and context of the material,
I accept that it comprises
information prepared for consideration of Cabinet. I also accept that the
information contains deliberative
material and is not purely factual. The
documents are marked as Cabinet, and whilst this is not a determinative factor,
the substantive
nature of the material clearly demonstrates a forthcoming
consideration of Cabinet.
these reasons, I am satisfied the information in documents 2, 3, 17 and 40 are
Cabinet information for the purposes of schedule
1, 1.6 (1)(a) of the FOI Act
and would be contrary to the public interest to disclose.
the information in document one (page seven), document 16 (page two) and
document 21 (page two), my preliminary view in
the draft consideration was that
I was not satisfied this information is information that was provided, or
produced for the purpose
of being provided, to Cabinet. In response to my draft
consideration, Education provided a submission stating that this material
exempt on the basis it was discussed in Cabinet, or prepared for the purpose of
discussions in Cabinet.
material in each document is a sentence stating that an issue will be considered
by the Chief Minister or by the SEMC. It does
not disclose the substance of the
issue or reveal any specific deliberations, it is merely a statement of fact.
Whilst the issues
the statements refer to may be considered by Cabinet and may
attract the Cabinet exemption, the statement that the issue will be
by Cabinet is not in itself exempt.
Irrespective
of the above, the Cabinet exemption does not apply to purely factual
information, as discussed in Schedule 1, 1.6(1)(b)
of the FOI Act. I consider a
sentence stating that an issue will be considered is a factual statement.
Accordingly, I do not accept
that the material in document one (page seven),
document 16 (page two) and document 21 (page two) is Cabinet information for the
purposes of Schedule 1, 1.6(1)(a) of the FOI Act.
now consider whether the reminding information at issue is contrary to the
public interest to disclose under Schedule 2 of the FOI
Public interest test
determine whether disclosure of information is, on balance, contrary to the
public interest, s 17(1) of the FOI Act prescribes
the following five
(a) identify any factor favouring disclosure that applies in
relation to the information (a relevant factor favouring disclosure),
any factor mentioned in schedule 2, section 2.1;
(b) identify any factor favouring nondisclosure that applies in relation to
the information (a relevant factor favouring nondisclosure),
including any
factor mentioned in schedule 2, section 2.2;
(c) balance any relevant factor or factors favouring disclosure against any
relevant factor or factors favouring nondisclosure;
(d) decide whether, on balance, disclosure of the information would be
contrary to the public interest;
(e) unless, on balance, disclosure would be contrary to the public interest,
allow access to the information subject to this Act.
addition, there is an initial step of ensuring that none of the irrelevant
factors listed in s 17(2) of the FOI Act are considered.
note the irrelevant factors listed is s 17(2) of the FOI Act and I do not
consider that any irrelevant factors arise in this Ombudsman
Factors favouring disclosure
2, s 2.1 of the FOI Act contains a non-exhaustive list of public interest
factors favouring disclosure.
the factors favouring disclosure listed in Schedule 2, s 2.1 of the FOI Act, I
agree with Education that the following factors
are be relevant to the remaining
information at issue. Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected
Promote open
discussion of public affairs and enhance the government’s accountability
– Schedule 2, 2.2(a)(i);
Contribute to
the positive and informed debate on important issues or matters of public
interest - Schedule 2, 2.2(a)(ii); and
reason for a government decision and any background or contextual information
that informed the decision – Schedule
2, 2.2 (a)(viii).
Additionally,
the FOI Act has an express pro-disclosure bias which reflects the importance of
public access to government information
for the proper working of representative
This concept is promoted
through the objects of the FOI Act.
documents relate to the ACT Government’s decision to transition to online
learning in response to Covid-19. It is reasonable
to accept this decision has
impacted a large portion of the general public.
accept the documents would assist in increasing accountability, inform public
debate on the important issue of online learning (in
the context of Covid-19)
and reveal the reasons for a government decision. As such I have afforded each
of the above factors significant
these reasons, I am satisfied that disclosure of the information sought could
reasonably be expected to promote the objects of
Factors favouring nondisclosure
contends there are four factors favouring non-disclosure, stating that
disclosure could reasonably be expected to:
prejudice the
protection of an individual’s right to privacy or any other right under
Human Rights Act
(HR Act) (schedule 2,
s 2.2(a)(ii))
prejudice trade
secrets, business affairs or research of an agency or person (schedule 2,
2.2(a)(xi))
intergovernmental relations (schedule 2,
s 2.2(a(x))
prejudice an
agency’s ability to obtain confidential information
(s 2.2(a)(xii)).
Individual’s right to privacy
factor favouring non-disclosure is that disclosure of the information could
reasonably be expected to prejudice the protection of
an individual’s
right to privacy or any other right under the HR Act.
I place significant weight on the right to privacy of
individuals and their right to have their personal information protected. I
decided that their right to privacy in relation to their personal information
has a higher standing of public interest not to
disclose, than the public
interest in disclosing this information. Accordingly, the names of third
parties, and their contact details
have been deleted from the information being
provided to you.
12(a) of the HR Act provides that everyone has the right ‘not to have his
or her privacy, family, home or correspondence
interfered with unlawfully or
arbitrarily’. It does not provide a general right to
but can essentially be
viewed as the right of an individual to preserve their personal sphere from
interference from others.
Information Privacy Act
(IP Act) identifies the circumstances in
which the disclosure of information may constitute a breach of an
individual’s privacy.
An individual’s personal information can only
be disclosed in accordance with the Territory Privacy Principles listed in
1 of the IP Act.
Personal information is defined in s 8 of the IP Act as:
information or an opinion about an identified individual or an individual who is
reasonably identifiable–
(i) whether the information or opinion is true or not; and
(ii) whether the information or opinion is recorded in a material form or
information at issue which Education contends contains personal information of
its staff and third parties are in documents one,
four, six, seven, eight, nine,
12, 13, 14, 16, 18, 21 – 37, 39, 41, 43, 45 – 48, 51, 54 and 55.
disclosure of information about agency staff is not generally considered to
prejudice the protection of the individual’s
right to privacy where the
information is wholly related to the individual’s routine day-to-day work
activities.
respect of the names and contact details of third parties (non-government
individuals), it is my view that their personal information
would not normally
be captured in the documents encompassed by the applicant’s request.
information has only been captured under the irregular circumstances surrounding
the documents, being the State and Territories
response to Covid-19. I have
therefore placed significant weight on their right to privacy.
respect to the names and contact details of Education and other State and
Territory employees (where they appear in the context
of correspondence between
Government agencies), I consider that disclosure of this information would only
reveal that government
employees are performing their normal duties, which I
consider would contribute to the accountability and transparency of government
action and decision-making. Education has not provided sufficient reasoning as
to why disclosure of names and contact details of
government staff would
prejudice their right to privacy. As such, I am not satisfied disclosure of this
information could reasonably
be expected to prejudice the protection of an
individual’s right to privacy.
response to my draft consideration, Education disagreed with my view that the
personal information in document 9 (page 1, para
1), document 12 (page 3) and
document 16 (page 3) should be released. I have addressed each document
specifically below:
Document 9 (page
1, para 1) – this material refers to teachers from a school being asked to
self-isolate in response to Covid-19.
Education submits that release of the
school name and the number of teachers asked to self-isolate could result in
those teachers
being identified. Since there is a considerable number of
teachers who teach at the school in question, I do not consider that simply
disclosing the number of teachers who were asked to self-isolate would by itself
be enough to identify those specific teachers. Accordingly,
I am not satisfied
disclosure of this information could reasonably be expected to prejudice the
protection of an individual’s
right to privacy.
Document 12
(page 3) – this material refers to the same information as document 9. For
the same reasons as above, I am not satisfied
disclosure of this information
could reasonably be expected to prejudice the protection of an
individual’s right to privacy.
Document 16
(page 3) – this material refers to the name of a school. Education submits
that identification of the school in
the context of litigation and social media
could enable a person to be identified. The document does not discuss any issues
the school in the context of litigation or social media. Furthermore,
the students’ name is to be withheld under schedule 2,
s 2.2(a)(ii)) of
the FOI Act. Given the number of students who attend the school in question, I
do not accept that identifying the
name of the school could reasonably be
expected to lead to that student being identified. As such, I am not satisfied
of this information could reasonably be expected to prejudice the
protection of an individual’s right to
Prejudice trade secrets, business affairs or
research of an agency or person
has submitted that documents eight, nine, 14, 16, 24, 25, 32 and 33 contain
‘information relating to business affairs
of persons or organisations has
been deleted from the documents’ and this information should not be
disclosed in order to protect
business information, particularly the names of
Education has not specified how the disclosure of this information would
prejudice the business affairs of the people or
businesses to which the
information relates. Furthermore, I have reviewed a copy of the un-redacted
information and in my view there
is no apparent sensitivity to the information.
accept that information pertaining to third party businesses working with or
providing information to the ACT Government is ‘business
information’. However, I am of the view that disclosing this fact could
not reasonably be expected to prejudice the business
affairs of the third
parties. Based on the information before me, I am not satisfied this factor is
applicable, noting the FOI Act
places the onus on the party seeking not to
disclosure information.
Prejudice intergovernmental
has submitted that documents 42A, B, C, D and 49B contain Education Council
briefs and papers and if this information is
disclosed, this would prejudice
intergovernmental relations.
consider the purpose of this factor favouring non-disclosure is to protect the
relationships between Australian Governments. I also
consider the additional
factor of protecting an agency’s ability to obtain confidential
information, in these circumstances,
also relates to protecting these
relationships.
Accordingly,
for disclosure to prejudice intergovernmental relations, the disclosure of the
information should reveal information
provided in confidence between the ACT,
Federal or other State and Territory Governments.
Education Council is a national body which provides a forum to coordinate
education policy at the national level. The documents
contain information
provided to the Education Council from all States and Territories in relation to
their respective responses to
reviewed a copy of the un-redacted information, my preliminary view is the
information may prejudice intergovernmental relations
on the grounds the
information was communicated on a confidential basis and disclosure could
reasonably be expected to:
adversely affect
ongoing intergovernmental relations
cause another
government to be hesitant about providing information to the ACT Government in
result in a loss
of trust and cooperation between governments, and
prejudice the
workings of the Education council specifically, including the full and open
participation by all of it’s members.
the importance of high level intergovernmental cooperation in times of national
crisis (such as Covid-19), I afford the protection
of the information in
Documents 42A, B, C, D and 49B significant weight.
Prejudice an
agency’s ability to obtain confidential information
also submitted that disclosure of information in Documents 42A, B, C, D and 49B
would prejudice an agency’s ability
to obtain confidential information on
the basis the documents were written in the spirit of cooperation and
confidentiality at high
levels of government’.
already determined that the information was provided in confidence by various
third parties. It is reasonable then, to expect that
disclosure of the documents
would prejudice the ACT Government’s ability to obtain similar information
in forthcoming scenarios
of a similar nature.
already noted above, the ability to obtain confidential information for the
purposes of managing a crisis such as Covid-19 is of
significant importance.
Accordingly, I afford the protection of the information in Documents 42A, B, C,
D and 49B significant weight.
Balancing the factors
I have identified public interest factors favouring disclosure and
non-disclosure, I now must consider the public interest balancing
test as set
out in s 17 of the FOI Act.
note that balancing public interest factors is not, however, simply a case of
quantifying the number of relevant factors for disclosure
and nondisclosure,
with the higher quantity being consider in the public interest. The
decision-maker’s task is to consider
the relative importance and weight of
each factor they have identified. The weight given to a factor will depend on
the effect that
disclosing the information would have on the public
FOI Act also has a pro-disclosure bias, and as a result, the public interest
test should not be approached on the basis that there
are empty scales in
equilibrium, waiting for arguments to be put on each side, rather the scales are
‘laden in favour of disclosure’.
am satisfied, on balance, the names of government staff in the context
identified at paragraph 73, the public interest factors favouring
outweigh the public interest factors favouring nondisclosure due to the fact
that disclosure would only reveal that government
employees are performing their
normal duties.
am satisfied that, on balance, in relation to third party business information,
the public interest factors favouring disclosure
outweigh the public interest
factors favouring non-disclosure due to the fact that Education has not provided
sufficient evidence
as to why disclosure would prejudice the business affairs of
third parties.
all the remaining information, based on the information before me in this
review, I am satisfied, on balance, the public interest
factors favouring
nondisclosure outweigh the public interest factors favouring disclosure. This is
because, as discussed above, I
consider there is significant public interest in
the ACT government’s ability to obtain confidential information and
strong intergovernmental relations in a time of public crisis.
s 82(2)(b), I vary the respondent’s decision to refuse access to the
information at issue under s 35(1)(c) of the FOI
consider that the applicant should be given access to the information in:
Document one,
page seven;
Document four in
its entirety;
Document eight,
Document nine,
page one, paragraph one;
Document nine,
Document 12 in
its entirety;
Document 14,
Document 16,
page two in its entirety;
Document 16,
page three in its entirety with the exception of a third party’s
Document 21,
page two in its entirety;
Document 23,
with the exception of the names of third party individuals that have been
Document 24,
page three;
Document 25,
page three, paragraph one;
Document 32 with
the exception of the names of third party individuals that have been withheld;
Document 33,
page two; and
Document 33,
page three with the exception of the names of third parties individuals that
have been withheld
Symone Andersen
Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
Waterford v Commonwealth of
[1987] HCA 25
Taggart and Queensland Police Service
[2015] QICmr
Mann v Carnell
Alistair Coe and ACT Health
Directorate
[2018] ACTOFOI 4
[1987] HCA 25
Ombudsman FOI
Guidelines 4: Considering the public interest, page 16 (
https://www.ombudsman.act.gov.au/publications/foi-guidelines
Mann v Carnell
See s 17 of the FOI Act.
See s 6(b) of the FOI Act.
Alistair Coe and ACT Health
Directorate
[2018] ACTOFOI 4
Taggart and Queensland
Police Service
[2015] QICmr 16
RTF format (979 KB)
Signed PDF/A format