BE and Justice and Community Safety Directorate [2021] ACTOFOI 1 (21 February 2021)
and Justice and Community Safety Directorate
ACTOFOI 1 (21 February 2021)
and reasons for decision of
Senior Assistant Ombudsman, Louise Macleod
Application
AFOI-RR/20/10057
[2021] ACTOFOI 1
Justice and Community Safety
Directorate
of Information Act 2016
(ACT) – deciding access – whether
disclosure of information is contrary to the public interest – secrecy
– prohibited by law – whether documents are in scope
the purposes of
Information Act 2016
), I am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman.
s 82(2)(a) of the FOI Act, I
the decision of the
Justice and Community Safety Directorate
), dated 10 November
Background of Ombudsman review
19 October 2020, the applicant applied to JACS for access
copy of the video from the CCTV camera in the main room of WCC WS1b recorded on
October 2020 from 12:00 to 21:30 ADST
26 October 2020, JACS acknowledged the applicant’s request and confirmed
the scope of the request.
10 November 2020, JACS advised the applicant it had identified CCTV footage as
falling within the scope of the access application.
JACS refused access to the
footage in full. In making this decision, JACS relied on Schedule 1, s 1.14
the FOI Act.
23 November 2020, the applicant sought Ombudsman review of JACS’ decision
under s 73 of the FOI Act.
3 February 2021, I provided my preliminary views about JACS’s decision to
the parties in
draft consideration. My preliminary view was to confirm the
4 February 2021, JACS advised they accepted the draft consideration and did not
any further submissions.
4 February 2021, the applicant provided the following
submissions:
is a CRIMINAL ACT, possibly by a Corrections Officer (I.E. a public
27 of the Draft refers:
Information
captured by Schedule 1 is taken to be contrary to the public interest to
disclose unless the information identifies corruption
or the commission of an
offence by a public official or that the scope of a law enforcement
investigation has exceeded the limits
imposed by law.
This negates
Paras 28 and following; in fact it ENHANCES the issue of law enforcement in
alerting ACTCS to the possibility of a criminal
act by a Corrections Officer
(See Para 29)
What is NOT
visible is as important as what IS VISIBLE.
To undertake
the act, if by someone coming in from outside, they will enter the Pod on the
left hand side of the limit of the field
of view and be at the doorway to Cell 4
on the right hand side of the limit of the field of view. The image will go from
to indistinct BUT as the subject moves across the field of view, they
would be clearly identifiable.
...if Joe E
Blogs from the Fyshwick Daily Bugle wishes to access that CCTV footage, Section
222 is decidedly relevant but in this
case, the requestor is me about movement
in my home. One size does not fit all.
Section 222 and Privacy is a red herring. I wish to see if a Public Official has
transgressed the limits of his or her legal
and official role. It is a matter of
concern that ACTCS do not wish to release data that MAY or MIGHT clear a member
of their staff.
Scope of Ombudsman review
applicant is seeking the footage from a particular CCTV camera during a
particular time period.
their submission dated 30 November 2020, JACS advised the identified CCTV
footage does not have visibility of the particular area
the applicant wanted to
reviewed the footage, it appears this area is not clearly visible, however, the
applicant advised they would like to proceed
with this review. I note the
applicant’s submissions, dated 4 February 2021, in which they state
‘what is not visible
is as important as what is visible’.
Information at issue
information at issue in this Ombudsman review is the CCTV footage identified by
issue to be decided in this Ombudsman review is whether giving the applicant
access to the information at issue would be contrary
to the public
making my draft consideration, I had regard
applicant’s access application and review application
decision regarding the initial access application
FOI Act, in particular Schedule 1, s 1.3
Corrections Management Act 2007
(ACT) (the CM Act)
applicant’s submissions to my draft consideration
respondent’s FOI processing file relating to the access application
unedited copy of the information at issue.
Relevant law
7 of the FOI Act provides every person with an enforceable right of access to
government information. This right is subject
to other provisions of the FOI
Act, including grounds on which access may be refused.
to the public interest information is defined in s 16 of the FOI Act
information—
is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under schedule 1;
disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest under
the test set out in section 17.
public interest test set out in s 17 of the FOI Act involves a process of
balancing public interest factors favouring disclosure
against public interest
factors favouring nondisclosure to decide whether, on balance, disclosure would
be contrary to the public
35(1)(c) of the FOI Act provides that an access application may be decided by
refusing to give access to the information sought
because the information being
sought is contrary to the public interest information.
50 of the FOI Act applies if an access application is made for government
information in a record containing contrary to the
public interest information
and it is practicable to give access to a copy of the record from which contrary
to the public interest
information has been deleted.
72 of the FOI Act provides that the person seeking to prevent disclosure of
government information has the onus of establishing
the information is contrary
to the public interest information.
1 of the FOI Act sets out categories of information that is taken to be contrary
to the public interest to disclose.
2 of the FOI Act sets out the public interest factors that must be considered,
where relevant, when determining the public
The contentions of the parties
its decision notice, JACS’
have determined that the CCTV footage contains information that is taken to be
contrary to the public interest to disclosure under
Schedule 1 of the Act.
release of the CCTV footage can reasonably be expected to prejudice the safe and
proper operations of ACT Corrective Services
(ACTCS) and I note that CCTV
footage is considered protected information under the
Corrections
Management Act 2007
the application for Ombudsman review, the applicant
rejecting my FOI Request, I believe that JACSFOI has ignored the Public Interest
Test in order to frustrate action against a person,
Corrections Officer or
Inmate for a criminal event.
submissions are discussed in more detail below.
Considerations
have carefully considered an unedited copy of the information at issue together
with the information provided by the applicant and
respondent.
Information
that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under Schedule
found the information sought is contrary to the public interest to disclose
under Schedule 1 of the FOI Act.
Information
captured by Schedule 1 is taken to be contrary to the public interest to
disclose unless the information identifies corruption
or the commission of an
offence by a public official or that the scope of a law enforcement
investigation has exceeded the limits
imposed by law.
considered the applicant’s submission dated 4 February 2021. In effect,
the applicant is submitting that the footage may or
may not identify a
corrections officer in the area at the time the applicant claims an offence may
have been committed.
do not accept the assertion that corrections officers being in the general
vicinity around the cell, is itself an offence for the
purposes of the exception
outlined in Schedule 1. For the exception to apply, the footage would need to
‘identify corruption
or the commission of an offence by a public
official’, which in my view, is not the case.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied it does not fall under the exceptions outlined in Schedule 1. As
a result, provisions of Schedule 1 of
the FOI Act may be relevant to the
information at issue. Consequently, I will now consider whether the information
at issue is contrary
to the public interest information to disclose under
Schedule 1 of the FOI
enforcement or public safety information
its decision, JACS considered whether the information at issue was law
enforcement and public safety information under Schedule
1, s 1.14(f) and (i),
is a lawful method used to monitor and manage the safety and security of
detainees and staff within AMC and can assist in the
investigation of an
incident when it occurs. The release of CCTV footage can reasonably be expected
the prejudice the safe and proper
operations of ACT Corrective Services
Information
the disclosure of which, or could reasonably be expected to:
prejudice the effectiveness of a lawful method or procedure for preventing,
detecting, investigation or dealing with a contravention
or possible
contravention of the law; or
(i) prejudice
a system or procedure for the protection of people, property or the
environment.
accept that CCTV is a lawful method used to monitor and manage the safety of
Alexander Maconochie Centre (AMC) staff and detainees.
However, JACS did not
establish that disclosure of the information at issue could reasonably be
expected to prejudice the safe and
proper operations of ACTCS, particularly as
the location of the CCTV camera is known.
Accordingly,
I do not consider the information at issue to be contrary to the public interest
to disclose under Schedule 1, s 1.14
Information
disclosure of which is prohibited by law
JACS did not identify Schedule 1, 1.3 in its original decision, JACS identified
this factor in its submission to this review.
footage is considered protected information under the CM Act and any
unauthorised disclosure would constitute an offence to section
222(2) of the CM
Act. For this reason the following Schedule 1 factor is also
applicable:
1, 1.3 Information disclosure of which is prohibited under law
Any other information the disclosure of which is prohibited by a secrecy
provision of a law.
considered s 222(2) of the CM Act which provides:
person to whom this section applies commits an offence—
if the person—
makes a record of protected information about someone else; and
is reckless about whether the information is protected information about someone
if the person does something that divulges protected information about someone
else and is reckless about whether—
the information is protected information about someone else; and
doing the thing would result in the information being divulged to someone
information is defined in s 222(1) as information about a person that is
disclosed to, or obtained by, a person because
of the exercise of a function
under the CM Act or the administration of that Act.
JACS’ involvement in administering the CM Act and monitoring activities
through CCTV, I consider s 222(1) to be applicable.
Further, as the CCTV footage
was obtained by JACS exercising functions under the CM Act, I consider it would
be subject to the confidentiality
provisions in s 222 in relation to the CCTV
note that various exceptions to the secrecy provision under s 222 exist,
including where information is divulged by the person under
the CM Act, or
another territory law (see
s 222(3)(a)). Therefore a question arises as to
whether these exceptions mean that disclosure is permitted under the FOI Act.
applicant contends that s 222 of the CM Act is not applicable as the applicant
is a detainee in the corrections centre where the
CCTV footage is captured.
my view, the exception in 222(3)(a) is not relevant in this matter. This is
because the definition of a secrecy provision in Schedule
1, s 1.3(7)(b) of the
FOI Act expressly states that a prohibition may be ‘absolute or subject to
stated exceptions or qualifications’.
do not consider the applicant being a detainee to which the CM Act applies,
falls under any of the exceptions.
Accordingly,
I consider the CCTV footage is protected information and disclosure would
constitute an offence to section 222(2) of
the CM Act. Therefore, I consider the
footage to be contrary to the public interest to disclose on the basis it is
prohibited by
I consider the material should be not be disclosed under Schedule 1 of the FOI
Act, I am not required to consider whether any Schedule
2 factors favouring
disclosure or non-disclosure
s 82(2)(a), I
JACS’ decision to refuse access to the information at issue under
35(1)(c) of the FOI
Senior Assistant
21 February
RTF format (897 KB)
Signed PDF/A format