Fletcher (a pseudonym) v Knight (a pseudonym) (No 2) [2025] ACTCA 8 (28 February 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
Fletcher (a pseudonym) v Knight (a pseudonym) (No 2)
[2025] ACTCA 8
Hearing Dates:
Decision Date:
McCallum CJ, Mossop and Baker JJ
The appeal and the cross-appeal are dismissed.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– Appeal against ruling admitting unlawfully
obtained evidence under
Evidence Act 2011
seizure of items under a three-condition warrant – whether requisite
belief required to be formed before seizure
of property under three-condition
– Cross-appeal against exclusion of evidence –
attempted cover up of contravention of Australian law by police –
attempted cover up relevant to consideration of the “undesirability of
admitting evidence that has been obtained in
the way in which the evidence was
obtained” in
Evidence Act
– Appropriate standard of appellate review
Evidence Act
error not established – whether
House v The
error required – whether
Sidaros v The Queen
15 ACTLR 64
should be followed – no challenge to decision in
– correctness standard applied
Legislation Cited:
Acts Interpretation Act
Acts Interpretation Amendment Act 2011
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT), s 45A
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2008
Evidence Act 2011
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Human Rights Act 2004
Legislation Act 2001
Supreme Court Act 1933
Cases Cited:
Adler v Gardiner
[2002] FCA 1141
Alexander v Bakes
[2023] ACTCA 49
21 ACTLR 27
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
BC v The Queen
[2019] NSWCCA 111
Bunning v Cross
[1978] HCA 22
(1978) 141 CLR 54
Caratti v Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police
[2017] FCAFC
257 FCR 166
Caratti v Commissioner of Australian Federal Police (No 2)
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations
[2000] HCA 47
203 CLR 194
Director of Public Prosecutions v Marijancevic; Director of Public
Prosecutions v Preece
[2011] VSCA 355
; 33 VR 440
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) v RDT
[2018] NSWCCA 293
Dunesky v Elder
[1994] FCA 1020
Dwyer v Calco Timbers Pty Ltd
[2008] HCA 13; 234 CLR 124
Em v The Queen
[2007] HCA 46
Hart v Commissioner of Australian Federal Police
[2002] FCAFC 392
124 FLR 384
[2022] NSWCCA 206
302 A Crim R 365
Kadir v The Queen
[2020] HCA 1
267 CLR 109
[2023] NSWCCA 256
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
92 ALJR 713
Moore (a pseudonym) v R
[2024] HCA 30
New South Wales Commissioner of Police v Nationwide News Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 366
70 NSWLR 643
Parker v Churchill
[1985] FCA 425
Parker v Comptroller-General of
Customs [2009] HCA 7; 83 ALJR
Puglisi v Australian Fisheries Management Authority
[1997] FCA 846
148 ALR 393
Question of Law Reserved
[1998] 70 SASR 28
R v Bauer (a pseudonym)
[2018] HCA 40
[2014] NTSC 19
R v Ireland
[1970] HCA 21
(1970) 126 CLR 321
[1950] HCA 25
(1950) 82 CLR 133
[2020] NSWCCA 283
R v Siang Pin Foo (No 2)
[1998] NTSC 50
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
[2022] ACTMC 4
Restricted Judgment
[2022] ACTMC 5
Restricted Judgment
[2023] ACTSC 238
Ridgeway v The Queen
(1995) 184 CLR 19
Rogerson v R
[2021] NSWCCA 160
290 A Crim R 239
Sidaros v The Queen
[2020] ACTCA 11
15 ACTLR 64
Slater (a pseudonym) v R
[2019] VSCA 213
State of Victoria v Brazel
[2008] VSCA 37
; 19 VR 553
Tasmania v Crane
[2004] TASSC 80
Warren v Coombs
[1979] HCA 9
142 CLR 531
Whim Creek Consolidated NL v Colgan
[1991] FCA 605
Young v The King
[2024] SASCA 47
Texts Cited:
Australian Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 26, vol 1,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 38,
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
102, December 2005)
Explanatory Memorandum,
Evidence Bill 1994
Revised Explanatory Statement,
Evidence Bill 2011
Alex Fletcher (a pseudonym) & Dale Fletcher (a pseudonym)
(Appellants)
Robert Knight (a pseudonym) (Respondent)
Representation:
J Pappas & S Howell (Appellants)
K McCann (Respondent)
Hugo Law Group (Appellants)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
File Numbers:
AC 36 and 37 of 2023
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: ACT Supreme Court
Before: Loukas-Karlsson J
Date of Decision: 31 August 2023
Case Title:
Restricted Judgment
[2023] ACTSC 238
McCALLUM CJ:
appeal raises important questions concerning the application of
Evidence Act 2011
(ACT), which contemplates the mandatory exclusion
of otherwise admissible evidence where the evidence was obtained improperly or
unlawfully. Such evidence must be excluded unless a specified test is satisfied
(“unless the desirability of admitting the
evidence outweighs the
undesirability of admitting evidence that has been obtained in the way in which
the evidence was obtained”).
appellants were accused of using hidden cameras in a house they owned to obtain
intimate images of their female tenants. The
evidence to prove those
allegations consisted of electronic files obtained by police from three separate
devices (two phones and
an HP laptop computer) seized during the execution of
were executed, and the evidence obtained subsequently processed, involved
breaches of requirements under the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth). The fate of
the prosecution case turned on the admissibility of the evidence seized.
facts and the law are set out in the judgment of Baker J, which I have had the
benefit of reading in draft. I am grateful for
her Honour’s comprehensive
and lucid analysis. Subject to what follows, I agree with her Honour’s
reasons and conclusions.
have also had the benefit of reading the draft judgment of Mossop J, who
has written separately on two issues: the standard of review
to be applied by
this Court and the relevance of improper conduct engaged in by police
the evidence the subject of objection was “obtained”.
to the first issue, notwithstanding his Honour’s compelling argument for
the contrary conclusion, I agree with Baker J, for
the reasons her Honour has
stated, that the standard of appellate review this Court must apply to a
decision whether to admit evidence
the subject of an objection based on
s 138 is the correctness standard. For my own part, whatever was intended
historically, I have
some doubt as to whether the text of s 138 can be
construed as conferring a discretionary power. The test is not whether the
the desirability of one matter outweighs the undesirability
of another but whether it does. It is not an easy test to apply as it
an evaluative judgment to be made by reference to terms of indeterminate
reference (“desirability” and “undesirability”),
is framed as an objective test, not a judicial discretion. However, as Mossop J
and Baker J have both noted, the point was
not argued and it follows that, for
the time being, this Court should follow its own decision in
Sidaros v The
[2020] ACTCA 11
15 ACTLR 64
second issue addressed by Mossop J is the relevance of a subsequent cover-up to
the determination whether to admit the evidence.
The HP laptop was found to
contain numerous video files depicting three of the complainants, and the young
child of one of them,
naked. That evidence was held to have been unlawfully
obtained because the laptop, having been lawfully seized, was “moved
another place for examination” for more than the 30 days allowed for that
purpose under
. The device was examined two
days after the expiration of that period. The issue of timing was drawn to the
attention of the detective
in charge of the investigation by the computer
forensics team, and steps could have been taken to examine it urgently or apply
an extension of the period allowed, but he approved its examination outside
the statutory period.
it followed that the evidence was obtained in consequence of a contravention of
an Australian law, in my view that contravention
would not, of itself, have
warranted the exclusion of such important evidence, even taking into account the
detective’s informed
instruction to the forensics team to go ahead.
after the evidence had been obtained, the detective took steps to conceal the
contravention. His police notes, as disclosed
to the defence team, were
redacted to obscure the timing issue. Then, in his evidence before the
magistrate, the detective claimed
that he was not aware of the problem and that
he had been told by the forensics team that the device would be examined within
magistrate admitted the evidence from the laptop and the appellants were
convicted of the charges arising from that evidence.
On appeal to the Supreme
Court, the appeal judge took the view that the steps taken by the detective to
cover up the illegality
could not be condoned by the Court and that this conduct
tipped the balance in favour of excluding the evidence.
agree that the cover-up cannot be condoned by the Court. My concern is whether
the detective’s conduct after the evidence
had been obtained is a relevant
consideration in determining whether unlawfully obtained evidence is to be
admitted. Left to my
own wits, I would construe s 138 to be concerned
solely with the way in which the evidence was obtained, not any aftermath
principal reason for reaching that conclusion is that I see no textual path in
s 138 for having regard to events after the evidence
in question was
obtained. Section 138(1) provides:
(1) Evidence that was obtained—
(a) improperly or in contravention of an Australian law; or
(b) in consequence of an impropriety or of a contravention of an Australian law;
must not be admitted unless the desirability of admitting the evidence
outweighs the undesirability of admitting evidence that has
been obtained in the
way in which the evidence was obtained.
“undesirability” to be weighed against the desirability of admitting
the evidence is the undesirability of admitting
evidence that has been obtained
in the way in which the evidence
was obtained
. Section 138(3) contains a
list of considerations that must be taken into account in that weighing
exercise. While that list is
non-exhaustive, the considerations specified may
be seen to be directed to balancing, on the one hand, matters directed to the
interest in prosecuting allegations of criminal conduct and, on the other
hand, an evaluation of the particular impropriety or contravention
consequence of which the evidence was obtained. To frame the issue in the
familiar language of sentencing principles, the
cover up does not inform the
objective seriousness of the impropriety or contravention. It is plainly a
separate impropriety, but
not one that is addressed in s 138.
matters listed in s 138(3) that the court must take into account under
s 138(1) are:
(a) the probative value of the evidence; and
(b) the importance of the evidence in the proceeding; and
(c) the nature of the relevant offence, cause of action or defence and the
nature of the subject matter of the proceeding; and
(d) the gravity of the impropriety or contravention; and
(e) whether the impropriety or contravention was deliberate or reckless; and
(f) whether the impropriety or contravention was contrary to or inconsistent
with a right of a person recognised by the International
Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights; and
(g) whether any other proceeding (whether or not in a court) has been or is
likely to be taken in relation to the impropriety or
contravention; and
(h) the difficulty (if any) of obtaining the evidence without impropriety or
contravention of an Australian law.
of those matters invokes the conduct of any person after the evidence was
obtained as a consideration relevant to the assessment
required to be made under
s 138(1). The only forward-looking consideration is (g), which is
concerned only with the existence of
any other means of addressing the
impropriety. The issue to be considered under s 138(1) is not the
desirability of admitting the
evidence in all the circumstances of the case; it
is the desirability of admitting “evidence that has been obtained in the
way in which the evidence was obtained”.
that understanding, the Court does not condone the cover up by admitting the
evidence; it is simply a question of the later conduct
being irrelevant to the
proceedings against an accused person because it is not part of the way in which
the prosecution evidence
was obtained.
the prosecution did not take this point in the appeal. On the contrary, it was
expressly conceded that the balancing exercise
under s 138(1) “may
encapsulate other connected improprieties” including conduct in the nature
of a cover-up. The concession
was made in light of the three decisions
considered in the judgments of Mossop J and Baker J in which police conduct
involving a
subsequent cover-up of their illegality or impropriety was taken
into account in the application of s 138:
Tasmania v Crane
[2014] NTSC 19
Slater (a pseudonym) v R
[2019] VSCA 213.
agree with Mossop J’s observation that those cases do not articulate a
uniform principle consistent with the language of s
138. The relevant
passages are set out in his Honour’s judgment.
, the Supreme Court of Tasmania accepted that one of the improper
acts relied upon (the making of misleading statutory declarations)
after the evidence was obtained but rejected the prosecutor’s submission
that it was not relevant to the exercise
of the “discretion” under
s 138. The reason given was, with respect, rhetorical (“the attitude
of those officers
to the rule of law, as displayed during the relevant
investigation and any associated prosecution, before, during and after the
of the evidence, must be relevant to the exercise of the discretion
conferred by s138”). For my part, it is not self-evident
that a police
officer’s attitude to the rule of law “must be relevant” to
the admissibility of evidence in a criminal
, the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory considered that the
evidence was relevant to “the public interest in ensuring
that the facts
and circumstances during and leading up to the relevant searches could be
revealed and examined by others including
a court at some later time”.
While there is plainly a public interest in that matter, it is something that
can be addressed
by other processes. It is not clear to me why the consequences
of police misconduct that is causally irrelevant to the obtaining
of proof of
the commission of a criminal offence should be visited on the public interest in
the prosecution of criminal offences,
particularly in a case in which there are
alleged victims.
, the Victorian Court of Appeal considered that it was relevant to
consider “the undesirability of the same thing being done
cases”. In my respectful opinion, while the public interest in deterring
police misconduct is manifest, that is not
an issue with which s 138 is
concerned. The text of the section specifies a test that is confined to
“the way in which the
evidence was obtained”.
any event, as already noted, the point was not taken by the prosecution and it
was not submitted that the cases that have held
otherwise (including a decision
of the Victorian Court of Appeal) are plainly wrong. Accordingly, it would not
be appropriate to
determine the appeal on this basis. Having regard to the
issues on which the appeal was conducted, the appropriate course is for
join in the orders of the majority, notwithstanding my different conclusion as
to the proper construction of s 138.
Introduction
have had the benefit of reading the judgment of Baker J in draft. I agree
with the orders that her Honour proposes and, subject
to what follows, with her
reasons. In these reasons, there are two issues which I wish to
(a) first, to explain why, notwithstanding my significant doubts about the
correctness of the decision in
Sidaros v The Queen
[2020] ACTCA 11
as to the approach to the review of decisions made under s 138, it is
not appropriate to reconsider that decision in this case; and
(b) second, to explain why I agree with Baker J’s conclusion that,
for the purposes of s 138, it was open to the magistrate
to take into
account the conduct of Detective Knight in covering‑up the breach of
the law arising from the late examination
of the HP laptop notwithstanding that,
by the time the cover‑up occurred, the evidence had already been
“obtained”.
The applicable standard of review
refers at [172] to the decision of the Court of Appeal in
held that decisions as to the admissibility of evidence under s 138 are
reviewable on the basis of correctness rather than
by reference to the
limitation in
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
In this part of my
reasons, I:
(a) explain the reasons why I consider that there is a strong case for saying
that appellate review of decisions under s 138 is limited
in accordance
House v The King
(at [24]-[83]); and
(b) explain why it is not appropriate to determine the issue in this case (from
The standard of review is a question of statutory interpretation
the standard of review is
House v The King
or correctness is not a
question that is separate from determining the nature of the decision which is
under review. It is not an
exercise in deciding, separate from the underlying
decision, what should be the applicable standard of review. It is the nature of
the underlying decision which determines the standard of review. If the
underlying decision is discretionary (in the true sense of
accommodating
different outcomes), then review is in accordance with
House v The King
If the underlying decision is one in relation to which there is only one right
answer, then review is on the basis of correctness.
As a result, the
determination of the standard of review does not arise from an abstract focus on
the nature of the appeal but instead
from a concrete focus upon the nature of
the underlying decision. Where the underlying decision is a common law decision,
involves the determination of the content of the common law. Where, as
here, the decision derives from statute, it involves a determination
meaning of the statute.
what is in question is a decision under a statutory provision, the statement
that the statutory provision can give rise to only
one correct answer is a
conclusion which dictates that the correctness standard applies. To state the
conclusion is to state the
end of the analysis rather than the beginning. The
statement of the conclusion does not provide any reason for that conclusion.
or not a statutory provision gives rise to only one correct answer
involves a question of statutory interpretation. That exercise
approached in the usual way.
in what follows, a division has been drawn between text, context and legislative
purpose, it must be remembered that such
a division is somewhat artificial in
that any conclusion as to text must involve weighing context and legislative
purpose. It is
not necessary to establish any ambiguity in the statutory text
before regard can be had to the purpose of an Act.
Section 139
Legislation Act 2001
(ACT) requires a court to prefer the
“interpretation that would best achieve the purpose of the Act” over
other interpretation”, and applies even in circumstances where
giving effect to the legislative purpose involves “displacing
the apparent
meaning of the Act”:
Legislation Act
Although, in
what follows, text and statutory context are considered first before moving on
to legislative purpose, each is part
of a single process of
interpretation.
The text of
does not provide a clear
contemplates a balancing exercise. Unlike other balancing
exercises that exist in the
Evidence Act
, it is not framed by reference
to matters immediately associated with the conduct of the trial such as
“probative value”
or “the danger of unfair prejudice”.
Rather, it is framed by reference to a judicial assessment of “the
desirability”
of two alternative courses of conduct. The matters that may
be taken into account in assessing “desirability” are not
(as is made clear by the non-exclusive language of
include the matters set out in subs (3) and reflect the underlying purpose
of the provision.
are arguments that can be made both ways as to whether this exercise should be
characterised as truly discretionary or instead
involves an evaluative
language of “desirability” tends towards a true discretion.
Desirability is a concept which involves an inherently
personal assessment. An
alternative criterion that might have more clearly involved a single answer
would have been a decision as
to where, after undertaking the balancing
exercise, “the public interest” lay. However, the more personal and
individualised
language of “desirability” is used. That usage is
also consistent with the significant latitude given to the judge as
matters to be taken into account. Although the matters to be taken into account
cannot be described as unlimited because they
will always be limited by the
scope and purpose of the provision in the context of the Act as a whole,
subs (3) makes it clear that
it is not intended to be exclusive. The
purpose of the provision includes reaching a balance between the public
interests in crime
control, deterring police illegality, protecting individual
rights and maintaining judicial legitimacy. Given the non-exclusive nature
subs (3) and the incommensurable nature of the matters that are listed in
the absence of any direction as to the weight to be
given to any of those
matters, the suggestion that the statute permits only one answer is
the other hand, it may be argued that — because of the identified matters
that are being weighed and the specification of
some of the considerations that
must be taken into account — the balancing exercise is not a true
discretion because it is
simply a choice between two alternative outcomes which
may involve an “evaluative judgment”. It can be argued that the
balancing exercise contemplated by the text is one where an appeal court is in
just as good a position as a trial judge to undertake
the exercise. Looking more
broadly at the statute, the language in
may be contrasted with
generally expressed requirements for grants of “leave” to which
the public policy questions at stake,
could be characterised as
involving a similar balancing exercise to that involved in
relation to which appellate authority now appears to favour the correctness
State of Victoria v Brazel
[2008] VSCA 37
; 19 VR 553 at
New South Wales Commissioner of Police v Nationwide News Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWCA 366
70 NSWLR 643
can be accepted for present purposes that the text of
Evidence Act
, in its statutory context, is not so obviously clear as to
compel an interpretation that it involves the exercise of a discretion
accommodates different answers. Similarly, the text of the provision is not so
obviously clear as to compel a conclusion that
the question posed by
can have only one correct answer in the circumstances of any
particular case.
other particular provisions in the
Evidence Act
, nor the Act as a whole,
provide a clear answer as to the nature of the decision under
those circumstances, it is necessary to have regard to extrinsic materials in
order to determine the purpose of the provision
and hence its scope. In doing
so, it must be borne in mind that one of the principal goals of the
was to provide a uniform regime for the rules of evidence and, hence, it
is unlikely that the Legislative Assembly intended a significant
departure from
the regime applicable in other uniform evidence law jurisdictions unless that
was made clear.
Bunning v Cross involves a discretion
foundation for the consideration by the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC)
of what should be included in an
Evidence Act
was, relevantly, the
decision in
Bunning v Cross
[1978] HCA 22
(1978) 141 CLR 54.
The judgments in that case
recognised the existence of a discretion to exclude otherwise admissible
evidence. Notwithstanding the
variety of ways in which the word
“discretion” can be used, it is clear that the court was recognising
a discretion to
exclude evidence which involved a balancing exercise determined
by the trial judge, in that case, a magistrate. It is clear that
the court was
not simply determining for itself the correct answer to the question that it
faced, the admissibility of the breath
testing results. Rather, the judgment of
Stephen and Aickin JJ (at 71) referred to their conclusion that “a
close examination
of [the magistrate’s] reasons leads us to conclude that
his Worship did not give proper effect to relevant criteria and that
exercise of discretion cannot be allowed to stand”. They referred to the
fact that discretion involved “broader questions
of high public
policy” (at 74). They referred to the fact that the formulation of the
“criteria upon which this discretion
is to be exercised” could be
done only by reference to the case at hand, “[o]therwise the exercise of
judicial discretion
may become fettered by rules, seemingly apt enough when
first conceived but inappropriate to all the varied circumstances with which
courts will be confronted in the future” (at 77). In reviewing the
magistrate’s decision, they referred to the exercise
“miscarried” because of misconceptions about what should be taken
into account. Having concluded that the magistrate’s
exercise of
discretion could not stand, the judgment then considered whether or not the
matter should be remitted to the magistrate
to re-exercise his discretion.
Although the judgment ultimately determined that, in the circumstances, it was
appropriate for the
High Court to re-exercise the discretion, the need to
consider the issue was indicative of the fact that the primary locus of the
discretion was with the magistrate and not simply a matter for the judges of the
High Court to determine the correct answer. That
is consistent with the earlier
observation about whether the magistrate gave “proper effect to relevant
criteria”, within
which the judgment explains two reasons for their
Honours’ reluctance to interfere with the discretion of the magistrate
First, because to do so is to interfere with the
exercise of a discretionary judgment by the magistrate...; secondly, because of
advantages which the magistrate enjoyed over this Court in the exercise of
discretion, advantages not confined to his encounter at
first hand with the
parties and witnesses but extending also to what must be his intimate
acquaintance with local circumstances relating
to law enforcement, a matter
germane to the proper exercise of this discretion.
reasons of Stephen and Aickin JJ in
Bunning v Cross
are indicative that
the reference to discretion meant a discretion in relation to which there was no
one correct answer, and which
was only to be interfered with in accordance with
principles consistent with
House v The King
. There can be no doubt,
having regard to the terms of that judgment, that it contemplated the exercise
of a discretion of the sort
that would be subject to limited review rather than
a more confined exercise involving only one answer.
Authorities
subsequent to
Bunning v Cross
recognised that it involves an exercise of
discretion which was the subject of review in accordance with
House v The
. For example, in
Ridgeway v The Queen
(1995) 184 CLR 19
the plurality judgment endorsed the conclusion of Stephen and Aickin JJ in
Bunning v Cross
that it was “settled law” that a trial judge
has a discretion to exclude prosecution evidence on public policy grounds
circumstances where it had been obtained by unlawful conduct on the part of
police and, at 41, only turned to reconsider whether
the evidence should be
excluded after being satisfied that the decision of the court below “was
vitiated by error”. That
recognition of the existence of a discretion has
remained the case in jurisdictions where
Bunning v Cross
remains the
governing principle: see, for example,
Young v The King
[2024] SASCA 47
would be possible for the High Court to develop the common law by articulating
the nature of the
Bunning v Cross
discretion so as to change its content.
As pointed out below, this appears to be a prospect contemplated by Doyle JA in
Young v The King
, but that has not yet happened, and even if it did, it
would not alter the historical fact that the decision in
Bunning v Cross
involved a true discretion which informs the interpretation of
ALRC 26 proposed a discretion
the Australian Law Reform Commission’s interim report on evidence
, Report No 26 (1985), hereafter ALRC 26), the Commission
proposed in its Draft
Evidence Bill
three discretions to exclude evidence.
Clause 114 was a general discretion to exclude evidence in similar terms to what
135. It required the probative value of the evidence to be
“substantially outweighed” by various matters. Clause 115
discretion to exclude evidence in criminal cases which did not require that the
probative value of the evidence be “substantially
outweighed”. It
was therefore the equivalent of what is now s 137, except that it was
expressed in clearly discretionary terms
(“may refuse”) rather than
the mandatory terms in s 137 (“must refuse”). The third
provision was cl 116,
which is the equivalent of s 138. It has the
same basic structure as s 138. The only difference of significance is that
cl 116 required
the desirability of admitting the evidence to
“substantially” outweigh the undesirability of admitting evidence
had been obtained in the manner in which the evidence was obtained rather
than, as appears in s 138, that it simply outweigh that
undesirability. The
clause was accompanied by cross-references to the earlier discussion of policy
issues in the report at [958]-[959]
and to its commentary on the clause at
[960]-[966] and [968]-[969]. Those cross-references are significant.
portions of the body of the report which are referred to leave no doubt that the
Commission intended that the decision as to whether
or not to exclude improperly
obtained evidence that it proposed in the Draft
Evidence Bill
would involve the
exercise of a discretion by a trial judge which would only be subject to review
in accordance with
House v The King
. That appears from a reading of
Chapter 39 in ALRC 26 ([957]-[968]) as a whole, but also from the following
particular matters.
Commission commenced its consideration at [958] under the heading
“Improperly Obtained Evidence”. At [958]-[959],
it described in some
detail the policy considerations that needed to be taken into account when
considering the judicial response
to unlawful or improper behaviour.
[960], the Commission discusses a variety of approaches that might be adopted to
deal with illegality or impropriety. They include
disregarding it: [960];
imposing a strict rule of exclusion of evidence that was illegally obtained:
[961]; automatic exclusion where
the misconduct was deliberate: [962]; or
admission where there are alternative remedies to deal with the misconduct:
[963]. Having
considered these alternatives, the Commission then turned to its
desired approach and said (at [964]):
964. A discretionary approach
seems the most appropriate one to take in dealing with illegally and improperly
obtained evidence. This
is the approach that has been developed by the High
Court. Admittedly, any approach that is discretionary and subject only to
appeal rights, relies heavily on the judgment of the individual judge.
It also, by definition, lacks certainty of result, and therefore
predictability to flexibility. Nevertheless, it is suggested that the
conflicting concerns in this area, and a wide variety
of circumstances,
necessitate such an approach. The Law Reform Commission of Canada has
... there is an undeniable advantage in granting judges discretionary power,
since it keeps the courts continually in touch with current
social attitudes and
may lead to the eventual evolution of the rules as the courts adapt them to
changing social realities. It gives
the courts the role of guardians of the
public’s freedom.
An approach based on the existing discretionary approach is that which is
preferred. The proposal, however, makes some changes to
the law to meet some
criticisms of it.
(Footnotes omitted.)
Commission then described the departures that it proposed from the existing law
by providing guidance as to the factors to be
taken into account in the exercise
of discretion and a change to the onus and standard of proof by recommending
that the “burden
should rest on the prosecution to persuade the court that
the evidence should be admitted” and that the reasons for admission
“substantially” outweigh exclusionary considerations.
far as providing guidance as to the factors to be taken into account was
concerned, the Commission opened with the following (at
Guidance in the Exercise of the Discretion
method of minimising the inherent difficulties in the exercise of discretionary
power, and, to a certain extent, of avoiding
the danger of too great a disparity
between legal decisions, is to indicate precisely the nature of the conflicting
interests which
should be balanced and to articulate the factors which should be
taken into account in the exercise of the discretion.
Commission then turned to the application of its proposal to admissions, which
was reflected in its cl 116(2) and ultimately reflected
in s 138(2).
At [967], the Commission explained its proposal to not retain a general fairness
discretion as had existed in
[1950] HCA 25
(1950) 82 CLR 133.
issue of appellate review was then expressly dealt with (at
Appellate Review
. At present an appeal court has limited scope to vary a
trial judge’s exercise of the
Bunning v Cross
discretion. This
judicial restraint is understandable. It derives from a number of factors.
Reasonable men may hold differing views
on the exercise of a discretion. There
is a danger of large numbers of appeals if full review of discretion is
permitted. In addition
the view is generally held that the trial judge is
usually in a better position to decide how a discretion should be exercised
he sees and hears the witnesses and follows all aspects of the trial. An
issue that needs to be considered is whether it is appropriate
to retain the
existing limited appellate control where a discretion involves consideration of
matters of public interest. At this
stage it is not proposed to change the
existing law.
(Footnote omitted.)
passage makes it clear that the Commission contemplated a provision involving
only limited review in accordance with
House v The King
. It expressly
contemplated that differing views may be reasonably held. It expressed a view
that the decisions of trial judges should
only be subject to a limited form of
review because those judges will be in a better position to decide how it should
be exercised
and because there would otherwise be a danger of a large number of
appeals. It made it clear that its view was that there should
be no change to
the existing law, which involved only limited review, but also made it clear
that this was an issue to be considered.
portions of the Commission’s report make it absolutely clear that the
provision in the Draft Bill that it proposed contemplated
the exercise of a
discretion which was only subject to limited appellate control. Any possibility
of departing from that limited
appellate control was left as a matter to be
considered in the future.
ALRC 38 maintained the
the Commission’s final report (
, Report No 38 (1987),
hereafter ALRC 38), the Commission considered the response to the proposals
in ALRC 26. The proposal in relation
to exclusion of evidence obtained
illegally or improperly was significant, with different interest groups arguing
that the proposal
was either too favourable to the prosecution or to an accused.
The Commission decided to retain the model that it had proposed in
except that it decided to remove the requirement that had been incorporated in
the earlier draft that the desirability of
admitting the evidence
“substantially” outweigh the undesirability of doing so. It
proposed, as is now reflected in s
138, that the desirability of admitting
the evidence simply outweigh the undesirability of doing so: see [164]. Relevant
for present
purposes is the fact that the Commission continued to describe what
was being proposed as a discretion (see [154], [161], [164]).
Evidence Bill
at Appendix A of the report included s 119, the heading
to which provided “Discretion to exclude improperly obtained
The report also included a draft explanatory memorandum which,
in relation to the proposed cl 119, included the
Clause 119 – Discretion to exclude improperly
obtained evidence
320. This clause provides a discretionary exclusion for evidence obtained
improperly, unlawfully or in consequence of an impropriety
or breach of the law.
It applies in both civil and criminal trials. It reflects, with some
modifications, the present exclusionary
discretion known as the rule in
Bunning v Cross
. The main difference is the placing of the onus of proof
on the party seeking to have the illegally or improperly obtained evidence
draft explanatory memorandum then goes on to describe in summary form each of
the proposed subsections.
can be no doubt that the ALRC was, in its final report, proposing what it
understood to be a discretion consistent with the
way in which the proposal had
been described in ALRC 26, subject only to the amendment to remove the word
“substantially”.
There was nothing in the final report which
indicated any intention to alter the limited nature of the reviewability of that
as described in ALRC 26. It is apparent from the absence of any
reference to it in the final report that the limited reviewability
arising from
the discretionary nature of the exercise was, in contrast to other features of
the proposal, not the subject of controversy
in the submissions received by the
Commission.
The Commonwealth Parliament intended a
1995 and 2011, prior to the enactment of the
Evidence Act 2011
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) was the governing Act in ACT courts.
can be no doubt that the Commonwealth Parliament was intending to implement the
ALRC recommendation in relation to what became
The Explanatory
Memorandum for the
Evidence Bill 1994
(Cth) was somewhat briefer than the draft
explanatory memorandum in ALRC 38. The relevant part simply describes the
various components
of cl 138 which became s 138. It does not cast
additional light on the nature of the exercise contemplated in s 138 as
the heading to
Evidence Act 1995
as enacted was
“Discretions to Exclude Evidence”. The heading to that Part formed
part of the Act:
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
heading to s 138 itself provided: “Discretion to exclude improperly
or illegally obtained evidence”. At the time
Evidence Act 1995
was enacted, the heading did not form part of the Act, though it was a matter
which could be taken into account if the provision
was considered to be
ambiguous, as it formed part of the Bill put before the Commonwealth Parliament
and was within the scope of
s 15AB(2)(a)
Acts Interpretation
. (Following the
Acts Interpretation Amendment Act 2011
section heading became part of the Act.) That what was intended was a discretion
is clear. There is nothing in the extrinsic
material that would suggest that
what was to be enacted involved some different form of “discretion”
which was reviewable
on a different basis to that contemplated by the
ALRC 102 recommended no change to the discretion
the ALRC revisited the
Evidence Act
in December 2005 (
Uniform Evidence
, Report 102 (2005), hereafter ALRC 102), it recommended no relevant
The report referred (at [16.82]) to the earlier
consideration given in ALRC 26 to “various options” and
discretionary approaches”. There was nothing in the report
which indicated any reconsideration of the nature of the discretion
been referred to in ALRC 26 and maintained in ALRC 38.
Legislative Assembly intended a discretion
the Legislative Assembly came to enact its own
Evidence Act
in 2011, it
changed the heading to
to “Discretionary and mandatory
exclusions” in substitution for “Discretions to Exclude
Evidence”. This had
the effect of making the heading consistent with the
heading in the Evidence Acts of other States and the Northern Territory, which
had been changed following a recommendation in ALRC 102 (at [16.50]) in order to
recognise that
is a mandatory exclusion.
intention to enact a provision involving the exercise of a discretion was made
clear by the terms of the Revised Explanatory Statement
Evidence Bill
(ACT), which described the provision and its “Human rights
implications” in uncontroversial terms and concluded:
clause is intended to reflect, with some modifications, the exclusionary
discretion at common law that is known as the rule in
Bunning v Cross
[1978] HCA 22
(1978) 141 CLR 54.
(A similar reference to
Bunning v Cross
was included in the
Explanatory Memorandum for the New South Wales Act: see the argument in
v The Queen
[2020] HCA 1
(2020) 267 CLR 109
modifications referred to are those that were proposed by the ALRC, namely, the
specification of a list of considerations and
the change to the burden of proof
as a result of the prima facie inadmissibility of the evidence. There can be no
doubt that the
Legislative Assembly intended to maintain the discretionary
nature of the provision.
Section 139 commands regard to the
legislative purpose
Legislation Act
requires that, in working out the meaning of
an Act, “the interpretation that would best achieve the purpose of the Act
to be preferred to any other interpretation”. Having regard to the
legislative history of
and the legislative and non‑legislative
context that may be taken into account pursuant to
can be no doubt that the legislature intended
to involve a discretion
akin to that which was available at common law as a result of the decision in
Bunning v Cross
with the limited form of reviewability contemplated by
the ALRC. That intention exists in a context in which it is clear that the
statute altered the burden of proof by providing, as a starting point, the
exclusion of evidence, but then permitting, on a discretionary
admission. Thus, although there was a change from the common law discretion to
exclude to a statutory discretion to admit,
the expressed intention of the ALRC
and the legislature was to maintain it as a true discretion with the consequence
of limited appellate
Perhaps they did not really mean a
true discretion?
means of avoiding the force of the extrinsic materials in determining the
purpose of the legislative provision would be to contend
that, notwithstanding
that the exercise under the common law decision of
Bunning v Cross
has always been uniformly described as involving the exercise of a
“discretion”, the meaning of that term is sufficiently
flexible to
accommodate a decision-making process that falls outside the scope of
different meanings that can be accommodated in the concept of a discretion have
been recognised in a number of decisions of the
High Court:
Coal and Allied
Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
203 CLR 194
Dwyer v Calco Timbers Pty Ltd
[2008] HCA 13; 234
CLR 124 at [37]-[40]. The High Court has recognised in
at [37] that
the expression “discretion” is “apt to create a legal category
of indeterminate reference”.
can be accepted, as a matter of legal theory, that the argument that the
discretion is not a true discretion is one which is open.
However, the
flexibility of the concept as a matter of legal theory does not have the
persuasive force that it might otherwise have
when considering the intention of
the legislature in relation to the current issue. There can be no doubt, having
regard to the discussion
in ALRC 26, that what was being contemplated was a
discretionary exercise in the traditional sense, that is, an exercise in
to which there was no single correct answer and which would be subject
to only limited grounds of review. That is made most clear
by the passage quoted
at [51] above. There is nothing in the extrinsic materials which would indicate
that the reference to discretion
was to some lesser form of constrained
evaluative judgment.
Which model of review is a question of
public policy
effect of determining, as a matter of statutory construction, that a provision
involves a decision in relation to which there is only one
right answer has the consequence that it is reviewable on appeal for its
correctness rather than the more constrained review available under
. That has the consequence that it is easier for courts of appeal to
overturn the decision of trial judges. It would have the effect
of centralising
the standard-setting in a Court of Appeal or High Court and, hence, making those
standards more uniform.
the other hand, treating the provision, as the ALRC did, as giving rise to a
true discretion where there is no single right answer
means that review of the
decision is constrained in the manner prescribed by
House v The King
That would mean that the matters that are to be taken into account are, subject
to the limits in
, the province of the trial judge, and questions
of the weight to be given to the various considerations is also a matter for the
trial judge. As the ALRC pointed out, that has the potential to preserve the
decisions of trial judges most familiar with the case
and would not tend towards
an increase in the number of appeals.
of these alternative models for appellate review is better is a question of
public policy. If the issue is raised in the context
of the common law test, as
Young v The King
, then there is greater potential for the
common law to be judicially developed so as to alter the nature of the
discretion being
exercised. It would be open to recharacterise the
discretion as in fact being an evaluative judgment in relation to
which there was only one right answer. However, when dealing with
a statutory
provision such as
, the judicial function is more limited. In the
Legislation Act
is the most significant
provision. Questions of public policy or the desirability of one model of
reviewability over another cannot
intrude into the interpretive exercise in a
manner that is inconsistent with the command in
Sidaros is not determinative
regard to what has been said above, it is necessary to consider the decision in
structure of the reasons of the relevant part of the unanimous judgment in
was to set out a summary of the submissions made by each party
and then express the court’s reasons for its conclusion. In
, the submissions of the parties made no reference to the text or
legislative history of
The full extent of the reasons under the
heading “Consideration” at [38] were as follows:
House v The King
principles do not apply to the appellate review of
the decision of the primary judge as the question admits of only one correct
This is to be contrasted with the question of an appropriate sentence
for an offender where a range of different sentences might
be regarded as
legally available:
R v Bauer (a pseudonym)
[2018] HCA 40
266 CLR 56]
BC v The Queen
[2019] NSWCCA 111]
Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW) v RDT
[2018] NSWCCA 293
. The line is drawn between a unique outcome and the correctness standard on
the one hand and on the other hand a range of legally
available outcomes, where
House v The King
standard applies:
Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
92 ALJR 713.
The correctness
standard, therefore, applies in this case because, as stated above, the question
admits of only one correct answer.
as the reasons commence with a statement that the question admits only one
correct answer, that statement dictates the conclusion
that the decision does
not involve a discretion. However, the statement of that conclusion merely
raises, but does not determine
the answer to, a question of statutory
interpretation. Insofar as any reasons are given in the quoted passage, the
court appears
to have simply adopted the passages from
. In my opinion, none of those decisions determine the issue or
are of significant weight in the determination of the issue.
(a) The passage from
involved a holding that, for the purposes of
Evidence Act 2008
(Vic), “[t]he question of
whether tendency evidence is of significant probative value is one to which
there can only ever be
one correct answer” and hence was subject to review
on the correctness basis.
(b) The passage from
simply recorded the agreement of the parties that
the statement in
was equally applicable to
“the question of whether the probative value of the evidence was
substantially outweighed by any
prejudicial effect” for the purposes of
concerned to an interlocutory appeal relating to the admission of
tendency evidence. The passage relied upon in
was a conclusion as
to the nature of the appellate function reached by Basten JA, which was not the
subject of submissions and was
joined by Johnson J and RA
Hulme J: see [55], [59]. The reasons of Basten JA related to the admission of
tendency evidence but could
be understood as intended to be broader: see [4].
His Honour’s reasons were based largely upon the statement by the High
at [61] referred to earlier. His Honour did place some
weight upon the fact that there was a difference between decisions involving
“binary choice” and decisions which involved a spectrum of outcomes:
see [16]. The limited significance of the binary
nature of the outcome was
pointed to by Kirk JA in
[2023] NSWCCA 256
quoted passage from
appears to assume that the statements made in
relation to other aspects of the
Evidence Act
are applicable to the
provisions of
However, that conclusion appears to have been reached
without any consideration of the text, the legislative history or any
permissible
extrinsic materials to which regard may be had under the
Legislation Act
. There is clearly a difference between an exercise
required by
Evidence Act
and the balancing
exercise required by
Forensic questions such as the extent of the
“probative value” or the extent of “the danger of unfair
are matters closely confined to the parameters of the case
being run. They contrast with the much broader questions raised by the
exercise contemplated under
It is certainly not clear that a
decision as to the nature of review on the former issues is necessarily
applicable to a decision
on the latter.
reference in
to the decision in
is a reference to
the influential passage in the judgment of Gageler J explaining the two
standards of appellate review, where his
Honour said (at [49]):
line is not drawn by reference to whether the primary judge's process of
reasoning to reach a conclusion can be characterised
as evaluative or is on a
topic on which judicial minds might reasonably differ. The line is drawn by
reference to whether the legal
criterion applied or purportedly applied by the
primary judge to reach the conclusion demands a unique outcome, in which case
correctness standard applies, or tolerates a range of outcomes, in which
House v The King
standard applies. The resultant line
is not bright; but it is tolerably clear and workable.
again, the citation of that passage simply exposes the issue that has to be
determined. It does not provide any reason why the
specific statutory provision
under consideration should be determined to fall on the correctness or
side of the dim but workable line identified by Gageler J.
my view, the fact that the text of the provision and its purpose were not
considered in the reasons given in
and the significance
of the text of the provision and its purpose for the interpretation of its
meaning, may provide a proper basis
for departing from that
Other decisions
decisions of the High Court and intermediate Courts of Appeal are not
inconsistent with the conclusion that I have reached that
interpreted as involving a discretion in the sense of a statutory decision in
relation to which there is no single correct
Kadir v The Queen
, the question was the admissibility of unlawfully
obtained evidence. Notices of contention raised the issue of whether the Court
of Criminal Appeal had erred in holding that a
House v The King
necessary. The High Court was able to avoid determining the question because
there had been acceptance in the Court of
Criminal Appeal that it was necessary
to demonstrate a
House v The King
error, the Court of Criminal Appeal had
found such an error, and the High Court found the Court of Criminal Appeal was
have done so. It is notable that the summary of the arguments put
[2020] HCA 1
(267 CLR 109
at 117) Nettle J asking a question about the significance
of the explanatory memorandum for the Evidence Bill 1995 (NSW) indicating
intention to reflect, with some modifications, the exclusionary discretion at
common law known as the rule in
Bunning v Cross
. However, having regard
to the approach adopted by the court, that issue was not referred to or
elaborated upon in the judgment.
[2020] NSWCCA 283
was an appeal relating to the exclusion of
evidence under s 138. The court held (at [114], [134], [140]) that it was
not necessary
to determine the nature of appellate review of a decision under
Evidence Act
. However, Bathurst CJ (with whom Wilson J
agreed) reviewed authorities on other provisions as well as
expressed the opinion that, although minds might differ on the question of
whether the desirability of admitting the evidence
is or is not outweighed by
the undesirability of doing so, “there can only be one correct
answer” (at [111]). Ultimately,
this conclusion appears to have been
reached as a matter of impression. He noted, however, (at [113]-[114]) that the
reasons of Gummow
and Hayne JJ in
Em v The Queen
[2007] HCA 46
pointed in the opposite direction and that the preponderance of
authority on
is that appellate review is governed by
the principle of judicial restraint in
House v The King
. He referred to
his reluctance to say that earlier cases which had treated appellate review of
decisions under
as being on a basis analogous to
House v The
were wrongly decided. Those cases were set out at [67] of the judgment.
Wilson J agreed with the Chief Justice. Button J agreed that
the nature of
appellate review of decisions under
did not need to be decided but
indicated that the presence of the words “desirability” and
“undesirability”
may play a role in deciding whether there was only
one right answer. Further, the non-exclusive nature of
may also be
Rogerson v R
[2021] NSWCCA 160
290 A Crim R 239
involved a question as to
whether a trial judge had correctly excluded evidence pursuant to
Evidence Act
. The court considered that the decision in
in relation to
“must apply equally” to the issue
in relation to
It treated the section as involving an
“evaluative judgment” rather than “an exercise of judicial
discretion”:
at [544]. It therefore overturned or declined to follow
a series of cases which treated the issue as being subject to
House v The
: at [545]. No consideration was given to the legislative history of the
provision, the heading to
(“Discretionary and mandatory
exclusions”), the heading to the relevant section (“General
discretion to exclude
evidence”), or the use of the word “may”
in the opening words of the provision. All of these features were not
the provision as considered in
[2022] NSWCCA 206
302 A Crim R 365
, the court considered
the standard of appellate review to be applied on an appeal from a decision made
pursuant to
Evidence Act
. Reference was made to the
decision in
and the decision in
at [542]-[548]
in relation to the operation of
of the Act. However, the court
decided that it was not necessary to determine the issue because, whichever
standard of review applied,
there was no relevant error: [72].
was an appeal against conviction, which was upheld. Kirk JA wrote the
principal judgment. His Honour considered the standard of review
on appeal of a
decision under
in the context of a challenge to the admission of an
electronically recorded interview. Both parties submitted that the standard
appellate review of a decision under
was the correctness standard:
[13]. Having reviewed the reasons in
, his Honour pointed out that
the assessment of significant probative value as required for the purposes of
did “not involve weighing up multiple, incommensurable factors
in the manner required by the third step of
”: [18]. His Honour
pointed out that, while a decision involving a binary choice was more likely to
be subject to the correctness
standard, there are many binary choices to which a
House v The King
-type standard is applied: [19]. His Honour recognised
that the issue was “complex, borderline and important” and did
need to determine it as the parties both contended for the correctness standard,
and he was satisfied in any event that a
House v The King
error existed:
[22]. N Adams J, in agreeing with Kirk JA, noted that the significant textual
differences between
might limit the assistance provided by
the decision in
. RA Hulme AJ agreed with Kirk JA without
Young v The King
was an application for leave to appeal against convictions.
Doyle JA wrote the principal judgment. The case turned on the admissibility
certain evidence which was alleged to have been obtained unlawfully. The court
was addressing the exclusion under the common law
rather than the
. Doyle JA referred to the decision in
R v Ireland
[1970] HCA 21
(1970) 126 CLR
and the decision in
Bunning v Cross,
and discussed the application of
those principles not to evidence directly obtained through unlawful means, but
to derivative evidence
obtained as a result of some earlier misconduct or
unlawfulness. He then turned to consider the standard of appellate review. The
parties approached the appeal on the basis that
House v The King
His Honour said that “[t]his was understandable given that the decision is
routinely described as a discretion, and
has generally been treated this way in
the authorities”: at [122]. Despite this agreement, His Honour went
on to consider the
issue. He referred to more recent decisions under
the decision of the High Court in
, and the reasons of Bathurst CJ
. He also referred to the reasons of Kirk JA in
considering the common law public policy discretion, his Honour thought it was
significant that there was a binary choice rather
than a choice between a range
of potential outcomes. He recognised (at [136]) that decisions involving a
binary choice may involve
discretions which are subject to the principles of
appellate restraint, but pointed to some indications that the public policy
was not of that type. These were, first, that questions about the
admissibility of evidence generally involve an issue of law that
has only one
correct answer. Second, although the considerations are
“incommensurable”, they are to be weighed by reference
competing public policies identified in
Bunning v Cross
and other High
Court cases rather than considerations anchored in achieving fairness to the
parties in a particular case. He characterised
the decision as more analogous to
a claim for public interest immunity, which attracts the standard of
correctness. However, having
regard to the absence of submissions and the fact
that it would involve a departure from the approach that courts in South
had generally applied, he refrained from expressing a concluded view
on the issue: at [141]. Kourakis CJ agreed with Doyle JA. David
agreed with Doyle JA, but indicated that she would prefer not to express a
concluded view on the issue of the standard of review
without the benefit of
full argument.
that this is a decision about the common law, it is more open for judges to
develop, that is, change, the common law, than it
is to change the effect of a
statute. Given that the
Bunning v Cross
discretion is a judicially
created common law principle, it would be legitimately open for courts to modify
the nature of the exercise
so that it does not involve a true discretion but
should be considered to be an “evaluative judgment” and hence
to review on a correctness basis. That contrasts with a statutory
provision, the meaning of which changes with actions by the legislature
than a change in the attitude of appellate judges.
The decision in
Moore (a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] HCA 30
Evidence Act 2008
(Vic). That section
requires the exclusion of evidence presented by the prosecution if “its
probative value is outweighed by
the danger of unfair prejudice to the
accused”. The court held that, upon appellate review of a decision made
, the appeal court was obliged to apply the correctness
standard. The High Court found that the same approach to review should be
adopted in interlocutory appeals as in conviction appeals. Given the
forensically focussed concepts of “probative value”
“unfair prejudice”, there is a basis for distinguishing the
balancing exercise required by
with the more public policy‑focussed
balance of desirability under
of these cases preclude the approach that I have indicated above. None of them
have reached a conclusion contrary to the conclusion
true discretion. Insofar as judges have reached tentative conclusions contrary
to the conclusion that I have suggested
above, that has been done without regard
to the extrinsic materials to which I have referred which, in the Australian
Capital Territory
context (and, in my view, elsewhere), support the conclusion
that I have indicated.
these reasons, I do not consider that the decision in
preclude further consideration by this court of the approach to appellate review
in an appropriate case. However, in this
case, neither party sought to directly
challenge the adoption of the correctness standard. The respondent did file a
cross appeal,
which may have been understood as raising whether the primary
judge should have overturned the magistrate’s decision in relation
HP Laptop in circumstances where no
House v The King
identified. However, as that ground was put in written submissions, it was
focussed on the asserted need within the framework
of review for correctness to
give appropriate deference to the decision of the magistrate, who had heard the
voir dire over 11 days,
and to articulate why the decision was erroneous. That
position was maintained in oral submissions, where counsel for the respondent
made it clear that she was advocating the need for “deference”, not
the application of the
House v The King
standard of review. Given the
absence of any direct challenge to the decision in
, it is not
appropriate to determine in this case whether that decision should continue to
be followed.
Can the “cover-up” be taken into
Baker has identified three decisions in which police conduct involving a
subsequent cover-up of their illegality or impropriety
was taken into account in
the exercise of discretion under
Those cases were
[2004] TASSC 80
[2014] NTSC 19
pseudonym) v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 213.
potential difficulty for an approach which permits a cover-up to be taken into
account arises from the language of
Section 138(1)
“the desirability of admitting the evidence” outweighing “the
undesirability of admitting evidence that
has been obtained in the way in which
the evidence was obtained”. This second expression focuses on the
“way in which
the evidence was obtained”. That language is
consistent with:
(a) the temporal endpoint of the required consideration being the point at which
the evidence “was obtained”; and
(b) the relevant consideration for the purposes of the balancing exercise being
the manner in which that obtaining occurred rather
than subsequent conduct.
cases referred to in Baker J’s reasons do not articulate a uniform
principle consistent with the language of
Tasmania v Crane
[2004] TASSC 80
, police had trespassed on
premises and found a cannabis crop. During the course of committal proceedings,
two police officers had
each made statutory declarations which contained a
misleading or false statement: at [13]. The submission was made that the making
of the misleading statutory declarations was not a factor relevant to the
exercise of discretion under
because it occurred after the evidence
had been obtained. Blow J rejected that submission, saying (at [21]):
However, when evidence is improperly or illegally obtained by police
officers, I consider that the attitude of those officers to the
rule of law, as
displayed during the relevant investigation and any associated prosecution,
before, during and after the obtaining
of the evidence, must be relevant to the
exercise of the discretion conferred by
[2014] NTSC 19
, Hiley J agreed with criticisms of some of
the police witnesses’ evidence both at the committal and in the Supreme
Court, although
he did not consider that they deliberately lied. At [149], he
Conduct of this kind, namely conduct that has occurred well after the events
the subject of the particular searches, is relevant to
one of the two parts of
the balancing process, namely the public interest in ensuring not only that
evidence is obtained properly
and lawfully, but also in ensuring that the facts
and circumstances during and leading up to the relevant searches, can be
and examined by others including a court at some later time.
Slater (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 213
, after the
relevant evidence had been obtained, a police officer made a statement about the
relationship between two police investigations
which was alleged to be
calculated to mislead the court about the nature of the relationship between the
two operations. The submission
was made on behalf of the prosecution that, for
the purposes of
, the evidence could not have been obtained in
consequence of the statement because it occurred subsequently. The court said at
There is obvious force in the submission, to the extent that it contends that
an impropriety taking place after evidence has been
obtained cannot, of itself,
engage the section. However, it is less clear that, once the section is
attracted by an impropriety or
contravention, a later impropriety is necessarily
irrelevant to the balancing exercise. We will confine our attention to the kind
of impropriety alleged here, which is an attempt to conceal the consequences of
the original impropriety or contravention from the
The public policy which is advanced when evidence is excluded under
is broadly described in
It is not merely the public
interest in excluding the specific evidence obtained by or in consequence of the
relevant impropriety
or contravention. It is the public interest in not
admitting any evidence obtained in the relevant way. In other words, the section
looks not only at what was done in the instant case, but at the undesirability
of the same thing being done in other cases.
For that reason, if an attempt is made to conceal the impropriety or
contravention, or its consequences, from a court seeking to apply
one of the purposes of the provision is apt to be undermined. Accordingly, such
an attempt is a matter that may potentially be relevant
to the balancing
exercise under
(Footnotes omitted)
The court then referred with approval to the decision of Blow J in
and Hiley J in
before concluding that the conduct
of the police officer was “potentially relevant to the balancing exercise
”: at [59].
is notable that, in each of those cases, there was clearly an antecedent
illegality or impropriety involved in the obtaining of
evidence sufficient to
trigger the operation of
Therefore, the situation is to be
distinguished from one where an illegality or impropriety only occurs
the evidence is obtained. In such a circumstance, it has been held
Bunning v Cross
discretion had no application:
Question of
Law Reserved (No 1 of 1998)
[1998] SASC 6634
(1998) 70 SASR 281.
Having regard to the terms
, the section could not apply because the obtaining of the evidence
was not “in consequence of” the illegality.
there is an impropriety or illegality involved in the obtaining of evidence, in
my view, it is inevitable that a judge exercising
the discretion will take into
account, in assessing the undesirability of admitting the evidence in question,
the judge’s other
experience of police conduct, whether before or after
the impropriety or illegality, in addition to the evidence of police conduct
which constituted the impropriety or illegality in the particular case. That is
because the assessment of the undesirability of admitting
that evidence will be
affected by the judge’s perception of the need to deter unlawful or
improper conduct by police. Thus,
even though the language of
focussed on “the way in which the evidence was obtained” in the
circumstances of the particular case, the language
accommodates
taking into account matters not connected with the obtaining of the evidence
that exist both before and after the evidence
was obtained through the
requirement to consider the “undesirability” of its admission. It is
by this means that circumstances
involving a “cover‑up” can be
fitted within the language of
Of the authorities referred to
above, the point is most clearly made by Blow J in
referred in the passage quoted above to the attitude of police to the rule of
or not this interpretation of the scope of
operates appropriately in
the case of a cover-up is assisted by consideration of two alternative
scenarios, one involving a cover-up
and one not.
the first scenario, akin to the present circumstances, the evidence is obtained
in an unlawful manner. Material relevant to the
unlawfulness is not disclosed by
police in the prosecution brief. Redactions are made which hide evidence
relevant to the existence
of the unlawfulness in the obtaining of the evidence.
The officer in question gives evidence on an application to exclude the
but makes no admission of the unlawful conduct. The existence of the
unlawful conduct is only disclosed by evidence obtained through
directed to the police and cross‑examination of the officer.
the alternative scenario, evidence is obtained in precisely the same unlawful
manner. Material relevant to the unlawfulness is
disclosed by police in the
prosecution brief of evidence and identified as such. The officer in question
gives evidence fully disclosing
the unlawful conduct.
would be very surprising, having regard to the purpose of
difference in those circumstances could not be considered in determining whether
or not the unlawfully obtained evidence
should be admitted. While a subsequent
cover-up does not fall within the scope of “the way in which the evidence
was obtained”,
it is, on the approach that I have explained, a
discretionary matter which can be taken into account for the purposes of
considering
the desirability of admitting evidence that has been obtained in
that way. Although, in that expression, the concept of
“desirability”
is tied to the way in which the evidence was
obtained, the significance of that relevant unlawfulness is to be judged by
to the subsequent conduct of police. If the subsequent conduct of
police is such as to indicate a respect for the rule of law and
the rights of an
accused person to challenge the admissibility of unlawfully obtained evidence,
then there is a lesser need for deterrence
through the refusal to admit the
evidence. On the other hand, if the conduct of police in covering up what they
had done was considered
to be reflective of an inappropriate attitude to the
rule of law and the rights of an accused, then there would be a greater need
deterrence of future unlawfulness of the kind involved in the case.
this basis, I agree with the conclusion reached by Baker J at
30 March 2022, Magistrate Theakston (the magistrate) found Alex Fletcher (a
pseudonym) and Dale Fletcher (a pseudonym) (the
appellants)
guilty of several
offences relating to the capturing of intimate images using hidden cameras
installed at a house which they jointly
Restricted Judgment (No 2)
[2022] ACTMC 5
Restricted Judgment (No 2)
). The intimate images were
taken of female tenants who had leased rooms in the house from the
appellants.
prosecution case included electronic files found on a Samsung mobile phone owned
by, and found on, Alex Fletcher (the Samsung
phone), electronic files found on a
Huawei mobile phone, which was owned by, and found on, Dale Fletcher (the Huawei
phone) and electronic
files from an HP laptop computer, which was found in the
appellants’ home. The appellants contended that the evidence found
of these electronic devices was obtained unlawfully and that the evidence should
be excluded under
Evidence Act 2011
evidence is found to have been obtained illegally or improperly,
Evidence Act
requires that the evidence be excluded unless “the
desirability of admitting the evidence outweighs the undesirability of admitting
evidence that has been obtained in the way in which the evidence was
magistrate found that the evidence on the Huawei phone and the HP laptop
computer were each obtained in breach of provisions of
(Cth). After conducting the balancing exercise required by s 138, the
magistrate excluded the evidence from the Huawei phone, but
admitted the
evidence from the HP laptop computer under s 138:
Restricted Judgment
[2022] ACTMC 4
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
, the magistrate rejected the appellant’s
contention that evidence found on the Samsung phone was unlawfully seized.
following a further challenge by the appellants, the magistrate found
that as the investigating officers had breached
when obtaining the password for the Samsung phone,
the evidence found
on the Samsung phone was unlawfully obtained, but that that evidence should be
admitted under s 138.
appellants appealed against their convictions, contending that the magistrate
had erred in failing to exclude the evidence obtained
from the Samsung phone and
the HP laptop computer.
31 August 2023, Loukas-Karlsson J (the primary judge) allowed the
appellants’ appeals:
Restricted Judgment
[2023] ACTSC 238
Restricted Judgment (SC)
). Her Honour rejected the appellants’
contention that the evidence found on the Samsung phone should have been
excluded. However,
her Honour accepted the appellant’s contention that the
evidence found on the HP laptop computer should have been excluded
Evidence Act
. Critical to this latter conclusion was her
Honour’s finding that the Officer in Charge of the Investigation
(Detective Knight)
(a pseudonym) had deliberately ‘covered up’ an
illegality involved in the examination of the HP laptop computer. Her
ordered that the appellants’ convictions be set aside and remitted the
proceedings to the magistrates Court to be determined
according to law.
way of Notices of Appeal filed 29 September 2023, the appellants challenge the
correctness of the primary judge’s decision
refusing to exclude evidence
obtained from the Samsung phone. By way of a Notice of Cross-Appeal filed 27
October 2023, the Director
of Public Prosecutions (the Director) challenges the
correctness of the primary judge’s decision excluding the evidence
from the HP laptop computer. No challenge has been made to the
magistrate’s decision to exclude the evidence obtained from
the reasons outlined below, both appeals should be dismissed.
prosecution case
appellants are identical twin brothers who jointly owned a house in Forde, in
the Australian Capital Territory. At the relevant
times, Alex Fletcher was an
officer of the Australian Federal Police (AFP). Dale Fletcher was a registered
electrician.
appellants rented out various rooms of the house to three female tenants. The
prosecution alleged that the appellants installed
a number of hidden cameras in
the bedrooms of the female tenants in order to capture intimate material, as
well as another camera
outside of the house for the purposes of capturing
intimate material of a female neighbour.
prosecution case relied on hidden cameras that were found behind the front
plastic covers of two television sets, and behind small
glass windows on timber
clothes hook racks located within the bedrooms, and associated wiring connecting
those cameras to other equipment
within the house:
Restricted Judgment (No
at [4]. The prosecution case also relied on images and videos found on
Alex Fletcher’s Samsung phone and Dale Fletcher’s
Huawei phone, as
well as images and videos found on the HP laptop computer.
investigation
8 May 2019, Detective Knight sought and was granted three warrants under
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), for the search of Alex Fletcher’s person
(the person warrant), Alex Fletcher’s car (the car warrant) and the home
jointly owned by the appellants in Forde ACT (the premises warrant). Detective
Knight also obtained an order requiring Alex Fletcher
to provide information to
access a device pursuant to
person warrant was in the form of a standard “three condition”
warrant, as approved by the Full Federal Court in
Dunesky v Elder
[1994] FCA 1020
at 557C; see also
Caratti v Commissioner of the
Australian Federal Police
[2017] FCAFC 177
257 FCR 166
warrant authorised seizure of items which satisfied each of the three conditions
set out in the warrant.
first condition specified a large list of “things”, ranging from
computers and mobile phones, through to “databases”,
“photographs” and “receipts”. The second condition
specified that the “things” were to relate
to specified persons
(Alex and Dale Fletcher, two named females, and a person named
“Beano”) and to two specified mobile
numbers. The third condition
And as to which there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that they will
afford evidence as to the commission of the following
State offence that has a
federal aspect, and that is an indictable offence against the law of the State
of the Australian Capital
Crimes Act 1900
Possess child exploitation material,
punishable by 7 years imprisonment.
8 May 2019, Detective Knight conducted briefings regarding the execution of the
warrants for the following day with several police
officers and a member of the
AFP Digital Forensics team:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [12]. During
the briefing, Detective Knight explained that he and another officer would
execute the person warrant on Alex Fletcher
at the Majura Police Complex, and
that Alex would then be given the option of being present during the search of
his residence:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [13]. If Alex Fletcher chose
to be present, the premises search would commence once Detective Knight arrived
with Alex. Detective
Knight also requested that the Digital Forensics team
member attend and assist with the execution of the premises warrant:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
following morning, Detective Knight signed the premises warrant over to Senior
Constable Kube:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [14]. At about 12:10pm,
Detective Knight and Senior Constable Hardiman attended the Majura Police
Complex, where he took Alex
Fletcher into a meeting room to execute the person
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
in the meeting room, Detective Knight cautioned Alex Fletcher and provided him
with a copy of the person warrant, which Alex
Fletcher read. Detective Knight
asked him “do you have anything on your person that’s named in that
warrant?” Alex
Fletcher replied “ah, just got a phone”,
indicating his black Samsung mobile phone.
Sergeant Hardiman then took the Samsung phone and placed it into Alex
Fletcher’s sports bag, which he then placed into
a police car:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
[16]. Detective Knight recorded the person
warrant as having been “executed”. However, no paperwork was
completed in
relation to the taking of the Samsung phone at this time:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
Fletcher told the officers that he wished to observe the execution of the
premises warrant. He then accompanied Detective Knight,
Senior Constable
Hardiman and another officer to his premises to observe the execution of the
premises search warrant. The Samsung
phone and work bag were placed into the
police vehicle. At about 1:30pm, the warrant was signed back over from Senior
Constable Kube
to Detective Knight. The police then drove to the
appellants’ residence:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
after this, police in another vehicle waiting at the ‘form up point’
(a location close to the appellants’
premises), intercepted Dale Fletcher
as he was driving home, approximately 70 metres from the appellant’s
premises. Senior
Constable Corey opened the door of the car and told Dale to get
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
this time, Dale Fletcher was not a suspect, and a person warrant had not been
obtained with respect to him. Senior Constable Corey
was of the mistaken belief
that she was authorised by the warrant to seize Dale’s mobile phone and
seized his Huawei phone.
Senior Constable Corey left Dale with the other police,
and consulted officers at the premises, who advised her to bring Dale to
premises. She returned to Dale and then walked to the premises with him:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
arriving at the premises, Senior Constable Corey handed the Huawei phone to
Senior Constable Linden. Senior Constable Linden
kept the phone in her
possession until the Digital Forensics team was set up, then handed it to them.
The phone was later handed
to the property officer:
Restricted Judgment (No
Constable Corey subsequently found an HP laptop computer in plain sight in Alex
Fletcher’s bedroom:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [22]. Another
police officer, Senior Constable Kube, later took the laptop downstairs to the
Digital Forensics team for examination.
Senior Constable Kube was informed by
Digital Forensics that the phone should be moved pursuant to
Crimes Act 1914
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [22]. She
completed a property movement form to this effect:
Restricted Judgment (No
property officer also recorded the moving of Dale’s Huawei phone on a
property movement form:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [23]. However, the
property officer erroneously described the Huawei phone as a ‘Black
Samsung phone’ located on ‘[Alex
Fletcher]’ at
‘1942’ by ‘Senior Constable Linden’.
arrested Alex Fletcher at approximately 2:45pm:
Restricted Judgment (No
at [24]. Senior Constable Hardiman directed Alex to provide the password
for the Samsung phone pursuant to the
order, which Alex complied with.
However, the phone was not examined at this time.
Fletcher remained at the premises until approximately 8:00pm, when he was taken
to the Watch House. Dale Fletcher was arrested
at approximately 2:15pm and
remained at the premises until around 5:50pm, when he was also transported to
the Watch House:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
that evening, Senior Constable Hardiman gave Senior Constable Linden Alex
Fletcher’s sports bag and told her to seize
the Samsung phone from within
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [26]. That seizure was recorded as
occurring at the appellants’ premises at 2012 hours (rather than at the
Majura Police
Complex earlier that day):
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
[26]. All of the items (both seized and moved) were then transported to the
Majura Forensic Operation Centre.
7 June 2019, Senior Constable Smyth, a member of the Digital Forensics Team,
began examining the items obtained in the search:
Restricted Judgment (No
at [27]. He informed his team leader, Mr Rees, that the deadline to
examine the items would potentially expire the following day
and offered to work
late in order to examine the items before the deadline expired. This offer was
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
12 June 2019, Senior Constable Smyth sent an email to Detective Knight informing
him that neither item had been examined and requesting
confirmation that an
extension of time for examination had been sought:
Restricted Judgment (No
at [28]. He then examined the moved Huawei phone. Later that day (and
without having received a response to his prior email), Senior
Constable Smyth
sent a further email to Detective Knight noting the Huawei phone had been
preliminarily reviewed and that photographs
of interest had been found. He
stated that he intended to move the HP laptop computer the following morning and
was processing the
items on the assumption that an extension of time had been
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
the morning of 13 June 2019, Senior Constable Smyth examined the HP laptop
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
Constable Smyth. In that email, Detective Knight informed
Senior Constable Smyth
that no extension of time had been sought and that he believed all of the moved
items could be seized due
to how the investigation had progressed:
Judgment (No 1)
at [28]. At that stage he had not viewed any of the contents
from the items.
afternoon, Detective Knight attended the Majura Forensic Operation Centre and
told Senior Constable Smyth his decision that both
the Huawei phone and the HP
laptop computer were to be formally seized.
5 July 2019, Detective Knight commenced examining the Huawei phone and HP laptop
computer. On 23 September 2019, he examined the
Samsung phone. The Huawei phone
was found to contain a large number of video files depicting the first, second
and third complainants
in their bedrooms, getting dressed and naked:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [66]. The HP laptop computer was found
to contain a large number of video files depicting the first, second and fourth
complainants,
and the fourth complainant’s young child, naked:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [67]. The Samsung phone was found to
contain video files and an image of the third complainant moving around her
bedroom, getting
dressed and being naked as well as images of the fourth
complainant drying herself, with one of those images depicting her partially
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
proceedings before the magistrate
was conducted in the Magistrates Court for a period of 11 days
from 3 August 2020 to 18 August 2020 in relation to the admissibility
items examined.
Knight gave evidence on the
on 5 August 2020. He said that the
Samsung phone was seized under the person warrant at Majura Police Complex, and
that while no paperwork
was completed at this time, there was an intention
“to fill out the [Property Seizure Record] at the house [later]”.
said that he attended the Exhibit Management Centre on 23 September 2019,
where he retrieved the Samsung phone and reviewed it.
HP laptop computer and Huawei phone were examined by police after the statutory
time limit prescribed by
had expired. Detective
Knight gave the following evidence in cross-examination in relation to this
issue (emphasis added):
MR PAPPAS: You learned, of course, during the course of your work in this matter
that the HP laptop and the Huawei phone, although
moved under
never examined within the statutory time limit, didn’t you?
DETECTIVE KNIGHT: No.
MR PAPPAS: Well. Didn’t you find out that that hadn’t happened?
DETECTIVE KNIGHT: No
MR PAPPAS: Okay. You’re sure on that?
DETECTIVE KNIGHT: I’m positive, yes.
MR PAPPAS: Positive, okay. Have you ever had a discussion in person or in
writing with anyone about the need to obtain an extension
of time under
section 3K?
KNIGHT: Your Honour,
I was asking DF [Digital Forensics] when they would have
the examination completed by and they assured me it was done within the 30
MR PAPPAS: All right, okay. So who did you speak to at DF that assured you it
had been done within 30 days?
KNIGHT: Mr Scott Reece.
in the cross-examination, Detective Knight again maintained that Mr Reece told
him “that the items had been examined in
time”. He said that Mr
Reece told him this in the presence of another officer from the Digital Forensic
Team, Talbot Smyth,
but that he could not be sure whether Mr Smyth heard that
conversation. Detective Knight acknowledged that he had not asked Mr Reece
Smyth to prepare a statement in connection with the proceedings.
evidence of Detective Knight that Digital Forensics had assured him that the
examination was done within the 30 day period was
contradicted by the evidence
of the email correspondence between Mr Reece of the Digital Forensics Team and
Detective Knight, as
set out at [123] above.
brief of evidence prepared by Detective Knight did not include any mention of
the contravention of the 30 day period. Detective
Knight also redacted an entry
in his notebook relating to the seizure of the HP laptop computer.
magistrate’s Evidentiary Decision
Summary of findings
magistrate held that:
(a) The evidence found on the Samsung phone had not been unlawfully seized:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [29] – [35];
(b) The evidence found on the Huawei phone had been unlawfully obtained, and the
evidence obtained from it should be excluded under
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [36] – [42], [86];
(c) The evidence obtained from the HP laptop computer had been unlawfully
obtained, but that the evidence should be admitted under
Evidence Act
because its probative value outweighed the undesirability of
admitting the evidence in the way in which it was obtained:
Judgment (No 1)
at [43] – [46], [87].
a subsequent
judgment delivered on 20 December 2021, the
magistrate held that the evidence from the Samsung phone was unlawfully
obtained, but
that the evidence obtained from it should be admitted because its
probative value outweighed the undesirability of admitting the
evidence in the
way in which it was obtained.
magistrate’s reasons for reaching the conclusions relating to the items
which are the subject of the present appeal (the
Samsung phone and the HP laptop
computer) are set out below.
The Samsung phone
the proceedings before the magistrate, the appellants contended that the Samsung
phone was not seized from Alex Fletcher at the
Majura Police Centre, but that it
was taken from him and moved to the warrant residence, where it was subsequently
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [29]. The appellants
further contended, relying on
Puglisi v Australian Fisheries Management
[1997] FCA 846
148 ALR 393
, that as the phone was not
“found” at the warrant residence, the subsequent seizure at the
appellants’ residence
was not lawful:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
magistrate noted that in
, police had seized items under an
invalid warrant, and then subsequently obtained a valid warrant for the
defendant’s home.
Justice Hill had held that the police could not lawfully
seize those items by transporting the items to the home and then retaining
under a notional execution of the second warrant, because the items were not
“found” at the defendant’s home.
The magistrate held that
could “easily be distinguished” because the present
case concerned a “valid warrant that legalised the seizure
of the phone in
the first place”:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
magistrate observed that the term “seize” is not defined in the
, but that it had been held by the Full Federal Court that a
seizure is a “question of fact”, which may or may not be
which is constituted by “the forcible taking of possession of
things”, provided that the item is not “moved”
for later examination
(which permits an executing
officer to move items without the executing officer forming any view as to the
contents of the items):
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [30], citing
Hart v Commissioner of Australian Federal Police
[2002] FCAFC 392
magistrate observed that “there was no suggestion at the time or
afterwards that the phone was moved under
” and that “[n]o issue
was taken by the defendants about the validity of the warrant to search
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [31] – [32]. His
Honour continued (at [32]):
Detective [Knight] gave evidence that at the time [of seizure] he held the
requisite belief. It is true that the usual property seizure
records were not
completed at the time, and that a property seizure record was later completed
that erroneously described where and
when the phone was seized. Those two facts
of themselves do not of themselves invalidate the lawfulness of the seizure. At
muddle the evidence about what occurred and certainly do not reflect
the AFP’s usual practice. It could not be described as
best practice.
Honour concluded that as he was “not convinced” that the Samsung
phone was seized illegally or improperly, the appellants’
objection to the
admission of the evidence failed, and the phone would be admitted into
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
in the subsequent
judgment, his Honour held that the police
had breached
when directing Alex Fletcher to
provide the password to the Samsung phone.
permits a constable to apply to a magistrate for an
order requiring a specified person to provide information and/ or assistance
is reasonable and necessary to enable the constable to,
access data that is held in a “data storage device” which has been
found (i) on warrant premises; (ii) on a search of
a person authorised by
warrant, or which has been moved under
seized under div 2 of
of that Act:
However, where such an order is made by a magistrate
to seizure,
that order has “no affect on or after seizure”:
. Where a seizure has been made, it is necessary to obtain a
further order under
see note to
the present case, the police had obtained the
order from a magistrate
prior to the execution of the search warrants. As noted at [119] above, Senior
Constable Hardiman directed
Alex Fletcher to provide the password to his mobile
phone at approximately 2:45pm during the execution of the premises warrant. As
the magistrate had accepted Detective Knight’s evidence that he seized the
mobile phone at the Majura Police Complex earlier
that day, it followed that the
evidence obtained from that phone was illegally obtained and that
Evidence Act
was enlivened.
consideration of the factors under
Evidence Act
Honour concluded that the evidence found on the Samsung phone should be admitted
into evidence, despite the breach of s 3LA.
In so finding, his Honour placed
particular weight on the probative value and importance of the evidence and that
the offences related
to conduct involving “a significant breach of
“inadvertent”
breach, involving a “puzzling” provision.
HP laptop computer
provides that:
(2) A thing found at warrant premises, or a thing found during a search under a
warrant that is in force in relation to a person,
may be moved to another place
for examination or processing in order to determine whether the thing may be
seized under a warrant,
or the thing suggests the existence of a digital asset
that may be seized under a warrant if:
(a) both of the following apply:
(i) it is significantly more practicable to do so
having regard to the timeliness and cost of examining or processing the thing at
another place and the availability of expert assistance;
(ii) the executing officer or constable
assisting suspects on reasonable grounds that the thing contains or
constitutes evidential
material or the thing suggests the existence of
a digital asset that may be seized under a warrant; or
(b) for a thing found at warrant premises--the occupier of the premises consents
in writing; or
(c) for a thing found during a search under a warrant that is in force in
relation to a person--the person consents in writing.
prescribes a 30 day time limit for the examination and processing of a
computer or data storage device that has been moved under
executing officer believes on reasonable grounds that the thing cannot be
examined or processed within the 30 days, the executing
officer may apply to the
issuing officer for an extension of the time limit:
was common ground that the police had unlawfully retained and examined the HP
laptop outside of the period prescribed by
Acts Interpretation Act
the magistrate found that the 30 day period for examining the HP laptop computer
would have expired on 11 June 2019. The laptop
was not examined until 13 June
2019. In those circumstances, his Honour concluded that the evidence obtained
from the HP laptop was
illegally obtained and
was enlivened:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
considering, and rejecting, other bases on which the appellants contended that
there was illegality and/or impropriety in the
investigation, his Honour turned
to consider whether the HP laptop computer should be admitted under
Evidence Act
despite the contravention of s 3K(3A) of the
Honour observed that
Evidence Act
sets out a list of
considerations, which he sequentially addressed as follows.
his Honour noted that a number of files had been found on the HP laptop computer
which depicted various videos of the complainants
moving around their rooms
whilst naked and getting dressed. Of these, 13 video files depicted the bedroom
used by the first complainant,
27 video files depicted the bedroom used by the
second complainant and 6 video files depicted the bathroom of the
appellants’
neighbours’ house:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
[67]. His Honour held this evidence was “clearly relevant and
compelling”, in relation to each of the charges, and
that the probative
value of the evidence was high:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
magistrate found that exclusion of all of the evidence from the Huawei phone and
the HP laptop computer would “drastically
weaken” the prosecution
case against both defendants involving the first, second and fourth
complainants, but that this could
not be said about the prosecution case
involving the third complainant (as the videos depicting her were on the Samsung
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [70]. His Honour concluded that the
evidence was important.
Honour noted that the charges carried maximum penalties of 7 years and 2
years’ imprisonment, and that the offence of capturing
visual data
involved a “gross breach of trust and an outrageous invasion of
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [73]. His Honour observed
that whilst the offences are serious, “they are not the most serious
offences to come before the
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
to the gravity of the contravention, the magistrate found that Detective Knight
was “put on notice” on 12 June 2019
that the time period for
examining the HP laptop computer may have expired:
Restricted Judgment (No
at [75]. His Honour rejected Detective Knight’s claim that he had
been told that the examination had occurred within the statutory
time period,
noting that this claim was inconsistent with the evidence of members of the
Digital Forensics Team and emails and other
Restricted Judgment (No
magistrate stated (at [77] – [78], emphasis added):
The prosecution brief compiled by Detective [Knight] made no reference to the
examinations occurring out of time ... Further, the
copy of Detective
[Knight’s] field notebook provided by him as part of the prosecution brief
contained an entry relevant to
this issue, which was redacted. That entry was
dated 14 June 2019 and read:
1340 FOC, MAJURA
NO NEED TO SIGN BIC MOVED ITEMS
MAY CHANGE STATUS ON PROMIS
@ SEIZED @ BELIEF CONTAIN
EVIDENTIAL MATERIAL
It is clear from the above, that the 30 day time period had expired days before
the items were examined by Digital Forensics, inspected
by Detective [Knight]
and subsequently seized. Additionally, the absence of any information within the
prosecution brief disclosing
that breach is suspicious.
The redaction of the
above relevant field notebook entry and Detective [Knight’s] initial
denial about ever being told the items
were examined out of time leads me to
find that Detective [Knight] deliberately attempted to cover up that breach
in the judgment, his Honour continued (at [83]):
... Unfortunately, the actions in relation to the laptop computer appear to have
been at least reckless and subsequently deliberately
covered up.
particularly unfortunate, as the issue could have easily been avoided by simple
administration and, if necessary, an extension
of time. There is a public
interest in not sanctioning such illegalities. To do so potentially encourages
future breaches, which
in turn could undermine the confidence the community has
in the professionalism and discipline of the AFP. That would be a significant
loss in the longer term and could potentially affect future prosecutions.
magistrate noted that the unlawful retention and examination of the HP laptop
computer contravened article 17 of the
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
Human Rights Act 2004
which protects individuals from unlawful or arbitrary interference with privacy:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
Honour also observed that there was no evidence that any other proceeding,
disciplinary action or remedial training arising out
of the above illegalities
had occurred or was planned:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
his Honour observed that:
The HP laptop computer was simply examined late. It was open to Detective
[Knight] to monitor the impending deadline, request a timely
examination by the
Digital Forensics Team and, if necessary, request an extension of time. If he
had done so, he was likely to have
been granted that extension:
Judgment (No 1)
into account all of these matters, the magistrate determined that the
desirability of admitting the evidence obtained from
the HP laptop outweighed
the undesirability of admitting evidence that had been obtained in the way in
which the evidence was obtained.
The magistrate’s reasons indicate that
two factors were significant in this conclusion: first the exclusion of the
would have a significant impact on the prosecution case; and second,
the laptop computer “was already in the possession of
the police”
and the lawful examination could have occurred days earlier or with an extension
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [85] and [87]. Accordingly, his
Honour determined to admit the evidence obtained from the HP laptop computer.
magistrate’s Verdicts
a judgment delivered on 30 March 2022, the magistrate found each appellant
guilty of the following offences:
(a) A charge of capturing visual data by agreement contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) and s 45A of the
Criminal Code 2002
relating to the first complainant;
(b) A charge of capturing visual data by agreement contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) and s 45A of the
Criminal Code 2002
relating to the second complainant;
(c) A charge of capturing visual data by agreement contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) and s 45A of the
Criminal Code 2002
relating to the third complainant.
magistrate found the appellants not guilty of charges relating to the taking of
footage of the appellants’ neighbours:
Restricted Judgment (No 2)
at [73] – [80]. His Honour also held that Alex Fletcher was not guilty
of a charge relating to capturing visual data of an unknown
woman in a public
toilet, and that Alex Fletcher was also not guilty of the charge that he
possessed child exploitation material:
Restricted Judgment (No 2)
The Supreme
Court appeal
appellants appealed their convictions, contending that the magistrate had erred
in admitting the evidence found on the HP laptop
computer and the Samsung phone.
In a judgment delivered on 31 August 2023, the primary judge dismissed the
appeal against the magistrate’s
decision relating to the Samsung phone,
but allowed the appeal against the magistrate’s decision relating to the
computer. Her Honour’s reasons for so concluding are summarised
The Samsung phone
primary judge upheld the magistrate’s finding that the Samsung phone had
been lawfully “seized” from Alex Fletcher
at the time of execution
of the personal search warrant at Majura Police Complex:
Restricted Judgment
at [39] – [67]. In so finding, her Honour held that the
magistrate had correctly recognised that the term “seize”
defined in the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), and that whether an item is seized
is a question of fact, which involves the forcible taking of possession of an
Restricted Judgment (SC)
at [55], citing
primary judge took into account the following evidence in finding that Detective
[Knight] had seized the Samsung phone whilst
at the Majura Police
(d) A personal search warrant was served on Alex Fletcher at the Majura Police
Restricted Judgment (SC)
(e) Alex Fletcher was asked by officers whether he had anything described in the
Restricted Judgment (SC)
(f) Alex Fletcher indicated that he had his phone on him and gave the Samsung
phone to police:
Restricted Judgment (SC)
(g) The phone was not returned to Alex Fletcher:
Restricted Judgment (SC)
(h) At the time that the phone was taken by the police officers, there was no
suggestion that the phone was being moved pursuant
Restricted Judgment (SC)
(i) Detective Knight gave evidence that he had formed the belief that the
Samsung phone may have child exploitation material on it.
It was open to the
magistrate to accept this evidence, whilst rejecting other aspects of Detective
Knight’s evidence as unreliable:
Restricted Judgment (SC)
Whilst there were issues regarding Detective Knight’s credibility,
“there was no apparent advantage to be gained
by putting forward evidence
that the phone was seized at the Majura Police Complex rather than at the
residence”:
Restricted Judgment (SC)
(j) The phone was a “personal device of an individual suspected of
possessing child exploitation material” (which distinguished
the Samsung
phone from the HP laptop computer, which was found in a shared residence between
the two brothers, where other individuals
were also residing):
Judgment (SC)
primary judge held that “absent a clear indication that the phone was
merely being ‘moved’ as opposed to being
‘seized’, the
events of the taking of the phone were, in substance on the facts, a
Restricted Judgment (SC)
at [61]. Accordingly, her Honour
concluded that notwithstanding “administrative and technical errors”
in the completion
of the relevant paperwork, it was open to the magistrate to
find that there was a seizure of the Samsung phone during the execution
personal search warrant:
Restricted Judgment (SC)
primary judge also rejected the appellants’ challenge to the
magistrate’s conclusion that the Samsung phone should
be admitted into
evidence under
Evidence Act
, despite the breach of
Restricted Judgment (SC)
at [68] – [80]. In
particular, her Honour held that “the evidence on the Samsung phone was
highly probative, the offences
are serious, and the specific impropriety
concerning the Samsung phone was inadvertent”:
Restricted Judgment
at [76]. Her Honour concluded that there was no error in the
magistrate’s decision, whether or not the correctness standard
House v The King
error was required to be shown:
Restricted Judgment
at [76] – [77]. In so finding, her Honour assumed that there had
been a breach of
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism
Financing Act 2006
Restricted Judgment (SC)
at [78]. This
related to a demand that Detective Knight had made of Westpac Bank concerning
Dale Fletcher’s domestic transactions
which might have indicated Dale
Fletcher’s location at certain times.
The HP laptop computer
primary judge found that the magistrate erred in admitting the material from the
HP laptop, as the “cover up” by Detective
Knight associated with the
unlawful examination of the laptop out of the statutory time frame “cannot
be condoned by the Court”:
Restricted Judgment (SC)
at [111]. Her
Honour considered that the cover up was a “relevant and pressing
consideration”, which “tips the
balance away from admission”:
Restricted Judgment (SC)
at [112] and [113]. Her Honour also considered
that it was unclear whether the magistrate had expressly considered the cover up
exercising his discretion to admit the evidence obtained from the HP laptop
Restricted Judgment (SC)
the correctness standard, the primary judge determined that the magistrate erred
in ruling that the evidence obtained from
the HP laptop computer was admissible:
Restricted Judgment (SC)
at [114]. In the alternative, her Honour
concluded that the magistrate had failed to properly take Detective Knight cover
account, and that this failure constituted a
Restricted Judgment (SC)
the primary judge had upheld the appellants’ appeal in part, the primary
judge set aside the magistrate’s orders and
proceedings were remitted to
the Magistrate for redetermination of the six counts of capturing visual data
that the appellants had
been convicted of (see at [100]
above). Her
Honour also corrected an inadvertent typographic error made by the magistrate in
recording the appellants’ convictions,
whereby the first appellant’s
charges were wrongly ascribed to the second appellant, and visa-versa.
Determination
present appeal was commenced pursuant to
Supreme Court Act
(ACT). Like the appeal from the magistrate, this form of appeal is a
Alexander v Bakes
[2023] ACTCA 49
21 ACTLR 27
Sidaros v The Queen
[2020] ACTCA 11
15 ACTLR 64
, this Court held
that the correctness standard of review is the appropriate standard to be
applied to an appeal against a decision
approach taken in
is consistent with the decision of the High
Moore (a pseudonym) v R
[2024] HCA 30
, which held
(with respect to
Evidence Act
) that the correctness standard
is the appropriate standard to be applied where the decision appealed from
“demands a unique
outcome” rather than tolerating a range of
preparing these reasons, I have had the benefit of considering the draft
judgments of Mossop J, which expresses doubt concerning
the correctness of the
decision in
and McCallum CJ, which expresses the tentative view
was correctly decided. The decision in
unanimous decision of this Court. On this appeal, the Director did not contend
was wrongly decided, or that it should not be followed. The
issue not having been the subject of submissions of either party, I do
to express any views as to the correctness of
. As Mossop J
ultimately concludes,
must be followed.
Accordingly,
this Court is required to “[determine] for itself the correct outcome
while making due allowance for such ‘advantages’
as may have been
enjoyed by the judge who conducted the trial or hearing”:
The Samsung
issue in the proceedings before the magistrate and the primary judge was whether
the Samsung phone was “seized” by
Detective Knight at the Majura
Police Station.
meaning of the term “seized” was considered by the Full Federal
. At [81], the Full Court held as follows:
The term ‘seizure’ is not defined in the
ordinary meaning of the word is ‘confiscation or forcible taking
possession (of land or goods)’. Some act must be
done sufficient to
indicate that a seizure has been made. In
Halsbury’s laws of
, it was said of seizure of goods under writs of fieri facias that:
... [a]ny act which, if not done with the court’s authority, would amount
to a trespass to goods will constitute a seizure
of them when done under the
writ. Whether or not there has been a seizure is a question of fact.
The passage was cited with approval [by the Full Federal Court] in
. The designation of seizure as a question of fact leaves open the
possibility that a seizure may be effected and characterised as
though it may be beyond the authority given by the warrant or the statute
(citations omitted).
[103], their Honours emphasised that “[s]eizure, as noted earlier, is a
matter of fact. It is a forcible taking of possession
of things”. Of
course, that “forcible taking” need not be a violent (or even a
physical) taking:
Whim Creek Consolidated NL v Colgan
[1991] FCA 605
. Rather, what is required is “some act of dominion which,
of its nature, is such that there would be no doubt in the mind of
a reasonable
observer that seizure has taken place”:
a seizure requires a “forcible taking of possession of things”,
property will not be “seized” if it
is given over to police
voluntarily. Property will also not be “seized” if the property is
“moved” to another
place for examination pursuant to
at [83] and [103].
magistrate’s finding that the phone was not provided voluntarily was not
challenged by the appellants, either in the proceedings
before the primary
judge, nor in the present appeal.
could such a contention have been sustained if it had been advanced. The Samsung
phone was handed to police by Alex Fletcher during
the course of an interview at
the Majura Police Complex. That interview commenced with the giving of a
caution. The transcript of
the interview records the following exchange as
having occurred at the time that Alex Fletcher handed over the phone:
Q3 All right, [Alex], so I have a search warrant issued by the court authorising
myself and the other police officers present –
just in regards to
yourself, to a person warrant. So I’ll hand you that. For the purposes of
the audio can you just read the
first paragraph out aloud?
Q5 I will talk to you about it if you’d like, after you’ve read the
warrant, mate. Now, you’ve read the warrant?
A Oh, yeah. Yeah.
Q28 All right. So keeping in mind the caution, is there anything named in the
warrant – did you bring anything, or do you have
anything on your person
that’s named in that warrant?
A Ah, just got a phone.
Q29 Your phone. Which phone is that?
A My Samsung phone. None of them are mobile numbers on here though.
Q31 Okay. So do you mind just emptying your pockets so I can see your phone,
A Just the phone?
Q32 Ta. What model’s [sic] that one?
A An S – S nine.
is clear from the above that Detective Knight required Alex Fletcher to hand
over the Samsung phone. Alex Fletcher handed over
the phone, after which time it
was exclusively in the possession of police. In the context of Alex Fletcher
having been cautioned
and shown the person warrant, which authorised police to
seize any mobile phone that was connected to him, it could not be said that
had provided the Samsung phone voluntarily. Further, as the primary judge
observed, there was no suggestion that the phone was
pursuant to the powers conferred by
phone was therefore “seized” within the ordinary meaning of the
as the Full Federal Court made clear in
at [81], a seizure may be
lawful, or it may be unlawful. In these circumstances, the real issue that
arises for determination is whether
the Samsung phone was lawfully seized
pursuant to the power conferred by the person warrant
this respect, the appellant made two related submissions:
(i) Detective Knight could not seize the Samsung phone under the person warrant
without turning his own mind to the question of whether
there were reasonable
grounds for suspecting that the phone was “evidential material”
within the meaning of
(ii) Detective Knight did not turn his mind to the question of whether there
were reasonable grounds for suspecting that the phone
was evidential material
under the person warrant.
“Evidential material” is defined in
to mean “a thing relevant to an indictable offence or a thing
relevant to a summary offence, including such a thing in electronic
to the first contention, a textual consideration of the relevant provisions of
does not immediately suggest that there is any statutory
requirement on the executing officer (as opposed to the issuing officer)
independently conclude that there are reasonable grounds to suspect that an item
to be seized will constitute “evidential
material” within the
s 3F(2)(b)(i)
authorises the executing officer to seize any items specified in the
Section 3F(2)(c)
only requires an executing officer to consider
whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that the item is evidential
when the executing officer wishes to seize items that are not named in
the search warrant.
a construction might also be thought to accord with the policy of the
provisions. The issuing of a search warrant constitutes
a finding by the issuing
magistrate that there are reasonable grounds to suspect that the items specified
in the search warrant will
be relevant to an indictable or summary offence.
Those reasonable grounds having been established, it might be considered that
executing officer should not be required to re-embark upon this
consideration again (in what will often be a highly charged environment,
limited time to consider competing considerations).
Nonetheless,
there is support in the case-law for the appellant’s contention that an
executing officer must turn his or her
mind to the question of whether there are
reasonable grounds to suspect that a particular item will constitute
“evidential
material” within the meaning of
before the officer seizes the item.
example, in
Baker v Campbell
[1983] HCA 39
at 102, Brennan J
(as his Honour then was), when commenting on the scope of s 10(b) of the
Crimes Act 1914
The provision refers to grounds for believing (
and the belief must be held by
both the issuing justice and the constable executing the warrant
thing to be seized
afford evidence, not that it
evidence. (emphasis in bold added, italics in original).
observations have been made in authorities determined since
. For example:
Parker v Churchill
[1985] FCA 425
Burchett J stated that “he [the executing officer] has to decide whether
there are grounds for believing particular
documents will afford evidence, which
would be impossible without some knowledge of the issues likely to
Adler v Gardiner
[2002] FCA 1141
, Hely J held
that “[t]he executing officer or constable assisting has to consider
whether ‘there are reasonable grounds
for suspecting’ that the
document will afford evidence as to the commission of a warrant offence”.
His Honour continued
“[t]his is [a] judgment which the executing officer
must make in relation to every ‘thing’ which is to be seized
reliance upon the warrant”;
at [83], the Full Federal Court held that “[t]o be
lawful, [a decision to seize material under a search warrant] must be based
the requisite state of satisfaction that the things seized are evidential
material of the kind specified in the warrant”
(see also at [102] and
[103]); and
Caratti v Commissioner of Australian Federal Police (No 2)
, Wigney J held that “before seizing a document or other
item, an executing officer had to consider, amongst other things, whether
were reasonable grounds for suspecting that the item would afford evidence as to
the commission of the offences to which the
warrant related (the offences in the
third condition). That judgment must be made at the time of seizure. An
executing officer is
not authorised to seize a thing without forming that
judgment, with a view to examining the thing subsequently to determine if it
in fact evidential material”.
should be noted that in
, the Full Federal Court also held (at [103])
... once a purported seizure has been made without proper consideration of
whether there were reasonable grounds for suspecting that
the things seized are
or contain evidential material or relate to an offence, the legal invalidity of
that seizure does not
change its character as a seizure. Nor
does it reduce the seizure to a pre-examination removal under
where, as here, a three condition search warrant is broadly drafted to include a
“shopping list” of “every
conceivable type of thing that might
be found” (
[2017] at [66] – [67]), it may be that the
validity of the search warrant depends upon the third condition as being read as
to require that the executing officer to independently turn his or her mind to
whether there are reasonable grounds for suspecting
that an item will afford
evidence as to the commission of the offence(s) specified in a search warrant
before seizure of that item.
is also some merit in the appellant’s second contention, namely that
Detective Knight did not turn his mind to the question
of whether there were
reasonable prospects for suspecting that the Samsung phone would afford evidence
of the offence specified in
the person warrant at the time that he took that
phone whilst at the Majura Police Complex.
Knight gave evidence in cross-examination that he had “reasonable grounds
to suspect that there would be – like
given the information that there may
be child exploitation material [on the Samsung phone]”. However, some
caution must be
taken before accepting this evidence.
noted at [155] above, the magistrate found that Detective Knight deliberately
attempted to cover up the breach of
connection with the examination of the HP laptop computer (which is addressed
below). This finding was not challenged by the Director
in the proceedings
before the primary judge, and has not been challenged on the present appeal.
trier of fact is not obliged to accept or reject the whole of a witness’
evidence, and may accept part of a witness’
evidence whilst rejecting
other parts. However, where a witness has been shown to have deliberately lied
in part of their evidence,
the remainder of the witness’ evidence should
be carefully scrutinised before other parts of the witness’ evidence are
Knight was the applicant for the person warrant. The material that Detective
Knight relied on to obtain the person warrant
was not in evidence in these
proceedings (the proceedings not being by way of an application for judicial
review of the warrant).
However, the Samsung phone fell squarely within the
first two conditions of that warrant, being a mobile phone that was found on
Alex Fletcher’s person. The warrant also stated that the offence suspected
was possession of child exploitation material. In
these circumstances, if
Detective Knight had turned his mind to the issue, he may well have suspected
that the phone would contain
evidential material relating to an offence of
possessing child exploitation material. In this respect, I agree with the
primary judge
that the Samsung phone was in a different category to the HP
laptop computer and the Huawei phone, neither of which were found in
Fletcher’s possession: see similarly
Restricted Judgment (SC)
a likelihood that Detective Knight would have had a particular state of mind
he had turned his mind to this issue does not necessarily address the
question of whether he
turned his mind to the issue
time of taking the Samsung phone
the present case, Detective Knight subsequent conduct was arguably inconsistent
with him having positively concluded that there
were reasonable prospects that
the Samsung phone would afford evidence of the offence specified in the person
warrant at the time
of taking the phone. Specifically, if Detective Knight had
turned his mind to this issue, and positively concluded that there were
reasonable prospects that the Samsung phone would afford evidence of the offence
specified in the person warrant at the time of taking
the phone, one might have
expected that Detective Knight would have taken action to record that the phone
was being seized at that
time pursuant to the person warrant and to ensure the
integrity of that evidence. He did not do so.
as the appellant submitted, nothing was said by Detective Knight to indicate
that the Samsung phone was being seized under
the person warrant; no records
(such as a property seizure record) were made to indicate that the phone was
being seized under the
person warrant at that time; the phone was not placed in
an exhibit bag; and no receipt was issued to Alex Fletcher under
to record that any seizure had been made. Whilst the failure
to issue such a receipt would not, of itself, constitute an illegality
impropriety that enlivened s 138 (
R v Siang Pin Foo (No 2)
[1998] NTSC
, Detective Knight failure to issue a receipt tends to suggest that he gave
no consideration to whether the Samsung phone should be
seized at that time, and
that he did not turn his mind to whether there were reasonable prospects that
the Samsung phone would afford
evidence of the offence specified in the person
warrant at the time that he took the phone in the Majura Police Centre. Finally,
Detective Knight said nothing about having seized the phone, or having turned
his mind to the “requisite belief” in his
written statement that was
prepared for the proceedings. He first asserted that he had seized the phone at
the Majura Police Centre
in his answers in cross-examination.
his judgment, the magistrate referred to Detective Knight evidence that he
(Detective Knight) had “the requisite belief”
at the time that he
took the Samsung phone at the Majura Police Centre. However, the magistrate did
not expressly state whether this
evidence was accepted or rejected, nor did he
provide any reasons for accepting part of the evidence of Detective Knight in
circumstances
where he had made significant findings against Detective Knight
credibility in other parts of the judgment (see further at [201]
it is not necessary to resolve either of these legal or factual issues that were
raised by the appellants on the appeal (neither
of which appear to have been
clearly argued in either of the proceedings below). Even if (i) it were
concluded that Detective Knight
was required to consider whether there are
reasonable grounds for suspecting that the Samsung phone would afford evidence
commission of the offence specified in the search warrant before
seizing the phone; and (ii) it were concluded that Detective Knight
did not turn
his mind to whether the Samsung phone would afford evidence as to the commission
of the offence specified in the search
warrant before he took the phone at the
Majura Police Centre, for the reasons outlined below, I
would nonetheless
conclude that the Samsung phone should have been admitted under s 138.
the magistrate and the primary judge concluded in respect of the
illegality, the probative value of the evidence obtained from the Samsung phone
was high; it was important evidence; and the offences
in question, whilst not
the most grave in the criminal calendar, involved a serious breach of the
were recorded.
contrast, the present illegality, if established, is comparatively minor. As
observed at [196] above, it was well open to Detective
Knight to have concluded
that there were reasonable grounds for suspecting that a mobile phone found on
Alex Fletcher would contain
evidence relating to the offence specified in the
person warrant, namely possession of child exploitation material. So much is
from the decision of the magistrate to issue the person warrant in the
first place (a decision which was not the subject of challenge).
Knight could have formed that opinion without first examining the phone.
Alternatively, it was open to Detective Knight
to move the Samsung phone for
examination pursuant to the powers conferred by
As the mobile phone was otherwise susceptible to seizure under the person
warrant, any breach of the
Human Rights Act
have constituted a serious breach. This is not to downplay the significance of
Detective Knight’s conduct. On any
view Detective Knight’s approach
to the execution of the person warrant was careless. It demonstrated either an
or a lack of appreciation, of the seriousness of police conduct in
executing a search warrant.
appellants also contended that, in considering whether to admit the evidence
under s 138, this Court should take into account
the other illegal and improper
conduct that was found to have been engaged in by the executing officers,
including the unlawful seizure
of Dale Fletcher’s Huawei phone, the
breaches of
in respect of the HP laptop
computer and the Huawei phone, Detective Knight’s deliberate attempt to
cover up the
breach (see at [234] below) and an alleged breach of
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
have given consideration to each of these matters, but do not
consider that they should carry any significant weight. The breaches
by law enforcement personnel concerning the Huawei phone and
the HP laptop computer are properly considered in determining the admissibility
of those items of evidence, rather than in determining the admissibility of the
Samsung phone. The magistrate rejected the appellants’
contention that
there had been a breach of
Anti-Money Laundering and
Counter-Terrorism Financing Act
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
– [51]. The primary judge assumed, but did not determine whether a breach
of that provision had occurred:
Restricted Judgment (SC)
[104]. On the appeal, the appellants did not advance any submissions, orally or
in writing, in support of their
contention that the magistrate’s
determination was wrong. Further, the appellants did not articulate a connection
between any
of that Act and the evidence found on the
Samsung phone.
addition, the appellants contended that if Detective Knight’s evidence
that he seized the Samsung phone at Majura Police
Centre was not accepted, it
would follow that Detective Knight had given false evidence on this issue also,
and that this is a further
matter that should be considered in assessing whether
the evidence obtained from the Samsung phone should be admitted under
Evidence Act
. In considering whether the evidence obtained from the
Samsung phone should be admitted under
, I have proceeded on the basis that
Detective Knight’s evidence that he “formed the requisite
belief” should not
be accepted. However, such a finding does not carry the
same weight as the unchallenged finding concerning his attempted deliberate
cover up of the illegality concerning the HP laptop computer (as to which see
[209] – [240] below).
Ultimately,
requires the Court to determine whether “the desirability of
admitting the evidence outweighs the undesirability of admitting
evidence that
has been obtained in the way in which the evidence was obtained”. The onus
is on the Director to persuade the
Court of this matter:
Comptroller-General of
Customs [2009] HCA 7; 83 ALJR 494 at [28] (French
CJ). The evidence obtained from the Samsung phone was highly probative and of
importance to the proceedings. The gravity of the contravention was
comparatively minor. In my view, the desirability of admitting
this evidence
outweighs the undesirability of admitting evidence that has been obtained in the
way in which the evidence was obtained.
Accordingly,
the appellants’ appeal against the primary judge’s decision
affirming the admission of the Samsung phone
should be dismissed.
The HP laptop
Introduction
the police were authorised to examine
the laptop for no longer than 30 days after it was moved. There was no challenge
to the magistrate’s
finding that the police examined the laptop two days
after the 30 day period expired.
this reason, the evidence from the HP laptop computer was obtained unlawfully,
and the threshold condition in
Evidence Act
Accordingly, the evidence obtained from the HP laptop computer was required to
be excluded unless the prosecution demonstrated
that the “desirability of
admitting the evidence outweighed the undesirability of admitting the evidence
that had been obtained
in the way in which the evidence was
Evidence Act
enumerates a number of matters which
“must” be considered by a court when making this evaluative
assessment. On the appeal
to this Court, there was no challenge to the
magistrate’s findings that:
(i) The exclusion of all of the evidence from the HP laptop computer would
“drastically weaken the prosecution case against
both defendants involving
the first, second and fourth complainants” (the evidence from the Huawei
phone also being excluded):
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
(considering
s 138(3)(a)
and (b) of the
Evidence Act
(ii) The possess child exploitation material and capturing of visual data
offences carry maximum penalties of 7 years’ and
imprisonment respectively. The latter, while a summary offence, is an offence
that involves, in this case, “a
gross breach of trust and an outrageous
invasion of privacy”: see;
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
(considering
s 138(3)(c)
Evidence Act
(iii) On 12 June 2019, Detective Knight was on notice that the s 3K time limit
had, or was about to expire. He took no proactive
action to address this, and
did not seek an extension of time, or any advice about the action to be taken
(considering the gravity
of the contravention,
s 138(3)(d)
(iv) The contravention of s 3K was “at least reckless” (considering
s 138(3)(e)
Evidence Act
(v) The unlawful retention and examination of the HP laptop computer contravened
article 17 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Human Rights Act 2004
(ACT), which protect individuals
from unlawful or arbitrary interference with privacy and correspondence:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [79] (considering
s 138(3)(f)
Evidence Act
(vi) There is no evidence of other proceeding, disciplinary action or remedial
training arising out of the illegality having occurred
or being planned:
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [80] (considering
Evidence Act
). After the oral hearing on this appeal, this Court inquired
of the parties whether any further evidence as to this issue was sought
adduced on this appeal. The parties indicated that no such application was
sought to be made.
(vii) It was open to Detective Knight to monitor the impending deadline, request
a timely examination by the Digital Forensics Team
and, if necessary, request an
extension of time. If he had done so, he was likely to have been granted that
Restricted Judgment (No 1)
at [82] (considering
s 138(3)(h)
Evidence Act
view of the probative value and importance of the evidence, and the relative
unimportance of the breach (examination of the computer
two days after the
statutory time limit of 30 days), if Detective Knight had openly disclosed to
the appellants that the HP laptop
computer had not been examined within the 30
day time limit, and frankly informed the Court of that fact and the reasons for
failure to comply with the time limit, it may not have been difficult to
conclude that the
balance should be struck in favour of admitting the
issue which is at the heart of this ground of appeal concerns the weight to be
given to the magistrate’s unchallenged finding
that Detective Knight had
attempted to cover up that illegality. It is to this question that I now
The relevance of the attempted cover-up
Director accepted that it was open to the Court to consider the attempted cover
up by Detective Knight when determining whether
the HP laptop computer should be
admitted under
Evidence Act
. In order to determine the
weight to be given to this matter, it is necessary to briefly explain why an
attempted cover up of illegal
conduct should be taken into account under this
views on this issue have been refined by the draft judgments of McCallum CJ and
Mossop J, for which I am grateful.
is enlivened where evidence is obtained improperly or in contravention of an
Australian law, or “in consequence of” an
illegality or impropriety.
For this reason, it has been held that the section is not engaged where the
impropriety or illegality
occurs after the impugned evidence is obtained:
Slater (a Pseudonym) v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 213
; see similarly
Question of Law Reserved
[1998] 70 SASR 28
(considering the issue at
common law).
the position is different where a further illegality or impropriety occurs after
established illegal or improper conduct,
such as where there is an attempted
cover up of an illegality or impropriety. In that case,
has already been
‘triggered’ by the unlawful or improper conduct. The question then
is whether the attempted cover up
may be considered as part of the evaluative
balance under
Evidence Act
Victorian Court of Appeal, and single instance decisions of the Supreme Court in
Tasmania and the Northern Territory have each
answered this question in the
affirmative:
at [55] – [56];
[2004] TASSC 80
148 A Crim R 346
[2014] NTSC 19
and [140] and [149]. In my view, the conclusions reached in each
of these decisions accord with the text, history and purpose of
to text, I accept that
is somewhat opaquely drafted. The court is required
to weigh the desirability of admitting “the evidence” against the
“undesirability of admitting evidence that has been obtained in the way in
which the evidence was obtained”. As Mossop
J observes (at [86]), viewed
in isolation, the language in
is consistent with the provision
containing a “temporal endpoint” which concludes at the time that
the evidence “was
obtained”, such that, as McCallum CJ suggests (at
[11]), it would not be open to a court to have “regard to events after
evidence in question was obtained” in determining whether evidence should
be admitted under
must be read as a whole.
Section 138(3)
sets out a non-exhaustive list of
matters which “must” be considered by the court when determining
whether to admit evidence
One of the matters which
“must” be considered by a court when determining whether to admit
the evidence is “whether
any other proceeding (whether or not in a court)
has been or is likely to be taken in relation to the impropriety or
contravention”:
s 138(3)(g)
Evidence Act
. This is a strong
textual indication that the matters to be taken into account in assessing the
“undesirability” of admitting
evidence in
should not be
temporally confined to the point at which the impugned evidence was
“obtained”.
as Mossop J notes (at [89]), another matter which will be relevant to the
assessment is the prevalence of the illegality or impropriety in question: see
Director of Public Prosecutions v Marijancevic; Director of Public
Prosecutions v Preece
[2011] VSCA 355
; 33 VR 440 at
. In its interim
report, the ALRC envisaged that, in determining whether to admit the evidence,
the court would consider whether the
breach is an “example of a wider
pattern of misconduct”: Australian Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 26, vol 1, 1985) at [964]; see also Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
(Report No 102, December 2005) at
[16.84]. As Mossop J observes (at [89]), any such “pattern of
misconduct” will necessarily
encompass instances of illegality or improper
conduct which predate and/or postdate the contravention that resulted in the
“obtaining”
of the evidence. This too, points against a narrow
temporal construction of
recognition that
was intended to permit consideration of the prevalence of
the illegal or improper conduct potentially explains part of the curious
phrasing of
Specifically, as the Victorian Court of Appeal in
observed (at [55] – [56]):
The public policy which is advanced when evidence is excluded under
not merely the public interest in excluding the specific evidence obtained by or
in consequence of the relevant impropriety
or contravention. It is the public
interest in not admitting any evidence obtained in the relevant way. In other
words, the section
looks not only at what was done in the instant case, but at
the undesirability of the same thing being done in other cases.
For that reason, if an attempt is made to conceal the impropriety or
contravention, or its consequences, from a court seeking to
the purposes of the provision is apt to be undermined. Accordingly, such an
attempt is a matter that may potentially be relevant
to the balancing exercise
s 138(3)...
other words, the structure and phrasing of
was not intended to
the matters which may be considered in determining the
“undesirability” of admitting the evidence; rather, the structure
and phrasing of
was intended to
the matters which may be
considered in assessing “undesirability” to include the
undesirability of not admitting any
evidence that has been obtained (in the
instant case or other cases) in the relevant way.
wide construction of the “undesirability” considerations in
accords with the purpose and history of the provision.
Section 138
derived from the
Bunning v Cross
discretion, which required the court to
“balance the desirable goal of convicting wrongdoers against the
undesirable effect
of giving curial approval, or even encouragement, to the
unlawful conduct of those whose task it is to enforce the law”:
[2020] HCA 1
267 CLR 109
Bunning v Cross
[1978] HCA 22
(1978) 141 CLR 54.
In some important respects,
is broader than the
Bunning v Cross
discretion:
For example,
Bunning v Cross
discretion,
applies to civil as well as
criminal proceedings, and to illegal and improper conduct committed by civilians
as well as law enforcement
at [12] – [13]. There
is, however, no indication in any of the Australian Law Reform Commission
reports that the enactment
was intended to
the range of
considerations that were open to be considered under the
Bunning v Cross
discretion. The introductory words to
(“[w]ithout
limiting the matters that the court may take into account under subsection
(1)”) confirm this.
two considerations referred to earlier, that is the prevalence of the illegality
or impropriety, and whether action has been taken,
or will be taken, in respect
of the breach
(s 138(3)(g))
also illustrate a mechanism by which an attempted
cover up is rendered relevant to the
indicates that exclusion of evidence may not be required where other
proceedings have been or are likely to be taken in respect of
the contravention.
This is because the other proceedings may meet the need for deterrence or
denunciation of the breach, and thus
satisfy (or largely satisfy) the purpose of
exclusion. For similar reasons, the “undesirability” of admitting
may be reduced where there has been individual and/or institutional
ownership of the breach, particularly where proactive changes
have been made to
ensure that such breaches are not repeated in the future.
attempted cover up of a breach is the exact opposite of these scenarios. Where,
as here, a law enforcement official endeavours
to cover up their illegal or
improper conduct, the contravention is not addressed, and the officer’s
illegal or improper conduct
is compounded by the attempt of police to cover up
the wrongdoing. In these circumstances, the need to denounce and deter the
conduct may be considerably heightened. That is, just as a relatively
minor contravention may require exclusion of evidence if the
contravention is
“widespread or entrenched” (
Marijancevic
at [65]), a
relatively minor contravention may also require exclusion where the response to
the contravention is not to own and address,
but to attempt to obfuscate.
mechanism remains focussed on the illegality or impropriety which
‘triggered’ the operation of
here, the examination of the
computer outside of the statutory time period. The cover up merely affects the
weight to be given to
that contravention.
Alternatively,
it could also be said that an attempted cover up of illegality or impropriety is
so intrinsically linked to the illegality
or impropriety as to properly
constitute part of the “way in which the evidence was obtained” in
may be particular force in this argument in a case such as the present. In the
present case, Detective Knight was made aware
that the 30 day period had expired
the HP laptop computer was examined. He did not correct the
technician’s erroneous belief that an extension had been obtained,
instead misled the technician into believing that the time limit did not apply
(he directed the technician that he believed that
seizure could occur “due
to how the investigation had progressed”). In these circumstances, where
the roots of the attempted
cover up lay in the contravention itself, it may be
said that the cover up is ‘part and parcel’ of the contravention,
such that the attempted cover up cannot be excised from the illegality which
may also provide some support for this approach. Attempts by
law enforcement officials to cover up illegal or improper conduct have
capacity to undermine the efficacy of
Where a cover up is not discovered,
illegality or improper conduct by law enforcement officials cannot be addressed
by the procedure
established under
For this reason, there may be as
strong an interest in deterring cover ups of illegal conduct, as there is in
deterring the illegal
conduct itself.
difference between the approaches to
outlined above (that, is an approach
which focusses on the illegality or impropriety which triggers the provision;
and one which
has an expanded focus which includes a subsequent cover up of an
illegality) is not merely of theoretical interest. Under the focussed
the interest in deterring and denouncing unlawful conduct is limited to the
particular conduct that triggered the operation
(here, the examination
of the HP laptop computer outside of the 30 day period). Under the expanded
approach, it would be open to
the court to also take into account any need to
deter and/or denounce the attempted cover up in deciding whether to admit the
Nonetheless,
I do not consider it necessary to resolve whether the expanded approach is
permissible under
For the reasons outlined below, it suffices for me to
conclude that, at a minimum, evidence of an attempted cover up may be considered
balance in the way permitted by the focussed approach. In
circumstances where these issues of construction were not addressed by
parties on the appeal, I do not consider it appropriate to comment further on
the availability of the expanded approach.
The weight to be given to the attempted cover up in the present
Knight gave evidence that he had been advised that the examination of the laptop
had occurred within the time permitted
This evidence was contradicted by contemporaneous emails sent by Senior
Constable Smyth, which demonstrated that Detective Knight
had been informed that
the examination had not proceeded within the
time limit. The brief of
evidence that was prepared by Detective Knight made no reference to the
contravention of
. Detective Knight also
redacted an entry in his notebook relating to the seizure of the HP laptop, in
an apparent attempt to ensure
that the appellants would not become aware of the
contravention. As has already been noted, the Director did not challenge the
magistrate’s
finding that Detective Knight had attempted to engage in a
deliberate cover up of the
breach. Rather, in her written and oral
submissions, counsel for the Director acknowledged that the magistrate was
highly critical of the [Detective Knight’s] conduct
towards the HP laptop”.
Director contended that the primary judge had erred in concluding that the
magistrate had failed to take into account the attempted
cover up. I
agree with this submission. As noted at [155]
para above, the
magistrate expressly referred to the attempted cover up in his decision. On a
fair reading of the reasons, it is clear
that his Honour took this matter into
account, but determined that, in view of its probative value and importance, the
evidence obtained
from the HP laptop computer should be admitted. Accordingly, I
do not consider that
House v The King
error was established.
as outlined above, this appeal is to be conducted on the correctness standard.
Whilst it is true that this form of rehearing
remains a “process for the
correction of error” (
Alexander v Bakes
at [22]), such error will
be shown where the appellate court reaches a different conclusion to that which
has been reached by the
first instance decision maker. So much is clear from the
High Court’s decision in
Warren v Coombs
[1979] HCA 9
at 552, in which their Honours held that where the correctness
standard applies:
The duty of the appellate court is to decide the case - the facts as well as the
law - for itself. In so doing it must recognize
the advantages enjoyed by the
judge who conducted the trial. But if the judges of appeal consider that in the
circumstances the trial
judge was in no better position to decide the particular
question than they are themselves, or if, after giving full weight to his
decision, they consider that it was wrong, they must discharge their duty and
give effect to their own judgment.
magistrate did not have any real advantage over the primary judge, or this
Court, in determining the admissibility of the HP laptop
computer. There is, and
was, no dispute that Detective Knight deliberately attempted to cover up the
contravention of
. This Court must determine for
itself the weight to be given to this matter in determining where the s 138
balance lies.
evidence obtained from the HP laptop computer was of high probative value and
was important in the prosecution case. The offences
charged concerned grave
criminal conduct, which constituted a significant breach of the privacy of the
complainants and, no doubt
caused each of them significant emotional distress.
The contravention which enlivened the operation of s 138(1), although “at
least reckless”, involved the examination of the computer within days of
the time limit imposed by law.
the attempt by Detective Knight to cover up the contravention must also be taken
into account. To adopt Mossop J’s
analysis (at [93]), Detective
Knight’s attempted cover up is “reflective of an inappropriate
attitude to the rule of
law and the rights of an accused” which heightens
the need deter future contraventions of
Taking this matter into account, I consider that the evidence obtained from the
HP laptop computer must be excluded under s 138,
even though that evidence may
well have been admitted if Detective Knight had frankly disclosed the breach of
to the appellants and to the Court in the
proceedings at first instance.
Accordingly,
the primary judge correctly concluded that the evidence obtained from the HP
laptop computer should be excluded and that
the magistrate erred in concluding
otherwise. It follows that the Director’s cross-appeal should also be
the reasons outlined above, both the appeal and the cross-appeal should be
I certify that the preceding two hundred and forty one [241] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Court of Appeal
Associate: Hayden Clift
Date: 28 February 2025
Alex Fletcher and Dale
Fletcher are referred to collectively in this judgment as “the
appellants”. For clarity, their
first names and surnames will be used when
they are referred to individually.
The relevant provisions of the
have been amended since the decision in
, however, not in a way which appears to impact upon his
observations.
RTF format (673 KB)
Signed PDF/A format