BO and ACT Ombudsman [2021] ACTOFOI 17 (6 December 2021)
and ACT Ombudsman
(6 December 2021)
and reasons
for decision of Acting Deputy Ombudsman, Louise Macleod
Application Number
AFOI-RR/21/10030
Decision Reference
[2021] ACTOFOI 17
ACT Ombudsman
Decision Date
Freedom of Information Act 2016
(ACT) – deciding access
– whether disclosure of information is contrary to the public interest
– information in
possession of Ombudsman –
Ombudsman Act 1989
1. For the purposes of
Freedom of Information Act 2016
), I am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman.
2. Under s 82(2)(a) of the FOI Act, I
the decision of the ACT
Ombudsman, dated 28 September 2021.
Background of Ombudsman review
3. On 14 September 2021, the applicant applied to the ACT Ombudsman
(respondent) for access to the following information:
‘...I would like to request two reports regarding myself [name
withheld] ... , under the FOI Act. The reports were written by
[name withheld]
of [organisation withheld], working out of the ACT Together consortium
investigating reportable conduct allegations.
I was told by [name withheld] that
these final reportable conduct reports were provided to the Ombudsman’s
The first report was finalised around the end of November 2020.
The second report was finalised around the start of February
4. On 28 September 2021, the respondent advised it identified 2 documents as
falling within the scope of the access application and
decided to refuse access
in full to both documents.
5. In making its decision, the respondent relied on Schedule 1, s
1.12(c) of the FOI Act.
6. On 2 November 2021, the applicant sought Ombudsman review of the
respondent’s decision under s 73 of the FOI Act.
7. On 18 November 2021, I provided my preliminary views about the
respondent’s decision to the parties in a draft consideration.
8. On 22 November 2021, the respondent advised they accepted my draft
consideration and had no further submissions.
9. The applicant did not provide any further submissions
Information at issue
10. The information at issue in this Ombudsman review are the two documents
the ACT Ombudsman refused access to.
11. The issue to be decided in this Ombudsman review is whether giving the
applicant access to the information at issue would be contrary
to the public
12. In making my draft consideration, I considered:
applicant’s access application and review application
respondent’s decision
the FOI Act, in
particular Schedule 1, s 1.12(c)
(Ombudsman Act)
respondent’s FOI processing file relating to the access application
an unedited copy
of the information at issue.
Relevant law
13. The FOI Act provides every person with an enforceable right of access to
government information. This right is subject to other
provisions of the FOI
Act, including grounds on which access may be
14. Contrary to the public interest information
is defined in s 16 of the FOI Act as:
information—
(a) that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
schedule 1; or
(b) the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
interest under the test set out in section 17.
15. Section
35(1)(c) of the FOI Act provides that an access application may be decided by
refusing to give access to the information
sought because the information being
sought is contrary to the public interest information.
16. Section 50 of the FOI Act applies if an access application is made for
government information in a record containing contrary
to the public interest
information and it is practicable to give access to a copy of the record from
which contrary to the public
interest information was deleted.
17. The FOI Act provides that a party seeking to prevent disclosure of
government information bears the onus of establishing the information
contrary to the public interest
information
18. Schedule 1 of the FOI Act sets out categories of information that is
taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose.
The contentions of the parties
19. In its decision notice, the respondent said:
Schedule 1 section 1.12(c) provides that information in the possession of the
Ombudsman that has been obtained or generated in relation
to a function
exercised under the
Ombudsman Act 1989
, division 2.2A (Reportable
conduct) is information the disclosure of which is taken to be contrary to the
public interest.
All of the information falling within the scope of your access application is
information which was obtained or generated in relation
to a function exercised
by the Ombudsman under division 2.2A of the
Ombudsman Act 1989
application for Ombudsman review, the applicant said:
...Schedule 1.12 does not explain anything other than to say that you were
provided with information about me in relation to the reportable
investigation. I am asking for that information about myself, nobody else, so I
fail to see how this applies to me.
I need copies of the reports I have requested access to in order to challenge
reportable conduct
allegations which have been substantiated. These substantiations have smeared
my name and made
it difficult to regain my WWVP registration, which affects my ability to work
and to volunteer. I was
unable to provide definitive proof that these reports never occurred, though
I did submit a lot of
information supporting the fact that the allegations were false. I have been
provided with a final
finding on the reportable conduct investigation, but the documented findings
do not reflect the
information that the investigator told me was included in the report. In
order to appropriately refute
the substantiations, I need to know what was included in the report presented
to the Ombudsman.
.. Additionally, the report is about me and I have the right to know what is
contained therein. I also have the right to challenge
the finding as I am
innocent of these substantiations.
21. These submissions are discussed in more detail below.
Considerations
22. I carefully considered an unedited copy of the information at issue
together with the information provided by the applicant and
respondent.
Information that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to
disclose under Schedule 1
23. Schedule 1, section 1.12(c) provides that information in the possession
of the Ombudsman that was obtained or generated in relation
to a function
exercised under division 2.2A (Reportable Conduct) of the
Ombudsman Act
information the disclosure of which is taken to be contrary to the public
24. Under Schedule 1 of the FOI Act, information is taken to be contrary to
the public interest unless the information identifies
corruption or the
commission of an offence by a public official or the scope of a law enforcement
investigation exceeds the limits
imposed by law.
25. The applicant alleges the exceptions outlined above are relevant on the
basis there has been corruption in a reportable conduct
investigation to which
the documents at issue relate. The applicant states:
The investigator used a CYPS appraisal report to determine the findings,
though the two processes are purportedly independent and
separate. Also, the
child at the heart of these allegations is returning to my care, as [named
employee] of the CSD has made the
decision that it is in his best
26. I reviewed the information at issue, and I am satisfied it does not fall
under the exceptions outlined in Schedule 1. The applicant
did not provide
sufficient information to determine that corruption took place in the reportable
conduct investigation or subsequent
reports. Based on the information before me,
I am satisfied the information at issue does not identify corruption, an
offence, or
misuse of power in a law enforcement investigation. As a result,
provisions of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act may be relevant to the information
issue. Consequently, I will now proceed to consider whether the information at
issue is contrary to the public interest information
to disclose under Schedule
1 of the FOI Act.
27. After reviewing a copy of the un-redacted material, I agree with the
respondent that the entirety of the information in both documents
is information
that was obtained or generated in relation to a function exercised by the
Ombudsman under division 2.2A of the
Ombudsman Act
. The applicant’s claim
that the documents contain personal information about them has no bearing on the
applicability of Schedule
1, s 1.12(c) of the FOI Act. For this reason, I am
satisfied the information at issue is contrary the public interest information
under Schedule 1, s 1.12(c) of the FOI Act and should not be disclosed.
28. Under s 82(2)(a), I confirm the respondent’s decision to refuse
access to the information at issue under s 35(1)(c) of the
Louise Macleod
Acting Deputy Ombudsman
Section 7 of the FOI
Section 72 of the FOI Act.
RTF format (868 KB)
Signed PDF/A format