Convine v Hogg & Gloster [2008] ACTRTT 10 (14 August 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: CONVINE –V- HOGG & GLOSTER
[2008] ACTRTT 10
(14 August 2008)
Catchwords:
Bond Dispute
Legislation:
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
Tribunal: J.A. David,
August 2008
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT
RE: John CONVINE
Justin HOGG & Katrina GLOSTER
Tribunal : J.A. David
the Office of Rental Bonds to release
to the lessor and the
balance to the tenants, Justin Hogg and Katrina Gloster in equal shares.
..................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT
John CONVINE
AND: Justin HOGG & Katrina GLOSTER
REASONS FOR DECISION
J.E. David, Member
29 January 2008 the Office of Regulatory Services referred a rental bond dispute
between the above parties. in relation to the
premises at 18/2 Postle Circuit,
Holt in the ACT, to the Tribunal. The matter came for hearing on 20 March 2008.
The Tribunal ordered
that the Office of Rental Bonds release $65 of the balance
of the bond to the lessor and the remaining balance to the tenants in
14 July 2008, the lessor wrote to the Tribunal requesting details “as to
how the final figure was calculated”, particularly
in relation to
“the amount that was deducted from the weekly rent and the total deducted
in relation to uneven paving surfaces”.
The lessor requested the
information in order to make a claim against the Body Corporate for
“delays and inaction in repairing
the damage caused by trees”.
the hearing the parties agreed that the lease was for a fixed term of 12 months
commencing on 8 September 2006 and that the tenants
vacated on 2 November 2007
after the lessor gave verbal notice to vacate as he was urgently selling the
lessor stated that after the tenants moved out he found they had left furniture
in the premises (such as a fridge, washing machine
and dryer) which the lessor
moved from the premises after the lease expired. Also, the lessor had the
carpets cleaned and repaired
the vertical blinds. The lessor claimed the
Internal clean
Spray weeds $
Weed garden
Internal door
damage $ 54
rent until goods removed $245
Move goods out
batteries at tip $ 20
Repair vertical
blinds $ 12
Time to find
supplier and pick up $ 24
Carpet cleaning
– balance owing $ 22
relation to the claimed amounts, the Lessor produced receipts for the internal
door damage ($54), the carpet cleaning ($132), and
for one vertical blind blade
tenants had agreed to pay one week’s rent of $245.00 to enable them to
carry out the cleaning and removal of their remaining
possessions. The tenants
had refused to pay for the cleaning and carpet cleaning on the basis that the
tenants had organised for
the father of one of them, a professional cleaner, to
carry out the cleaning including the carpets and had requested the further
for that to be carried out. The tenants stated the lessor organised the carpet
cleaning during the further week without their
agreement and only gave them
over-night notice that he was doing so. The tenants said that they had been
unable to clean prior
to moving out as the lessor had started the painting and
repairs to the inside of the premises which made it impossible for them
remain living in the premises for as long as they had organised.
in a Statutory Declaration by Ms Kirstie Waltman, sister of one of the tenants,
she stated that “the gardens were over
grown and the pavement front and
back were unweeded.” The family weeded the gardens and pavements.
“Although there
was no weeding done when [the tenants] moved out of the
property, the gardens and pavement were in better condition from when they
all the above into consideration, the Tribunal determined that the tenants
should not pay for the cleaning or carpet cleaning,
weeding or spraying of
weeds. As the tenants had already paid $112 to the lessor towards the cleaning
costs, the Tribunal ordered
that the lessor repay this amount to the tenants.
Also, the Tribunal determined that the tenants should not pay for rent for the
further week’s rent on the basis the further week was sought to enable the
tenants to have the premises cleaned and their remaining
goods removed. The
lessor’s actions made this impossible and breached that verbal agreement.
tenants said that they wrote to the lessor on 4 March 2007 requesting he carry
out necessary repairs to the premises, including
to the backyard fence and
pavement. In the notice, the tenants stated that the pavement was so uneven
that a visitor to the premises
had sprained her ankle in an injury caused by the
unevenness. The tenants also raised the need for repairs to the back sliding
for a pest eradication, and to the vertical blinds “with little
white ties” that “are starting to give way”.
The tenants
sought a rental reduction if they undertook the repairs. Apparently, the lessor
did not answer the letter.
Condition of Premises Report dated 9 September 2006, signed by both the lessor
and the tenants, noted that the rear paving was
“to be repaired” and
that the side gate needed fixing. Despite the Condition Report and the
tenant’s letter
of 4 March 2007, these repairs were not carried out during
the term of the tenancy. The tenants sought a rental reduction under
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
(the Act) due to the loss of
amenity they experienced due to the non-repair. This application was made on
the basis that the tenants
experienced a loss of amenity from the time the
tenancy commenced to the date of vacation.
of the Act, the Tribunal has the power to order a reduction in the
rent payable under a residential tenancy agreement where the tenant's
enjoyment of the premises has diminished significantly as a result of the
lessor’s failure to make repairs. . In
Peters v Commissioner for
Housing for the ACT
[ACTRTT6 [2006] the tribunal held that it had
the ability to impose a rent reduction which spans the entire period of the
from the lessor's initial failure to make repairs (or withdrawal of
facilities) until the lessor has fully discharged (or met) his/her
obligations.
In this matter, the breach spanned the entire period of the tenancy as the
Condition of Premises Report dated 9 September
2006 noted that the paving was to
the lessor seriously breached his obligation to repair, the Tribunal ordered a
rental reduction of $456 (56 weeks at $8.12 per
week rounded up) under
for the repairs the lessor failed to carry out during the entire period of
the tenancy. Of that amount $6.00 per week is for the
non-repair of the paving,
and $2.12 for the non-repair of the back door, the lack of pest eradication and
the blinds “with
the little white ties”. Whilst the Tribunal
sympathises with the lessor who stated he had requested the Body Corporate to
carry out the repairs to the paving, under the Act, it is the lessor who has the
obligation to carry out repairs to the premises
and the lessor who suffers the
rental reduction if the repairs are not undertaken.
the circumstances the Tribunal determined that the tenants were to pay the
lessor the total sum of $65, made up of $54 for repairs
to the internal door and
a further $11 towards the repair of the vertical blind. The Tribunal ordered
that amount of the bond still
held by the Office of Rental Bonds be released to
the lessor and the balance be released to the tenants in equal shares.
the Office of Rental Bonds to release $65 to the lessor and the balance to the
tenants Justin Hogg and Katrina Gloster in equal
Jennifer David
August 2008
RTF format (56.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format