Knowles v McGrory [2025] ACTMC 11 (21 May 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Knowles v McGrory
[2025] ACTMC 11
Hearing Dates:
27 February 2025 and 21 May 2025
Magistrate Theakston
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– Road Transport Legislation – Drive whilst
suspended – Whether s 72 evidentiary certificate admissible –
Whether breach of legislative conditions invalidates driver licence suspension
– no evidence to answer submission
Legislation Cited:
Road Transport (General) Act 1999
Road Transport (Offences) Regulation 2005
Road Transport (Safety and Traffic Management) Act 1999
Public Sector Management Act 1994
Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
Legislation Act 2001
Administrative Arrangements 2017 (No 1)
Road Transport (Driver Licensing) Act 1999
Human Rights Act 2004
Cases Cited:
Police v Candy
[2025] ACTMC 5
Stone v French
[2013] ACTMC 4
O’Reilly v State Bank of Victoria
Commissioners
Cassell v R
[2000] HCA 8
Hijazi v Orr
(1997) 26 MVR 266
(1997) 98 A Crim R 408
SAS Trustee Corporation v Miles
[2018] HCA 55
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
Mirko Bagaric,
Ross on Crime
(Thomson Reuters, 9
Ashley Knowles (Informant)
Rodney McGrory (Defendant)
Representation:
R Mackenzie – ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Informant)
Legal Aid ACT
(Defendant)
Charge Number:
CC2024/1484
Introduction
today I found the defendant had no case to answer in relation to a charge and
dismissed the same. These are my reasons.
defendant was before the Court for the hearing of several charges. Relevantly,
he was charged with the offence of driving while
his driver licence was
suspended, contrary to s 32(2)(a) of the
Road Transport (Driver Licencing)
. He pleaded not guilty to that charge.
prosecution case was that in 2023 he was pulled over by police and observed to
have been driving while his driver licence had
been suspended. There was no
issue that he was driving a registrable vehicle on a road at the relevant time.
The defendant took
issue with the certificate tendered to prove the suspension,
submitting that:
(a) the certificate was invalid and therefore should not be admitted into
evidence, and
(b) in any event, the purported suspension was invalid and of no effect.
these proceedings, as in all criminal proceedings, the onus of proof is on the
prosecution, and they are required to prove each
element of an offence beyond
reasonable doubt. Proof is based on the evidence before the court.
the end of the prosecution case and before a defendant decides whether to
present their own case, the defendant may make a no case
to answer submission.
The test to be considered in those circumstances is whether, based on the
evidence before the court, whether
the defendant could lawfully be found guilty:
see for example,
(1997) 98 A Crim R 408
at 416. Put another
way, and as summarised in
Ross on Crime
ed, 2022) at
The test to be applied is whether there is evidence which, if accepted would
provide evidence of each element of the charge. Even
if there is such evidence,
it may be so lacking in weight or reliability that it is open to the court, as a
matter of discretion,
to dismiss the information.
the present case, the only evidence of the suspension was in the form of a
certificate. Obviously, if that certificate was inadmissible,
or the suspension
found to be invalid, then that test would fail, and I would be required to find
the defendant not guilty and dismiss
the charge.
Certificate
defendant objected to the admissibility into evidence of a certificate
purportedly made in accordance with
Road Transport (General) Act
. That certificate was relied on to prove that the defendant’s
driver licence was suspended at the relevant time. The objection
was based upon
the reasoning adopted in
Police v Candy
[2025] ACTMC 5.
As I understand
it, that reasoning did not involve any suggested inadequacy in the form or
content of the notice, but rather whether
the author of the certificate was
authorised to issuing the same. It concluded that the author was not, and the
notice was therefore
invalid and inadmissible. That determination involved a
consideration of various documents that devolved authority and various statutory
provisions. The certificate in that judgment was purported issued under a
similar, but different provision, namely
Road Transport
(Safety and Traffic Management) Act 1999
have concluded that the
notice in this matter is admissible. I have done
so principally due to the construction of that provision which, in my view, does
not require me to go behind an appropriately presented certificate to consider
the authority of the author to issue the same. This
feature does not appear to
have been argued or considered in
. This convenience, about readily
accepting the admissibility of the certificate, does not in any way detract from
a defendant’s
ability to challenge the matters contained within a
certificate by pointing to and or presenting other evidence that raises a doubt
devolution of authority within government is notoriously unclear. This is
demonstrated by the complexity of the discussions in
legislative provisions are impractically precise and utilise different methods
to devolve power, for example delegations
of powers or the appointment of
‘authorised persons’ who may then exercise powers defined by statue.
Sometimes, both
mechanisms are utilised in series. Those arrangements also
change over time, with instruments being amended, revoked or substituted.
Additionally, the powers may be simultaneously devolved by different principals
to various individuals or positions. Those devolutions
often exist within
complex government structures, which themselves involve uncertainty, including
inconsistent titles and terminology,
and which invariably change and evolve over
time. Individuals come and go, make act in more than one capacity and, at
be required to act in positions or on behalf of others. A
determination that a particular person had a power to exercise a particular
devolved power at a particular time is not necessarily a simple inquiry.
response to that challenge, the common law has developed a range of principles,
including the
principle and the de facto officer doctrine; the
former which provides that a principal may act through staff when
administratively
necessary, and the latter which may validate the acts of an
officer ineffectively appointed: See
O’Reilly v State Bank of
Commissioners
[1983] HCA 47
and the minority judgment
of Kirby J in
Cassell v R
[2000] HCA 8
. Modern statutory
provisions echo, in part, those principles, (see for example
Public Sector Management Act 1994
Transport (General) Act 1999
Australian Capital
Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
(Cth)). Modern provisions also provide
presumptions that statutory instruments are valid (see for example
Legislation Act 2001
); and permit Ministers to sign instruments on behalf
of another Ministers (see for example
Legislation Act 2001
Additionally, instruments themselves may contain provisions intended to provide
flexibility (see for example article 5 of the
Administrative Arrangements
2017 (No 1)
, which provided that Ministers were authorised to act on behalf
of other Ministers).
Road Transport (General) Act 1999
states relevantly:
Certificate
evidence and other evidentiary provisions
certificate that appears to be signed by or on behalf of the road transport
authority ... and states any of the following matters,
is evidence of:
(a) a matter that appears in or can be worked out from the demerit points
register or driver licence register kept under the
Road Transport (Driver
Licensing) Act 1999
(7) A court must accept a certificate or other document mentioned in this
section as proof of the matters stated in it if there is
no evidence to the
Certificates,
such as this, have been described as providing prima facie evidence of the facts
stated, that such evidence has no inherent
weight, and it remains necessary for
the court to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the offence has been
Hijazi v Orr
(1997) 26 MVR 266
Accordingly, it is
open to the defendant to present and or point to other evidence that supports an
alternative finding or at the
very least creates a reasonable doubt about the
facts described in a certificate.
opportunity to challenge the matters described within a certificate should not
be confused with any challenge to the provenance
or validity of the certificate.
The latter does not appear available when the certificate, on its face,
satisfies the requirements
of the provision.
High Court, in in
SAS Trustee Corporation v Miles
[2018] HCA 55
(the judgment of Kiefel CJ, Bell and Nettle JJ) observed that ‘the
starting point for ascertainment the meaning of a
statutory provision is, of
course, the text of the provision considered in light of its context and
purpose.’ That principle
is echoed in
Legislation Act 2001
. Earlier, the High Court observed in
Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
‘a court construing a statutory provision must strive to give meaning to
every word of the provision.’ Additionally,
Territory legislation must
also be interpreted, so far as is possible, in a way that is compatible with the
rights described in the
Human Rights Act 2004
72 does not expressly require a certificate to be valid. Instead, the ordinary
meaning of the text requires that the certificate
only appears to be signed by
or on behalf of the Road Transport Authority and state relevant matters. The
natural and ordinary meaning
of that language is not ambiguous.
word ‘appears’ would do no work and have no meaning if the provision
was construed to require the certificate to have
been, as a matter of fact,
signed by the Road Transport Authority or someone authorised to do so on the
authority’s behalf.
above construction is consistent with the obvious purpose and context of the
provision and Act. In particular, the provision’s
purpose is obviously to
streamline the proof of technical and ordinarily non-controversial facts; and
more generally, the purpose
of the Act is the administration and enforcement of
the Road Transport Legislation:
Road Transport (General) Act
. The provision exists along with a range of other provisions,
described above, that provide flexibility for the devolution of statutory
authority. Further, the defendant retained the opportunity to challenge the
actual contents of the certificate. The convenience
provided by these
certificates is in the context of the court hearing very minor offences where
any engagement with the question
signed may trigger an inquiry unacceptably disproportionate in scale.
Accordingly, I see
no ambiguity in the ordinary meaning of the provision or any
inconsistency between that construction and the purpose and of the Act
legislative context.
in the circumstances where a defendant retains the opportunity to present and or
point to other evidence which may create
a reasonable doubt about the contents
of the certificate, including compelling the production of records from the Road
Authority, the above construction appears consistent with the human
rights of a fair trial and rights in criminal proceedings described
Human Rights Act 2004
Accordingly,
the s 72 certificate was admitted into evidence.
Validity of the
certificate
Road Transport (General) Act 1999
requires, amongst other
things, a suspension notice be sent to the defendant before any suspension.
Such a notice must state, amongst
other things, any information prescribed by
regulations. Regulation 16J of the
Road Transport (Offence) Regulations 2005
requires the notice to include a statement that ‘any suspension action
... continues until the suspension is revoked under the
Act, part 3’. In
the present case a copy of this suspension notice was attached to the
certificate admitted into evidence.
It did not make a reference to part 3 of
the Act. Instead, it referred only to s 47 of the Act. While s 47 is in part
is also in that part and provides a separate mechanism for the
revocation of a suspension. The defendant submitted that as this
requirement
had not been met, the suspension was invalid and without effect.
High Court, in
Project Blue Sky
, at [91] described how failure to comply
with such requirements may affect the validity of a statutory power, and at [93]
considered to be the better test:
91. An act done in breach of a condition regulating the exercise of a statutory
power is not necessarily invalid and of no effect.
Whether it is depends upon
whether there can be discerned a legislative purpose to invalidate any act that
fails to comply with the
condition. The existence of the purpose is ascertained
by reference to the language of the statute, its subject matter and objects,
the consequences for the parties of holding void every act done in breach of the
condition. Unfortunately, a finding of purpose
or no purpose in this context
often reflects a contestable judgment. The cases show various factors that have
proved decisive in
various contexts, but they do no more than provide guidance
in analogous circumstances. There is no decisive rule that can be applied;
is not even a ranking of relevant factors or categories to give guidance on the
93. ... A better test for determining the issue of validity is to ask whether
it was a purpose of the legislation that an act done
in breach of the provision
should be invalid. This has been the preferred approach of courts in this
country in recent years, particularly
in New South Wales. In determining the
question of purpose, regard must be had to "the language of the relevant
provision and the
scope and object of the whole statute". (Footnotes omitted)
this case the requirement was obviously for the purpose of putting the recipient
of a suspension notice on notice about what he
or she could do before a
suspension to avoid that suspension and what he or she could do after the
suspension to have the suspension
revoked. The incorrect reference effectively
deprived the reader of notice of any information pointing to the mechanism
by s 47A that the suspension may be revoked if the defendant once again
adhered to the infringement notice management plan. That
failure, within a
scheme designed to provide a recipient with every opportunity to avoid a
suspension, is of significant consequence
and, to my mind, elevates the failure
to one which the purpose of the legislation would render the suspension
Accordingly,
I found the subsequent suspension invalid and without effect and therefore,
there was no evidence that the defendant
was suspended at the relevant
Court ordered: In relation to CC2024/1484, the defendant is not guilty of the
charge, and that charge is dismissed.
I certify that the preceding twenty-four [24] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Decision of his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Marcus Malouf
Date: 22 May 2025
RTF format (233 KB)
Signed PDF/A format