Inquest into the death of Catherine Maree Broadbent [2024] ACTCD 1 (17 June 2024)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Matter Title:
Inquest into the death of Catherine Maree Broadbent
[2024] ACTCD 1
Decision Date:
Coroner Archer
See [46]–[49], [50]–[62]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– mental health – death by suicide –
multiple drug toxicity – coronial proceedings – impact of delay
– Multi-Agency Response Guide – intermediate residential services
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
Cases Cited:
Inquest into the deaths of Bearham & Ors
[2021] ACTCD 1
Counsel Assisting:
File Number:
CD 233 of 2018
CORONER ARCHER:
Catherine Maree Broadbent died between 17 and 18 September 2018. She was 39
years old at the time of her death. I respectfully
refer to Ms Broadbent as
“Cathy” in these findings. Professor Johan Duflou, forensic
pathologist, found that the cause
of Cathy’s death was multiple drug
toxicity. Toxicological testing revealed the presence of multiple psychoactive
medications,
which, in combination, resulted in death, with Etizolam and
Carisoprodol being the major components. As I address below, I find that
intentionally took her own life.
death was reported to the Coroner as “violent” or
“unnatural” for the purposes of
Coroners Act
(ACT) (“the Act”).
assumed jurisdiction in relation to Cathy’s death, I was required to hold
into the manner and
cause of her death, and make the findings required by
of the Act. That
section of the Act relevantly provides:
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find,
if possible—
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the person has
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
(i) state whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection with
the inquest or inquiry; and
(ii) if a matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the matter
Section 34A
arriving at the findings I am required to make, I have a discretion as to
whether a hearing should be conducted
of the Act). I can dispense with a
hearing in the circumstances and according to the processes set out in
34A Decision not to conduct hearing
(1) A coroner may decide not to conduct a
hearing into a death if, after consideration of information given to a coroner
to the death of a person, the coroner is satisfied that—
(a) the manner and cause of death are sufficiently disclosed; and
(b) a hearing is unnecessary.
(2) A coroner must not dispense with a hearing into a death of a person, if
the coroner has reasonable grounds for believing the death
in care or death
in custody.
(3) A coroner who decides not to conduct a
hearing into a death must give to the Chief Coroner and a member of the
immediate family
of the deceased written notice of the decision including the
grounds for the decision.
the circumstances that are outlined below, I reached the view that a hearing
into Cathy’s death was not required in order
for me to make the findings
required by
I therefore dispensed with a hearing. In accordance with
(3) of the Act, I gave written notice of my decision not to conduct a hearing to
Cathy’s friends, Katherine Crawford and James
Collier, whose interest in
the matter is discussed below.
full coronial brief was not prepared. The information that is relied upon in
making these findings emerged from the extensive records
subpoenaed from ACT
Health Services, and the information provided by Cathy’s
hearing was convened, and appearances from those claiming to have a sufficient
interest were not sought. I acknowledge the obvious
role that the
Territory’s agencies had in providing Cathy’s care. Throughout the
inquest, two of Cathy’s friends
were remarkable in their advocacy for
Cathy. Katherine Crawford had become friends with Cathy in 2003, and I accept
that they considered
themselves to be sisters. James Collier was a friend of
Katherine, and through that friendship, he met Cathy in 2011. In a health
James faced many of the challenges that confronted Cathy, and offered insights
into the issues I address in my reasons from
his personal experiences.
shall, with respect, refer to them as Katherine and James.
Procedural History
(a) The Delay
the Court has conceded in correspondence with Cathy’s friends, the history
of the inquest has been very unfortunate. The
disposition of Cathy’s
inquest was deferred, pending the outcome of a series of inquests that dealt
with the suicide of inpatients
at The Canberra Hospital (“TCH”).
Those deaths occurred between January 2015 and December 2016, and were dealt
with together,
as they aggregated issues concerning the treatment of mentally
ill people at TCH. Findings in relation to those deaths were handed
Coroner Margaret Hunter on 4 March
matter was not advanced in any meaningful way before and after that hearing took
place. In March 2022, I assumed the
role of what was called the “dedicated
coroner”, and sought to address a substantial backlog of cases, including
30 matters that involved deaths that occurred before Cathy died. I can
offer no reasonable explanation as to why such a situation
was permitted.
delay in progressing Cathy’s inquest has had a number of consequences. At
the first instance, it has caused distress to
those who have waited for so many
years for the process to be completed.
Section 3BA
of the Act requires inquests
to be carried out in way that recognises that the death of a person, and an
inquest into the person’s
death, has a significant impact on the
person’s family and friends. That statutory obligation has not been
discharged in this
case. It is appropriate that my findings record that failure,
and my apology for it. I am sorry.
my responsibility to make the findings required by
of the Act is
impacted by the passage of time. I do not have an open-ended authority to
investigate a death as if I was exercising
the powers of a royal commission. My
findings must relate to public safety issues that arise in connection with the
inquest. The
inquest is directed at establishing the manner and cause of
Cathy’s death. It is beyond my power to investigate the adequacy
complete response of public health authorities to Cathy’s mental health
issues during her adult life.
that framework, and pursuant to
of the Act, I must state whether a
matter of public safety arises. In that context, public safety has a temporal
significance. It
involves a consideration of systemic issues that might affect,
relevantly, the treatment and care of people today who suffer from
illness of the kind that afflicted Cathy. The passage of time inevitably limits
my capacity to draw parallels between Cathy’s
experiences with the mental
health system and how that system operates at the present time.
(b) Defining the Issues
my direction, the Court contacted Katherine and James in November 2022 to invite
from them submissions regarding their concerns
as to Cathy’s care. I am
aware that the request was confronting, and I acknowledge that that request, and
the Court’s
ongoing contact with them, has forced them to relive the
trauma associated with Cathy’s passing. Their response was received
August 2023. It is appropriate that I summarise the nature of those concerns,
noting the context for them is set out in the
factual findings that follow.
and James submitted that the overall management of Cathy’s mental health
care by ACT mental health services was not
appropriate. In particular, they
considered the Multi-Agency Response Guide (‘’MARG’’)
process to impose
a treatment protocol that involved the withdrawal of mental
health care and support from Cathy when she was in crisis. They submitted
Cathy also interpreted the MARG in this manner, and experienced it as a form of
punishment and abandonment from mental health
services. In their view, the MARG
was the final straw in Cathy’s deterioration and contributed to her death.
and James suggested that the treatment indicated was a lengthy involuntary
hospital admission, which would have facilitated
a period of recovery and crisis
stabilisation.
(c) The Scope of My Investigation
Court wrote to the affected parties, including the ACT Government Solicitor, on
27 September 2023. The letter had several purposes:
(a) It communicated to the affected parties my view that an examination of the
care that Cathy received in the mental health care
system would be limited to
the last two months of her life. That period was determined with regard to the
limiting factors set out
above, but also to allow the manner of her death to be
properly contextualised.
(b) Parties were given notice that the factual findings set out in the letter
were, subject to a process of submission that was invited,
likely to reflect the
findings I would make.
(c) To allow the affected parties to make submissions as to a number of issues,
(i) Whether a hearing was necessary?
findings should the Coroner make?
(iii) In respect to Cathy’s mental health care and treatment, was there a
need for some form of long-stay residential mental
health service?
(iv) What options for long-stay residential mental health facilities were
available in 2018, for which Cathy might have been a candidate?
(v) What options for long-stay residential mental health facilities are
available now?
(vi) Are there any other community-based mental health services available now to
assist those that are severely and chronically disabled
by mental illness?
(vii) Any other comments or observations regarding the analysis contained in
that letter, in respect to the MARG or the quality of
care provided to Cathy by
clinicians.
Regarding the voucher system that operated with respect to Hyson Green:
(viii) What was the purpose of that system, and how did it operate?
(ix) Does it still operate today in respect of Hyson Green and/or other mental
health facilities in delivering a similar form of
residential accommodation and
Territory responded in terms that did not meaningfully engage with the questions
and James responded and expressed their disagreement as to the conclusions set
out in the Court’s correspondence.
Consistent with their original
submissions, they reiterated their concerns with the MARG process. They
submitted that the MARG process
involved the withdrawal of engagement with
Cathy, and had effectively represented a form of cost-saving. In their view, the
pattern of treatment that was set out in the timeline of her engagements
(Annexure A) demonstrated that the MARG process was neither
safe nor effective.
That timeline also, in their submission, demonstrated that Cathy was
manipulating hospital staff when she told
them she had no suicidal plans.
– FACTUAL FINDINGS
was foreshadowed in the Court’s letter of 27 September 2023 that the
factual findings set out in the letter were those I
had provisionally made. I
had considered Katherine and James submissions before arriving at that point of
view. The findings I now
record closely reflect the provisional
Cathy’s Mental Health History
struggle with mental illness began when she was a child. A timeline of the
significant events in her life has been prepared
by Cathy herself, presumably
for clinicians, and is contained in the medical records.
is evident from that timeline, that her early childhood was marked by
significant instability and trauma. She reported her first
suicide attempt, and
the beginning of self-harming behaviour, between the age of 10 and 13. At age
15, she was placed in the foster
care system, and by age 16 or 17, she was
living alone in ACT government housing.
the time of her death, Cathy had been diagnosed with borderline personality
disorder (“BPD”), and complex post-traumatic
stress disorder
(“C-PTSD”). She was assessed by clinicians as being at a chronically
high risk of suicide. While her
mental illness was long-standing, its acuity
fluctuated. Prior to the last two years of her life, she had been significantly
functional for about a decade. A specific cause for the deterioration in
her mental health is not evident from the medical records.
mid-2016, City Mental Health (“CMH”) primarily managed Cathy’s
mental health care. Her treating team at CMH
included Ms Deidre Thompson
(“Deidre”, Clinical Manager and Social Worker), Ms Annelise
McQualter (“Annie”,
Case Manager and Clinical Psychologist) and Dr
Ingrid Butterfield (“Dr Butterfield”, Psychiatrist). Ms Christine
(General Practitioner) and Ms Christine Halsey (Public Advocate) also
provided important support to Cathy.
life had many positive aspects. Friends and clinicians involved in her care
described her as a highly intelligent individual,
who, while suffering from her
chronic illness, had obtained two university degrees, including a Bachelor of
Arts with first-class
honours. At the time of her death, she was employed by the
Commonwealth Government as a policy writer. She at once enjoyed the challenges
of her work and the company of her colleagues, whilst finding that it added to
the stresses of her life.
Mental Health Care in the Last Two
Months of Cathy’s Life
was considered by clinicians to be at a chronically high risk of suicide. The
timeline of the last couple months of her life
(Annexure A) demonstrates that
she struggled with suicidal thoughts almost daily, and frequently self-harmed by
cutting. Usually,
treatment of the resulting injuries was administered at the
Belconnen Walk-In Centre (“walk-in centre”). She also regularly
overdosed on medication, often on Carisoprodol and Alprazolam (Xanax) sourced
from the “dark web”. Overdosing on those
medications resulted in
weekly presentations to TCH, and occasionally the then-Calvary Hospital.
MARG in respect of Cathy was signed on 27 July 2018. Published governance in
respect of the MARG process refers to it in these terms:
MARGs are defined as ‘collaborative management guides for persons with a
mental illness or mental disorder, and whom, because
of their illness pose a
serious and imminent risk to themselves or others, and whom regularly come into
including emergency services’.
MARGs are designed to reduce risks to the clinically managed person by providing
coordinated and practical guidance for service providers
when interacting with
high risk clinically managed persons. The overarching aim of a MARG is to help
reduce the number and intensity
of clinically managed person’s crisis
restrictive
care practices.
signatories of the MARG included the CMH treating team and two representatives
from ACT Health. The overriding approach of the
MARG in this case reflected the
general aim of MARGs – to minimise hospitalisation and lengthy crisis
interventions, in favour
of therapeutic engagement in the community. In
accordance with that approach, the MARG contained a suggested approach for
in contact with Cathy in crisis (including TCH, Calvary, walk-in
centre, and the Crisis Assessment and Treatment Team (“CATT”))
restrict their treatment of her to physical injuries (either toxicity from
overdose or skin lacerations from cutting), and medically
clear her as soon
possible, with a plan for follow-up from the CMH team.
line with the MARG, the nature of Cathy’s hospital presentations (usually
at TCH) in the two months prior to her death were
usually voluntary, short, and
limited to medical treatment. The general course of hospital presentations
involved the treatment of
her physical injuries in the emergency department (ED)
rather than an admission to a mental health unit. Once medically cleared
on the same day or the next day), she was promptly discharged into the
community with follow-up support from CMH or CATT. The timeline
demonstrates the
frequency (sometimes back-to-back) and duration of Cathy’s hospital
presentations in the last two months of
this period, Cathy had nearly daily contact (except over weekends) with the CMH
team. She had scheduled weekly appointments
with Deidre, and fortnightly
clinical reviews with Annie and Dr Butterfield respectively. In addition to the
scheduled appointments,
the CMH team (usually Deidre) provided regular
supportive care to Cathy over the phone and in-person following crisis
presentations
at the hospital or the walk-in centre. Additionally, a voucher
system at Hyson Green was set up to allow Cathy access to 3-day in-patient
admissions twice monthly. Records indicate that the voucher system was in place
from 7 May 2018 until the time of her death. In the
two months prior to her
death, Cathy and the CMH team utilised the voucher system for short-stay
admissions on two occasions, on
6 to 8 August 2018, and on 24 to 28 August
Events Leading up to Death
(a) Last Hospital Presentation
last presentation to TCH was on 9 September 2018, being eight to nine days prior
to her death. She had presented voluntarily
on the day prior (8 September 2018),
to the Calvary’s Emergency Department following an overdose on Alprazolam,
and had been
subsequently transported to TCH on an emergency apprehension order
for management. At TCH, she was medically treated and discharged
on the same day
at 2215 hrs.
re-presented to TCH’s ED in the early hours of 9 September 2018. Records
suggest that she had overdosed again on Alprazolam.
When asked to stay in the ED
due to her being unsteady on her feet, she attempted to leave. As a result of
that, she was sedated
by clinicians, and was held under a duty of care in the
ED. A psychiatrist assessed Cathy in the ED at around midday. She was
co-operative
during that assessment, and denied having suicidal thoughts. She
agreed to call Lifeline, CATT, and CMH if needed. As per the MARG,
discharged from TCH following medical clearance at around 1329 hrs on 9
September 2018. The discharge plan was recorded
To be discharged from ED when medically cleared.
Catherine is willing to contact CATT and Lifeline if needed.
CMH follow up.
(b) City Mental Health
CMH team had consistent contact with Cathy following her discharge from TCH on 9
September 2018. Medical records show that the
CMH team had contact with Cathy
(in-person or by phone) on 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 17 September 2018.
17 September 2018, at around midday, Cathy met with her case manager, Deidre, at
the CMH office. She reported ongoing low mood
and wanting to overdose. She said
she was planning to go to work on Wednesday to Friday (18–19 September
2018), and had plans
to clean her home and do meal preparation that afternoon.
She confirmed that she was aware she had a meeting with clinical psychologist
Annie on the next day.
(c) Last Contact: Belconnen Walk-In Centre
17 September 2018, at some time prior to 1900 hrs, Cathy presented to the
walk-in centre with a laceration to her left arm, which
required eleven staples.
She denied having intention to self-harm further, reporting that she felt that
‘the pressure had passed’.
She declined to speak with CATT. Cathy
was last seen alive by Registered Nurse Stachura, as she left the walk-in centre
(d) Discovery
18 September 2018, Cathy missed a scheduled appointment at the CMH office. Annie
and Deidre, concerned about her welfare, attended
her home address at 8 / 8 Owen
Crescent, Lyneham, ACT. They entered the property at approximately 1145 hrs, and
located Cathy face-down
on her bed, unresponsive. ACT Ambulance Service
(“ACTAS”) arrived at 1200 hrs, and found no signs of life
(e) Post-mortem Examination
Peter Morrison gave directions as to the post-mortem process. At Coroner
Morrison’s direction, Professor Duflou conducted
the examination on 25
September 2018. Relevantly, his findings were:
At autopsy, there was evidence of extensive remote and more recent self-harm
with a very large number of healed, healing and more
recent incisions on the
body. These would unlikely have contributed to the death in any significant way.
Internal examination of
the body revealed no obvious pathology likely to cause
Toxicological testing revealed the presence of multiple psychoactive
medications, which likely in combination resulted in death due
to overdose, with
etizolam and carisoprodol being the major components in this case.
PART 3 - ANALYSIS OF THE QUALITY OF CARE AND TREATMENT
find that the mental health care and treatment provided to Cathy by clinicians,
in the two months prior to her death, was reasonable
and appropriate. There is
no evidence, within the care structures in place then, of any shortfalls in that
care that contributed
to Cathy’s death.
The Multi-Agency
Response Guide (MARG)
of the care provided to Cathy by clinicians requires consideration of the MARG.
The MARG formalised an approach of minimising
in-patient hospital admissions.
Cathy’s medical records demonstrate that the MARG was consistently
referred to by clinicians
responding to her being in crisis, and that it
influenced the treatment she received from services prior to her death,
particularly
in respect of the nature and duration of her hospital
presentations.
find that the MARG was a reasonable response by clinicians to evidence that
involuntary and frequent hospital admissions were not
therapeutic for Cathy.
Cathy frequently reported to clinicians that she found admissions punitive, and
that the trauma she experienced
in hospitals influenced her thinking towards
further self-harm. This is supported by observations in her medical records.
When involuntarily
admitted, Cathy was observed to continue to self-harm at the
ward, and/or became combative towards treating clinicians. On several
in early 2018, this resulted in her being physically and chemically restrained
in hospital.
medical records demonstrate that by early 2018, the clinicians involved in
Cathy’s care, including the CMH team and a Consultant
Psychiatrist from
TCH, had become concerned by the frequency of her hospital admissions. Several
case conferences were held (prior
to the formalisation of the MARG) to discuss
Cathy’s repeated admissions. There was consensus amongst clinicians
involved in
those meetings that hospital admissions did not keep Cathy safe, and
they were not therapeutic. It is against this background that
the MARG was
signed on 27 July 2018.
friends suggest that the MARG process could be inflexible and led her to feel
abandoned because certain services would
not engage with her when she was in
crisis. I am satisfied that the MARG was an advisory, and not a binding,
document for the agencies
involved, and it did not override the situational
assessment of clinicians dealing with Cathy in crisis. Cathy was still
involuntarily
admitted for treatment when she was unable to engage in safety
planning, and/or was voicing thoughts of suicidal ideation with a
plan. The MARG
did direct a form of response in the context of crisis, which involved the CATT
and ACTAS being viewed as the appropriate
response agencies. That was done to
ensure that treatment was appropriately streamed, and that therapeutic
interventions occurred
outside the context of crisis presentations. Records
demonstrate that Cathy was informed by clinicians of the MARG’s
development
and its purpose, and that she was in general supportive of its aim
to minimise her in-patient hospital admissions.
find that the development of the MARG was well-informed by the judgement of the
clinicians involved in Cathy’s care, and that
it was developed based on
sound therapeutic assessments.
The Canberra Hospital
follows from this assessment of the MARG, that TCH’s treatment of Cathy,
and its practice of promptly discharging her, was
appropriate in the
circumstances. There is no evidence to suggest that her repeated overdoses and
presentations to hospital were
due to either her being prematurely discharged,
or her discharge being inadequately planned. Cathy’s medical records
demonstrate
that TCH clinicians consistently engaged with CMH and/or CATT prior
to discharge to ensure appropriate follow-up support for Cathy
in the community
was available.
The City Mental Health Team
CMH team, consisting of a social worker, clinical psychologist and psychiatrist,
provided Cathy with ongoing, intensive, and holistic
care. Consistent with the
MARG, they made efforts to coordinate the care Cathy was receiving from other
service providers. They consistently
provided Cathy with follow-up support after
crisis presentations, and took steps to try and reduce her risk of self-harm by
support was available over weekends for her; for example, through CATT
Cathy’s medical
records that, in the months prior to her death, her treating team, within the
care delivery structures that
were available, were trying to focus on providing
therapeutic and recovery-oriented care to Cathy, rather than crisis management.
The evidence suggests that the CMH team provided Cathy with a high level of
care, and took appropriate steps to address her chronic
risk of self-harm and
PART 4 – FORMAL FINDINGS AND MATTERS OF PUBLIC
Manner and Cause of Death
of the finding required by ss 52(1)(a) and (b) of the Act are straightforward. I
find that, on or about 18 September 2018, Catherine
Maree Broadbent died at a
residence at 8 / 8 Owen Crescent, Lyneham, in the Australian Capital Territory,
of multiple drug toxicity.
respect of the manner of her death, I find that Cathy took the medications in
doses and circumstances that reflected an intent
to take her own life. The
finding of suicide in this case has evidential complexity, given the pattern of
self-harming (falling short
of suicide) that was apparent in Cathy’s life
for so long.
the following matters suggest that Cathy did intend to take her own
(a) Cathy was assessed as being at a significant chronic risk of suicide. That
assessment was repeated in the assessment made by
CMH the day before she died.
(b) Many of her previous attempts at self-harm could have resulted in her death.
She described her pattern of drug overdosing in
her consultation with Dr
Butterfield on 7 September 2018, as calling for help when medications taken in
overdose quantities began
to take effect. Her capacity to make that call
obviously related to the quantity of medications consumed, and her level of
intoxication.
At best, those self-harming events suggested that at the time of
the consumption of those drugs/medications, Cathy was, when overdosing
self-harming, indifferent as to whether she lived or died.
(c) Her presentation at the walk-in centre in the early evening of 17 September
2018, and the lacerations that were present suggested
that she was in an episode
(d) The autopsy results suggested the presence of a wide range of medications
(Alprazolam, Etizolam, Carisoprodol, Quetiapine, Meprobamate,
Lignocaine, and
Lamotrigine), as well as alcohol. Etizolam, Carisoprodol, and Meprobamate were
found at significant levels. Etizolam,
a benzodiazepine analogue which has
sedative and hypnotic effects, was not available on prescription in Australia at
the time of
Cathy’s death, and it was probably sourced by Cathy on the
“dark web”, where she was known to source medications,
Adverse outcomes have
been noted in respect of its use, particularly when combined with other drugs,
such as alcohol and medications
that also depress the central nervous system.
such, I find that Cathy did intentionally take her own
Public Safety Issues –
Intermediate Residential Services
the best efforts of the CMH team, the frequency of Cathy’s hospital
presentations indicate that her mental health was
not being effectively managed
in the community. While a lengthier period of hospitalisation was neither
appropriate nor available,
it is apparent that in between hospital
presentations, Cathy’s mental health had remained unstable, and she
required a level
of support that the CMH team were unable to provide. Her need
was not for a step-down facility providing a bridge between acute care
hospital setting and care in the community, but a form of intermediate
therapeutic respite and short-term recovery service.
indicate that the CMH team recognised the need for some type of
‘sub-acute’, or ‘non-acute’ form of
residential care for
Cathy, and were exploring options for in-patient admission to the Brisbane Unit
for Complex Trauma and Hyson
Green. Cathy herself reported to clinicians that
she wished to have a safe place away from the razor blades and medications that
was not the Adult Mental Health Unit (“AMHU”), and that she felt she
needed a three-week admission to a place like Hyson
Green to break her trauma
cycle. That would have been a form of residential crisis respite.
Cathy’s case, attempts were made by CMH to deliver a form of respite care
through Hyson Green, a private mental health care
provider. The Hyson Green
voucher system was ultimately utilised by Cathy, and the CMH team, to facilitate
short-term sub-acute in-patient
care, often over the weekends, when she was the
most vulnerable without the support of the CMH team. The voucher agreement that
to have been in force was for 72-hour stays twice a month.
voucher agreement was clearly insufficient to meet Cathy’s needs. Shortly
before her death, the possibility of a longer
admission to Hyson Green was being
discussed to facilitate her commencing EMDR therapy to address her early trauma
in a safe environment.
It is not known if such a placement would or could have
been funded beyond a few days. Her clinicians feared that the acuity of her
condition may have been disqualifying, so far as Hyson Green was concerned. The
voucher agreement included admission conditions that
suggest Hyson Green would
not treat her when she was acutely
Royal Commission into Victoria’s Mental Health System’s final report
(2021) is quoted at length to best conceptualize
the policy development that
might be needed in this space. As to crisis respite services, the Commission
9.6.2 Residential crisis respite
Crisis respite is a core element of the National Mental Health Service Planning
Framework but no longer exists in any meaningful
way in Victoria’s mental
health system. Respite programs are currently only available through the
National Disability Insurance
Scheme for eligible participants as
‘short-term accommodation packages’. This service offering
recognised that, from
time to time, participants may require temporary supports
that are different from their usual arrangements.
The Commission has heard from consumers, carers, families, supporters and
service representatives that a range of flexible, time-limited
respite services
would be a welcome addition to Victoria’s mental health system. For
People who are in distress or who are feeling on the edge of suicide often feel
much more comfortable going to respite centres than
to places where they are
likely to be locked up and possibly secluded. There are many people who will do
anything to stay out of
an inpatient unit, but who will willingly approach a
respite centre. They will come in under their own steam if they are allowed
because they feel that there will be people there who understand them, and see
it as a place of refuge. The UK studies have shown
that people with similar
levels of psychopathology and risk find respite centres more acceptable
environments to receive treatment
in, and the clinical outcomes are at least as
Witness Elizabeth Porter who reflected on her experiences of mental illness as a
young person, highlighted the transformational potential
of respite programs:
I feel like these kinds of models are hard for the current system to comprehend,
because the system is so focussed on pathologising,
medicating and getting
people out the door. So it is hard to convey how different and transformational
it can be to have a non‑clinical
space where people can physically go and
take themselves away from whatever chaos is happening in their lives. A key
feature also
is that peer spaces are not coercive ... I have recently set up
networks to run informal peer respite.
The Commission’s recommendation to establish crisis respite services is
informed by evidence of good outcomes in other states
and internationally.
Reports have suggested that peer-led respite services may lead to: reduced
hospital admissions; reduced emergency
department presentations; reduced
utilisation and expenditure on health services generally; reduced feelings of
stress and suicidality;
and improvements in carers’ resilience and ability
to cope with the demands on them.
55. Later in the Commission’s report, the idea of a greater
diversity of bed-based services was developed:
Victoria’s current continuum of bed-based services has large gaps, leaving
many consumers without access to essential mental
health treatment, care and
support before or after an admission to an acute inpatient
An innovative and diversified mix of bed-based services is needed. The
Commission has identified four broad categories of bed-based
service types that
must be available across the state in the future mental health and wellbeing
system. The best composition of these
bed-based services will be determined at
the statewide and regional levels as part of the broader planning process that
the Commission
has recommended.
56. The revised continuum of bed-based services was defined in these terms:
• Therapeutic respite and short-term recovery services will provide a
range of time-limited community-based support options
for consumers living with
mental illness who do not need an acute hospital admission but would benefit
from a period of care in a
supportive environment. These services include a
range of time-limited residential respite services and Prevention and Recovery
• Supported housing services will deliver a wide variety of safe, secure
and affordable housing options for certain mental
health consumers with
additional housing support needs, providing integrated, multidisciplinary and
individually tailored supports
on site. Supported housing models to be delivered
in the future system are discussed in Chapter 16: Supported housing for adults
and young people.
• Acute treatment, care and support services cover a broader spectrum of
support options for people experiencing an acute phase
of mental illness. These
services comprise acute inpatient services, Hospital in the Home services and
peer-led alternatives to inpatient
care. In its interim report, the Commission
recommended that the Collaborative Centre for Mental Health and Wellbeing be
established.
The Centre will also deliver acute inpatient services to its local
population to reinforce the translation of research into high-quality
• Extended rehabilitation services encompass three forms of longer-term
care options for people living with mental illness
or psychological distress and
ongoing mental health support needs. These extended rehabilitation services
comprise community rehabilitation
units (or re-envisaged community care units),
intensive rehabilitation units (or re-envisaged secure extended care units) and
capacity for civil consumers at Thomas Embling
Royal Commission went on to say that:
The Commission expects that a range of different models will be established,
including separate services for people experiencing
mental illness and people in
severe psychological distress due to situational crises and/or
suicidality.
ACT does have a range of mental health services delivered across this spectrum,
though limited by the smaller population size
that is serviced. The response
provided by the Territory to the Court’s letter of 27 September 2023 did
not contain a systematic
review of service delivery today, or discussion as to
whether the specific bed-based accommodation that Cathy required was available
today, or, as a matter of policy, should be available.
policy matrix in this area is complex. The Commonwealth Productivity Commission
released the final report of its
Mental Health Inquiry
in November 2020.
The Victorian Royal Commission published its final report in 2021. The
Commonwealth Government’s Suicide
Prevention Advisor made recommendations
to progress the implementation of the recommendations of those inquiries. The
National Mental
Health and Suicide Prevention Agreement (“the
Agreement”) sets out “the shared intention of the Commonwealth,
and Territory governments to work in partnership to improve the mental
health of all Australians, reduce the rate of suicide towards
zero, ensure the
sustainability of, and enhance the services of the Australian mental health and
suicide prevention system”.
It came into effect in March 2022. Its stated
goals have been described as seeking to deliver:
a comprehensive, coordinated, consumer-focused mental health and suicide
prevention system with joint accountability across all governments.
Key priority
areas under the National Agreement include regional planning and commissioning,
priority populations, stigma reduction,
safety and quality, gaps in the system
of care, suicide prevention and response, psychosocial supports outside the
NDIS, national
consistency for initial assessment and referral, workforce, and
data and evaluation.
ACT and the Commonwealth have entered into an arrangement on the
Schedule on Mental Health and Suicide Prevention
, which sets out their
shared commitments to give effect to the underlying principles of the Agreement,
which include prevention and
support strategies. Outside of that document, the
ACT would otherwise provide mental health service, including accommodation
that are targeted at suicide prevention. The ACT has its own mental
health and suicide prevention policies. Within this policy framework,
unclear what priority is going to be given in the ACT to providing the
residential respite and therapeutic service that was
needed in this case, or to
what extent it is feasible to develop therapeutic alliances with facilities in
other States or Territories
to provide these alternative care models.
it might be concluded that those who were delivering Cathy’s care were
constrained in accessing suitable accommodation
respite placements in the ACT, I
am not able to say, given the passage of time, whether a person suffering from
the same challenges
as Cathy did would find today that the position has changed.
In my view, considering that passage of time, the further pursuit of
is not justified, as it could not be said to be a matter that arises from my
investigation of Cathy’s death.
the purposes of s 52(4) of the Act, I make no finding that a matter of public
safety arises.
acknowledge the difficulties Cathy faced in her life, the tragedy of her
passing, and the grief suffered by those left behind. I
offer my sincere
condolences.
I certify that the preceding sixty-three [63] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the reasons for findings of his Honour Coroner
Associate: Markus Ching
Date: 17 June 2024
INTO THE DEATH OF
CATHERINE MAREE BROADBENT
CD 233/2018
CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS
27.07.18 – 18.09.18
MARG signed.
TCH presentation 31.07.18
Self-reported
overdose to AFP. ACTAS contacted.
Transported to
TCH by ACTAS and police on an EA.
Treated in ED.
Not admitted.
Discharge 1.08.18
discharge following medical clearance as per the MARG.
Dr Butterfield
consulted prior to discharge. Agreed with discharge after medical clearance.
Case manager
(CM, Deidre) notified of discharge.
Confirmed next
CMH appointments - CM on 2.08.18 and Dr Butterfield on 4.08.18.
Cathy wants to
be discharged. Denied current self-harm or suicidal ideation. Agreed to follow
up from CMH.
Meeting with CM at CMH
Cathy attends
CMH to see CM. Presents as intoxicated and making statements about future
overdose attempts.
appointment is tomorrow and can’t see her while she is intoxicated.
CM takes Cathy
TCH presentation 2.08.18
CM attempted
phone call welfare check. No answer.
CM attended
residence. Cathy appeared intoxicated and reported she had overdosed last night
on Xanax and Carisoprodol.
ACTAS attended
and transported Cathy to TCH.
treated in ED. Not admitted.
Discharge 2.08.18
discharge following medical clearance as per MARG.
Cathy wants to
be discharged home as per MARG.
Agreed to follow
up contact with CMH. Declined CATT support.
CM notified. CM
confirmed will call Cathy tomorrow.
Phone call with CM.
CM arranges upcoming Hyson Green admission.
Hyson Green admission
Meeting with CM at Hyson Green
Discussed recent
hospitalisation and went through the contents of the MARG.
Cathy pleased
that the MARG document ‘did not have any surprises’.
Cathy emails Psychologist (Annie M) reporting thoughts of self-harm.
Annie phone call to Cathy after email. Discusses a plan for the evening
e.g., shower, TV, reading harry potter.
Meeting with CM at CMH
Continues to
have chronic thoughts of self-harm and suicide.
Phone call with CM. Confirms upcoming CMH meetings:
Annie M next
Belconnen Walk-in presentation for sutures.
CMH notified.
13.08.18 AM
CM phone call to Cathy
Annie is away
Cathy reports
feeling okay. Will contact supports if she needs.
Appointment with
Annie confirmed for Thursday.
13.08.18 PM
Walk-in presentation for sutures.
CMH notified.
Meeting with CM at CMH
Discussed recent
walk-in presentation.
meeting with CM next Thursday and Dr Butterfield next Friday.
Will contact
supports as needed.
15.08.18 AM
Email from Cathy to CM.
Suicidal thoughts in email - ‘I
can’t do this’.
Shortly after email – presentation to
walk-in centre for sutures. CM notified and will contact Cathy later for welfare
Meeting with CM at CMH
Cathy reports
she is not coping.
Plans to take
medication obtained on dark web next weekend.
Plans to cut
herself this afternoon and then go to the nurse’s clinic to get stitched
Will go to the
supermarket this afternoon to get food for the week.
CM encourages
her to use DBT skills and contact supports in crisis. Cathy agrees.
Risk - remains
chronically high risk of self-harm and suicide. While voicing thoughts to
overdose she remains future focused.
Presentation at walk-in centre for sutures.
CMH notified.
18.08.18 AM
TCH admission 17.08.18
CM phone call to
Cathy for welfare check. Cathy answered, slurring her words. Reported she had
overdosed on Etizolam powder and Carisoprodol.
Transported to
TCH on an emergency apprehension order (EA).
Voicing suicidal
ideation with plan. Highly agitated and aggressive towards staff. Banging her
head on the walls. Required seclusion.
engaged in discharge safety planning.
‘everyone has thrown their hands in the air and abandoned her since the
MARG was introduced’.
ED3 with HDU
Cathy unhappy
Discharge 18.08.18 AM
Reviewed by CL
Psych prior to discharge.
Risk assessment
- chronic risk of deliberate self-harm and suicide. No immediate plans to
self-harm. Planning to engage in some her
technique e.g. DBT.
CM notified. CMH
will follow up Monday.
18.08.18 PM
TCH presentation 18.08.18
CATT contact
with Cathy following discharge. Cathy reports feeling helpless. Says her MARG
says she is chronically suicidal and not
to engage about it. CATT worker
encouraged her to go through DBT skills.
CATT home visit
@ 3:58 pm. Cathy unsteady on her feet. Reports she has overdosed on Xanax.
Transported
voluntarily to TCH by ACTAS.
treated in ED for overdose.
Upset about the
HDU admission yesterday and feels invalidated by CATT contact in morning.
Discharge - 18.08.18 PM
Reviewed by CL
Psych Dr DiBella
Wants to go
chronic risk of serious self-harm, currently denies plan and intent.
following medical clearance as per MARG.
CATT to follow
CMH appointment
(Discharge summary 131 – 132)
19.08.18 AM –
21.08.18 AM
TCH admission 19.08.18
Cathy called
000. Police and ACTAS attended.
Cathy found
unresponsive in bed. Transported to TCH.
admission to ICU for medical treatment of a severe polypharmacy overdose
Reviewed in ICU
on 20.08.17 by Psych.
Meeting with Dr
Butterfield and TCH clinicians on 20.08.18. Dr Butterfield’s advised
Cathy should be discharged home when medically
cleared with ongoing MH support.
Believes a MH admission not therapeutic.
following medical clearance as per MARG.
Butterfield notified.
To see CM on Thursday and Butterfield on Friday.
CATT notified.
Phone call to
Cathy when she arrives home following discharge.
CMHT daily clinical meeting re Cathy
Chronic high risk of
unintentional suicide, deliberate self-harm
Recent admissions
Email to CM threatening suicide (change in character)
Various presentations to services on a regular basis
suicide attempts in the past week with presentations in hospital.
engaging in DBT, EMDR or alternative psychotherapies
various medications from the intent to act on overdose thoughts.
Exacerbating in presentations suicidal thoughts
Fluctuating
capacity and judgment at times of crisis
A lot of abandonment in
Clinical review with CMH Psychologist Karen Onley (Annie M away)
Very distressed.
Reports wanting to die.
Upset by the
MARG. Feels like it puts the responsibility back onto her and she does not feel
strong enough to get better. Stated it
is reinforcing her belief about herself
that she is bad, that she hurts people and that no one can help her.
Recent stressor
– long-time friend is refusing to talk to her. Feels abandoned by all her
Phone call from
CM to Cathy in afternoon to advise Hyson-Green (HG) admission organised for
later in the week. Cathy says she will
stay safe until admission to HG. Does not
require MHSSU admission in the interim.
22.08.18 PM
Presentation at walk-in centre for sutures.
CM and CATT notified.
Meeting with CM.
Feeling abandoned by everyone because of her
self-harming behaviour.
Psychiatric review with Dr Butterfield
Significant
suicide attempts in the past 2 years. Prior to that significantly more
functional for preceding decade. Prior to that
had a period of significant
self-harm and suicidal ideation.
significant chronic risk of suicide due to both misadventure and depression.
Ongoing thoughts
of suicide. Largely triggered by sense of abandonment – friends angry with
her about self-harm and suicide
attempts. GP on long service leave.
admission to H-G this weekend.
Current meds
– stillnox 12.5 mg CR, PRN for insomnia and Seroquel 100 mg nocte
Next review in a
HG admission
Multiple emails from Cathy to CM
suicidal ideation and plan
Reports planning
to overdose when she gets home.
‘final instructions’ note in bedroom top drawer.
CM phone call to Cathy following emails - 28.08.18 (AM)
Cathy distressed
and sobbing.
HG offering her
an extended admission in coming weeks to commence EMDR therapy.
Reports ordering
fentanyl on dark web, expecting to get it later in the week.
Reports not
being able to see the future. Feels like she can’t stop the overdose.
Planning to
attend work on Thursday.
Planning to cut
in the afternoon to get through the day.
CM reminds her
she has not being receiving ongoing therapy recently.
Advised to call
CM as needed.
Presentation at walk-in for sutures.
CM notified.
30.09.18 AM
Meeting with CM at CMH
Cathy finished
her first half day at work. Planning on working two days a week on a
‘diversity framework’ project.
Feels she must
work because income insurance running out.
Cathy reminded
HG offering 8-week admission for EMDR therapy soon.
ongoing chronic risk of self-harm and suicide. Has been like that for last 2
years. Remains future focused.
30.08.18 PM
Cathy emails CM with photo of fentanyl patches purchased off dark web.
ACTAS contact Cathy. Cathy denies intention to overdose.
31.08.18 – 1.09.18 AM
TCH presentation 31.08.18
AFP notified by
CMH of fentanyl possession. Warrant obtained to remove fentanyl for her welfare.
residence. Cathy reports she has placed x 3 50 mcg patches on her body. AFP
removed and seized patches.
Transported to
TCH ED by ACTAS on an EA.
Able to identify
triggers in ED – says tried to go back to work after two years away and
did too much.
Feels abandoned
recently – GP on long service.
Chronic TOSH but future focused.
Discharge 1.09.18
discharge approx. 00:13 hrs
CATT follow up
over the weekend.
TCH presentation 2.09.18
(approx. 6:00 pm)
Cathy phone call
to lifeline reporting overdose of 20 Xanax and 30 Carisoprodol
AFP and ACTCAS
attend residence.
Transported to
TCH by ACTCAS under EA
Discharge 2.09.18
discharge approx. 9:00 pm
following medical clearance as per MARG.
Shortly after
discharge, refusing to leave ED. Blocked ED entrance and causing a commotion.
CMH and AFP notified on her behaviour.
Discharge 3.09.18
AFP attend TCH
ED and attempt to transport Cathy to watch house.
Dr Butterfield
advises AFP of Cathy’s suicide risk. Cathy returned to ED.
Dr Butterfield
met with Cathy in ED.
Discharged with
usual CMH f/u/
Appointment with
Dr Butterfield on Friday.
Psychiatric review with Dr Butterfield
distressed and angry regarding events of last week. Feels let down and
traumatized by ‘the system’.
Distressed from
recent involuntary treatment.
Frustrated at
work – finds reading about failures in systems regarding aged care
triggering. Wants more work to keep her busy.
Aware that she
tends to overdose and then feels a little calmer once medication has kicked in
and then calls for help as she gets
– ongoing complex PTSD and BPD with depressive and obsessive
characteristics
Plan/medication
– trial of Lyrica 75 mg BD for ongoing pain from headaches and hand injury
– may also help anxiety.
Review in 1 week
Calvary presentation 8.09.18
presentation to Calvary ED
overdose with Alprazolam tablets. Severe cuts on left arm requiring 45 –
47 sutures.
Insisted on
being discharged home as per MARG.
Tried to abscond
ED – yelling, screaming, and hitting bed rails to try and get out.
Required sedation.
Transferred to
8.09.18 (PM)
Transferred to TCH 8.09.18
Transferred from
Calvary to TCH ED
EA revoked at
TCH but not medically cleared due to sedation. Managed under duty of care.
Reviewed by
Registrar in ED.
Reports being
distressed by events of morning – held down by 6 men and injected.
Nil current
suicidal thoughts and wants to go home. Chronic risk of suicide.
Discharge 8.09.18 PM
(approx. 10:00 pm)
discharge following medical clearance as per MARG.
Agreed to CATT
Review by CM
Discharge plan
discussed with Dr Hindwal.
TCH presentation 9.09.18
Presentation
following overdose.
Psychiatric
assessment – denied suicidal thoughts, reports will seek help when needed.
Reviewed in ED
by consultant psychiatrist.
following medical clearance.
Discharge 9.09.18
Agreed to follow
up from CATT and lifeline.
CMH notified to
Meeting with CM and Annie M at CMH
Discussed events
of weekend including traumatising experience at Calvary and TCH.
Cathy described
being pinned down by six men for hours and Calvary and disparaging comments made
Wants to take
the rest of her Xanax. Wants to use fentanyl.
once Cathy more stable to return to DBT skills group,
Discussed EMDR
review with Dr Butterfield 14.09
Continue seeing
CM every Thursday.
Presentation to walk in centre.
CMH notified.
Email to Annie (p
Email says Annie
M refused to see her at home. Feels alone and abandoned.
‘archive this moment as the suicide note’.
phone call to Cathy after email
Cathy reports
not coping. Feeling abandoned and lonely
Cathy provided
‘supportive counselling’ over the phone.
CM suggested
trying to get a bed a HG over the weekend.
Cathy confirmed
she planned to attend meeting with CM on Thursday.
CM phone call to Cathy
Impression -
improved since yesterday.
Confirmed CM
appointment tomorrow.
Meeting with CM at CMH
Cathy excited
looking a longer-term admission to HG to address early trauma and commence EMDR.
Psychiatric review with Dr Butterfield
– Cathy doing a bit better.
addressing early trauma at HG with EMDR therapy.
Cathy confirmed
no plans to overdose on the weekend and was focused on getting back to work.
Next review with
Dr Butterfield in a fortnight
Presentation at walk -in clinic for sutures.
Denied suicidal ideation
and confirmed would see MHS tomorrow.
17.09.18 (approx. 11:00 am)
Meeting with CM at CMH
Reports ongoing
low mood, wanting to overdose.
appointment with Annie tomorrow
Planning to
attend work Wed – Friday
Will spend that
afternoon cleaning and preparing food.
Advised can
– ongoing chronically high risk of self-harm and suicide (baseline mental
17.09.18 (approx. 7:00 pm)
Presentation to walk-in centre for sutures
2 new self-administered
lacerations on her left arm.
Nil current intent to self-harm
Declined to
speak with CATT.
CMH notified.
Last seen by RN Stachura at 7:10 pm.
Police report
Cathy missed 11:00 am appointment with Annie and Deidre (CM).
and Deidre attended her residence and found her face down on her bed
unresponsive.
ACTCAS called and arrived 12:00 pm. No signs of life.
Police report
The Act is inconsistent in its
use of the concept of an “inquest”. In s 52 of the Act,
“inquest” is effectively
synonymous with a process of investigation.
Inquest into the deaths of
Bearham & Ors
[2021] ACTCD
Canberra Hospital and Health
Services Operation Procedure, Multi-Agency Response Guide (CHHS17/2118 , issue
date 9.09.17, review
date 1.07.20).
On 31 August 2018, the AFP
were contacted by ACT Mental Health to check the welfare of Cathy, who had
allegedly told her GP that
she sourced Fentanyl from the dark net and was
intending on using it. On that occasion, a search warrant was obtained, and
Fentanyl patches were seized.
For example, the voucher
agreement contained an admission condition that Cathy would not self-harm 24
hours prior to admission.
Royal Commission into Victoria’s Mental Health System
Report, February 2021) vol 1, 552-3.
The view of the Commission (at
page 554) was that those who would likely be suitable for respite programs of
the type described would
not be those not at high, imminent risk of harm to
themselves or others.
Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare,
Australia's Mental Health System
(Webpage, October
RTF format (571 KB)
Signed PDF/A format