AXELL v AAI Ltd ACN 005 297 807 T/AS GIO (Motor Accident Injuries) [2025] ACAT 52 (17 July 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
AXELL v AAI Ltd ACN 005 297 807 T/AS GIO (Motor Accident
[2025] ACAT 52
MOTOR ACCIDENT INJURIES
– where insurer
accepted liability for late application – where insurer agreed to pay
treatment and care benefits from
13 weeks before application made – where
discretion to pay benefits from date of accident not exercised –
exceptional
circumstances – application of Treatment and Care Guidelines
– construction of clause of Guidelines dealing with exceptional
circumstances – meaning of “exceptional circumstances” -
whether circumstances of applicant were exceptional –
whether discretion
to backdate payment should be exercised
List of Legislation:
Insurance Act
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2019
, Schedule 1
Social Security Act 1991
Subordinate
legislation cited:
Health Insurance (Professional Services Review)
Regulations 1999
Motor Accident Injuries (Treatment and Care)
Guidelines 2023
Cases cited:
Angelakos v Secretary, Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations
[2007] FCA 25
Beadle v Director-General of Social Security
1984 AATA 176
Dranichnikov v Centrelink
[2003] FCAFC 133
Groth v Secretary, Department of Social Security
[1995] FCA 1708
Hernandez v AAI Ltd t/as GIO
[2025] ACAT 45
Ho v Professional Services Review Committee No 295
[2007] FCA 388
Montgomery v NRMA
[2024] ACAT 60
Neish v NRMA
[2022] ACAT 24
Nulty v Blue Star Group Pty Ltd
[2011] FWAFB 975
Oreb v Willcock
[2005] FCAFC 196
Re Perder Investments Pty Ltd v Elmer
[1991] FCA 212
R v Kelly (Edward)
[1999] UKHL 4
[2000] QB 198
Riddell v Secretary, Department of Social Security
[1993] FCA 261
Secretary, Department of Social Security v Hales
[1997] FCA 1565
Williams v GIO
[2021] ACAT 100
Senior Member M Hyman
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) MAI 1/2025
GREGORY JON AXELL
AAI LIMITED ACN 005 297 807
TRADING AS GIO
Senior Member M Hyman
The Tribunal orders that:
respondent’s decision of 13 January 2025 to affirm payment of treatment
and care benefits to the application only from 13
weeks before the date on which
he lodged his application is set aside.
respondent is ordered to pay treatment and care benefits to the applicant from
the date of the
......................................
Member M Hyman
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
decision is about whether treatment and care benefits for a motor accident
injury should be paid to the applicant (
) by the respondent (
the respondent
applicant was walking by the side of the road, or riding a scooter either on or
beside the road, in December 2023 when he was
struck by a vehicle insured by the
respondent. He lodged a late application with the respondent for treatment of
the injuries he
sustained, and while the respondent accepted liability, that
liability extended only to 13 weeks before the application was lodged,
of his treatment and care expenses dated from an earlier period. Mr Axell sought
internal review of GIO’s decision,
and the respondent reviewed its
original decision and affirmed it. Mr Axell has now applied to this tribunal for
review of the respondent’s
internal review decision.
matter came before the tribunal on 3 June 2025. Mr Axell represented his own
interests. Ms Raisa Aniversario of Counsel appeared
for the respondent. Because
the review process set out in the MAI Act limits the admission of evidence after
the internal review
decision, no evidence was taken at the hearing, which
proceeded by way of final submissions by the parties.
before the Tribunal comprised the application for external review, the internal
review notice and statement of reasons, the
notice accepting liability under a
late application, the applicant’s explanation for his late application,
the medical report
provided with that explanation, and some further
correspondence between the parties.
issues before the Tribunal for resolution are:
(a) whether the internal review decision to affirm the payment of care and
treatment costs from 13 weeks before lodgement of the
application was affected
by an error of law or fact;
(b) if the respondent’s decision was so affected, what remedy the Tribunal
should order;
(c) if the decision under review is set aside, whether the applicant’s
circumstances were exceptional;
(d) if so, whether the discretion to date treatment and care benefits from the
date of the accident should be exercised; and
(e) taking all the above into account, what decision the tribunal should make.
The legislative framework
5. The MAI Act
establishes a scheme to simplify motor accident insurance in the ACT and make it
easier to navigate.
Accident Injuries Commission is established by the
, its functions including the
supervision of the scheme, the regulation of insurers and issuing, monitoring
and reviewing MAI Guidelines
provided for in the
MAI Act includes some overarching provisions that govern the way in which the
scheme established under the Act is to operate.
The objects of the Act include
“to ensure benefits are available to support all people injured in motor
accidents on a no-fault
basis, subject to some exclusions and
limitations”; “to support people injured in motor accidents to
access defined benefits”;
and “to promote and encourage
the early, quick, cost-effective and just resolution of
the Act also
requires that insurers, applicants for defined benefits and claimants act in
good faith and do their best to help resolve
issues between them and bring the
matter to finality. Specifically, parties are obliged to try to finalise
applications “as
justly and promptly as
7. A person who
suffers a personal injury as a result of a motor accident in the ACT is entitled
to defined benefits,
which comprise
income replacement benefits, treatment and care benefits, quality of life
benefits, death benefits and funeral
for a single vehicle motor vehicle accident is the insurer for that
motor vehicle;
defined benefits
payable to a person injured in a motor vehicle accident are to be paid by the
relevant insurer.
application period for a person seeking defined benefits under the MAI Act is
set at 13 weeks after the date of the
and an injured person
must make an application within that application period. The insurer can accept
an application for treatment
and care benefits, however, up to two years after
the accident if the applicant offers a full and satisfactory explanation for the
late application.
and care is defined to include medical treatment, mental health treatment and
pharmaceuticals;
injured in a motor accident is entitled to treatment and care
treatment and care
expenses are expenses for treating the injuries of a person, but do not include
treatment and care that was not
reasonable and necessary, or that did not relate
to injuries sustained in the motor
an insurer has accepted liability, it must pay treatment and care benefits from
the date of the accident, unless the application
was lodged late, in which case
benefits are paid from 13 weeks before the date the application was made. Where
an insurer has accepted
liability under a late application, and is satisfied on
reasonable grounds that there are exceptional circumstances justifying earlier
payment, the insurer may pay benefits from the date of the accident. The MAI
Guidelines may provide for what might be considered
exceptional
circumstances.
MAI Act identifies certain decisions by an insurer as internally reviewable
decisions, including decisions refusing to pay
defined benefits from a date
earlier than 13 weeks before a late application was
The Act then allows
certain people, including applicants for benefits, to seek internal review of an
insurer’s internally reviewable
The MAI Guidelines may
provide for how an internal review is to be conducted, and an internal review
must comply with those
Guidelines.
An insurer must
complete an internal review within 10 days of receiving an application, making a
new decision affirming, amending
or setting aside and substituting the
internally reviewable decision. The insurer must give the applicant notice of
the new decision,
a statement of reasons, and information about how to apply for
external review.
12. The MAI Act
identifies decisions (
ACAT reviewable decisions
) for which applicants may
seek external review by the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal (ACAT),
including an internally reviewed
decision by the insurer to refuse to pay
treatment and care expenses from earlier than 13 weeks before a late application
A review by ACAT may
be made “on a question of law or
Section 197 of the
Act sets out how a review decision by the ACAT must be made.
Act is accompanied by a number of sets of Guidelines (the MAI Guidelines) made
by the Commission to explain and prescribe how
the Act should operate. The
relevant Guidelines in the present matter are the
Motor Accident Injuries
(Treatment and Care) Guidelines 2023
the Treatment and Care
). Clause 5 of the Treatment and Care Guidelines deals with the
exceptional circumstances provision in section 128 of the MAI Act,
four particular sets of circumstances that qualify as
exceptional.
this matter the respondent has accepted liability but, applying section 128 of
the MAI Act and clause 5 of the Treatment and Care
Guidelines, has refused
to pay treatment and care expenses from an earlier date than 13 weeks before the
applicant lodged his application.
This has had the effect of excluding most of
the treatment and care expenses relating to his injury. The dispute has not
to the facts of the matter, which appear to be not at issue.
evidence, however, is scanty. I am reliant for my understanding of the relevant
events on the applicant’s letter of 8 January
2025 to the insurer
explaining why he was late in lodging his application. There is little in the
way of corroborative evidence.
But the respondent has not contested any of the
evidence, and I have seen nothing that would encourage me to regard Mr
account as mistaken, exaggerated or fabricated; but the account is
rather incomplete, and I have inferred some of what follows –
for example
that he was on or with a scooter (because he says that he does not need to claim
for the scooter); and that the police
were called (because he accessed the
police report in order to track down the driver of and insurer for the
accident occurred on 10 December 2023, when Mr Axell was, apparently, walking or
riding a scooter. He was struck by a vehicle
and thrown to the ground. An
ambulance and apparently the police were called. At the time the ambulance
officers told him that he
had suffered bruising to his left leg but was
otherwise uninjured, and could walk home. Subsequently, on 15 December 2023, his
coach suggested that he seek medical attention for his knee. After an
x-ray of his knee, a GP consultation and two MRIs, and following
Christmas-New Year break, Mr Axell saw a knee specialist on
8 February 2024. The specialist identified a need for knee surgery,
and the applicant says that he then realised that “this was going to
become more than a simple healthcare issue”. The
applicant had surgery for
ligament damage on 27 February 2024.
his surgery, Mr Axell says that he contacted “an injury compensation
lawyer”, who said that they could not help
him, referred him to “a
website” and told him he had twelve months (I assume from the date of the
accident) to make a
early March 2024, on recovering from surgery, Mr Axell began the process of
exploring how he could make an insurance claim. He
then discovered that he had
lost the details about the accident, the vehicle and the driver, and was obliged
to obtain access to
the police report. Once he had the details, he began the
process of completing the claim form. It was at that point that he discovered
that he had missed the 13-week deadline for lodging a claim. He says that he
then decided “to wait until all expenses were
known and present my claim,
complete, without any further back and forth. Had I been able to speak to a
lawyer I may have acted earlier.”
applicant works in the defence area, and said that he was under a great deal of
pressure from his work. In addition, he was unable
to have a mobile phone with
him during work hours, so it was difficult or impossible for the insurer to get
in touch with him.
The arguments of the parties
applicant took the position that the respondent had failed to identify his
circumstances as exceptional when it should
The respondent pointed to
the operation of section 128 of the MAI Act and clause 5 of the Treatment and
Care Guidelines, asserting
that, together, these left the insurer with no choice
but to deny the applicant’s claim for payment from earlier than 13 weeks
before it was lodged.
alternative, if that construction of the Act and Guidelines was wrong, the
respondent sought an explanation of how the “exceptional
circumstances” test ought to be
Consideration
193 of the MAI Act states that an external review of an insurer’s decision
proceeds “on a question of law or fact”.
It is accepted that this
means that the review is not a merits review, that is, an enquiry into what the
correct or preferable decision
is on the available evidence, but rather an
enquiry whether the decision was taken according to law:
Montgomery v
decision not to backdate the payment of treatment and care affected by an error
of fact or law?
explained above, the date from which the respondent decided treatment and care
benefits were to be paid was derived from section
128 of the MAI Act and clause
5 of the Treatment and Care Guidelines. Section 128 of the Act reads as follows:
Treatment and care
benefits—period payable
(1) This section applies if a relevant insurer accepts liability
under section 65 for an application for defined benefits.
(2) The period for which treatment and care benefits are
(a) starts on—
(i) the date of the motor accident, if—
(A) the insurer accepts liability for an application made during
the application period; or
(B) the insurer accepts liability for a late application and is
satisfied on reasonable grounds that there are exceptional circumstances
justifying the earlier payment of treatment and care benefits; or
(ii) if the insurer accepts liability for a late
application and is not satisfied under paragraph
(a) (i) (B)—the date that
is 13 weeks before the date of
the application; and
(b) ends 5 years after the date of the motor accident.
(3) The MAI guidelines may make provision for the kinds
of circumstances that may be exceptional circumstances for
subsection (2).
late application is one made more than 13 weeks after the date of the
The effect of section
128 is that where an insurer accepts liability for a late application, as here,
benefits are payable only from
13 weeks before the date of application, unless
the insurer is satisfied, on reasonable grounds, that there are exceptional
circumstances,
and that those circumstances justify earlier payment, in which
case the benefits are payable from the date of the accident.
128(2)(a)(i)(B) establishes a discretion to be considered by the insurer, and
like discretions generally, requires that
two decisions are made: the first
decision is to determine whether the preconditions for the discretion are met
– in this case,
whether the circumstances are “exceptional”.
If that test is met, the discretion is enlivened, and a separate decision
arises, whether the discretion should be exercised.
then to the first of those decisions, the question in each case will be whether
the circumstances of the particular applicant
are exceptional. Subsection (3)
points to the potential for some guidance to be obtained from the Treatment and
Care Guidelines.
The relevant entry in the Guidelines is clause 5, which reads
as follows:
5. EXCEPTIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES - LATE
APPLICATIONS (Section 128)
These guidelines make provision for the kinds of circumstances which may be
regarded as exceptional circumstances for a late application
for back-paying
treatment and care expenses to the date of an accident.
5.1 Exceptional circumstances
5.1.1 If a late application is made for defined benefits an
insurer is to back-pay treatment and care expenses to the date of an
in the following exceptional circumstances:
application is for a person that died from injuries resulting from the motor
accident, at a date after the motor accident;
application is for an injured person that was hospitalised for at least 4 weeks
during the initial application period;
relative, spouse or child of the injured person died from injuries resulting
from the motor accident or was hospitalised for
at least 4 weeks during the
initial application period; or
The delay in
making a complete application is a direct result of errors or mistakes made by
an MAI insurer in relation to handling
an application from the injured person,
during the initial application period.
decision-maker for the respondent interpreted clause 5 to mean that exceptional
circumstances obtained only on the four specified
occasions. But that is not
what the clause says. On a plain reading it merely says that, whenever they
occur, the circumstances specified
are to be treated as exceptional; and, by
implication, in every other case the insurer is left to determine whether the
circumstances
in that particular case are exceptional.
test posed here by section 128 of the MAI Act and clause 5 of the Treatment and
Care Guidelines runs parallel to the “exceptional
circumstances”
test considered by the Full Federal Court in
Section 106KA of
Health Insurance Act 1973
(Cth) established a discretionary decision
to be taken where there were exceptional circumstances and regulation 11 of the
Health Insurance (Professional Services Review) Regulations 1999
made under that Act, specified certain circumstances where the test might be
met. Black CJ and Wilcox J concluded that the
test was engaged in two ways:
either through the application of the usual meaning of the English word
“exceptional”,
or else by application of the specified circumstances
in regulation 11. In a similar way there are two ways of applying the test
the present instance: either through determining whether an applicant’s
circumstances are “exceptional” in the
normal sense, under section
128 of the MAI Act, or by establishing that the applicant’s circumstances
fall within those specified
in clause 5 of the Treatment and Care
Guidelines.
from the plain sense of the words in the clause, there is another reason why the
construction adopted by the respondent cannot
be accepted. The discretion
established by section 128 – the exceptional circumstances exception
– is very broad. The
respondent is left to consider the circumstances of
the applicant, in all their possible variety, and determine whether they are
exceptional. The construction of clause 5 of the Guidelines adopted by the
respondent would have the effect of removing any element
of discretion, by
narrowing the operation of the exception to four tightly prescribed
circumstances, and limiting the discretion
to those four circumstances and those
four only. This would in effect mean that the MAI Commission, in making the
Treatment and Care
Guidelines, had replaced the broad discretion of the
legislature with a narrow and effectively non-discretionary fettering of that
discretion. Indeed, the respondent’s construction effectively implies that
the exercise of the decision-maker’s discretion
is to be at the behest of
the Commission – something, I am sure, that was not intended by the
Commission.
Re Perder Investments Pty Ltd v
the court stated:
The principle underlying the rule against replacement of a statutory
discretion by a statutory prohibition is simply respect for Parliamentary
sovereignty. Where Parliament says that in certain circumstances there is a
discretion to grant permission, then no official may
replace that law by one to
the opposite effect - for example, by a law requiring that in no circumstances
shall permission be granted.
the present matter the construction adopted by the respondent does not amount to
a prohibition, but it would nevertheless represent
an extreme fettering of the
discretion granted by the legislature, and cannot be regarded as a construction
that should be adopted
if an alternative is available.
Aniversario maintained that the construction of clause 5 adopted by the
respondent was open to it. I do not agree; for the reasons
given above, the
reading I have advanced there is the only way in which the clause can be read.
It is my conclusion that the respondent
applied the wrong test in determining
the application of the exceptional circumstances provision in section 128 of the
the applicant, and the decision was therefore affected by an error of
law. The decision is set aside.
Did the applicant’s
circumstances meet the “exceptional circumstances” test?
a decision is set aside under the MAI Act, the Tribunal must choose between
substituting its own decision and remitting the
matter to the insurer for
reconsideration, with directions where the Tribunal so
Hernandez v AAI
Ltd t/as GIO
I noted that
the MAI Act is silent about how a substitute decision is to be taken, but the
apparent way forward is for the Tribunal
to weigh up the facts and apply the MAI
Act and any relevant guidelines to the facts as found – that is, to take a
on the merits of the applicant’s case, relying only on the
evidence that was available to the respondent when the decision
was taken, or
has been subsequently admitted. The alternative path, in which the Tribunal
remits the matter to the insurer, with
or without directions, leaves the
Tribunal with a great deal more discretion.
the present instance, the respondent asked at the hearing that, if the decision
under review were set aside, the application of
the “exceptional
circumstances” test should be explained. That implies that the Tribunal
should make a decision in substitution
for the decision under review, as that
would in turn require that I determine whether the applicant meets the
“exceptional
circumstances” test, and then, if he does so, determine
whether those circumstances justify the exercise of the discretion
to backdate
the payment of benefits.
phrase “exceptional circumstances” appears in various legislative
contexts, in Commonwealth, State and Territory statutes.
Ho v Professional
Services Review Committee No
J considered the meaning of the phrase (in section 106KA of the
Insurance Act 1973
(Cth)) at some length, citing the statement in
We must construe "exceptional" as an ordinary, familiar English adjective,
and not as a term of art. It describes a circumstance which
is such as to form
an exception, which is out of the ordinary course, or unusual, or special, or
uncommon. To be exceptional a circumstance
need not be unique, or unprecedented,
or very rare; but it cannot be one that is regularly, or routinely, or normally
encountered.
J further noted that a decision regarding exceptional circumstances requires
that the circumstances as a whole be taken into
account, in that each single
circumstance may not stand out as exceptional, but taken together they may meet
that test. He concluded
It is not correct to construe ‘exceptional circumstances’ as
being only some unexpected occurrence, although frequently
it will be. Nor is it
correct to construe the plural ‘circumstances’ as if it were only a
singular occurrence, even though
it can be a one off situation. The ordinary and
natural meaning of ‘exceptional circumstances’ in s 106KA (2)
a combination of factors which, when viewed together, may reasonably be
seen as producing a situation which is out of the ordinary
course, unusual,
special or uncommon.
decision in
has been widely followed and stands as the accepted
authority on the subject. It was adopted by the Full Bench of then Fair Work
Nulty v Blue Star Group Pty
case involved a missed statutory deadline, and the Full Bench noted that mere
ignorance of the deadline did not of itself
constitute an exceptional
circumstance.
alternative, similar, frequently used phrase is “special
circumstances”, which appears in, for example, the
Social Security Act
(Cth), where there must be special circumstances (other than financial
hardship alone) for an applicant if a debt arising from overpayment
(section 1237AAD).
The provision has been the subject of extensive
judicial comment. In
Angelakos v Secretary,
Department of Employment and Workplace
) Besanko J canvassed a number of cases in which the
Federal Court had commented on the test (not all of which related to the debt
provisions). Earlier authority had focused on whether the circumstances were
“unusual, uncommon or exceptional” (see
Beadle v Director-General of Social
), but in successive
cases the question was raised whether that test was unduly demanding. In
Dranichnikov v
the Full Court of
the Federal Court noted that opinion was tending to cohere around the concept
that all that was needed was that
the case was simply different from the
ordinary or out of the usual run. In
Department of Social Security v
French J commented as
The concept of special circumstances is broad. A constellation of factors,
including financial circumstances, may fall within it.
... The evident
is to enable a flexible response to the wide range of
situations which could give rise to hardship or unfairness in the event of
rigid application of a requirement for recovery of debt. It is inappropriate to
constrain that flexibility by imposing a narrow
or artificial construction upon
the words. ... to anticipate the limits of the categories of possible cases
by imposing on the language
of the section a fetter upon its application which
is not mandated by its words, is to erode its useful purpose.’
Groth v Secretary, Department of Social
Kiefel J said that
the special circumstances test:
.. would require something to distinguish Mr Groth’s case from others,
to take it out of the usual or ordinary case. ... It
would of course follow that
if one were to conclude that something unfair, unintended or unjust had occurred
that there must be some
feature out of the ordinary. ...
Riddell v Secretary, Department of Social
, the Full Court of
the Federal Court commented as follows:
Each particular case must be considered on its merits. It is the essential
nature of the provision to create a broad discretion to
meet the great variety
of circumstances which must occur, raising considerations of individual
hardship, need, fairness, reasonableness,
and whatever else may move an
administrator, keeping in mind the scope and purposes of the Act, to make a
decision one way or the
Besanko J made his own focused comment on the distinction
between “out of the ordinary” and uncommon” on the one
and “exceptional” on the other, as follows:
I also note that the authorities have emphasised time and again the
importance of maintaining flexibility in determining what constitutes
circumstances. The danger is that the test will be overstated if the word
‘exceptional’ is emphasised. It was
not the intention of Parliament
to confine the exercise of the discretion to an exceptional case. There is less
risk of overstatement
if the words ‘unusual’ or
‘uncommon’ are emphasised. Those words indicate, correctly in my
view, the fact
that there must be something that distinguishes the case from the
ordinary or usual case. It may not be easy to postulate the ordinary
case other than in quite general terms and, in doing so, close attention must be
given to the particular statutory context.
the above it does not appear that there is a significant difference between
special and exceptional circumstances, each of them
requiring circumstances that
are unusual or out of the ordinary, although the comments by Besanko J in
suggest that “exceptional” sets a more demanding
test. The Explanatory Statement accompanying the Bill for the MAI Act
no indication whether the adoption of the “exceptional
circumstances” test was intended to be more demanding
“special circumstances” test.
the above one can draw the following conclusions about the assessment to
determine whether an applicant meets the exceptional
circumstances
(a) The first step is to test whether the applicant’s circumstances fall
within the four particular cases specified in clause
5 of the Treatment and Care
Guidelines. If they do, the person’s circumstances are exceptional; if
they do not, the circumstances
are to be tested against the usual meaning of the
(b) All the applicant’s circumstances, taken together, are to be taken
into account.
(c) There is no single formula or set of standard criteria to be applied; the
question is whether the circumstances meet the usual
“exceptional” – whether they are out of the ordinary, unusual,
special or uncommon; but they do not
need to be extraordinary or unique.
Clearly, the more unusual the circumstances the easier it will be for the
conclusion to be drawn
that they are exceptional; but while the words of Besanko
might suggest that “exceptional” is more
unusual than “special”, the comments of Rares J in
encourage any such distinction to be made cautiously. In marginal cases, whether
circumstances are exceptional is the kind of
judgment on which reasonable minds
might differ.
(d) The test is intended to be broad and flexible, in order to take account of
the wide range of possible circumstances that might
need to be considered.
(e) Following
, ignorance of the MAI Act is not of itself an
exceptional circumstance; but the phrase “of itself” suggests that
particular case, ignorance of the Act might be taken into account as one of
several circumstances contributing to the making of the
then to Mr Axell, the circumstances to be considered include the
(a) He was using the road or footpath as a pedestrian or in riding a scooter
when struck by the insured’s vehicle (the police
report not having been
filed, I am unaware of the details).
(b) After examination by paramedics he was advised to walk home, thinking
himself uninjured.
(c) An injury became apparent a short time later.
(d) The Christmas-New Year break caused further delay, in obtaining imaging of
the injured knee.
(e) By the time Mr Axell had surgery he was close to the 13 week deadline, and
by the time of his recovery from surgery he was apparently
(f) Having not been in a vehicle at the time of the accident Mr Axell had no
insurer of his own to help him through the process.
(g) Having thought he was uninjured, he had not secured the details of the
vehicle with the thoroughness that he would have applied
if conscious of an
injury requiring medical treatment.
(h) After tracking down the details through the police report, Mr Axell delayed
lodging his claim for a further period, amounting
to about nine months.
list does not include Mr Axell’s ignorance of the MAI Act, in line with
the view stated in
Mr Axell appears not to have been trained in
the law, but only a moderate amount of research would have led him to the MAI
although the legislation is not without its complexities, the clear
identification of Part 2.3 of the Act, headed “Application
for Defined
Benefits”, should have provided a signal of where to start. Mr Axell is
plainly an educated person. I have not
taken his ignorance of the MAI Act into
for the advice that Mr Axell said he sought from “an injury compensation
lawyer”, he says that advice was to the effect
that he should consult
“a website” and that he had twelve months to make a claim. But the
quality of the evidence is
very poor – there is no documentary
corroboration, the lawyer is not named, the website is not identified and the
the lawyer’s advice is entirely hearsay.
Axell does not meet the test set in clause 5 of the Treatment and Care
Guidelines. Nevertheless, the events do seem in the main
to be out of the
ordinary or uncommon, especially the accident having occurred when he was not in
a vehicle, the advice that he was
uninjured and the delayed onset of injury; and
the loss of the details about the vehicle seems a direct result of the paramedic
at the accident that he was uninjured. While some of the other events are
unexceptional in themselves, I have no hesitation in finding
Axell’s circumstances, taken as a whole, were exceptional.
events adequately explain missing the 13-week deadline, but the further nine
months’ delay detracts from the picture. Ms
Aniversario focused on that
aspect, pointing to the way in which the MAI scheme was intended to allow motor
accident injury matters
to be resolved quickly. In my view these considerations
are best taken into account when contemplating whether to exercise the
– that is, they go to whether the exceptional circumstances
justify the backdating of benefits, and, accordingly, are considered
Do the circumstances justify the backdating of the
treatment and care benefits?
128 establishes that benefits may be paid from the date of the accident for a
late application for which the insurer has accepted
liability where the insurer
is “satisfied on reasonable grounds that there are exceptional
circumstances justifying the earlier
payment”. I think in most cases the
discretion, once enlivened, will be exercised, although it is easy enough to
imagine exceptional
circumstances which would fail to justify earlier payment
– an unexpected and remarkable stroke of good fortune for the applicant,
for example, might not encourage an insurer to make such an adjustment. The
wording of section 128 means that the focus throughout
applicant’s circumstances – these circumstances, taken as a whole,
must be exceptional, to enliven the discretion,
and must be such as to justify
the bringing forward of the date for payment of treatment and care benefits.
Generally speaking, the
circumstances will justify the exercise of the
discretion where it would be unfair, or unjust, or unreasonable, to deny the
to the applicant.
the present instance, Mr Axell’s circumstances would seem to suggest that
he should receive the benefits. A person struck
by a vehicle while walking or on
a scooter should not be left without recourse unless there has been some foolish
or unlawful element
in use of the road - and no suggestion along those lines has
been made in this matter. The complicating factor is the elapsed time.
lodged his application in, say, March or April 2024 it would have been easier to
reach the conclusion that, in all the
circumstances, benefits should be paid
from the date of the accident. But Mr Axell delayed by about nine months in
lodging his application,
and his only explanation for the delay is that he
thought it would be better to lodge his application when “all expenses
known”. I do not regard this as a reasonable excuse, as he cannot
have known with any certainty whether further medical attention
to his knee may
have been needed at some later time.
Axell provided a what he says is a complete list of his treatment and care
amounts claimed, as set out in the following
Treatment and care
Physiotherapy
Dr Mark Porter
Initial surgical consult
Dr Mark Porter
Capital Chemist
Pharmaceuticals
Dr Trevor K Law
Surgical assistant
Dr Senthan Ponniah
Anaesthetist
Post-surgical brace
Emily Hargreaves
Physiotherapy
Emily Hargreaves
Physiotherapy
Emily Hargreaves
Physiotherapy
Emily Hargreaves
Physiotherapy
Emily Hargreaves
Physiotherapy
Emily Hargreaves
Physiotherapy
Emily Hargreaves
Physiotherapy
Emily Hargreaves
Physiotherapy
Emily Hargreaves
Physiotherapy
Angus Whittle
Physiotherapy
Angus Whittle
Physiotherapy
Dr B Pillalomarry
GP medical report
Dr B Pillalomarry
GP medical report
the above expenditures, Mr Axell was reimbursed by the respondent a total of
$365 being the two medical report fees charged by
Dr Pillalomarry and the final
physiotherapy appointment with Angus Whittle. This left him $9,643.13 out of
pocket (assuming all the
expenses were referable to the accident).
examination of the above list reinforces the impression that the delay in making
the claim is difficult to regard as anything except
neglect by the applicant of
his own interests. By early April 2024 he had sustained most of the expenses,
with a string of physiotherapy
appointments all that was to follow. Mr Axell did
not act with anything approaching expedition in making his claim, and his
explanation
during the hearing – that his work was exceptionally demanding
and busy over the period – does not seem adequate; even
when busy, people
can mostly manage to attend to their essential interests.
is plain that Mr Axell has slept on his rights. Yet the circumstances of Mr
Axell’s claim remain exceptional, in my view,
and apart from the delay in
making the claim, certainly point to reasonable justification of the earlier
payment. Ms Aniversario
pointed to the importance of prompt resolution of
applicants’ claims as an essential part of the MAI scheme, noting that,
the earlier scheme that it replaced, applicants with complex or contested
claims had waited as long as eight years for resolution.
I accept the importance
of avoiding delay, as a central part of the scheme, and I note that promptness
is recognised in both the
objects of the MAI Act and in the “good
faith” provisions.
case, however, the need for “quick” or “prompt”
resolution of applications is associated with a requirement
“just” outcomes. I note, too, that the reference to promptness (and
to justice) seems to relate only to applications
that have already been made and
claims that have already been lodged. The objects of the Act include ensuring
that benefits are available
to people injured in motor accidents “subject
to some exclusions and limitations”, and it seems that Mr Axell has
encountered
one of those exclusions. But the objects also include supporting
injured people in accessing benefits; and that encourages me to
believe that, at
the margins, people should have access to benefits rather than be denied them.
In the present instance, it seems
to me therefore that the wish for a just
outcome should prevail: the respondent has before it Mr Axell’s itemised
claims; the
lapse of time is not so great as to have led to lost evidence and
documentation; the respondent’s interests do not seem otherwise
prejudiced; the circumstances that Mr Axell has called to attention all relate
to or are ancillary to, the accident; and those
circumstances seem to me to be
plainly exceptional.
my view, the respondent should pay the applicant’s claim from the date of
the accident. Naturally, each expense would need
to be justified against the
criteria in section 113 of the MAI Act.
decision under review is set aside. In substitution I have decided that
treatment and care benefits for the applicant are to be
paid from the date of
the accident.
The Tribunal orders that:
respondent’s decision of 13 January 2025 to affirm payment of treatment
and care benefits to the application only from 13
weeks before the date on which
he lodged his application is set aside.
respondent is ordered to pay treatment and care benefits to the applicant from
the date of the accident.
......................................
Senior Member M Hyman
***************
[1 August 2025]
[Correcting the name referenced in paragraph 5 from Motor Accident
Insurance Commission to Motor Accident Injuries Commission]
MAI Act s 6
MAI Act Part 1.3
MAI Act s 25
MAI Act, ss 6(a), (c) and
MAI Act, s 20(2)(b)
MAI Act s 38
MAI Act s 33
MAI Act, s 34
MAI Act, s 39
MAI Act, s 58
MAI Act, s 59
MAI Act, s 110
MAI Act, s 112
MAI Act, s 113
MAI Act, s 128
MAI Act s 186 and Schedule
1, Part 1.1, item 23
MAI Act s 187
MAI Act s 188
MAI Act s 191
MAI Act s 192 and Schedule
1, Part 1.2, item 28
MAI Act s 193
Transcript of proceedings, 3
June 2025, page 4
Transcript of proceedings, 3
June 2025, pages 11-12
Transcript of proceedings, 3
June 2025, page 21
[2022] ACAT 24
[2021] ACAT 100
[2024] ACAT 60
NAI Act, ss 58, 59
[2005] FCAFC 196
[1991] FCA 212
, [21] (Pincus
MAI Act, s 197
[2025] ACAT 45
[2007] FCA 388
[1999] UKHL 4
[2000] QB 198
at 208 (Lord Bingham of Cornhill
[2011] FWAFB 975
, at [13-14]
[2007] FCA 25
, at [26-33]
1984 AATA 176
[2003] FCAFC 133
[1997] FCA 1565
[1995] FCA 1708
[1993] FCA 261
MAI Act, ss 6(d),
RTF format (337 KB)
Signed PDF/A format