DPP v Wilson (a pseudonym) (No 2) [2025] ACTCA 13 (14 April 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
DPP v Wilson (a pseudonym) (No 2)
[2025] ACTCA 13
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Mossop, Loukas-Karlsson and Baker JJ
(1) Appeal dismissed.
(2) Order (1) does not preclude the prosecution from filing an amended
tendency notice which relies on the tendencies that were relied
upon by the
prosecution in the trial before McCallum CJ from 26 September 2023 to 10 October
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– tendency evidence – acts of indecency to
persons under 16 years by a young person – whether in the interests
justice to revisit pre-trial ruling admitting tendency evidence – whether
presumption of significant probative value under
s 97A of the
Evidence Act
was displaced – where prosecution sought to rely on different tendency
to that specified in the tendency notice – appeal
Legislation Cited:
Court Procedures Act 2004
Crimes Act 1900
Evidence Act 2011
Supreme Court Act 1933
Cases Cited:
[2015] NSWCCA 327
257 A Crim R 340
Davidson (a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] NSWCCA 60
DPP v Alexander
(a pseudonym) (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 413
DPP v Wilson (a pseudonym)
[2023] ACTSC 100
DPP v Wilson (a pseudonym) (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 286
DPP v Wilson
(a pseudonym)
[2025] ACTCA 4
Hughes v The Queen
[2017] HCA 20
263 CLR 338
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
Jacobs (a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] VSCA 309
Parkinson v Alexander
[2017] ACTSC 201
R v Bauer (a pseudonym)
[2018] HCA 40
[2023] NSWCCA 123
111 NSWLR 501
[2024] NTSC 56
R v Sean (a pseudonym) (No 2)
[2023] ACTSC 132
Sharman (a pseudonym) v The King
[2023] VSCA 56
TL v The Queen
[2022] HCA 35
Texts Cited:
Council of Australian Attorneys-General,
(1 December
Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse
(Criminal Justice Report, Executive Summary and
– II, 2017)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Appellant)
Joseph Wilson (a pseudonym) (Respondent)
Representation:
V Engel SC & B Chifuntwe (Appellant)
A Williamson SC & J Cunliffe (Respondent)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
AKN & Associates (Respondent)
File Number:
ACTCA 28 of 2024
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: ACT Supreme Court
Before: Taylor J
Date of Decision: 16 September 2024
Case Title: DPP v Wilson (a pseudonym) (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 286
respondent has been charged with indecently assaulting two sisters, LO and FO
(the complainants). The Director of Public Prosecutions
(the Director) seeks to
rely on the evidence of each complainant as tendency evidence in support of
proof of the counts on the indictment
relating to the other complainant. The
prosecution submits that because of the cross-admissibility of this evidence,
the charges
relating to the two sisters should be tried together.
a pretrial judgment delivered on 5 May 2023, Berman AJ held that the prosecution
was permitted to adduce tendency evidence in the
respondent’s trial:
DPP v Wilson (a pseudonym)
[2023] ACTSC 100
Wilson (No 1)
respondent was subsequently tried on an indictment containing counts relating to
both complainants before a jury of twelve, presided
over by McCallum CJ, which
commenced on 26 September 2023. In that trial, her Honour directed the jury that
they could engage in
tendency reasoning with respect to the evidence of both
complainants. The jury were unable to reach a unanimous agreement with respect
to any of the counts on the indictment, and were discharged on 10 October 2023.
the course of the trial, McCallum CJ granted the prosecution leave to amend the
dates specified in a number of counts in the
indictment. As a result of the
amendments, the dates pleaded incorporated periods where both LO (the younger
sister) and the respondent
were younger than was originally averred.
the discharge of the jury, the Director determined that the respondent should be
retried. Prior to the commencement of the
retrial, the respondent made an
application to revisit Berman AJ’s orders, contending that this course was
justified by the
amendment of the indictment.
a judgment delivered on 19 September 2024, Taylor J (the primary judge)
acceded to this application, holding that the prosecution
was not permitted to
adduce the tendency evidence relating to LO in support of the counts on the
indictment relating to FO. Her Honour
accordingly directed that the indictment
be severed, with the counts relating to LO to be tried separately to those
relating to FO.
Director appeals against this decision. As the decision is interlocutory in
character, the Director requires leave to appeal:
Court Act 1933
(ACT). On 31 January 2025, Mossop J granted leave to
appeal on two grounds, namely that:
(a) The primary judge erred in concluding that it was in the interests of
justice to revisit the earlier pre-trial ruling made by
Berman AJ on 5 May 2023;
(b) Her Honour erred in concluding that the presumption of significant probative
value of the tendency evidence was displaced.
the reasons outlined below, the appeal should be dismissed.
allegations
The original indictment
an indictment dated 12 January 2022, the respondent was charged with nine counts
of sexual offending against two sisters –
LO (born in 2003) and FO (born
in 1996). The respondent was born on 15 February 1993 and turned 18 on 15
February 2011.
1 to 3 on the indictment alleged acts of indecency against LO (three counts
commit act of indecency on a person under the age
of 10 years contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
Counts 4 to 9 alleged acts of indecency
against FO (one count commit act of indecency on a person under the age of 16
years contrary
, four count commit act of indecency
without consent contrary to
, one count assault with
intent to commit act of indecency contrary to
The allegations relating to LO
respondent’s family and LO and FO’s families were close friends. The
sisters would visit the respondent’s home
from time to time and he also
visited their home from time to time.
1 and 2 on the indictment relate to an alleged incident which occurred when LO
went with other members of her family to the
respondent’s family home. The
prosecution alleges that at one point in the evening, LO went to the front room
of the home with
the respondent and her brother to watch television. The
respondent asked LO to sit on his lap. She did so. After a while, the respondent
asked if he could tickle LO. LO agreed.
respondent then rubbed LO’s arms and legs with his hands and began kissing
LO’s arms and her cheek. The respondent
asked LO to kiss him on the cheek.
As she went to do that, the respondent turned his head so that LO ended up
kissing him on the
mouth. The respondent placed a hand on the back of LO’s
head during that kiss. This alleged conduct is the subject of Count
indictment.
prosecution alleges that after kissing LO, the respondent then moved his hands
inside LO’s shirt and placed his hands on
her chest and stomach. The
respondent then moved his hand inside LO’s leggings. The respondent then
alternated between having
his hands on LO and inside her underwear, touching her
genitals. The respondent did not penetrate LO. This lasted about 5 to 10
This alleged conduct is the subject of Count 2 on the indictment.
3 relates to a separate incident, which is also alleged to have occurred at the
respondent’s home. On this occasion,
LO, her brother and the respondent
again went to the front room to watch television. LO’s brother played
video games, sitting
on a stool close to the TV. The respondent and LO sat on
one of the couches at the back of the room. The respondent asked LO if he
tickle her. She agreed. The respondent picked up one of LO’s arms and
began kissing it. He started kissing her further
up her arm. LO’s brother
turned around when the respondent’s kisses reached LO’s neck. The
respondent said something
to the effect of that he was “blowing air into a
balloon”. LO’s brother then turned back to face the television.
the original indictment, these two incidents are alleged to have occurred
between February 2011 and January 2013. At this time,
LO was between 7 and 9
years old, and the respondent was 18 or 19 years old.
The allegations relating to FO
is seven years and six months
older than LO. The complaints relating to
FO were alleged to have occurred when FO was between 14 years and 22 years and
the respondent
was between 17 years and 25 years. Chronologically, the
allegations are as follows.
2010 and 2012, it is alleged that the respondent would make comments to FO about
the size of her breasts and the attractiveness
of her bottom whilst the
respondent was babysitting FO and her siblings during the school holidays. It is
also alleged that between
2008 and 14 February 2014, when FO was aged between
12 and 17 years, and the respondent was aged between 15 and 20 years, the
pulled FO into his room. It is alleged that on one or two occasions,
the respondent pushed FO onto his bed and ran his hands up and
down her back
(uncharged conduct).
14 February 2011 and 15 February 2012
when FO was 15 years old and the
respondent was between 17 and 18 years old, the respondent came to FO’s
house, and said that
he wanted to borrow FO’s brother’s games
console. It is alleged that the respondent pulled the complainant into the front
lounge room of her house, and that he held her down and kissed her neck a number
of times. The respondent is also alleged to have
rubbed FO’s genitals over
her clothes. FO could feel that the respondent had an erection (count 4). The
respondent then tried
to pull FO to his car, but stopped when FO’s brother
came outside and asked what they were doing.
14 February 2011 and 15 February 2013, when FO was 15 or 16 years old and the
respondent was 18 or 19 years old, the respondent
touched FO’s bottom a
number of times whilst they were at a family friend’s party. FO repeatedly
asked the respondent
to stop (count 5).
next charges concerning FO are alleged to have occurred between 14 February 2012
and 15 February 2014,
when FO was 16 or 17 years old and was at the
respondent’s family home. As the complainant walked to the bathroom, the
grabbed her and pulled her into his room. He pushed FO onto his bed
and kissed her (counts 6 and 7).
14 February 2012 and 15 February 2015, when FO was around 17 years old, she, the
respondent, the respondent’s sister,
and the respondent’s
sister’s boyfriend were watching a movie in the theatre room of the
respondent’s family home.
The respondent suggested to his sister and her
boyfriend that they might wish to leave the room. After they did so, the
picked FO up and put her down on the couch, holding her so that she
could not move. He then kissed her neck and moved his hand between
inner thighs and rubbed her genitals over the top of her clothes (count 8). FO
told the respondent that she was uncomfortable
and that she did not like what he
was doing. The respondent told FO to be quiet. This incident ended when the
respondent’s
sister and boyfriend returned to the room.
final count on the indictment was alleged to have occurred in 2017, when FO was
21 years old. She and the respondent went to the
respondent’s
sister’s wedding, which was held overseas. The respondent flirted with FO
at the wedding, but FO told the
respondent that she was not interested in him
(uncharged conduct). After the wedding, a reception was held at the
respondent’s
family home in Canberra. The respondent’s mother became
intoxicated, and FO offered to take her to her bedroom. After FO left
bedroom, she saw the respondent, who was standing outside the room. She spoke to
the respondent. The respondent then pushed FO
up against the wall, grabbed her
breasts and squeezed them (Count 9).
The Tendency
12 April 2023, the prosecution filed an Amended Tendency Notice. In that Notice,
the prosecution set out a description of each
of the incidents that are the
subject of the counts on the indictment, as well as the uncharged conduct
referred to at [18], [20]
and [21] above.
1 and 2 were particularised in the Amended Tendency Notice as Incident 1; Count
3 was particularised as Incident 2; the uncharged
conduct relating to the
appellant making comments on FO’s appearance summarised at [18] above was
particularised as Incident
3; Counts 4 and 5 were particularised as Incidents 4
and 5 respectively; Counts 6 and 7 were particularised as Incident 6; the
conduct relating to the appellant pulling FO into his bedroom
summarised at [20] above was particularised as Incident 7; Count 8
particularised as Incident 8; the uncharged conduct summarised at [21] above was
particularised as Incident 9; and Count 9 was
particularised as Incident 10.
Amended Tendency Notice particularised the tendencies to be relied upon as
That the accused had a tendency to act in particular ways, namely:
1. To act upon his sexual interest in children (Incidents 1 – 8);
2. To act upon his sexual interest in LO (Incidents 1 – 2);
3. To act upon his sexual interest in FO (Incidents 3 – 10);
4. To act in opportunistic ways at his home to act on his sexual interests [sic]
(Incidents 1 – 3; 5 – 8; 10).
That the accused had a tendency to have a particular states of mind [sic],
have a sexual interest in children (Incidents 1 – 8);
have a sexual interest in LO (Incidents 1 – 2);
3. To have a sexual interest in FO (Incidents 3 – 10).
proceedings below and on appeal proceeded on the basis that the only particulars
upon which the evidence of LO and FO were said
to be cross-admissible were
particulars 1 and 4 (that is, “to have a sexual interest in
children”, “to act upon
his sexual interest in children, and
“to act in opportunistic ways at his home to act on his sexual
interests”). Particulars
2 and 3 (“to act upon his sexual interest
in LO”, “to act upon his sexual interest in FO”, “to
a sexual interest in LO” and “to have a sexual interest in
LO”) were only sought to be employed in support of the
counts relating to
that individual complainant.
The decision
of Berman AJ admitting the tendency
Justice Berman heard the prosecution’s application to adduce tendency
evidence on 24 April 2023.
respondent did not object to the tendency evidence sought to be relied on by the
prosecution insofar as it related to each individual
complainant. That is, there
was no dispute that the evidence relating to the counts relating to LO (counts
1, 2 and 3) was cross-admissible,
and the evidence relating to FO (the uncharged
acts and counts 4 – 9) was cross-admissible. The respondent’s
was to the tendencies relating to one sister being led in proof of the
acts against the other, and
. If accepted, the necessary
consequence would be that the counts relating to LO would need to be severed
from the counts relating
respondent accepted that because LO and FO were under the age of 18 years at the
time of the alleged acts,
Evidence Act 2011
applied, and hence that there was a presumption that the proposed tendency
evidence had significant probative value:
. However, the respondent submitted that there were exceptional
circumstances which justified the taking into account of a number
, and that, taking those matters into account, the presumption
that the tendency evidence had significant probative value was rebutted.
a judgment delivered on 5 May 2023, Berman AJ held that the tendency evidence
was cross-admissible with respect to each complainant:
DPP v Wilson (No 1)
[2023] ACTSC 100
Wilson (No 1)
). In so holding, his Honour accepted
that there were “exceptional circumstances” permitting consideration
of a number
Wilson (No 1)
at [36]. In
particular, his Honour explained that there is a “very big
difference” between an 18 year old indecently assaulting
a 7 or 8 year old
girl, and a 17 year old making sexualised comments to a 14 year old girl and
then committing acts of indecency
upon her when she was 15 years old, and he was
18 years old: whilst the former has paedophilic qualities, the latter may be
as “an adolescent male acting on a sexual attraction to an
age-appropriate friend”:
Wilson (No 1)
found that the circumstances were exceptional, his Honour took into account the
factors referred to in
ss 97A(5)(b)
, (c) and (d) of the
Evidence Act
Wilson (No 1)
at [36]. However, after taking these matters into account,
his Honour was not satisfied that the presumption of significant probative
had been rebutted:
Wilson (No 1)
at [55]. In reaching this conclusion,
his Honour noted that:
(i) The two complainants “are sisters, and, obviously, part of the same
family which has a friendly relationship with the accused’s
Wilson (No 1)
at [41]. His Honour continued, “[t]he demonstrated
tendency is much more than a tendency relating to children or young women
generally. It is a tendency to have a sexual interest in girls from a particular
family and to act on that sexual interest from time
(ii) Apart from one charge (count 5, which allegedly occurred at a party of a
family friend), all of the alleged offending occurred
either in the home of the
accused or the home of the complainants:
Wilson (No 1)
(iii) All of the offences are alleged to have occurred when other people,
particularly family members were nearby:
Wilson (No 1)
at [43]. His
Honour considered that this aspect of the complaints was “particularly
probative”, noting that this feature
of alleged offending was also
considered to be significant by the High Court in
Hughes v The Queen
[2017] HCA 20
263 CLR 338
(iv) None of the allegations involved any form of penetrative sexual activity:
Wilson (No 1)
at [44]. Further, neither complainant alleges that she
was forced, or even encouraged, to touch the respondent’s genitals:
Wilson (No 1)
Honour accepted that there was a prospect of the jury having an emotional or
irrational response to LO’s evidence, but considered
emotional reaction on the part of a juror in hearing the allegations made by LO
is not likely to be so extreme that
appropriate directions [would be] unable to
achieve an unemotional consideration of the evidence by that juror”:
Wilson (No 1)
at [58] – [65]. His Honour accordingly rejected the
respondent’s contention that the evidence should be excluded under
Evidence Act
Honour ordered as follows:
Leave is granted to file the amended notice of intention to adduce tendency
evidence dated 12 April 2023.
The prosecution be permitted to adduce tendency evidence as notified in the
amended notice of intention to adduce tendency evidence
dated 12 April 2023.
Amended Tendency Notice referred to in his Honour’s orders is relevantly
extracted at [26] above.
before McCallum CJ
respondent’s trial commenced before McCallum CJ and a jury of 12 on
26 September 2023. The respondent pleaded not guilty
to each count on the
indictment. His case was that the alleged offending did not occur.
original indictment upon which the respondent was arraigned before the jury
particularised the offences against LO as occurring
“between 15 February
2011 and 1 January 2013”. LO was aged between 7 and 9 years and the
appellant was aged between 18
and 19 years at this time.
3 October 2023 (day 5 of the trial), following LO’s cross-examination, the
prosecutor made an application to amend counts
1 – 3 on the indictment
relating to LO. The amendment was to expand the date range of each alleged
offence from “between
15 February 2011 and 1 January 2013” (as
originally particularised) to “between 1 January 2009 and 1 January
The prosecutor explained that the amendment was sought because, in
cross-examination, LO had accepted that counts 1 – 3 could
have occurred
at any time between when she was in kindergarten and year 2, although LO
maintained that she believed that she was
between six or seven.
opposing the proposed amendment, counsel for the respondent referred to the
earlier tendency ruling, but did not seek to revisit
the ruling. Chief Justice
McCallum granted the prosecution leave to amend the tendency notice. The
prosecutor did not seek to amend
the tendency notice to take account of the
amended dates in the indictment.
his closing address to the jury, the prosecutor described the tendency evidence
in the following terms:
An important part of this case is what is called tendency evidence. The accused
is charged with a number of offences. You have heard
evidence about them from
both sisters and the people that they later told growing up. The Crown says that
what the accused did by
indecently touching them demonstrated a tendency to have
sexual interest in the sisters from the family and to act on that sexual
interest from time to time.
describing the tendency evidence, the prosecutor told the jury:
You probably will have noticed the similarity in the circumstances in which the
conduct occurred. Where it occurred mostly either
at the accused’s home or
at the home of the sisters during their family gatherings. And significantly,
both girls describe
occasions of being indecently assaulted by the accused when
other people, particularly family members were nearby. Notwithstanding
of detection, there was that sort of brazenness in how he dealt with both girls
Her Honour will tell you that if you’re satisfied beyond a reasonable
doubt that any of the charged incidents occurred and
that you can infer from
that incident that the accused had a tendency to have a sexual interest in
sisters from the family and act
on it from time to time, then you can use that
fact in determining whether the accused committed each of the other charges that
will need to consider on the indictment.
That is, you can use the fact that he indecently assaulted one of the sisters to
corroborate or make it significantly more likely
that he indecently assaulted
the other in the way that they have told us. Can I suggest that it’s more
understandable that
the accused committed each of the offences in the way that
LO and FO told us once you know that he was sexually attracted to them
them to obtain that sort of fleeting sexual gratification.
reference was otherwise made by the prosecutor to any of the tendencies
described in the Amended Tendency Notice.
the conclusion of the prosecutor’s address, the respondent’s counsel
indicated that he wished to “note for the
record that there’s been a
change in the way the tendency evidence was put”. However, he said that he
did not “want
to say anything more about it”. In response, McCallum
CJ invited the respondent’s counsel to make further submissions
issue, emphasising “if it’s likely to create an unfairness, I want
to deal with it now, not in the Court of Appeal”.
respondent’s counsel then referred to the tendency notice (extracted above
at [26]). Her Honour responded:
[I]f you go to the end of Berman AJ’s judgment, I rather took his Honour
to reject that [a tendency to have a general sexual
interest in children]
implicitly in paragraph 64. You said there was a real danger that the jury would
improperly use the evidence
to find he has a sexual interest in children more
broadly. I’ve picked up on that. I’ve said its not alleged to be a
tendency to have a sexual interest in children more broadly. It’s focused
on the sisters which was the way the prosecutor put
it. So I thought he narrowed
the tendency rather than broadening it. I assumed that was in relation to this
to the remarks of Berman
Honour then read her proposed direction to counsel. That direction noted that
the prosecution did not rely on a general tendency
to have a sexual interest in
children generally, and emphasised that the tendency alleged was to “have
a sexual interest in
girls from a particular family”.
hearing the proposed direction, counsel for the respondent indicated that his
concern was with the change in formulation from
“fleeting acts” to
“obtain sexual gratification”. The respondent’s counsel
pointed out that “none
of [this] was particularised”. However,
counsel for the respondent continued...
I take your Honour’s point that what my
learned friend might have done is narrowed it in the way that his Honour, Berman
has done in his decision. I don’t want to say anything more about it.
I think the way your Honour has – what your Honour
has read out, I
don’t take issue with that...
further submissions were made concerning the proposed direction.
her summing up, McCallum CJ directed the jury in the terms which she had
proposed. In particular, her Honour directed:
Members of the jury. Part of the Crown case is that
the accused had a
to have a sexual interest in girls
from a particular family, that is KO and FO, and to act on that interest from
time to time by engaging
in opportunistic or fleeting acts of indecency
acts are said to have been opportunistic because they were committed in the
family home or a family home either of the accused
or the complainant or
possibly another family in the presence of a family member or when other family
members were nearby in the
house. The Crown says you would be satisfied the
accused had this tendency because of his conduct in the counts on the indictment
and also other conduct. (emphasis added)
briefly referring to the evidence of the uncharged acts and the counts on the
indictment, her Honour continued:
Be careful about this; however,
it’s not alleged that the accused had a
sexual interest in children more broadly
, the allegation concerns LO and FO,
sisters whom the accused saw regularly in the context of family gatherings.
Obviously, there’s
a significant difference between having a sexual
interest in a prepubescent girl as LO was at the time, she alleges she was
and the alleged offending against FO who was older and closer in age to
the accused. (emphasis added)
jury retired to consider their verdicts on 9 October 2023. On 10 October 2023,
the jury were discharged, having been unable to
reach unanimous verdicts with
respect to any of the counts on the indictment.
The primary
judge’s decision excluding the tendency
the discharge of the jury, the then Acting Director determined to retry the
respondent on the indictment as amended by McCallum
CJ in the first trial.
30 August 2024, the respondent filed an application in proceeding seeking,
amongst other rulings, leave to revisit Berman AJ’s
tendency ruling on the
ground that the amendment to the indictment had materially altered the basis
upon which that ruling was made.
a judgment delivered on 19 September 2024, the primary judge found that it was
in the interests of justice to revisit Berman AJ’s
tendency decision
admitting the tendency evidence.
Berman AJ, her Honour considered that there were exceptional circumstances
which permitted consideration of a number of the matters
proscribed by
Evidence Act
Wilson (No 2)
at [48]. However, in contrast
to Berman AJ, her Honour held that the presumption in
had been displaced,
and that the tendency evidence did not have significant probative value:
Wilson (No 2)
to her Honour’s conclusion was the importance of the age of the
respondent. Her Honour noted that, on the amended indictment,
the respondent was
between 15 and 18 years of age at the time of the alleged offences, whereas
Berman AJ’s decision had been
predicated on a prosecution case that the
respondent was over the age of 18 at the time of each of the alleged offences:
Wilson (No 2)
primary judge considered that because of this youth, the respondent’s
behaviour could not necessarily be explained by reference
to patterns of
behaviour or fixed tendencies, referring to
R v Sean (a pseudonym) (No 2)
[2023] ACTSC 132
and the dissenting judgment of Adams J in
257 A Crim R 340:
Wilson (No 2)
at [65]–[66];
[68]–[70]. Whilst acknowledging that it is possible for conduct engaged
in by an accused young person to
be adduced as tendency evidence, her Honour
cautioned that an alleged tendency in a young person should be “carefully
scrutinised
because of what can be accepted as to the significance of the
developing brain and the limited opportunity a young person has to
tendencies”:
Wilson (No 2)
primary judge also observed that the ages of the sisters at the time when the
acts allegedly occurred were “markedly different”,
with the offences
against LO occurring at a time when LO was, “on any view,
prepubescent”, such that the conduct evinced
an “unequivocally
paedophilic” interest:
Wilson (No 2)
at [49]. In contrast, her
Honour observed that the offending against FO commenced when FO was 14 years old
(the uncharged acts) and
continued until she was 21 years old, which was an
“age appropriate” interest:
Wilson (No 2)
primary judge accepted that there was “undoubtedly some similarity”
between the incidents, as they occurred “for
the most part in the
accused’s home, there are other people present in the home and the
complainants [were] members of the
same family to whom the accused had
Wilson (No 2)
her Honour took into account that there were also differences in the conduct
alleged. First, the allegations relating to
LO began “playfully”,
but the incidents related to FO had an “air of menace and/or control about
Wilson (No 2)
at [58] – [59]. Second, the relationship
between LO and the respondent was akin to an “older brother”, while
relationship with FO was more in keeping with “friendship”:
Wilson (No 2)
at [62]. Third, her Honour was also of the view that the
conduct alleged with respect to LO did not reflect the same level of
“‘disinhibited
disregard’ of risk” as that displayed
with respect to FO:
Wilson (No 2)
her Honour also observed that the conduct towards FO had proceeded over an
extended period of time, whereas the conduct against
LO involved only two
occasions occurring in “very quick succession”, with “no
evidence that the ‘unusual’
sexual interest, being paedophilic in
nature, has ever been repeated”:
Wilson (No 2)
referring to the generality of the tendency alleged (namely, “a tendency
to have a sexual interest in children”
and to “act on that interest
opportunistically”), her Honour concluded (at [82] – [85]):
Returning to the two separate inferences employed in the tendency reasoning, the
combination of the relevant factors I have identified
in this matter, warrant
hesitation about attributing the conduct against LO to a tendency of the 15 or
16 year old accused to have
a sexual interest in children and in LO, and to act
on that sexual interest opportunistically.
Further, I am not satisfied that the evidence about the conduct directed toward
LO makes it more likely that the conduct directed
toward FO occurred.
I am satisfied that there are sufficient grounds to rebut the presumption of
significant probative value. Accordingly, the prosecution
should not be
permitted to adduce tendency evidence with respect to LO in the case against the
accused with respect to FO.
This does not disturb the prosecution’s reliance on tendency reasoning
with respect to FO.
primary judge accordingly ordered that the prosecution “is not permitted
to adduce the tendency evidence of Counts 1 –
3 in support of Counts 4
– 9 on the indictment”:
Wilson (No 2)
at [116(1)]. Her Honour
also directed that the indictment be severed, with Counts 1 – 3 (that is,
the counts relating to LO)
to be tried separately to Counts 4 – 9 (that
is, the counts relating to FO):
Wilson (No 2)
at [116(2)].
Mossop J observed in the leave decision, these orders only addressed the use of
the evidence concerning LO in support of the counts
relating to FO:
(a pseudonym)
[2025] ACTCA 4
. The orders are silent on
the question as to whether the evidence concerning FO may be used in support of
the counts concerning LO.
than [85] extracted at [61] above, and an earlier reference to the respondent
not seeking to “revisit the prosecution’s
reliance on tendency
evidence for Counts 4 to 9 in relation only to FO” (
Wilson (No 2)
at [13]), there was no explanation for this differentiation. These passages tend
to suggest that her Honour may have understood the
respondent’s challenge
to the tendency evidence to be limited to the use of LO’s evidence in
support of the counts relating
to FO, and not to extend to the use of FO’s
evidence in support of the counts relating to LO.
Section 97A
Evidence Act
than count 9 (which was alleged to have occurred when FO was between 21 and 22
years), each count on the indictment and each
of the uncharged acts sought to be
relied upon as tendency evidence concerned sexual offending that was alleged to
have occurred
when the complainants were under 18 years of age. In these
circumstances, it was common ground between the parties that
Evidence Act
applied to the prosecution’s application to adduce the
tendency evidence.
Evidence Act
provides as follows:
Admissibility of tendency evidence in proceedings involving child sexual
(1) This section applies in a criminal proceeding in which the commission by
the defendant of an act that constitutes, or may constitute,
a child sexual
offence is a fact in issue.
(2) It is presumed that the following tendency evidence about the defendant
will have significant probative value for
(1) (b) and
section 101
(a) tendency evidence about the sexual interest the defendant has or had in
children (even if the defendant has not acted on the
(b) tendency evidence about the defendant acting on a sexual interest the
defendant has or had in children.
(3) Subsection (2) applies whether or not the sexual interest or act to which
the tendency evidence relates was directed at a complainant
in the proceeding,
or any other child or children generally.
(4) Despite subsection (2), the court may determine that the tendency
evidence does not have significant probative value if it is
satisfied that there
are sufficient grounds to do so.
(5) The following matters (whether considered individually or in combination)
are not to be taken into account when determining whether
there are sufficient
grounds for subsection (4) unless the court considers there are exceptional
circumstances in relation to those
matters (whether considered individually or
in combination) to warrant taking them into account:
(a) the sexual interest or act to which the tendency evidence relates (the
tendency sexual interest or act) is different from the
sexual interest or act
alleged in the proceeding (the alleged sexual interest or act);
(b) the circumstances in which the tendency sexual interest or act occurred are
different from circumstances in which the alleged
sexual interest or act
(c) the personal characteristics of the subject of the tendency sexual interest
or act (for example, the subject’s age, sex
or gender) are different to
those of the subject of the alleged sexual interest or act;
(d) the relationship between the defendant and the subject of the tendency
sexual interest or act is different from the relationship
between the defendant
and the subject of the alleged sexual interest or act;
(e) the period of time between the occurrence of the tendency sexual interest or
act and the occurrence of the alleged sexual interest
(f) the tendency sexual interest or act and alleged sexual interest or act do
not share distinctive or unusual features;
(g) the level of generality of the tendency to which the tendency evidence
(6) In this section:
child sexual offence—
(a) means each of the following offences (however described and regardless of
when it occurred):
(i) an offence against, or arising under, a territory law involving sexual
intercourse with, or any other sexual offence against,
a person who was a child
at the time of the offence;
(ii) an offence against, or arising under, a territory law involving an unlawful
sexual act with, or directed towards, a person who
was a child at the time of
the offence;
(iii) an offence against, or arising under, a law of the Commonwealth, a State
or a foreign country that, if committed in the Territory,
would have been an
offence of a kind mentioned in subparagraph (i) or (ii); but
Note State includes the Northern Territory (see Legislation Act, dict, pt
(b) does not include conduct of a person that has ceased to be an offence since
the time when the person engaged in the conduct.
97A “effects a very significant departure from the previous state of the
[2023] NSWCCA 123
111 NSWLR 501
New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal observed in
The features described in subs 5(a) – (f), which the courts are now
forbidden from taking into account in the assessment of
whether putative
tendency evidence has significant probative value, comprise substantially all of
the criteria that, under the pre-existing
law, were regarded as the basis in
logic and common sense for comparing the sexual acts said to prove the tendency
with the sexual
acts said to prove the tendency with the sexual acts charged.
Davidson (a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] NSWCCA 60
, Adamson JA
(with who Stern JA and Wright J agreed) also noted that “[t]he threshold
of exceptional circumstances in relation
to the consideration of these matters
was chosen intentionally in order to set a high bar”.
97A of the ACT
Evidence Act
(which is in identical terms to the New South
Wales provision) was enacted for identical reasons. The introduction of
Evidence Act 2011
(ACT) followed an agreement by the Uniform
Evidence Law Council of Attorney General members to implement the Model Bill,
turn flowed from recommendations 44 to 51 of the Royal Commission into
Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse in its Criminal
Justice Report.
That report expressly recommended that changes be made in relation to the
admissibility of tendency evidence “to
facilitate greater admissibility
and cross-admissibility of tendency and coincidence evidence and joint
Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual
(Criminal Justice Report, Executive Summary and Parts I – II,
2017) at 65 – 75; Council of Australian Attorneys-General,
(1 December 2017).
legislature has not provided any guidance as to the criteria by which
“exceptional circumstances” may be discerned:
However, it is clear from the language of s 97A that Parliament intended
“that evidence that an accused person has
exhibited a sexual interest in
children, or has acted on such a sexual interest, should be deemed probative of
any child sexual offence
with which the person may be charged, in a very broad
field of circumstances”:
Determination
Standard of
Director has been granted leave to appeal against two orders of the primary
judge: first, her Honour’s order that the prosecution
is not permitted to
adduce tendency evidence of Counts 1 – 3 in support of Counts 4 – 9
of the indictment and second,
her Honour’s order that the indictment be
severed, with Counts 1 – 3 to be tried separately from Counts 4 –
to the appeal against the first order (the tendency decision), it is now
well-established that the correctness standard applies
to an appeal against a
decision of a trial judge which admits, or refuses to admit, tendency evidence
pursuant to
Evidence Act
whether or not the
appeal is against a final conviction, or an interlocutory decision or order:
R v Bauer (a pseudonym)
[2018] HCA 40
at [7] – [14].
Mr Williamson SC, who appeared for the respondent, submitted that the position
is different in an appeal such as the present,
which alleges error in the
anterior decision made by a trial judge under
Evidence Act
In particular, Mr Williamson SC submitted that the inclusion of the word
“clearly connotes a discretion”, such
that the Director must demonstrate
House v The King
error in the decision
appealed from.
do not agree. Decisions to admit or to exclude tendency evidence are made
and/or 101 of the
Evidence Act
Section 97A
is merely a
presumption that feeds into each decision. There is no indication in the text,
purpose or history of
which supports the proposition that the
enactment of that provision was intended to change the standard of review on an
appeal concerning
the admissibility of evidence as tendency evidence.
to Mr Williamson SC’s submissions, it matters not that the appeal grounds
specified in the Director’s appeal
are directed to the anterior
decision. The
appealed from under
Supreme Court
(ACT) are the orders which excluded the tendency evidence,
and which severed the counts on the indictment relating to LO from those
relating to FO.
Accordingly,
it follows that the Court is to determine for itself whether the tendency
evidence was admissible:
at [31]. Although the reasons of the
primary judge may be taken into account in this assessment, the Director
“need not show
any particular error, save as to outcome”:
to the appeal against the second order, this appeal, like the proceedings below,
has been conducted on the basis that the outcome
of the appeal against the
severance decision should follow the outcome of the appeal against the tendency
decision. That is, if the
appeal against the tendency decision is allowed, the
appeal against the order severing the trial should also be allowed; whereas
the appeal against the tendency decision is dismissed, the appeal against the
order severing the trial should also be dismissed.
Director’s first ground of appeal: Did the primary judge err in finding
that it was in the interests of justice to revisit
Berman AJ’s tendency
her first ground of appeal, the Director contended that the primary judge erred
in finding that it was in the interests of justice
to revisit Berman AJ’s
tendency decision: see
Court Procedures Act 2004
the Director’s written submissions, this ground of appeal was advanced as
an independent ground of appeal to the challenge
to the primary judge’s
determination relating to the admissibility of the tendency evidence. However,
in her oral submissions,
the Director appeared to accept that the first ground
of appeal did not relevantly add to the second ground of appeal, and that this
Court would not allow the appeal unless the second ground of appeal were
is unclear whether the Director’s ultimate contention in the first ground
of appeal was that the primary judge should not
have entertained the
respondent’s application to revisit Berman AJ’s tendency decision.
If this submission were advanced
and maintained, we would reject it.
her written submissions, the Director submitted that the expansion of the date
range in the amended indictment “did not make
any change to the substance
of the allegations against the respondent”, as there “remained a
continuum of conduct”
which demonstrated a “tendency on the part of
the respondent which was significantly probative”. In particular, the
submitted that the “substance” of the allegations did not
alter because LO had provided an interview in which she stated
(contrary to the
indictment) that she might have been as young as 6 years of age at the time of
the offending, so that the amendment
only reduced the date of the alleged
offences concerning LO by one year.
discussed further below, when assessing the probative value of tendency
evidence, the Court is obliged to proceed on the basis
of the particulars
provided in the tendency notice. The factual background set out by Berman AJ in
the tendency judgment accorded
with the indictment, and the Amended Tendency
Notice, and specified the dates of the alleged offences against LO as occurring
2011 and 2013:
Wilson (No 1)
amendment of the indictment to expand the dates for counts 1 to 3 to include
potential offending in 2009 had the effect of lowering
the potential ages of
both LO and the respondent at the time of the alleged offending for those counts
and also increased the potential
difference between the timing of the
allegations relating to LO and those relating to FO by up to two years.
the young ages of the respondent, LO and FO at the times in question, for each
of these matters, an adjustment of even one year
had the capacity to materially
affect the assessment of the probative value of the tendency evidence. It
follows that the primary
judge did not err in considering the respondent’s
application to revisit Berman AJ’s tendency ruling.
Director’s second ground of appeal: Does the tendency evidence have
significant probative value?
cases to which
Evidence Act
applies, the assessment of the
probative value of tendency evidence sought to be adduced by the prosecution may
proceed in the following
three stages:
(i) The matters relevant to the assessment of the probative value of the
evidence should be identified;
(ii) If one or more of the matters identified at (i) above are within
Evidence Act
, a decision must be made about whether there are
exceptional circumstances such as to warrant taking that matter or matters into
account. If this question is answered in the negative for any matter(s), those
matter(s) must be excluded from the court’s
assessment of the probative
value at stage 3 below. If this question is answered in the affirmative for
any matter(s), those matter(s)
may be considered in the court’s assessment
of the probative value of the evidence at stage 3 below;
(iii) An assessment must then be made of the probative value of the evidence,
taking into account any matters that do not fall within
and any matters
which fall within
for which exceptional circumstances have been
established, to determine whether the presumption in
the present case, the matters which the respondent invites the Court to consider
(a) the age of the respondent, particularly at the time of the alleged offending
against LO (namely, between 15 and 18 years of age);
(b) the “potentially ... significant time period” between the
conduct alleged between the two complainants;
(c) the difference in the ages of the respective complainants;
(d) the difference in the length of time in which the sexual interest is evinced
with respect to FO as against LO;
(e) the difference in the relationship between the respondent and each
complainant;
(f) the differences in the sexual interest and the conduct which is the subject
of the tendency evidence; and
(g) the generality of the tendencies alleged.
age of the respondent at the time of the alleged offending is not one of the
matters listed in
Evidence Act
. It is also apparent
from the extrinsic materials that young accused persons were not within
Parliament’s contemplation in
the drafting of
Accordingly, as
the Director properly accepted, the respondent was not required to demonstrate
that exceptional circumstances exist
for that matter be taken into consideration
in assessing whether the
presumption has been displaced.
remaining matters identified above each fall within
ss 97A(5)(a)
, (b), (c), (d) and (g). However, the age of the
respondent at the time of the alleged offending alters the character of the
in ways which heighten the potential importance of each in this case.
For example, as discussed further at [93] below, whilst a difference
three years in alleged offending may not be of any particular importance when
assessing an alleged tendency of a mature
adult, such a difference may be
critical in assessing an alleged tendency of a young person. In these
circumstances, we agree with
the conclusions reached by both Berman AJ and the
primary judge that there are exceptional circumstances which warrant taking into
account the matters listed at [86]
it does not follow from the finding that there are exceptional circumstances
which warrant the taking into account of
matters that the
presumption is necessarily displaced. It remains incumbent on the Court to
assess the probative value of the tendency evidence, taking
into account each of
the matters identified at [86] above, to determine whether there are
“sufficient grounds” to conclude
that the tendency evidence does not
have significant probative value.
outlined above,
has significantly altered the law in respect of the
assessment of the probative value of tendency evidence for alleged offences of
child sexual assault. However, it has not altered the manner in which probative
value is assessed. That is, whilst
tips the scale strongly in favour of
admission, and precludes various items being placed on the scales unless
“exceptional
circumstances” are shown, the process by which
probative value is assessed remains otherwise unaltered.
assessment of the probative value of tendency evidence requires consideration of
two interrelated but separate matters”:
The first matter is the extent to which the evidence supports the tendency. The
second matter is the extent to which the tendency
makes more likely the facts
making up the charged offence... In summary, there is likely to be a high degree
of probative value where
(i) the evidence, by itself or together with other
evidence, strongly supports proof of a tendency, and (ii) the tendency strongly
supports the proof of a fact that makes up the offence charged:
the present case, both matters are finely balanced.
is force in the primary judge’s findings about the significance of the
respondent’s age in this matter:
Wilson (No 2)
[64]. The respondent was only three years older than FO. The first offence
against FO is alleged to have occurred
when FO was 14 or 15 years old and the
respondent was 17 or 18 years old. If established, the respondent’s sexual
in FO could be considered an “age-appropriate” sexual
Wilson (No 2)
at [60]. Although we would hesitate to describe
the respondent’s alleged sexual interest in LO as
“paedophilic”
[2024] NTSC 56
at [28]), it
is certainly the case that any sexual interest in LO could not be described as
“age-appropriate”, regardless
of whether the offending occurred when
LO was 6, 7, 8 or 9 years old.
whilst we do not accept Mr Williamson SC’s submission that the respondent
was “of an age where it is unlikely
he had had an opportunity to develop
tendencies”, care does need to be taken when assessing an alleged tendency
person. As the primary judge observed (at [64]):
... children and young people continue to develop emotionally, psychologically,
physically and sexually. That development includes
exploration and
experimentation in search of identity. Conduct engaged in during the course of
the development of a young brain may
not be fully understood or contemplated and
cannot necessarily be explained by reference to patterns of behaviour or fixed
tendencies,
in part because of limited life experience and the unpredictability
of adolescent behaviour.
See similarly
R v Sean (a pseudonym) (No 2)
[2023] ACTSC 132
, [15] – [16], [20] (McCallum CJ, referring to the “dynamic
and often volatile nature of adolescent behaviour”)
[2015] NSWCCA 327
257 A Crim R 340
(per Adams J, in dissent) and at [87] (Beech-Jones J).
this reason, as observed at [88] above, any temporal gaps in the allegations
need to be carefully scrutinised. In this respect,
senior counsel for the
respondent contended that the probative value of the evidence was reduced by the
“potentially ... significant
time period of up to three years ... between
the conduct alleged in respect of the two sisters”.
outlined above, on the amended indictment, the offending against LO was alleged
to have occurred between 1 January 2009 and 1 January
2011; whilst the offending
against FO was alleged to have occurred between 14 February 2011 and 1 January
2019. Accordingly, the
potential temporal gap in the offending between the
sisters is two years, rather than three years.
is necessary to consider the tendency evidence as a whole:
. Whilst the earliest charge relating to FO is alleged to have
occurred in February 2011, there is evidence of uncharged acts relating
which date back to 2008 (see at [18] above). Taking into account the evidence of
those uncharged acts, the alleged incidents
relating to LO overlap in time with
alleged incidents relating to FO.
Nonetheless,
it remains the case that the evidence reveals a persistent and consistent sexual
interest in FO over an extended period
of time, whereas the alleged offending
against LO was discrete, consisting of two offences that occurred close in time
and without
repetition: see
Wilson (No 2)
at [60] – [61] and [78].
There is no obvious explanation for this difference.
the other hand, the fact that LO and FO are sisters is significant. So much was
recognised by both Berman AJ and McCallum CJ, each
of whom emphasised that the
present case
involve a tendency “relating to children or
young women generally” or a “sexual interest in children more
but instead concerns “a tendency to have a sexual interest
in girls from a particular family”. This tendency is a much
particular tendency than a tendency to have a sexual interest in
“children” and to “opportunistically”
act on that sexual
interest at the respondent’s home (also noting that not all of the
offending against FO occurred in the
respondent’s home).
significance of relationship between the complainants is not limited to the DNA
which the sisters shared, although that fact is
not unimportant (in particular,
the DNA which the girls shared may have the result that the respondent was
attracted to common features
of the girls, both physical and personality-based).
The fact that the respondent had a common relationship with the sisters, via
family’s friendship with their family is also important. A willingness to
transgress this familial relationship is a matter
which heightens the probative
value of the evidence.
primary judge’s assessment of the similarity in the character of the acts
differed from Berman AJ. Acting Justice Berman
considered that “what is
not alleged” is important:
Wilson (No 1)
at [44]. His Honour
observed that there was no allegation of any form of penetrative sexual
activity, and no allegation that the respondent
forced, or even encouraged,
either sister to touch his genitals at any time:
Wilson (No 1)
contrast, Taylor J, whilst acknowledging that there was “undoubtedly some
similarity” between the incidents involving
FO and LO, considered that an
important difference between the allegations was that the conduct concerning FO
had “an air of
menace and/or control about them”, as they involved
the direct exertion of physical force, which was absent in the alleged
with respect to LO:
Wilson (No 2)
at [57] – [59] and [79].
this issue, we agree with Berman AJ that the similarities in the conduct
relating to each sister are more significant than the
dissimilarities in the
conduct alleged. The respondent engaged in indecent acts of touching with
respect to each sister, which consisted
of touching of the female genitalia and
kissing, particularly the necks of the two sisters. As Berman AJ observed, it is
that the alleged offending did not contain any penetrative acts, or
encouragement of either sister to touch the respondent’s
Wilson (No 1)
acknowledge that there are dissimilarities in the conduct alleged, in
particular in that the appellant repeatedly pushed and/or pulled
different rooms in order to indecently assault her, whereas the conduct alleged
with respect to LO commenced with superficially
more ‘playful’
applies, dissimilarities in the conduct alleged may weaken an
alleged tendency.
(Section 97A
simply precludes taking into account
dissimilarities unless there are exceptional circumstances). However,
dissimilarities do not
necessarily have this effect. It is necessary to have
regard to the possible reasons for any dissimilarities, and to ask whether
nature of the dissimilarities undermines the tendency sought to be advanced.
That was the point of the majority decision in
dissimilarities relied on by the appellant in
dissimilarities in the ages of the complainants and the alleged conduct of the
appellant – “ignore[d] the tendency
that they were adduced to
at [55] – [56]. The majority held that, when
properly assessed against the tendency asserted (“a tendency to engage
opportunistically
in sexual activity with underage girls despite a high risk of
detection”), the “fact that the appellant expressed [that
in a variety of ways did not deprive proof of the tendency of its significant
probative value”:
at [62] – [63].
the Director submitted, in the present case, the dissimilarities in the
respondent’s alleged conduct are readily explained
by the physical
difference in the size of the complainants. Simply put, the respondent was
required to exert less force to LO in
order to be able to indecently touch her
in comparison to FO. The dissimilarities are not of a nature which greatly
weaken the tendency
particularised by the prosecutor in the first trial.
difference in the age of the complainants is a matter that may impact upon the
character of the sexual interest demonstrated.
However, as noted at [97] above,
it is necessary to consider the tendency evidence as a whole. As noted above,
the tendency notice
particularises uncharged acts relating to FO which date back
to 2008, when FO was 12 years old, and not greatly older than LO was
at the time
of the alleged events concerning her (that is, 5 – 9 years old).
further importance is the brazen manner in which the alleged offending was
committed. For both sisters, the appellant’s conduct
involved a high risk
of detection, either as a result of a family member happening to observe the
respondent’s conduct and/
or of the sister crying out for assistance from
family members during the course of the alleged conduct. As in
[59] – [60]], this feature of the alleged offending increases the
probative value of the evidence. In particular, the evidence
“serve[s] an
important purpose in removing a doubt which the ‘brazenness’ of the
[respondent’s] conduct might
otherwise have raised”:
at [34], citing
at [58] – [60].
explained above,
represents a significant recalibration of the test for
admitting tendency evidence. Even where exceptional circumstances have been
established, tendency evidence relating to children is presumed to have
significant probative value unless the Court is satisfied
that there are
“sufficient grounds” to conclude otherwise.
into account each of the matters discussed above, we do not consider that
is displaced in respect of the tendencies advanced by the prosecutor
in the first trial; that is, a tendency to have a sexual interest
in girls from
a particular family, and to act on that interest by engaging in brazen,
opportunistic, or fleeting acts of indecency.
The evidence of each complainant
strongly supports this alleged tendency; and the alleged tendency strongly
supports proof of the
facts in issue (that is, whether the alleged conduct
as senior counsel for the respondent emphasised in his oral and written
submissions on the appeal, the tendency particularised
by the prosecutor in the
first trial was not the tendency that was ruled upon by the primary judge.
outlined above, the tendency notice that was issued by the prosecution has, at
all times, specified the tendencies relied on at
a high level of generality: to
have a sexual interest in children; to act on that sexual interest; and
“to act in opportunistic
ways at his home to act on his sexual
interests” [sic]. Whilst the prosecution particularised the tendency
relied on at trial
to a tendency to “have a sexual interest in girls from
a particular family” and “to act on that interest from time
by engaging in opportunistic or fleeting acts of indecency” (and also
relied on the brazen nature of the conduct),
at no stage has the prosecution
ever issued an amended tendency notice clarifying that it does not seek to rely
on the broad tendencies
alleged in the original tendency notice, or specifying
that it now relies on the narrowed tendencies.
is necessary for the prosecution to identify with precision the tendency
Jacobs (a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] VSCA 309
authorities of the High Court, the Victorian Court of Appeal and the ACT Supreme
Court have further emphasised that reformulation
of a tendency by the court,
absent formal amendment of the tendency notice, should not be condoned:
[2022] HCA 35
Sharman (a pseudonym) v The
[2023] VSCA 56
Parkinson v Alexander
DPP v Alexander
(a pseudonym) (No
[2024] ACTSC 413
. Accordingly, an assessment of the probative
value of the tendency alleged can only be made by reference to the tendency
particularised
in the tendency notice which is before the Court.
Berman AJ appeared to contemplate reliance on a narrower tendency, the tendency
notice which was the subject of his Honour’s
orders (the Amended Tendency
Notice) particularised the tendencies relied on by the prosecution in broad
terms which made no reference
to the fact that FO and LO were sisters. Although
his Honour’s ruling might have been clearer, it remained incumbent on the
prosecution to particularise in its tendency notice the tendency which it sought
to advance at trial.
trial, the prosecution effectively disavowed the tendency specified in the
Amended Tendence Notice, and further refined the tendency
referred to in Berman
AJ’s reasons without seeking leave for a further amendment to the Amended
Tendency Notice. Where the
respondent’s initial objection to the
reformulated tendency was not pressed, and during a busy trial, it is
understandable
that McCallum CJ did not require the prosecution to formally
amend the tendency notice so as to align with the narrowed tendency
advanced by the prosecution before the jury.
once a retrial was ordered, and particularly once the respondent had applied to
revisit Berman AJ’s tendency ruling,
the prosecution should have amended
the tendency notice to make clear the tendency or tendencies which the
prosecution sought to
advance at the retrial.
prosecution’s failure to do so has given rise to particular difficulties
on this appeal. Specifically, the orders of the
primary judge which the
prosecution has been granted leave to appeal from are orders which expressly
relate to a tendency notice
that particularised the tendencies sought to be
relied upon as a tendency to have a sexual interest in children; to act on that
interest; and “to act in opportunistic ways at his home to act on
his sexual interests” [sic]: see
Wilson (No 2)
general “sexual interest in children” says little about the
respondent having an age appropriate sexual interest, or
a preparedness to
“opportunistically” engage in that interest, with respect to FO.
Further, an age-appropriate sexual
interest in FO and a preparedness to
“opportunistically” engage in that interest on various occasions
over a lengthy
period of time does not strongly support proof of the facts in
issue concerning LO. Accordingly, the s 97A presumption of significant
value is displaced with respect to the tendencies alleged in the tendency notice
in relation to both complainants.
these were the only tendencies particularised by the prosecution in the notice
which was the subject of the ruling by the primary
judge, it follows that the
primary judge was correct to hold that the tendency evidence was not admissible.
It also follows that
the order severing the indictment was also correct, and
that the Director’s appeal should be dismissed.
for the reasons outlined above, we are of the view that the presumption
contained in
Evidence Act
was not displaced with respect to
the tendency particularised by the prosecutor in the first trial. This aspect of
reasons, whilst strictly
, was the subject of
submissions by both parties, including further written submissions on behalf of
the respondent which were provided
at the invitation of this Court following the
oral hearing of this appeal. In the unusual circumstances of the present appeal,
the first trial was conducted on the basis of a narrowed tendency and the
respondent’s retrial is imminent, we considered it
appropriate to record
those views so as to avoid any further delay to the proceedings.
completeness, and again, having fully considered submissions from the parties on
the issue, we are also of the view that the probative
value of the tendency
evidence outweighs its prejudicial effect. Like Berman AJ, we
view that any emotional reaction on the part of a juror to hearing the
allegations made with respect to LO (which are of
relatively minor indecent
assaults) may be sufficiently guarded against by appropriate directions:
Wilson (No 1)
at [62]. These directions may include a direction to the
jury panel that any person who feels that they cannot impartially and
unemotionally
consider evidence should ask to be excused.
we wish to make clear that the order dismissing the appeal does not preclude the
prosecution from seeking leave to amend
the tendency notice to rely on the
tendencies that were particularised by the prosecution at the first trial, or to
seek leave to
revisit the severance decision on that basis.
the above reasons, the orders of the Court are:
(1) Appeal dismissed.
(2) Order (1) does not preclude the prosecution from filing an amended tendency
notice which relies on the tendencies that were relied
upon by the prosecution
in the trial before McCallum CJ from 26 September 2023 to 10 October 2023.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and twenty-three [123] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Associate: H Clift
Date: 14 April 2025
RTF format (387 KB)
Signed PDF/A format