Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Giles [2020] ACTSCFC 1 (21 April 2020)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v
[2020] ACTSCFC 1
Hearing Date:
Murrell CJ, Burns and Loukas-Karlsson JJ
The practitioner’s name is to be removed from the roll.
Catchwords:
LEGAL PRACTITIONERS
– Application to remove practitioner from
the roll following ACAT recommendation – History of misconduct –
Misappropriation
of trust monies – Whether defendant is a fit and proper
person to practise law – Practitioner’s name removed from
Legislation Cited:
Legal Practitioners Ordinance 1970
Legal Profession
Legal Profession Regulation 2007
(ACT) regs 47, 62
Cases Cited:
Barristers Board v Darveniza
[2000] QCA 253
112 A Crim R
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1930) 60 CLR 336
Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales v Jafari
[2020] NSWCA 53
Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales v Parente
[2019] NSWCA 33
the Law Society of the ACT v Bandarage
[2019] ACTSCFC 1
Council of the
Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Legal Practitioner 201809
(Occupational Discipline)
[2019] ACAT 11
Council of the Law Society of
the Australian Capital Territory v LP 201809 (Charles Filgate Giles)
(Occupational Regulation)
[2019] ACAT 60
Law Society of New South
Wales v Bannister
[1993] NSWCA 157
Law Society of New South Wales v
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
Law Society of New South Wales v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185
Law Society of the ACT v Elmarazey
[2017] ACTSCFC
Law Society of the ACT v Powrie
[2017] ACTSCFC 4
Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee v Edward
[2007] WASC
Legal Profession Complaints Committee v Bower
[2019] WASC
Legal Services Commissioner v Rushford
[2012] VSC 632
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
52 NSWLR 279
Re a Practitioner
[1941] SAStRp 11
[1941] SASR 48
Practitioner
(1982) 30 SASR 27
Re Council of the Law Society of the
ACT v Tiirikainen and Giles
(ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal, Senior
Member Chenoweth, 27 March 2014).
Re the Application of Charles Filgate
Giles to be admitted as a Barrister and Solicitor
(ACT Supreme Court, Miles
CJ, Gallop and Sheppard JJ, 17 June 1994).
Re Legal Practitioners
Ordinance 1970; Ex parte Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory; Re
(1985) 51 ACTR 1
Re Legal Practitioners Act 1970; Re an
Application by Charles Filgate Giles
[2005] ACTSC 128
Practitioners Ordinance 1970; Re the Application of Charles Filgate Giles to be
admitted as a Barrister and Solicitor
(ACT Supreme Court, Miles CJ, Kelly
and Wilcox JJ, 12 October 1988)
The Council of the Law Society of NSW v
[2010] NSWCA 177
The Council of the Law Society of the
Australian Capital Territory v Davey
[2019] ACTSCFC 2
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
The Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
(Plaintiff)
Charles Filgate Giles (Defendant)
Representation:
D Moujalli (Plaintiff)
Self-represented (Defendant)
McInnes Wilson (Plaintiff)
Self-represented (Defendant)
File Number(s):
SC 462 of 2019
Introduction
1. The Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital
Territory (the Law Society) sought an order pursuant to
Profession Act 2006
(ACT) (LPA) that the defendant practitioner’s name be
removed from the roll of legal practitioners. The ground for the application
was that the Australian Capital Territory Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(ACAT) had found that the practitioner was guilty of
professional misconduct and
had recommended that his name be removed from the local roll of practitioners.
2. On 31 May 2018, the Law Society filed an application for disciplinary
action in ACAT.
3. The application alleged that the practitioner had acted
for clients in two matters. In one (the Bankwest matter), he had received
large sum from a third party and had paid it into the trust account, recording
it in the trust account ledger for the Bankwest
matter. At that stage, the
clients were not liable to pay the practitioner’s costs in the Bankwest
matter. However, in relation
to the second matter (the Rural Bank matter),
costs were payable. On 9 September 2015, by a ledger entry, the practitioner
transferred
$295,644.45 from the Bankwest trust ledger to the Rural Bank trust
ledger and then transferred the funds to his general office account,
he took the costs payable in the Rural Bank matter.
4. The application in
ACAT contained three charges. The practitioner conceded the two charges that
alleged breaches of the LPA in
relation to trust fund dealings: the transfer of
funds between the trust ledger accounts in breach of reg 47 of the
Profession Regulation 2007
(ACT) (LPR) and the unauthorised transfer of
$295,644.45 from the trust account to the practitioner’s office account in
of s 223(1) of the LPA.
5. However, the practitioner contested the
third charge, which alleged that the practitioner had dishonestly
misappropriated the sum
of $295,644.45 from his trust account. The practitioner
disputed that he had acted dishonestly; he said that his actions had been
but mistaken.
6. On 25 January 2019, ACAT found that that the charge of
dishonestly misappropriating funds was made out and that the practitioner
guilty of professional misconduct: Council of the Law Society of the Australian
Capital Territory v Legal Practitioner 201809
(Occupational Discipline)
ACAT 11 (ACAT
liability decision).
7. At the penalty hearing in ACAT, the
practitioner contended that his name should not be removed from the roll of
practitioners.
8. On 27 June 2019, ACAT made orders recommending that the
practitioner’s name be removed from the local roll, cancelling his
practising certificate, and ordering him to pay the Law Society’s costs of
the proceedings: Council of the Law Society
of the Australian Capital Territory
v LP 201809 (Charles Filgate Giles) (Occupational Regulation)
[2019] ACAT 60
penalty decision).
9. In this Court, the practitioner opposed the
removal of his name from the roll. Instead, he proposed that he be suspended
practice for 12 months (during which time he would work as a law clerk) and
then be entitled to a restricted practising certificate
for two years, after
which he would be entitled to apply for an unrestricted practising certificate.
Alternatively, he sought a
restricted practising certificate for three years,
after which he could apply for an unrestricted practising certificate.
Legislation
10. Section 425(3) of the LPA sets out, in descending order of
seriousness, the orders that may be made following a finding that the
practitioner is guilty of professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional
conduct, including:
orders—Australian legal practitioners
(3) The ACAT may
make the following orders in relation to the Australian legal practitioner:
(a) an order recommending that the name of the practitioner be removed from
the local roll;
(b) an order that the practitioner’s local practising certificate be
suspended for a stated period or cancelled;
(c) an order that a local practising certificate not be granted to the
practitioner before the end of a stated period;
11. Section 431(3) of the LPA provides:
with ACAT orders
(3) If the ACAT makes an order recommending
that the name of an Australian legal practitioner who is a local lawyer be
removed from
the local roll
(a) a copy of the order may be filed in the Supreme Court; and
(b) the Supreme Court may order the removal of the name from the roll.
12. Section 223(1) of the LPA provides that:
disbursing and accounting for trust money
(1) A law practice
(a) hold trust money deposited in a general trust account of the practice
exclusively for the person on whose behalf it is received;
(b) disburse the trust money only in accordance with a direction given by the
13. Section 229 of the LPA provides that a law practice may
withdraw money for payment to the practice’s account for legal costs
to the practice if any relevant provision of the LPA is complied
14. Regulation 47 of the LPR enables the transfer of trust money by
journal entry from one trust ledger account to another trust ledger
where the law practice “is entitled to withdraw the money and pay it to
the other trust account ledger account”.
15. Regulation 62 of the LPR
prescribes the procedure for withdrawing trust money held in a general trust
account for payment of legal
costs owing to the practice by the person for whom
the trust money is held. If there is a compliant costs agreement authorising
the withdrawal, the practitioner must give prior notice or submit a prior
request for payment: reg 62(3). Alternatively, withdrawal
may occur if a bill
has been submitted and a seven-day objection period has elapsed: reg
History of practice and earlier misconduct
16. On 20 January 1975, the practitioner was admitted to legal
practice in the ACT. For three years, he worked for the Commonwealth
Solicitor, undertaking trade practices work.
17. From 1978 to 1980, he
practised as a partner in a small private practice, primarily in conveyancing
and commercial law.
18. After a brief period working for a building
society, between 1981 and 1985, he practised as a sole practitioner, undertaking
conveyancing,
commercial law and commercial litigation.
19. In 1983, the Law
Society found irregularities in his trust account, cancelled his unrestricted
practising certificate, and brought
proceedings for removal of his name from the
roll of practitioners.
20. On the fourth day of the hearing before the Full
Court in February 1985, while still under cross-examination, the practitioner
submitted to an order that his name be removed from the roll: Re Legal
Practitioners Ordinance 1970; Ex parte Law Society of the
Australian Capital
Territory; Re Giles
(1985) 51 ACTR 1.
21. The Full Court decision does not
detail the charges against the practitioner. However, it appears from the later
Full Court decision
(see [23] below) that the charges related to a deficiency of
trust monies in the practitioner’s trust account between May 1982
1983 and the unauthorised withdrawal of trust monies. According to the
practitioner himself (at [14] of his affidavit of
13 December 2019), he
contravened provisions of the Legal Practitioners Ordinance 1970 by failing to
undertake monthly reconciliations,
failing to take out quarterly trial balances
and allowing debit balances to arise, but he cleared the debit balances
totalling $4,704.41
from personal funds and no client suffered a loss.
his affidavit of 13 December 2019 at [15], the practitioner stated that, after
he had lost his livelihood as a legal practitioner,
his marriage broke up and he
became bankrupt. Thereafter, until about 1996, he worked in fields other than
the law, largely in the
construction industry.
23. In 1988, the practitioner
applied unsuccessfully for his name to be restored to the roll. In dismissing
the application, the
Full Court observed that the application must fail because
the practitioner had “deliberately placed before the Court false
evidence”: Re Legal Practitioners Ordinance 1970; Re the Application of
Charles Filgate Giles to be admitted as a Barrister
and Solicitor (ACT Supreme
Court, Miles CJ, Kelly and Wilcox JJ, 12 October 1988) at 20.
24. In 1994,
the Supreme Court refused a further application for readmission: Re Legal
Practitioners Ordinance 1970; Re the Application
of Charles Filgate Giles to be
admitted as a Barrister and Solicitor (ACT Supreme Court, Miles CJ, Gallop and
Sheppard JJ, 17 June
25. From 1996 to 2005, the practitioner worked
as a law clerk.
26. In 2004, the practitioner earned the degree of Master of
Laws (ANU).
27. In 2005, the practitioner applied successfully for
readmission: Re Legal Practitioners Act 1970; Re an Application by Charles
Filgate Giles
[2005] ACTSC 128.
In its reasons for judgment, the Full Court (at
[16]) referred to an affidavit in which the practitioner had stated:
am profoundly sorry for the suffering and hardship that my misconduct has caused
so many good people. I cannot and will never allow
myself to engage in such
conduct again.
28. Between 2005 and 2011, the practitioner held a restricted
practising certificate. He worked as an employed solicitor for the
which he had earlier worked as a law clerk.
29. In 2011, the practitioner was
granted an unrestricted practising certificate.
30. In 2012, the practitioner
established his own practice. He “applied a protocol of requiring clients
written authority before
trust funds were disbursed” (practitioner’s
affidavit of 13 December 2019 at [25]).
31. In February 2014, the Law Society
brought disciplinary proceedings in ACAT that alleged unauthorised trust account
withdrawals
by the practitioner and his principal in the period 2009 to 2011,
when the practitioner was an employed lawyer. The practitioner
admitted the
32. In a position paper that he filed in ACAT for the purposes of
the penalty hearing, the practitioner stated:
have a rigid procedure in place that no funds are to be disbursed from the trust
account, under any circumstances, unless they are
first specifically authorised
in writing by the client as well as by me.
33. On 27 March 2014, the practitioner submitted to a finding
of professional misconduct. He was reprimanded, fined, and ordered
to undertake
education in trust accounting, as well as pay 50 per cent of the Law
Society’s costs. He retained his right to
practise: Re Council of the Law
Society of the ACT v Tiirikainen and Giles (ACT Civil and Administrative
Tribunal, Senior Member
Chenoweth, 27 March 2014).
34. Between June 2012
and June 2017, the practitioner held an unrestricted practising certificate. He
was the principal of a firm
known as Charles Filgate Giles &
Associates.
Facts related to the current matter
35. In 2014/2015, the practitioner acted for Mr and Mrs B (the
clients), who were defendants in proceedings brought by the Rural Bank
creditor in the Supreme Court of NSW (the Rural Bank matter, number 10035). The
clients were sued as guarantors of their failed
company Kennoss Pty Limited (K),
to which receivers (and, later, liquidators) were appointed. Hennessy & Co
acted for the Rural
36. At the same time, the practitioner acted for
the same clients in another matter, which concerned the activities of the
who had been appointed to K by the creditor Bankwest (the Bankwest
matter, numbers 10042 and 10043). In that matter, Norton Rose
Fulbright (NRF)
acted for the receivers and Bankwest.
37. In August 2014, the clients and
the practitioner entered into separate costs agreements relating to the
38. On 30 January 2015, NRF notified the practitioner that
$371,603.04 would be paid into his trust account, being “surplus
funds” from the proceeds of sale of properties owned by the clients and
their company, K. On or about 3 February 2015, the
monies were paid. After
minor payments were deducted, the “surplus funds” were credited in
the practitioner’s
trust account in relation to the Bankwest
39. On about 30 April 2015, the clients signed separate new costs
agreements relating to the two matters, which, for practical purposes,
identical. The new agreements were designed to supersede the earlier costs
agreements.
40. The costs agreement in relation to the Rural Bank matter
referred to professional costs invoiced of $370,090.99 (at $600 per hour)
disbursements of $38,014.82. The agreement stated that the practitioner would
retrospectively amend his invoices to charge
$500 an hour.
41. By each of the
costs agreements, the practitioner was authorised to withdraw from the relevant
trust account:
amount owing for our professional costs [and/or disbursements] in this matter
and for which we have given/sent you (a) an invoice,
or (b) request for payment
referring to the proposed withdrawal.
42. Each costs agreement allowed the clients to terminate the
practitioner’s services at any time, but on the basis that he
was entitled
to be paid for work done and disbursements incurred up to that time.
May 2015, the practitioner emailed the clients, stating:
to our discussion today I confirm that it is my practice, as you have already
experienced, of always requiring a written authority
that directs and authorises
any payment of monies to be made out of the trust account before any such
payment is made.
However, please note that I do reserve my rights pursuant to Regulation 62(4) of
Legal Professional Regulation 2007.
44. By August 2015, in the Rural Bank matter, the practitioner
had issued invoices to the clients totalling $386,838.86 and a statement
account for the same sum. On 28 August 2015, the clients terminated the
practitioner’s retainer in the Rural Bank matter
and instructed a new
solicitor, Mr PB. The costs in that matter became payable.
September 2015, the Supreme Court of NSW moderated the effect of an undertaking
whereby the clients had agreed that they
would not deal with certain assets, and
granted the Rural Bank leave to issue a garnishee order against the
practitioner, pending
which the practitioner was ordered not to disburse trust
moneys other than those the subject of his lien for costs, to any person
than the Rural Bank.
46. As the practitioner informed this Court, at that
point he was confronted with an imminent garnishee order that threatened him
with the loss of most of the monies in the trust account, leaving him with very
substantial unpaid costs.
47. Early on the morning of 8 September 2015, the
practitioner emailed the clients, seeking permission to transfer $68,875.85 from
his trust account to Mr PB’s trust account. There was no request to pay
any amount for the practitioner’s costs. The
email asserted that the
practitioner still held in trust the sum of $294,227.19 on behalf of the
clients, over which he claimed a
lien for unpaid costs in the Rural Bank matter.
The clients authorised the payment into Mr PB’s trust account.
practitioner then advised Hennessy & Co of the proposal. Hennessy & Co
responded that the Rural Bank objected to
the payment to Mr PB but not to the
payment of costs that were payable to the practitioner. The practitioner wrote
to Hennessy &
Co advising them that he intended to disburse the sum of
$294,227.19 held in trust to “general office account on account of
for unpaid costs”.
49. Later, on 8 September 2015, the practitioner
met with the clients and sought their approval to access the Bankwest trust
for the purpose of paying his costs in the Rural Bank matter. The clients
did not approve the proposal.
50. Nevertheless, on 9 September 2015 the
practitioner transferred by journal entry the sum of $295,644.45 from the trust
ledger account
for the Bankwest matter to the trust ledger account for the Rural
Bank matter, noting the reason for the transfer as “payment
per lien for
part payment of fees”. Prior to the transfer, the trust account ledger
for the Rural Bank matter had a nil balance.
After the monies were transferred,
payments totalling $295,644.45 were made from the trust account to the
practitioner’s office
account, returning the trust account ledger for the
Rural Bank matter to a nil balance.
51. At 10:59 AM on 9 September 2015, the
practitioner emailed Mr PB to advise that he had transferred the monies to
discharge outstanding
costs and disbursements.
52. From the trust account
standing to the credit of the Rural Bank matter, the practitioner transferred
the $295,644.45 to his office
account. After paying $65,000 to counsel, he used
the balance for personal and business expenses.
53. On 18 September 2015,
the practitioner met with the clients, one of whom threatened the practitioner
with legal action in relation
to the transfer of trust monies.
September 2015, one of the clients emailed the practitioner expressing surprise
that he had transferred the funds despite
his earlier assurance that no funds
would be withdrawn without the clients’ written authority.
55. After a
problem was identified during an audit, by letters dated 25 and 31 May 2016, the
practitioner reported to the Law Society
that he may have breached the
provisions of the LPA in relation to the transfer of $295,644.45 on 9 September
2015. In the letter
of 25 May 2016, the practitioner said:
8 September 2015, I met with my clients and sought their approval for me to
apply the part of the monies claimed by me pursuant
to my lien ($295,664.45) to
my unpaid costs and disbursements for [the Rural Bank matter]. No approval was
56. However, in a letter of 31 May 2016, the practitioner
stated that “[the clients had] not objected to the withdrawal of the
money to pay costs and disbursements”: ACAT liability decision at [58].
57. On 30 May 2017, the practitioner entered a deed of release with the
clients pursuant to which $130,000 was to be paid from the
trust account to the
practitioner in full and final settlement of all costs owed by the clients and
$165,000 was to be paid from
the trust account to the clients. These monies
58. In October 2016 to October 2017, Mr Clapham was appointed
manager of the practitioner’s law practice.
59. In May 2019, the
practitioner apologised to the clients for transferring the trust funds and then
“applying them to your
costs in [the Rural Bank matter]”.
ACAT liability decision
60. The practitioner submitted to ACAT that he had withdrawn
$295,644.45 in the honest and reasonable belief that he was doing so
He asserted that his conduct was “not objectively dishonest by the
standards of reasonable, honest people”.
In an affidavit dated 20 August
2018, the practitioner stated:
motivation for the journal transfer was that the clients owed me money for legal
costs and disbursements, and I believed that the
terms of the existing cost
agreements entitled me to transfer the subject funds. This belief was based on
the advice I sought from
Mr Andrew Fernon, Mr Geoff Farland, Mr Chris Erskine
SC, and my employed solicitor prior to performing the
transactions.
61. However, ACAT found that the practitioner had repeatedly
overstated the extent and nature of the advice that he had received from
regarding the propriety of the transaction of 9 September 2015: ACAT liability
decision at [40] and [53].
62. Similarly, ACAT was not favourably impressed
by the practitioner’s “dogged denial of the inadequacy of the time
notes as a record of the 8 September 2015 meeting”: at [42]. ACAT
found it troubling that, in cross-examination, the practitioner
sought to raise
exculpatory matters for the first time: at [43] and following. In these
respects, ACAT rejected the practitioner’s
evidence and observed that it
reflected adversely on his credit: at [50] and [56].
63. In relation to the
practitioner’s letter to the Law Society of 31 May 2016, ACAT found that
the practitioner had stubbornly
refused to recognise the inconsistency between
the statement in the letter of 31 May 2016 and “the clearly expressed
displeasure
of his clients prior to that time”: at [60]. At [61], ACAT
Tribunal’s opinion is that the statement by the respondent in the letter
of 31 May 2016 to the Law Society is clearly incorrect
given the evidence
referred to above. The letter was an important letter and the author was under
a duty to provide accurate information
and a matter which was of importance to
sender and recipient. That the Tribunal has found it inaccurate against a
background of
the respondent’s stubborn denials reflect poorly on the
credit of the respondent.
64. ACAT determined that the practitioner had been aware that
he had no verbal or written authority from his clients to make the journal
transfer and that he had not been entitled to do so: at [72]. Referring to
answers given in cross-examination, at [73], ACAT said:
[T]hese answers are directly
incompatible with the existence of an honestly held belief that the
respondent’s costs agreements
justified the journal transfer that he was
proposing to do. The Tribunal infers from the material just referred to that,
time of making the journal entry, the respondent you, knew that there was
nothing which constituted an entitlement to undertake the
journal transfer to be
found in the costs agreements ...
65. ACAT noted that, in relation to the grave charge of
misappropriation, the Law Society was required to establish the allegation
the “Briginshaw standard” (Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1930) 60 CLR
–[66]. ACAT was comfortably satisfied that the practitioner
“did not honestly hold the claimed belief that the costs
entitled the transfer to be made” and concluded that the transfer
“was done dishonestly”: at [74].
ACAT rejected the
practitioner’s claim that he had honestly believed that the transaction
from trust account to office account
had been authorised by the costs agreement:
66. Consequently, ACAT found that the misappropriation charge was
established. At [77], ACAT continued:
having been found in the handling of trust funds in the circumstances
established, the Tribunal is satisfied that conduct
must be characterised as
professional misconduct and such a finding is made.
67. ACAT’s repeated and unambiguous finding that the
practitioner had acted dishonestly were not challenged. As explained in
Society of the ACT v Powrie
[2017] ACTSCFC 4
12 ACTLR 184 (Powrie)
–[63], such findings may be challenged by an appeal to an appeal
Tribunal within ACAT or, with leave, to this Court.
Practitioner’s evidence and submissions to ACAT on
68. In an affidavit dated 6 May 2019, the practitioner
acknowledged that his conduct “was clearly dishonest by the objective
standards of reasonable, honest people”: at [7]. He stated that he had
reflected on his conduct, become self-aware and now
had “purposeful,
structured and very directed planning about [his] practice”: at [9]. He
provided a lengthy explanation
of how he had come to make an “egregious
error of judgement”. The explanation involved the factual complexity and
interconnectivity
of the matters in which he had acted for the clients, his
failure to properly communicate with the clients and the fact that he had
“erroneously interpreted” the terms of the Rural Bank matter costs
agreement: at [30]. At [42], he stated:
genuinely believed that I was authorised to withdraw the trust monies because of
the combination of the terms of my costs agreements
in [the Rural Bank matter]
and the invoice that I had sent to [the clients] on 18 August
69. The practitioner relied on affidavits from Mr Barnett, Mr
Clapham, and Mr Senatore.
70. Mr Barnett, a former President of the Law
Society, stated that he was prepared to continue to supervise the
practitioner’s
71. Mr Senatore, a business consultant who
had reviewed management of the practitioner’s practice, said that proper
and systems were in place and that the practitioner had engaged him for
12 months to assist him to implement Mr Senatore’s
recommendations.
72. Mr Clapham had been appointed as manager of the
practitioner’s practice for the period of 10 October 2016 to 10 October
2017 and had continued to manage the practitioner’s trust account for a
period thereafter, becoming a mentor to the practitioner.
He deposed to the
fact that the practitioner had cooperated fully with him, appeared to be
genuinely remorseful and had shown an
understanding of past misconduct by
improving his practices. He believed that there was no discernible risk of harm
to the practitioner’s
clients or the general public if the practitioner
continued to practise as a lawyer.
73. In relation to the misappropriation,
the practitioner relied on paragraphs [21]–[24], [55], [59]–[60] of
his written
submissions:
respondent has deposed that he genuinely believe that he was authorised to
withdraw the relevant money because of the combination
of the terms of the costs
agreement in matter number 10035 and the invoice that had been sent to the
clients on 18 August 2015 ...
He has deposed to his embarrassment that he
interpreted the costs agreement [in that way].
The respondent has deposed that in September 2015 he was blinded by his mindset
where he continued to treat all the files that he
had open for the clients as
one matter ...
On reflection, the respondent acknowledges that he was blinkered because of how
careful he thought he had been to consider the requirements
of the legislation
and did not objectively consider the detailed process for the transfer of the
relevant money ...
As a result of the various steps undertaken by the respondent since delivery of
the judgement, the respondent now acknowledges that
his conduct was dishonest by
the objective standards of reasonable, honest people. He has identified and
explained the reason why
he was unable to admit the misappropriation charge
before, which demonstrates a developed self-awareness and insight about his
The respondent acknowledges that he did not prepare his evidence properly and
ignored advice to obtain independent legal representation
The respondent has deposed that as a result of the matters discussed with his
clients in conference on 8 September 2015, he believed
that his client fully
understood that he was going to transfer the relevant money the next day without
their written authority ...
With hindsight, the respondent acknowledged that he
did not actually confirm his clients’ understanding of what was going to
happen and why.
With the benefit of genuine reflection, the respondent has acknowledged that
what he said to the clients in that conference was inconsistent
with his earlier
email of 6 May 2015 ...
74. Although the practitioner conceded that he had made a
serious error of judgment into which he had since gained insight, he did
concede that he had acted dishonestly; he maintained that his actions had
reflected an honest but mistaken belief about his entitlement.
practitioner submitted that an adequate response to his professional misconduct
may be an order restricting his right to practice
to that of an employee with
conditions, a public reprimand, the period of suspension from practice, a fine
and an order for costs.
ACAT penalty decision
76. ACAT reviewed the history of breaches by the practitioner
and noted the associated assurances regarding future conduct. At [61]
ACAT penalty decision, ACAT referred to the assurance that had been given in
February 2014 that:
have a rigid procedure in place that no funds are to be disbursed from the trust
account, under any circumstances, unless they are
first specifically authorised
in writing by the client as well as by me.
77. ACAT observed that the practitioner’s case for
avoiding removal was “based on his insight, contrition and remorse”
and the fact that he had a professional structure in place to support him: at
78. ACAT acknowledged that practitioner insight is a significant factor
in penalty assessment but observed that, despite a finding
of dishonesty, the
practitioner continued to maintain that his actions were the product of an error
of judgment and that “he
had made the transfers under a mistaken belief
honestly held”: at [73]. At [74], ACAT said:
consider that his insight into the September 2015 transaction is minimal and as
a consequence his declarations of remorse although
probably genuinely held, must
be regarded as transitory, being founded on an imperfect understanding of the
basis of his transgression,
and are “borne of present necessity and the
inevitability of close scrutiny”.
79. At [75], ACAT opined:
The Tribunal agrees that one
layer of protection for clients and the public would probably be established by
the support proposed
for future conduct of his practice. However unless, at the
centre, the person who is actually and nominally conducting the practice
fit and proper person to do so, then there can be no confidence that this is the
80. In relation to the practitioner’s good fame and
character, ACAT referred to a history of placing false evidence before the
and promising to do better: at [77]. ACAT noted that, in relation to the
present matter, the practitioner had provided incorrect
information to the Law
Society and had given evidence that had been rejected as lacking credibility.
In 2014, the practitioner had
given an assurance to ACAT and, in relation to the
present matter, he had given a written assurance to his clients: at [79].
81. ACAT described the practitioner’s appreciation of the significance
of breached assurances to be “shallow and somewhat
confused”: at
82. At [80], ACAT concluded:
view of the Tribunal is that the respondent is not of good fame and character
and is not a fit and proper person to remain a practitioner
of the Supreme Court
of the Australian Capital Territory. It is further satisfied that condition is
likely to be permanent having
regard to all the evidence.
83. Consequently, ACAT recommended that the
practitioner’s name be removed from the local roll.
Practitioner’s evidence in these proceedings
84. In addition to the material placed before ACAT, the
practitioner relied on extensive affidavit evidence from clients, accountants,
bookkeepers, solicitors, and barristers who knew him professionally, as well as
friends and acquaintances.
85. Mr B (one of the clients affected by the
misconduct) stated that he had known the practitioner for 20 years as an
acquaintance,
friend, and legal advisor. Notwithstanding the
practitioner’s conduct in this matter, he felt no ill will towards the
practitioner
and continued to hold him in the highest regard as a good, honest,
and decent person.
86. Mr Farland and Mr Fernon had been retained by the
practitioner as barristers in Mr and Mrs B’s matter in 2015. Mr Fernon
had been briefed by the practitioner in a variety of matters between 2000 and
2015. They said that they considered the practitioner
to be honest and hard
working. Prior to the ACAT hearing, Mr Fernon had provided a letter to the Law
Society stating that he believed
that the practitioner had been unaware that he
had acted unlawfully and that the practitioner had not sought to deceive Mr and
87. Mr Di Bartolo stated that, when he had been the trust account
auditor for the practitioner’s legal practice in 2016, he
had identified
that the trust monies had been transferred in the absence of a specific
authorisation on file. When questioned, the
practitioner had produced signed
costs agreements and an outstanding invoice, indicating that he believed that
that was all that
was required. The practitioner had stated that the clients
had been aware of the intention to transfer funds but had not consented.
Bartolo’s response that he would report the matter to the Law Society had
prompted the practitioner to report it. In
his dealings with the practitioner
for more than 10 years, the practitioner had been open and honest and, once the
matter was drawn
to his attention, he had taken prompt action to correct any
88. Ms Burkitt said that she had met the practitioner in 2013, when
she had begun to manage the trust account for the firm where the
practitioner
was then employed as a managing clerk. To her observation, the practitioner had
been well aware that there was a strict
requirement to obtain a client’s
written authority for transfers from a trust account to third parties and the
practitioner
had always complied with that requirement.
89. Mr Oliver said
that he had known the practitioner since about 1980 and that, for a period, he
had audited the practitioner’s
trust account. Since 2006, he had had
occasional social contact with the practitioner. He had found him to be honest
and of good
90. Ms Slater has provided bookkeeping services in
relation to the practitioner’s trust and general office accounts since
She has found the practitioner to be honest and of good character and
considers that he “would never have intentionally incorrectly
transferred
funds from the trust account on purpose” as he was “always very
careful with transactions relating to his
trust account”.
Bossert is a forensic accountant who has been instructed by the practitioner
since about 2009. She has found him to be genuine
and honest, as has Mr Thomas,
who has prepared economic loss reports for the practitioner’s practice
since 2012.
92. Ms Lombard is an accountant who has known the practitioner
since 2014 through a professional network and has engaged his services.
always found him helpful and does not doubt his honesty and integrity in running
a legal practice.
93. Mr Erskine SC stated that he had met the practitioner
when instructed by him in the mid-1990s. In 2005, he had provided the
practitioner
with an affidavit in support of his application for restoration to
the roll. Thereafter, he had been instructed by the practitioner
in a number of
matters. Although he has no direct knowledge of the practitioner’s
handling of his trust account, in his extensive
dealings with the practitioner
he has found the practitioner to be honest, thorough and professional.
Clynes, a barrister, said that the practitioner had briefed him on many matters
and the practitioner had impressed him as having
an excellent manner with
clients and acting with probity and diligence.
95. Mr Martin is an
experienced legal practitioner who has had numerous professional dealings with
the practitioner and has found
him to be courteous, professional,
straightforward, and honest. Mr Jones, a solicitor who has obtained advice from
the practitioner
practitioner, considers the practitioner to be honest, forthright, and
knowledgeable. Mr Harris has known the practitioner since 2017 and has
recommended clients to the practitioner. He trusts the practitioner’s
professional judgment. Mr Dudderidge met the practitioner in 1998 and has been
both a client and a colleague. He said that the
practitioner has always been
honest and of good character.
96. Mr O’Keefe has known the practitioner
since 2005 and worked with him from 2005 to 2007. He regards him as a person of
character and has never known him to be dishonest in his dealings. Mr
Jackson, who worked with the practitioner from 2012 to 2014,
is a friend who has
also instructed the practitioner. He considers the practitioner to be
trustworthy and knowledgeable. Mr Perkins,
a solicitor, has known the
practitioner since 1999. They used to meet regularly and discuss work. The
practitioner always conducted
himself in a proper, forthright, and honest matter
in their personal dealings. Ms Brown has known the practitioner in a personal
and professional capacity and has always found him courteous, honest, and
trustworthy.
97. Ms Grotte met the practitioner in 2013 when she instructed
him to appear as junior counsel in a medical negligence case that lasted
years. She found that he acted diligently, promptly, and with care.
Lay has known the practitioner since 2018. He supervised her legal practical
experience component of the Graduate Diploma
of Legal Practice and she found him
to be a person of integrity and good character.
99. Mr Patrick, Mr
Honkanen, Ms Bryant, Ms Burns, Mr Barnes, Ms Alcazar-Stevens, Ms Griffith, Mr
Maunch, Mr Omari, and Mr Bennett
have been clients of the practitioner in recent
years and all have found him to be open, professional, honest and concerned for
welfare of others. Ms McLaren, another former client, describe the
practitioner as a careful and proactive lawyer who had handled
proceedings in a
highly competent fashion, putting his client’s interests at the
100. Mr Synold, whose wife has been a client of the practitioner
and Mr Tea, the practitioner’s business banking manager, made
observations, as did Dr Champion, who has been engaged by the practitioner to
provide medico-legal advice.
101. Ms Corvini, who has had a social
relationship with the practitioner since about 1990, considers him to be
trustworthy, dependable,
honest, and supportive. Mr La Porte, Mr Landon-Smith,
and Ms East have known the practitioner for decades through skiing. They
found him to be a friendly, sincere, hard-working, and knowledgeable person. Mr
Franklin-Browne has known the practitioner
since 2010 as a friend and
rock-climbing partner. He has found the practitioner to be reliable and
dependable.
102. Mr Meehan, the Director of St John’s Care and
Emergency Relief, has engaged the practitioner in relation to a personal
conveyance and has referred clients to the practitioner for pro bono advice. He
has found the practitioner to be honest, diligent,
and readily available to
assist on a pro bono basis.
103. With the exception of Mr Erskine SC and
possibly Mr Clynes, each of the above referees expressed their understanding
Giles transferred the funds because, at the time of the transfer, he believed
that the terms of his costs agreements and the invoice
outstanding for
approximately $386,000 gave him the required authority to make the transfer or
and he so informed his clients of
his intention.
The Practitioner’s evidence and submissions to the
104. The practitioner conceded that he had chosen his own
interests over that of his clients: at [50] of his affidavit dated 13 December
105. At [51], he said:
accept that my conduct was objectively dishonest by the ordinary standards of
reasonable, honest people; particularly when looking
at my breach of my
self-affirmed practice, that I had earlier advised to my clients, that the trust
funds would only be transferred
with my clients specific written
106. At [53] he said:
I realise I was not thinking
clearly when I engaged in the transfer of funds and that I could have left them
in trust and relied upon
my general lien over the funds to resist the Rural Bank
garnishee. Subject to the determination of priorities, I may not have needed
make the transfer ...[I] failed to realise the importance of the terms of my
costs agreements. I now realise my general lien
did not authorise the transfer
of the funds.
107. At [56], the practitioner acknowledged that his failure to
make appropriate concessions in ACAT when cross-examined concerning
the meeting
with his clients on 8 September 2015 had “demonstrated a total lack of
insight on my part as to the seriousness
of not having conference of notes to
record the terms of such a very important meeting” and that he should not
have attempted
to minimise his responsibility for failing to take notes.
Similarly, he should have made appropriate concessions in relation to
clients’ instructions.
108. In relation to the reasons that this
understanding had come so late, at [59] the practitioner said that his
perception of himself
as an honest person had “blinkered” him from
seeing that his conduct was objectively dishonest. At [60](a), he referred
breaching his “self-made rule that I must never make a trust payment
without the express written authority of my clients”.
109. At [46] of
his affidavit, the practitioner submitted:
disciplinary proceedings have taught me very hard lessons and have made me far
more aware of my official responsibilities to
my clients, and the
110. The practitioner stated that he had studied many
disciplinary decisions, which had greatly enhanced his knowledge of his high
ethical duties required of an officer of the Court: at [49].
ACAT’s findings that he was not a credible witness, the practitioner noted
that he had experienced difficulties with
hearing some of the questions and now
always wore hearing aids when attending court: at [68].
112. At [66], the
practitioner said:
trust error was a genuine mistake, a misunderstanding and lack of insight on my
113. The practitioner submitted that his name should not be
removed from the roll and that an appropriate penalty was suspension for
period of 12 months (during which he could work as a law clerk), a restricted
practising certificate for two years thereafter,
and that he be entitled to an
unrestricted practising certificate thereafter.
114. The submission was
made on the following grounds:
(a) His 45 years of legal
experience was valuable to the community and should not be lost.
(b) Since ACAT had ruled on liability, he had read widely and gained guidance
from other practitioners concerning professional standards
and his ethical
stance had “significantly changed and hardened”. It was not
necessary to strike him off because he had
learned from his errors.
(c) The transaction had not been undertaken secretively.
(d) It had been an isolated transaction.
(e) When his “mistake was identified” he had “self-reported
and repaid the money”.
(f) He had cooperated with the Law Society’s investigations and directions
concerning his practice.
(g) Lay and practitioner referees had attested to his good fame and
(h) During the course of his practise, he had incurred debts of $511,000 and he
needed to repay those debts. He had liquidated assets
in order to do so. Other
than working as a legal practitioner, he had very limited prospects of obtaining
gainful employment.
General principles
115. The Court exercises a protective jurisdiction. Its role
is to protect the public against future misconduct by the particular
practitioner, to protect the public from similar kinds of misconduct by other
practitioners by setting the standard of behaviour
that is required of
practitioners, and to maintain public confidence in the legal profession: Law
Society of New South Wales v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185
per Beazley JA at 40; Legal
Profession Complaints Committee v Bower
[2019] WASC 281
116. Subjective features may be taken into account but cannot detract
from the core purpose of public protection: The Council of the
Law Society of
the Australian Capital Territory v Davey
[2019] ACTSCFC 2
Court cannot make findings inconsistent with necessary or essential findings
made by ACAT: Powrie at [83]–[84]. Such
findings include findings as to
the practitioner’s state of mind or motive for relevant conduct: Powrie at
[83]; Council of
the Law Society of the ACT v Bandarage
[2019] ACTSCFC 1
(Bandarage). They also include a finding that the practitioner’s
conduct amounts to professional misconduct: Powrie at [83];
Bandarage at
118. However, the Court is not bound to accept ACAT’s
recommendation that the practitioner be removed from the roll; it must
own independent determination of whether the practitioner’s conduct
warrants removal.
119. The ultimate question is the same as that in
disciplinary proceedings invoking the inherent jurisdiction of the Court, i.e.
whether, given the conduct that has been proven, the practitioner is a fit and
proper person to practise law: Ziems v The Prothonotary
of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
per Kitto J at 297–298; Powrie at
[86]–[87], Bandarage at [112] and [138].
120. The importance of honesty
and integrity when dealing with monies has been emphasised repeatedly: Council
of the Law Society of
New South Wales v Jafari
[2020] NSWCA 53
is a recent
121. Honesty in relation to trust account funds is critical to the
proper practise of law. A lawyer’s trust account has been
described as
“sacred”, and the importance of dealing strictly with trust monies
has been emphasised repeatedly: Re a
Practitioner
[1941] SAStRp 11
[1941] SASR 48
Practitioner
(1982) 30 SASR 27
per King CJ at 30–31; Legal Services
Commissioner v Rushford
[2012] VSC 632
; 38 VR 141 per Bell J at [39]. In Law
Society of New South Wales v Bannister
[1993] NSWCA 157
at 9, Sheller JA (with
whom Gleeson CJ and Handley JA agreed) said:
normal consequence of the misappropriation by a solicitor of the client’s
money is that his name be removed from the roll.
122. In Law Society of the ACT v Elmarazey
[2017] ACTSCFC 2
, the Court said:
legal practitioner who takes his or her client’s funds for his or her own
benefit, and who demonstrates no remorse or understanding
of the gravity of his
or her misconduct, is prima facie not fit to remain on the roll.
(Citations omitted)
123. There may be an exception to this rule where a lawyer has
not acted dishonestly in relation to the misuse of trust funds but,
even in the
absence of dishonesty, it is “borderline” as to whether a
practitioner should be removed from the roll: The
Council of the Law Society of
NSW v Doherty
[2010] NSWCA 177
and [71]; Legal Practitioners Complaints
Committee v Edward
[2007] WASC 287
124. In Bandarage at
[148]–[149], the Court said:
from the roll is reserved for the most serious cases of wrong conduct, where the
character and conduct of the practitioner
is assessed to be inconsistent with
the privileges of further practice; suspension may be adequate in those cases
where a legal practitioner
has fallen below proper standards, but not to the
extent that would indicate that the practitioner lacks the necessary attributes
of a person entrusted with the responsibilities of legal practice:
Barristers Board v Darveniza
In general, removal is appropriate only where the underlying reason for
disqualification is permanent, or at least of indefinite
Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
52 NSWLR 279
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v
[2019] NSWCA 33
at [34], Basten and
Meagher JJA indicated that, where a practitioner has manifested a serious
character flaw that would justify removal,
it is for the practitioner to
affirmatively satisfy the court that the unfitness was, or is, of limited
Is the practitioner a fit and proper person to practise
125. This is the third occasion on which the practitioner has
faced disciplinary action for misconduct in relation to trust monies.
two prior occasions, he has been found guilty of professional misconduct
involving breaches of professional standards in
relation to trust monies.
126. In the present case, a very substantial sum was dishonestly
misappropriated. The practitioner had use of the misappropriated
funds between
9 September 2015 and 31 May 2016, when the funds were restored to the trust
account. The practitioner did not restore
the funds immediately after the
clients expressed their displeasure with his conduct in September and October
2015 and did so only
when the matter had come, or was about to come, to the
attention of the Law Society.
127. The seriousness of the
practitioner’s misconduct was aggravated because it occurred in breach of
assurances that he had
given to the Full Court in 2005, to ACAT in 2014, and to
his clients in May 2015. The misconduct of September 2015 occurred not
after the assurances given to ACAT in 2014 and to the clients in May
128. The practitioner’s dishonesty was not confined to the two
transactions on 9 September 2015. In addition, ACAT found that
he had been
dishonest in the way in which he had dealt with the Law Society in May 2016 and
with ACAT during the hearing in 2018,
when he gave evidence that lacked
credibility in several important respects.
129. The Court takes into account
the character evidence of the many witnesses who provided such evidence and
accepts that such evidence
may inform an assessment of whether the practitioner
is a person of good character who is a fit and proper person to remain on the
roll. However, in this case, the character referees other than Mr Erskine SC
and possibly Mr Clynes provided an opinion as to the
practitioner’s
character based on a fundamental misapprehension. They had been informed that
the conduct was the product of
an honest but mistaken belief. They had not been
informed that, at the time when the conduct occurred, the practitioner knew that
it was dishonest. Indeed, the practitioner’s failure to disclose
ACAT’s finding of dishonesty is yet another example
of dishonest
130. In any event, character evidence may be of limited predictive
value: Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
is our view that, in this case, a far more reliable predictor of future
behaviour is the practitioner’s past conduct.
In the past, assertions of
insight and good intention have not been reflected in the practitioner’s
subsequent conduct.
131. During these proceedings, the practitioner both
maintained that he had acquired new and profound insight and also maintained
that his conduct was the result of an honest but mistaken belief about his
entitlement under the costs agreements. It was only when
he was well into oral
submissions and was pressed by the bench that he conceded that he had known at
the time of the misconduct that
he was acting dishonestly. This extraordinarily
belated acknowledgement of dishonesty can only reflect a fundamental lack of
132. Having regard to the gravity of the practitioner’s
misconduct, the history of similar misconduct, his breach of past assurances,
the dishonesty manifested in other respects connected with the complaint, and
the practitioner’s fundamental lack of insight,
we are satisfied that the
practitioner suffers from a seemingly permanent character flaw such that it will
never be possible to be
confident about the practitioner dealing properly with
trust funds. We are well satisfied that he is permanently unfit to
133. The Court orders that the practitioner’s name be removed
from the roll.
certify that the preceding one hundred and thirty-three [133] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
their Honours Chief
Justice Murrell, Justice Burns and Justice Loukas-Karlsson.
RTF format (384 KB)
Signed PDF/A format