MALONE & ANOR v DHINGRA & ANOR (Residential Tenancies) [2025] ACAT 54 (23 July 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
MALONE & ANOR v DHINGRA &
ANOR (Residential Tenancies) [2025]
RT 351/2025
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES
failure to lodge bond with ACT Office of Rental Bonds as required by section 23
Residential Tenancies Act –
Failure to lodge bond strict
liability criminal offence – Lessor's failure to provide tenants with
ingoing condition report
– Lessor’s claim for compensation for
alleged damage to garden – Tenant's failure to report the condition of a
tree to the lessor – tenant's obligation to upkeep the garden – In
absence of an ingoing report, the tenants’ evidence
repair/general condition of the premises is the evidence of the state of
repair/general condition on the day the
tenant took possession – Duty to
Legislation cited:
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
Case cited:
Banco de Portugal v Waterlow and Sons
[1932] UKHL 1
[1932] AC 452
Hasell v Bagot, Shakes & Lewis Ltd
[1911] HCA 62
, Karacominakis v Big
Country Developments Pty
[2000] NSWCA 313 (Karacominakis)
TC Industrial Plant Pty Ltd v Robert’s Queensland Pty Ltd
Senior Member P Hatami
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) RT 351/2025
BRENDAN MALONE
First Applicant
LOUISE MALONE
Second Applicant
TUSHAR DHINGRA
Second Respondent
Senior Member P Hatami
CORRECTED ORDER
Rental Bonds on behalf of the Territory is directed to release $66.56 of the
disputed sum to the lessor and the remainder to the
Tribunal finds that the lessors failed to lodge the bond with the Office of
Rental Bonds as required by
Residential Tenancies Act
application is otherwise dismissed.
counterclaim is dismissed.
registrar is directed to refer this matter with the finding at order 2 for
investigation with the relevant regulatory
...............................
Senior Member P Hatami
REASONS FOR DECISION
application is brought by former tenants of a property in Hawker, ACT against
their former landlords. In their application, the
tenants seek to:
(a) recover their bond of $3,080 minus the water usage charges of $66.56, being
a total of $3,013.44,
(b) have the lessors penalised for their failure to lodge their bond with the
Office of Rental Bonds as required by section23 of
Residential Tenancies Act
(c) seek to have an investigation conducted into the lessor’s alleged
failure to comply with their taxation obligations.
lessors have filed a counterclaim for $7,444.56 for replacement, delivery and
cost of planting a new fig tree at the property.
application was heard by this Tribunal on Monday 7 July 2025. Both parties
appeared in person and were self-represented. The Tribunal
provided the parties
with oral orders and a summary of reasons at the conclusion of the hearing.
These short reasons elaborate on
the orders and reasons of the 7 July
Lessors’ Failure to lodge Bond with the Office of Rental
23 of the RT Act provides that:
(1) The tenant must pay the bond to the lessor.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the lessor and tenant agree that the tenant
will deposit the bond with the Territory.
(3) If the tenant pays the bond to the lessor and not to the lessor’s
agent, the lessor must, before the prescribed period
ends, deposit with the
(a) the amount of the bond; and
(b) a notice in accordance with section 25.
Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units.
(4) If the tenant pays the bond to the lessor’s agent, the agent must,
before the prescribed period ends, deposit with the Territory—
(a) the amount of the bond; and
(b) a notice in accordance with section 25.
Maximum penalty: 20 penalty units.
(5) An offence against this section is a strict liability offence.
(6) In this section:
prescribed period
(a) 2 weeks after the day the lessor receives the bond; or
(b) if another period is prescribed by regulation—the prescribed period.
3A of the RT Act provides an outline of the application of the Criminal Code to
the RT Act as follows:
Other legislation applies in relation to
offences against this Act.
Criminal Code
The Criminal Code, ch 2 applies to all offences against this Act (see Code,
The chapter sets out the general principles of criminal responsibility
(including burdens of proof and general defences), and defines
terms used for
offences to which the Code applies (e.g.
recklessness
Penalty units
The Legislation Act, s 133 deals with the meaning of offence penalties that
are expressed in penalty units.
tenancy commenced on 19 November 2023, and the tenants moved out on 17 March
2025, they received the outcome of the final inspection
of the property on 19
March 2025.
21 March 2025 the lessors lodged the tenants’ bond with the ACT
Office of Rental Bonds. The lessors say that the illness
and subsequent death of
the respondent’s father in January 2024 led to their forgetting to lodge
the bond until after the tenancy
had ceased. The prescribed period for lodging
the bond with the Office of Rental Bonds was two weeks after the lessor received
The lessors lodged the
bond more than 15 months after this prescribed period.
to lodge a bond is a serious criminal offence under the RT Act carrying a
maximum of 20 penalty units, it is also a strict
Tribunal does not have the jurisdiction to make a finding in relation to the
commission of a criminal offence, nor can it impose
However, this Tribunal finds
that the lessors failed to lodge a bond with the office of Rental Bonds as
required by section 23 of
the RT Act. The Tribunal therefore directs the
registrar to refer this matter to the relevant regulatory authority with a copy
these reasons.
The Bond and the Fig Tree
dispute in so far as the release of the bond is concerned, relates to the
removal of a fig tree from the lessor’s property
by the tenants. It was
common ground between the parties, following discussions at hearing, that it was
a species of common fruiting
fig tree. The tenants removed the fig tree from the
garden at the property at some point in January 2024.
their counterclaim, the respondents have submitted a photograph of the fig tree
apparently taken on 18 November 2023 following
pruning of the tree by the first
respondent. The tree appeared in this photograph to be green and apparently
healthy. The tenants
took a photograph of the same tree on 22 December 2023, in
this photograph the tree leaves are brown, dry and shrivelled. They emailed
photograph along with other material to the lessors on 14 January 2024.
tenants say that the removal of the fig tree was necessitated by the fact that
it was dead and posed a safety risk to their children.
The lessors say that they
were not afforded the opportunity to address any illness that may have fallen
the fig tree by the tenants’
failure to report the tree’s declining
condition in a timely manner.
tenants say that they were not provided with an ingoing condition report upon
moving into the property and that they contacted
the lessor on more than one
occasion to ask for an ingoing condition report. They say that when they had not
received this, they
prepared an email with various photographs , including a
photograph of the tree, which they sent on 14 January 2024. This email and
photographs were provided to the Tribunal with the application.
photograph of the tree is date stamped for 22 December 2023. It shows the tree
to be in a radically different condition than the
photograph submitted by the
respondent dated 18 November 2023. Its previously green leaves are now brown,
dry and shrivelled.
the condition of the tree, following the communication with the lessors, the
first applicant said that being professionally
experienced in tree management
and removal, he decided to remove the tree. The applicants say that the tree was
clearly dead and
posed a safety risk to their children as it was losing limbs.
They say that when the lessors did not take any action in relation
to the dead
tree they decided to remove the tree themselves, because they understood that
their obligations as tenants extended to
upkeep of the garden and felt that the
lessors were on notice about the condition of the tree following the
tenants’ email
of 14 January 2024.
lessors did not raise the removal of the tree with the tenants until the end of
the tenancy when the final inspection was carried
out on 19 March
Failure to prepare ingoing condition
29 of the RT Act provides that at the start of tenancy:
(1) A lessor must, not later than the day after a tenant takes possession of the
premises, give the tenant 2 copies of a report about
the state of repair or
general condition of the premises and of any goods leased with the premises (a
condition report
) on the day the tenant is given the report.
(2) A condition report must be signed by the lessor.
(3) The tenant must, within 2 weeks after receiving the copies of the condition
report, return 1 copy to the lessor, either—
(a) signed by the tenant; or
(b) endorsed with a statement, signed by the tenant, indicating whether the
tenant agrees or disagrees with the whole of the report
or with specified parts
(4) If the tenant returns the copy signed but without further endorsement, the
tenant is taken to have agreed with the whole of the
condition report.
(5) However, for a consecutive tenancy agreement, the lessor and tenant need not
comply with this section if an original condition
report or subsequent condition
report exists for the premises.
(6) To remove any doubt, a condition report for premises may, but need not,
contain a list of items at the premises, other than goods
leased with the
If section 29 (1) has not been complied with section 30 states that:
(3) If section 29 (1) has not been complied with, evidence by the tenant
and of any goods
leased with the premises, is evidence of that state of repair or general
condition on the day the tenant took possession
of the premises.
ingoing condition report is a requirement of the RT Act, its purpose being to
protect both parties from exactly this type of situation.
Without an ingoing
report and with only a photograph of the tree manually dated by the lessors as
being taken on 18 November 2023,
the Tribunal cannot make a finding that the
tree was healthy and without issue at the commencement of the tenancy. The
tenants say
that they don’t have a clear recollection of the condition of
the tree when they moved in but that they didn’t notice
the sudden decline
in the tree – rather their first impression of the tree is captured in
their photograph of 22 December 2023.
to section 30 (3) of the RT Act, in absence of an ingoing condition report, the
tenants’ evidence about the state
of repair/general condition of the
premises is the evidence of the state of repair/general condition on the day the
tenant took possession.
that in the absence of an ingoing condition report, the state of the fig tree as
documented by the tenants in their photograph
of 22 December 2023 is
deemed to be the condition of the tree at the commencement of the tenancy on 19
November 2023. The Tribunal
finds that the tree was in poor health, possibly
dead at the commencement of the tenancy and that the tenants actions in removing
the tree after the lessor’s took no action in relation to the photograph
submitted by the tenants of the dead tree, were consistent
obligations under the RT Act.
Lessor’s claim for compensation
I am wrong and the Tribunal were to accept the lessors’ evidence of the
photo allegedly taken on 18 November 2023, then the
speed with which the tree
died is significant.
the tree in the lessor’s photograph of the 18 November 2023 to have become
the tree in the tenant’s photograph of
22 December 2023 suggests disease
rather than neglect. The lessors noted that the tree was on the same watering
system as the mandarin
tree nearby and another fig tree on the property, both of
which remained healthy. Therefore, it is more likely than not that the
tree’s demise did not occur because of the tenants’ neglect in
watering the tree.
lessors say that the tenants’ failure to notify them of the deteriorating
condition of the tree denied them of the opportunity
to attend to the tree and
perhaps save it. They say that they should be compensated by the tenants for a
replacement tree to be planted
at the property.
considering any claim for compensation the Tribunal must consider the
parties’ conduct and steps taken to mitigate their
Duty to mitigate
38 of the RT Act provides that:
A person who, apart from this
section, would be entitled to compensation under this Act is not entitled to the
compensation, or part
of it, if the loss, or part of the loss, to be compensated
could have been reasonably avoided.
right to recover damages is always subject to the requirement that the party
claiming damages (the innocent party) take reasonable
steps to mitigate their
loss, but the onus is on the other party to show the innocent party acted
unreasonably.
When an innocent
party is required to take steps to mitigate, the steps required will not be set
Where there has been a
failure to mitigate loss, the damages are reduced to what they would have been
had the innocent party acted
reasonably.
lessors did not provide an ingoing condition report at any point throughout the
course of the tenancy. It is not setting the bar
too high to say that this
requirement ought to have been met by the lessors and failure to do so means
that they failed to mitigate
their loss in relation to maintenance issues which
arose at the commencement of the tenancy. The loss of the tree may have been
if the tree had been declining in health in the first few weeks of the
tenancy and if the ingoing condition report was issued the
tenants would had had
an opportunity to assess and report on any maintenance issues, including the
garden, shortly after they moved
in. Even when the tenants provided the lessors
with a photograph of the tree with shrivelled and dry leaves on 14 January 2024,
lessors failed to take any action. It is only once the tenancy was over that
the lessors apparently noticed that the tree was missing.
The lessors have
failed to mitigate any loss they may have suffered by the loss of the fig tree
given their failure to provide the
tenants with an ingoing condition report as
discussed earlier and in failing to take any action in relation to the tree once
were on notice about the condition of the tree.
tenants have taken all steps available to them in the circumstances to mitigate
their liability in relation to the tree. They
have repeatedly requested that an
ingoing condition report be provided, and they have sent the lessors a
photograph of the ailing
tree. It would be setting the bar very high to expect
anything further from the tenants.
Referral for investigation in relation to tax evasion
their application the tenants also seek that an investigation is conducted into
the lessor’s potential failure to comply
with their taxation obligations.
No evidence was submitted to substantiate this allegation nor to compel the
Tribunal to refer the
matter for investigation. This part of the tenant’s
application is dismissed.
CORRECTED ORDER
Rental Bonds on behalf of the Territory is directed to release $66.56 of the
disputed sum to the lessor and the remainder to the
Tribunal finds that the lessors failed to lodge the bond with the Office of
Rental Bonds as required by
Residential Tenancies Act
application is otherwise dismissed.
counterclaim is dismissed.
registrar is directed to refer this matter with the finding at order 2 for
investigation with the relevant regulatory
................................
Member P Hatami
Date(s) of hearing:
First Applicant:
Second applicant:
First Respondent:
Second respondent:
Residential Tenancies
Residential
Tenancies Act 1997
Residential
Tenancies Act 1997
Residential Tenancies
TC Industrial Plant Pty Ltd v
Robert’s Queensland Pty Ltd
[1963] HCA 57
Banco de Portugal v Waterlow
[1932] UKHL 1
[1932] AC 452
Hasell v Bagot, Shakes &
[1911] HCA 62
, Karacominakis v Big Country Developments Pty Ltd
NSWCA 313 (Karacominakis)
RTF format (205 KB)
Signed PDF/A format