COLLETT & ORS v ACT PLANNING AND LAND AUTHORITY (No 2) (Administrative Review) [2025] ACAT 51 (17 July 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
COLLETT & ORS v ACT PLANNING AND
LAND AUTHORITY (No 2) (Administrative Review)
[2025] ACAT 51
AT 101/2023
Catchwords: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW –
review of a decision
approve, subject to conditions, a development proposal for a crematorium
adjacent to the Callum Brae Nature
Reserve – whether development proposal
should have been assessed in the impact track instead of the merit track –
of the development on landscape quality of the locality considered
– impact of the development on fragmentation of Swift Parrot
considered – whether the land is suitable for the development or use
authorised by the varied lease – whether
development approval should be
refused on discretionary grounds under s 120(a) and/or (h) – development
approved subject to
varied conditions
Legislation cited:
Cemetries and Crematoria Act 2020
Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
18, 18A, 75(1)
Nature Conservation Act 2014
Planning and Development Act 2007
(repealed), ss 113, 119, 120(a) and (,
123, 128, 144, 315, 316, 317, schedule 3, schedule 4 part 4.3
Subordinate
Legislation cited:
Territory Plan 2008
Jerrabomberra District Map and Code
(NI2008-27), C2
Lease Variation General Code
NUZ1 – Broadacre Zone Development Table
Cases cited:
Baptist Community Services v ACT Planning and Land
[2015] ACTCA 3
Collett v ACT Planning and Land Authority
[2024] ACAT 39
Ginninderra Falls Association v ACT Planning and Land Authority
[2017] ACAT 108
Senior Member M Orlov (presiding)
Senior Member A Pegrum
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) AT 101/2023
PAMELA COLLETT
First Applicant
Second Applicant
DIETLIND SOMMER
FRANCE MEYER
Fourth Applicant
Fifth Applicant
INVOCARE AUSTRALIA PTY LTD ACN 060 060
First Party Joined
RED BOX CONTRACTORS PTY
Second Party Joined
ACT PLANNING AND LAND AUTHORITY
Senior Member M Orlov (presiding)
Senior Member A Pegrum
The Tribunal orders:
decision to approve, subject to conditions, development application number
202138789/s144C/s144E/s144G is varied by:
(a) substituting for the approved variation to the Crown lease:
variation to the
Crown lease to:
the existing purpose clause uses with cemetery (limited to crematorium and
memorial park) and subsidiary thereto a caretaker’s
the car parking requirement to provide for a standard acceptable to the
authority; and
the restrictions associated with the existing uses and assignment.
(b) substituting for condition 5(a)(iv) of the conditions of approval:
(iv) minor changes to the development providing for:
retention of
trees TR4, TR5, TR20, TR21, TR25, TR26, TR75, TR76, TR88, TR99 and TR100;
retention of
tree TR65 unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Authority
that removal is unavoidable;
realignment of
the service road adjacent to the south-western boundary to provide for retention
of trees TR28, TR29, TR30, TR31, TR32,
TR33, TR35, TR36, TR37 and TR47 unless
the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Authority that there is no
alternative to removal;
retention of
existing Eucalyptus blakelyi and Eucalyptus melliodora trees located in soft
landscaped areas within the development
footprint unless the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Authority that there is no realistic
alternative to removal,
or removal is adequately compensated by additional or
substitute planting (whether within or outside the development footprint) to
prevent fragmentation of Swift parrot habitat;
screen planting
of suitable tree and plant species, consistent with the existing woodland
character of the site and the adjacent Callum
Brae Nature Reserve, along the
boundary of the site extending from Narrabundah Lane to tree TR35 to minimise
the visual impact of
the development on the landscape quality of the locality.
Note: Plans (and any supporting information) should identify the
proposed response including any plan updates. Emphasis should be
measures to prevent fragmentation of Swift parrot habitat in the immediate and
short term (1 to 5 years) including by preserving
existing trees that may not
presently be suitable as Swift parrot foraging habitat but may become suitable
as they mature and by
planting advanced specimens where possible.
The applicant’s response to this condition will be referred to the
Conservator to advise the Authority.
Overflow parking spaces may be adjusted (including reducing potential
impacts to identified trees such as additional permeable surfaces
in relevant
tree protection zone(s)).
(c) amending condition 5(c)(a.) of the conditions of approval by deleting the
words “cemetery and” so that it says:
dealing with crematorium uses;
...............................
Senior Member M
On behalf of the Tribunal
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
is an application for review of a decision to approve, subject to conditions, a
proposal to construct a new crematorium and associated
landscaping and other
works on Block 1 Section 3 Symonston (
) and to vary the Crown
lease as necessary to authorise the development and proposed used. The site is
located next to the Callum
Brae Nature Reserve (
Callum Brae
), located on
the lower eastern slopes of Mount Mugga.
evidence finished on 23 May 2024 and the Tribunal commenced hearing submissions
on 24 May 2024. The hearing was adjourned part-heard
while the matter was
referred to the Commonwealth Department of Climate Change, Energy, the
Environment and Water (
the Department
) for reconsideration of an earlier
controlled action decision made on 26 May 2020, in light of new evidence about
the potential impact
of the development on the Swift Parrot, which is listed as
a ‘critically endangered’ species under the
Environmental
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
Nature Conservation Act 2014
. The background to the referral is
explained in
Collett v ACT Planning and Land Authority
[2024] ACAT
20 March 2025, the Department gave notice confirming the original decision that
the proposed action is not a controlled action
in relation to sections 18 and
18A under section 75(1) of the EPBC Act. Section 18(2) prohibits a person from
taking action that
has, or will have, a significant impact on a listed
threatened species included in the critically endangered category. Section 18A
makes taking such an action a strict liability offence.
decision relates only to the specific matters protected under chapter 2 of the
EPBC Act. The reasons for the decision have not
been made available to the
Tribunal. While it is relevant the development has been determined not to be a
controlled action, the
Tribunal is not relieved of the task of deciding whether
the development proposal meets the requirement for development approval
given under sections 119 and 120 of the
Planning and Development Act 2007
(repealed) (
Planning Act
application was relisted for hearing of final submissions on 26 June 2025. By
then many of the grounds on which the applicants
originally said development
approval should be refused were abandoned or significantly narrowed.
following issues remained for decision:
(a) first, whether the development proposal should have been assessed in the
impact track instead of the merit track;
(b) second, whether the proposed lease variation does not achieve compliance
with criterion C1(i) of the Lease Variation General
the proposed use of private land for the purpose of a privately operated
“cemetery” is inconsistent with the
Planning Act, the Territory Plan
Cemetries and Crematoria Act 2020
(c) third, whether the proposed lease variation does not achieve compliance with
criterion C1(ii) of the LVGC, because the land to
which the lease applies is not
suitable for the development or use authorised by the varied lease;
(d) fourth, whether approval should be refused under section 120(a) because the
development proposal does not comply with the NUZ1
Broadacre Zone objectives
(i) to make provision for activities requiring clearance zones or protection
from conflicting development; and
(ii) to ensure that development does not adversely impact or visually intrude on
the landscape and environmental quality of the locality;
(e) fifth, whether approval should be refused under section 120(h) because of
the nature, extent and significance of probable environmental
impacts on remnant
patches of Yellow Box – Blakely’s Red Gum woodland, Swift Parrots
and Small Ant Blue Butterflies.
a short adjournment at the end of the hearing, the Tribunal informed the parties
it was satisfied development approval should
be given, subject to varying the
conditions of approval to clarify the limits on the permitted use as a
‘cemetery’, minimise
the visual impact of the development on the
landscape quality of the locality, including Callum Brae and prevent
fragmentation of
Swift Parrot habitat, particularly in next 1 to 5 years.
considering further submissions in relation to the appropriate form of orders,
the Tribunal made final orders on 30 June 2025.
Tribunal’s reasons for decision follow.
Impact of the development on the landscape quality of the
site has an area of some 9.7 hectares and is located at the corner of Mugga Lane
to the northwest and Narrabundah Lane to the
northeast. The southern boundary
adjoins the Callum Brae Nature Reserve. The Mugga Mugga Nature Reserve adjoins
Mugga Lane to the
reserves are connected to a wider network of reserves within Canberra Nature
Park (Red Hill Nature Reserve, Issacs Ridge Nature
Reserve and Wanniassa Hill
Nature Reserve).
predominant landscape character and visual quality of the locality is of
extensive native bushland, including remnant box-gum
woodland with an
understorey of grassland and native shrubbery. The previous use of the
development site as a zoo (established in
the 1980s and cleared of buildings and
facilities in 2003) degraded some of the landscape quality of the site with
planted non-local eucalyptus...and...highly disturbed ground
storey across much of the
Box-gum woodland and
mature remnant eucalyptus trees remain particularly on areas generally not
impacted by the zoo.
proposed development is relatively low density with a restrained footprint
relative to the site area. The footprint generally
occupies the southern central
part of the site, appropriately constrained by potential archaeological deposit
areas of significant
heritage value and retaining a deep band (some 100 metres)
of remnant box gum woodland adjacent to Narrabundah Lane and Mugga Lane
northern corner of the site.
proposed development includes two separate buildings (the chapel with
crematorium and the administration building with reflection
lounge), access
roads and carparks, memorial gardens with reflection pond, a habitat pond (the
existing dam), landscaping, planted
native species and a walking track
connecting to Callum Brae. The proposed buildings are of a simple low-rise
appearance with some
skillion roofs rising to approximately six metres above
ground. Materials are generally lightweight with metal cladding and some
walls. The overall design presents as unobtrusive buildings separated by
landscaped spaces.
access to the development is off Narrabundah Lane, with the primary service
access from Mugga Lane. For most of its length
the service road to the
crematorium runs within the 16 metre building setback from the Callum Brae south
Tribunal viewed the site on 21 May 2024. The Tribunal observed the native bush
landscape quality of the site presented as contiguous
to the locality of Callum
Brae at the southern boundary. The Tribunal also noted that notwithstanding the
overarching bush landscape
character of the locality, the landscape quality of
the site had been degraded by its former use as a zoo.
was common ground the development will have some impact on the landscape quality
of the site and, by extension, on the landscape
quality of the locality. The
applicants also expressed concerns about a loss of connectivity with adjacent
nature corridors. However,
the Tribunal accepts the ecological advice that the
proposed plantings of indigenous species appropriate to the site and environs
have been selected to “enhance the ecological values of the site and help
to integrate the sites ecological values with the
adjoining and nearby Canberra
Nature Park Reserves”.
Tribunal also noted that the EPBC protected box-gum woodland on the site was
referred previously to the Department for consideration
under the EPBC Act,
resulting in a determination that the development is not a controlled
Tribunal is satisfied the impact on landscape quality on the whole will be
negligible and that the proposed development footprint,
built form scale and
massing, tree retention and planting strategies will enable continuity of and
integration with the landscape
character and quality of the locality.
aligns broadly with the Notice of Decision (
The limited development footprint, with significant areas
of undisturbed or natural parts of the site in particular close to the two
frontages, are considered consistent with objective (a). The landscape will in
particular to the road frontages provide a substantially
rural landscape
proportionate to the surrounds including proximity to the urban area ...
While elements of the development will be visible, the low density and scale
are not inconsistent with this objective
while development of the
site will have some changes, any impacts are not considered to be adverse or
unreasonable... this is not
from a position of nil impacts ... some impacts will
occur. This proposal is however of a scale which is considered reasonable for
the site including consideration of the zone objectives
the Tribunal sees the proposed development treatment of the southern boundary
with Callum Brae differently. The Tribunal
considers the minimal visual buffer
between the Narrabundah Lane visitor access road and carpark, the proximity of
the crematorium
building to the boundary with Callum Brae and the service road
within the boundary setback, with associated removal of several mature
(including a remnant) will detract materially from the landscape quality of the
locale, particularly the northern outlook from
Callum Brae.
this extent the Tribunal agrees with the applicants’ concerns that this
part of the development is likely to “adversely
impact and visually
intrude on the landscape and environmental quality of the locality”.
ameliorate this, the Tribunal has imposed a condition requiring screen planting
of trees and plant species consistent with the
existing woodland character along
the boundary of the site, extending from Narrabundah Lane to tree TR35 –
which is west of
the crematorium building – as well as realignment of the
service road and retention of several trees slated for removal. The
considers this will adequately protect the landscape quality of the
Impact of the development on fragmentation of Swift Parrot
Tribunal heard substantial evidence from all parties and their experts as to
whether the proposed development would have, or is
likely to have, a significant
impact on the Swift Parrot. The Minister with responsibility under the EPBC Act
previously determined
the development proposal was not a controlled action
because it was unlikely to have any significant impacts on any protected
including Swift Parrots. The Minister’s determination informed
the original assessment and subsequent approval of the development
application.
Parrots are migratory, breed in Tasmania and migrate to south-eastern Australia,
foraging in autumn and winter in forest and
woodlands, including in the
issues explored in the evidence included the extent to which the conditions of
approval was likely to be effective in preserving
trees suitable for foraging;
whether planting trees to compensate for the removal of existing trees would
ensure fragmentation of
habitat did not
the significance of recorded
sightings of large numbers of Swift Parrots (a flock of 60 birds) at the
location in May 2021;
to which the Conservator, in providing advice in relation to the development
application, was aware of updated scientific
information regarding Swift Parrot
sitings in the locality;
consideration of the National Recovery Plan for Swift Parrots (published April
2024); whether the EPBC referral drew specific attention
to the Swift Parrot as
a ‘critically endangered’ species accessing the site for
and whether Capital
Ecology’s recommendations for box gum retention and removal and
compensatory planting adequately considered
potential fragmentation of Swift
Parrot habitat.
considering these issues, the Tribunal found the evidence of Professor Robert
Heinsohn and Dr Deborah Saunders, both respected
experts on Swift Parrots, to be
compelling. Their evidence generally related to the endangerment of the species,
material current
sightings of Swift Parrots on and near the site, and the
importance of preserving the integrity of foraging habitat to ensure the
chance of survival of the
Notwithstanding
the Commonwealth delegate confirmed, on 20 March 2025, that the proposed action
is not a controlled action under the
EPBC Act, the Tribunal considers the
potential fragmentation of Swift Parrot habitat associated with the development,
mature trees and the growth times for compensatory replacement trees,
cannot be dismissed considering the evidence of Professor Heinsohn
Saunders regarding the risk of fragmentation of Swift Parrot habitat,
particularly in the immediate to short term (one to
five years).
note, the evidence established Swift Parrots prefer to forage in large, mature
trees and that the site currently supports species
of eucalyptus foraging
habitat trees (including
Eucalyptus blakelyi
Conservator’s advice in connection with the initial assessment of the
development application, stated:
Given its relatively small area
and lack of swift parrot sightings directly on the site, the development overall
is unlikely to significantly
impact on the swift parrot. However, the loss of 15
important foraging trees, of substantial age and size, has the potential to
and fragment existing swift parrot habitat and should be avoided if at
all possible, or compensated
response, the conditions of approval included condition 5(a)(iv) providing for:
minor changes to the approved development to preserve some or
all of the (15) trees identified by the Conservator used for foraging
Swift Parrot - OR if unavoidable...information be provided demonstrating
removal of the trees be compensated for to ensure that fragmentation
of the Swift parrot habitat does not occur...The applicant’s
response to
this condition will be referred to the Conservator to advise the
Authority...overflow parking spaces may be adjusted
(including reducing
potential impacts to identified trees such as additional permeable surfaces in
relevant tree protection
Tribunal is not satisfied this condition gives sufficient certainty to habitat
outcome – particularly mitigating fragmentation
of habitat while
replacement trees grow to a sufficient level of maturity to provide suitable
habitat, noting the parrot’s
preference for foraging in mature trees. In
that context, Dr Saunders said:
The species needs mature trees
now to be retained, and it needs younger trees to move forward in the future ...
so it’s really
important for the long-term survival of a species that it
has habitat right now, so that it can persist while other habitats are
Tribunal also had regard to the evidence of Robert Speirs of Capital Ecology. Mr
Speirs prepared the ecological impact assessment
relied upon in the assessment of the development application.
Mr Speirs’ evidence was
valuable in clarifying how the Swift Parrot and its foraging habitat had been
considered in the proposed
development, notably in relation to the retention or
removal of box-gum woodland and new plantings.
Speirs noted that many remnant trees would remain on the site and opined that
“in the context of the larger environment we’re
working in being
that we’ve got Callum Brae next door, and ...a lot of box gum woodland to
the south ... and Mugga Mugga ...it’s
come to a stage where it’s a
fairly minor loss of those habitat trees”. However, the Tribunal
considers Mr Spiers’
evidence that the long-term restoration of habitat
would take more than 20 years to be particularly significant in the context of
assessing probable loss of habitat in the immediate to short
Tribunal recognises the proponent has gone to considerable trouble to contain
the development footprint, the associated service
infrastructure requirements
related to the retention of trees, the restoration intentions to replant with
box gum woodland post vegetation
clearance and tree removal, and the
identification of potential Swift Parrot foraging habitat to be removed or
retained within the
footprint as presented by Mr
the Tribunal is not persuaded sufficient steps have been taken to limit
fragmentation of Swift Parrot habitat in the immediate
to short term. Long term
restoration of habitat may turn out to be of little value if fragmentation of
habitat occurs in the immediate
to short term, when Swift Parrots are likely to
face the most challenging conditions according to the evidence of Professor
and Dr Saunders.
Tribunal considers that several mature trees nominated for removal are important
to preserving foraging habitat and should be
retained. The Tribunal also
considers that minor changes to the development to preserve existing trees that
are likely to reach maturity
and provide suitable habitat in a shorter timeframe
than newly planted trees and a requirement to plant advanced specimens of
compensatory
trees, is appropriate to ensure fragmentation of habitat does not
occur, particularly in the immediate to short term.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal has substituted in place of condition 5(a)(iv) a new condition
requiring retention of trees supportive of
Swift Parrot habitat and retention
(to the extent feasible) of
Eucalyptus blakelyi
within the development footprint, or the provision of additional
or substitute planting to prevent fragmentation of Swift Parrot
Should the development proposal have been assessed in the
impact track instead of the merit track?
applicants submitted the development application should be refused because the
development proposal was assessed incorrectly in
the merit track, instead of the
impact track.
Territory Plan includes development tables for each zone, which set out the uses
to which land may be put, identify the codes
against which a development
proposal must be assessed and the assessment track in which a proposal must be
proposal that the applicable development table says is assessable in the merit
track may nevertheless be assessable in the impact
track if, relevantly, the
proposal is of a kind mentioned in schedule 4 of the Planning
development proposal must not be approved in the impact track unless an
environmental impact statement (
) has been completed or an EIS
exemption is in force for the development proposal and the development is
consistent with the requirements
specified in section 128(1)(b).
4.3 of schedule 4 identifies certain development proposals requiring an EIS.
These include, relevantly, a proposal that is likely
to have a significant
adverse environmental impact on a critically endangered, endangered or
vulnerable species; a proposal involving
the clearing of more than 0.5ha of
native vegetation in a native vegetation area; and a proposal that is likely to
have a significant
adverse impact on the heritage significance of a place or
object registered under the
Heritage Act 2004
. In the first two cases,
the proposal is assessable in the impact track unless the Conservator provides
an environmental significance
) indicating that the proposal
is not likely to have a significant adverse environmental impact. In the latter
case, the proposal
is assessable in the impact track unless the Heritage Council
provides an ESO that the proposal is not likely to have a significant
impact on matters of heritage significance.
113(2) of the Planning Act provides that the determination of which assessment
track applies to a development proposal is
made by reference to circumstances
when the application is made.
site is in the NUZI – Broadacre Zone. The relevant development table is
the NUZI – Broadacre Zone Development Table.
This stipulates that the
minimum assessment track for a development proposal for a “cemetery”
and a “lease variation”
is the merit track.
development application was lodged on 2 September
ESO NI2020-527, in which
the Conservator indicated the proposal is not likely to have a significant
adverse environmental impact
and ESO NI2020-578, in which the Heritage Council
indicated the proposal is not likely to have a significant adverse impact on
of heritage significance, were in force when the development application
was lodged.
has two consequences. First, an EIS was not required. Second, applying section
113(2), the proposal was assessable in the merit
applicants submitted the proposal should have been assessed in the impact track
for two reasons.
amended development application 144C was lodged on 6 April 2022, by which time
both ESOs had expired. Also, the most recent
amended development application
144G was lodged on 3 May 2023, without an ESO from the Conservator being in
force. Although an ESO
was signed on 24 April 2023, it was not registered as a
notifiable instrument until 11 May 2023, with an effective date of 12 May
The applicants submitted that, in the absence of an active ESO, the amended
development applications should have been lodged
in the impact track.
the applicants submitted the Conservator, in issuing the ESO, failed to
acknowledge the status of the Swift Parrot as critically
endangered and their
assessment of the impact of fragmentation on flora and fauna failed to take into
account expansion of the Boral
Quarry that will require removal of more EPBC
protected woodland on the southern side of the development site.
first submission is answered by section 113(2). The determination of the
applicable assessment track is made by reference to circumstances
application is made. An amended development application is not a new application
for the purposes of section113(2).
144 provides that ACTPLA may, if asked by the proponent, amend a development
application provided, among other things, ACTPLA
is satisfied the amended
development will be substantially the same as the development applied for
originally and the assessment
track for the application will not change if the
application is amended.
assessment track applies to a development proposal, the proposal is in that
assessment track and that track must be followed
in assessing the development
application for the proposal.
development application amended under section 144 remains in the original
assessment track.
second submission raises an issue considered in
Ginninderra Falls Association
[2017] ACAT 108
, which concerned a development proposal submitted
in the merit track. The applicant in that case submitted the proposal should
been assessed in the impact track because it was likely to have a
significant adverse environmental impact on a “vulnerable”
– the Little Eagle. In rejecting the submissions, the tribunal said at
[102]-[104]:
What is clear, however, is that section 113(2) does
not permit reference to facts or circumstances arising after the application was
made. We have also concluded that the circumstances to be considered must be of
a nature or kind that the person or entity making
the development application
knew or should reasonably have known at the time the application was
We recognise that in some cases new evidence might come to light after a
development application has been made that (arguably) shows
that the application
should be assessed in the impact track. Section 113(3) accommodates that
possibility by enabling Ministerial
declarations to be made under sections 124
or 125 of the P & D Act. In our view, when section 113 is read as a whole,
that pathway
for addressing circumstances arising after the event (meaning after
the development application was made) confirms that ACTPLA (and
the Tribunal on
review) cannot consider such circumstances when considering whether a
development application has been assessed in
a track other than the track for
the proposal.
Applying these principles to this case, and assuming that there is no
issue that the Little Eagle and the Scarlet Robin are “vulnerable
species” for the purposes of Schedule 4, the question will be whether
Riverview and/or its agent/s who applied for approval
to undertake the
development proposed knew or should reasonably have known at the time the
development application was made that
the proposal “is likely to have a
significant adverse environmental impact” on either or both of those
[106] the tribunal said:
What would be relevant is evidence
Riverview (and/or ACTPLA) had “when the application [was] made”
going to Riverview’s
and ACTPLA’s understanding about whether the
proposal “is likely to have a significant adverse environmental
on either or both of those species.
proponents submitted, correctly in the Tribunal’s opinion, that there is
no evidence they or ACTPLA knew or should have
known the proposal was likely to
have a significant adverse impact on the Swift Parrot (assuming that fact is
established) at the
time the development application was submitted. Further,
with regard to the alleged future impact on Yellow Box – Blakely’s
Red Gum woodland, the proponents had obtained a determination on 26 May 2020
that the proposal did not constitute a ‘controlled
action’ under the
Accordingly,
this ground of challenge fails.
Is compliance with C1(i) of the LVGC achieved?
applicant submitted the proposal to vary the permitted use of the Crown lease to
include “cemetery” does not comply
with criterion C1(i) of the LVGC
because such use is inconsistent with the Planning Act, the Territory Plan and
Cemeteries and Crematoria Act 2020
provides that a lease is varied only where “the varied lease is consistent
with the Territory Plan including all relevant
argument was abandoned previously but revived on the final day of the
applicants’ submission treads the following path.
315 of the Planning Act provides that public land may be reserved in the
Territory Plan for the purposes of, among other things,
a cemetery or burial
316 provides that an area of public land must be managed in accordance with the
management objectives applying to the area
and the public land management plan
for the area.
317(1) states that the management objectives for an area of public land reserved
for a particular purpose are the management
objectives stated in schedule 3 in
relation to the areas of land reserved for that purpose.
3 provides that the management objectives for an area of public land reserved
for a cemetery or burial ground are “to
provide for the internment or
cremation of human remains and the internment of the ashes of human
to the argument, the Planning Act “that guides the Territory Plan 2008
only associates the term “cemetery”
to public land”.
Presumably, the applicants contend that only public land can be used for a
“cemetery”.
argument then pivots to the meaning of “cemetery” and
“crematorium” in the
Cemeteries and Crematoria Act 2020
dictionary of the Act defines “cemetery” to mean a place where human
remains are buried, cremated remains are interred
and deceased people are
memorialised and operated by the ‘authority’ – meaning the
Cemeteries and Crematoria Authority
established under section 113 of the Act.
“Crematorium” is defined to mean a place where human remains are
cremated remains are interred and deceased people are memorialised and
operated by a ‘licensee’– being a person
who has a licence to
operate a facility under section 49 of the Act or the authority.
applicants submitted the proposed lease variation would allow a
“cemetery” to be located on private land – contrary
Planning Act – and a private enterprise to operate a
“cemetery” – contrary to the
Cemeteries and Crematoria Act
submission must be rejected.
is achieved if the proposal is consistent with the Territory Plan including all
relevant codes. The
Cemetries and Crematoria Act 2020
regulates who may
operate a cemetery or crematorium. It has nothing to do with planning issues,
including the permissible use of
private land under the Territory Plan.
provisions of the Planning Act to which the applicants refer concern the use of
public land. They do not speak to the permissible
use of private land.
is defined in Territory Plan to mean “the use of land for the internment
or the cremation of the dead
including any funeral parlour or chapel erected on
such land and used in connection with the cemetery”.
is a permitted use under the NUZ1 – Broadacre Zone
Development Table.
is nothing in the Planning Act or the Territory Plan that precludes the use of
private land for the cremation of the dead, including
any funeral parlour or
chapel erected on the land and used in that connection.
ground of challenge fails.
development proposal does not provide for the land to be used for internment of
the dead, although this falls within the Territory
Plan definition of
“cemetery”. The NoD states that approval of the lease variation to
permit use of the land as a “cemetery”
does not extend to its use
for internment of the dead and if such use is proposed in the future, further
development approval would
Tribunal considers it is appropriate to make this pellucidly clear by inserting
the words “(limited to crematorium and memorial
park)” after
“cemetery” in the description of the approved variation to the Crown
Is compliance with C1(ii) of the LVGC achieved?
applicants submitted the proposed lease variation does not comply with criterion
C1(ii) of the LVGC because the site is not suitable
for use as a
“cemetery”, even if the permitted use is limited to cremation.
provides that a lease is varied only where “the land to which the lease
applies is suitable for the development or use
authorised by the varied
this case the “development or use authorised by the varied lease” is
described in the following terms:
...approve subject to
conditions the proposal for:
variation of
the Crown lease to:
the existing purpose clause uses with cemetery and subsidiary thereto a
caretaker’s residence;
the car parking requirement to provide for a standard acceptable to the
authority; and
the restrictions associated with the existing uses and
assignment,
at Block 1 Section 3 SYMONSTON, in
accordance with the plans, drawings and other documentation approved and
endorsed as forming part
of this approval.
varied lease does not merely authorise a change in the permitted use of the land
to “cemetery”. It permits the land
to be used for that purpose only
“in accordance with the plans, drawings and other documentation approved
and endorsed as forming
part of this approval”. One of the requirements is
to prepare an ongoing management plan, which is to be registered against
tile. A condition of approval is that, once constructed, the development is
managed and operated in accordance with the approved
The evident purpose of
these requirements is to ensure that use of the land for the purpose of a
”cemetery” is constrained
by the plans, drawings and other documents
forming part of the development approval, including the ongoing management
issue raised by C1(ii) is whether the land is suitable for that specific
main reason the applicants submit the land is not suitable is
The proposed development will compromise connectivity
between Red Hill, Mount Mugga, Callum Brae, Issacs Ridge and Wanniassa Hills
Nature Reserve as an estimate of 100 trees will be removed in Stage 1 of the
development and more in Stage 2. The subsequent loss
of tree canopy will
contribute to the deterioration of the adjacent Reserve as part of the
cumulative impacts inflicted on the area.
This renders the block unsuitable for
the proposed development.
submission has some force. However, the Tribunal considers the applicants’
concerns are adequately addressed by varying
condition 5(a)(iv) of the
conditions of consent in the manner discussed earlier. The Tribunal is satisfied
that with those changes
compliance with C1(ii) is achieved.
Should development approval be refused on discretionary grounds
under s 120?
120 provides that, in deciding a development application for a development
proposal in the merit track, the decision-maker
must consider a number of
discretionary factors including, relevantly, the zone objectives and the
probable impact of the proposed
development, including the nature, extent and
significance of probable environmental impacts.
Section 120(a) – zone objectives
NUZ1 – Broadacre Zone objectives are:
(a) make provision in a predominantly rural landscape setting for a range of
uses which require larger sites and/or a location outside
urban areas;
(b) make provision for activities requiring clearance zones or protection
from conflicting development;
(c) ensure that development does not adversely impact or visually intrude on
the landscape and environmental quality of the locality;
(e) ensure, where appropriate, that development and the use of land does not
undermine the future use of land which may be required
for urban and other
their closing submissions, the applicants focussed on compliance with objectives
(b) and (c).
Zone objective (b)
applicants submitted objective (b) is not met for two reasons.
the applicants submitted criterion C2 of the
Jerrabomberra District Map and
(NI2008-27) is not met because the development is located within the
1km buffer zone for the approved expansion of Boral Quarry.
C2 applies to area
RC1 shown on the Jerrabomberra District Precinct Map and
The Mugga porphyry zone porphyry zone and the existing
quarry operations are to be protected from constraints imposed by adjacent
development. A buffer zone of 1km will be maintained around the quarry sites in
order to ensure protection of adjacent areas from
noise, air blast overpressure
and ground vibration nuisance. Within this protection zone, only development
free of constraints on
quarry operation is to be permitted.
was no direct evidence of these matters. The proponent’s representatives
informed the Tribunal that the separation distance
is 920 metres instead of one
kilometre, although there was no evidence as to which part of the development
site infringes on the
buffer zone.
the applicants submitted the proposed development conflicts with the Separation
Distance Guidelines for Air Emissions published
by the Territory in November
eparation Guidelines
) because the proposed cremators are located
16 metres from the boundary with Callum Brae instead of 150 metres.
applicants submissions assumed non-compliance with a zone objective would
mandate that development approval should be refused.
This is incorrect.
Baptist Community Services v ACTPLA
[2015] ACTCA 3
, Refschauge and
Penfold JJ explained the significance of zone objectives at [58]-[63] as
58. We have rejected the appellant’s submission
that a proposal in the merit track must be approved if it is
code-compliant...and
ACTPLA’s submission that a proposal in the merit
track must not be approved if it is inconsistent with a “relevant”
zone objective...
59. This in our view leaves s 120 open to being interpreted, according to
its terms, as giving a discretion to approve or reject
a proposal that is
code-compliant (and therefore not required to be rejected under s 119) such
discretion being exercisable only
after consideration of the matters set out in
paragraphs 120(a) to (f) (to the extent that they are relevant to a particular
That is the alternative submission put by ACTPLA, and is in our view
the only meaningful way in which to interpret s 120.
60. In Argos Pty Ltd v Corbell [2012] ACTCS 102...at...[67] (Argos).
Burns J in obiter dicta said:
...s 119(1)(a) of the Planning Act requires consistency with the relevant
codes, not with the zone objectives. Section 53 of the Planning
Act provides
that the objectives for a zone set out the “policy outcomes to be
achieved” by applying the applicable development
table and code to the
zone. The objectives are not intended to operate as criteria against which
proposals, or constituent parts
of a proposal, are to be checked. Rather they
are intended to provide guidance in interpreting the rules and criteria found in
61. Our conclusions are partly consistent with Burns J’s views in
62. We agree with his Honour that the zone objectives are relevant in
interpreting a code) and thereby assessing compliance with
it), and that
inconsistency with zone objective does not mandate rejection of a development
63. However, we also consider that consistency with the zone objectives
is properly considered in the exercise of the s 120 discretion
to approve a
development in the merit track, and that inconsistency with zone objectives may
also provide a basis for a discretionary
rejection of a code-compliant
development. To that extent our views may differ from those expressed by his
Honour in Argos.
for present purposes that part of the development site infringes the Boral
Quarry buffer zone by approximately 80 metres,
it does not follow that the
development creates a constraint on quarry operations, which appears to be the
result the imposition
of a buffer zone is intended to prevent. The Tribunal is
not persuaded a minor infringement of the buffer zone is sufficient to justify
discretionary rejection of the development proposal.
Separation Guidelines are not part of the Territory Plan. The emphasis the
applicants gave them appeared to be founded on the
(unstated) proposition that
compliance with the guidelines was necessary to “make provision for
activities requiring...protection
from conflicting development” and
therefore, compliance with zone objective (b). Although the applicants’
position was
by no means clear, the submission appeared to be that if the
development proposal did not comply with the Separation Guidelines it
necessarily did not comply with zone objective (b) because it failed to protect
Calum Brae from a “conflicting development”.
Separation Guidelines are intended to provide recommended separation distances
between various emitters and sensitive land uses
and provides “one method
of considering potential conflicts between incompatible land
The introduction
While the separation distances in these guidelines are
recommended distances, there is the opportunity for a proponent to demonstrate
that a separation distance, other than the recommended distance, is appropriate
by using the mechanisms in these guidelines. Therefore,
the distances
recommended in these guidelines are indicative and may be adjusted having regard
to specific site circumstances.
“Background”, the Separation Guidelines state:
primary role of the guidelines is to aid in the assessment of development
proposals. The application of the guidelines will assist
in protecting the
amenity in residential and other sensitive areas, and can be used by planning
authorities to protect industry from
encroachment by sensitive land uses.
4.2 states that the guidelines are intended to protect the amenity of sensitive
land uses, including “parklands, recreation
areas or reserves (regular
public use)”.
recommended separation distance for cremation is 150 metres. The crematorium
building is located more than 150 metres from the
south-eastern boundary and
approximately 16 metres from the south-western boundary with Callum Brae.
4.1.4 of the Separation Guidelines states:
Where the distance
between the measurement point and the activity boundary is less than the
recommended separation distance, the Planning
and Land Authority should request
the proponent to demonstrate why the lesser distance would be appropriate in
accordance with Section
5 ‘Amendments to Separation Distances’ of
these guidelines.
5 provides criteria a proponent should address when seeking a site-specific
variation from the recommended separation distance.
The evidence suggests a
specific variation was not considered necessary. Purdon Planning wrote in their
‘Planning Report and
Statement against Criteria, dated May
The ACT Government’s Separation Distance Guidelines
for Air Emissions 2018 recommends 150m of separation between cremation
and urban areas. Given the site is located approximately 900m from
established urban areas, the siting is considered
appropriate.
applicants criticise this statement because it “fails to acknowledge that
the Government guidelines also recommend a 150m
of separation between cremation
activities and a reserve (regular public use)”.
NoD addressed the issue as follows:
More generally, the site is
outside of the main urban area and is considered suitable for use as a
crematorium which some community
members may find a sensitive use. With such
sensitivities, a site with limited urban surrounds is considered preferable...
the site is considered suitable for the use and proposal. The
interaction with the site surrounds including the neighbouring reserve
considered in this.
Tribunal accepts that Callum Brae is a reserve. Whether it meets the requirement
of “regular public use” is less clear.
While there was some evidence
of public use – the applicants being persons who regularly use the reserve
– there was
no evidence of the extent to which Callum Brae is used by
members of the public.
(without deciding) that Callum Brae is, or could be, a sensitive land use and
therefore that a recommended separation distance
of 150 metres would apply for
cremation, there is no evidence why a separation distance of 16 metres from the
south western boundary
with Callum Brae is inappropriate considering all the
circumstances.
Accordingly,
even if compliance with zone objective (b) requires compliance with the
Separation Guidelines – which is not established
on the evidence –
the Tribunal is not persuaded the established facts would justify discretionary
rejection of the development
Zone objective (c)
applicants submitted:
Capital Ecology report states...that
“The proposed development will have a large number of direct and indirect
environmental
The definition of “environmental qualities” includes reference
to noise, pollution and transportation.
The block is located at the intersection of three nature reserves, next to
a Heritage listed farm and a large rural NUZ1 Broadacre
zone. Around 100 trees
are marked for removal... More than 90% of the EPBC Act and NC Act controlled
Yellow Box Blakely’s Red
Gum Woodland will be removed due to the
construction of the overflow car park and the site’s second driveway on
Narrabundah
Lane. This will adversely impact on the wildlife corridor landscape
and on the environment quality of the locality.
Callum Brae Nature Reserve is located in the immediate vicinity of the
proposed development. As outlined in Canberra Nature Park Reserve
Plan 2021, one of Canberra nature reserves’ long-term management aim is to
maintain connectivity with other woodland
areas to ensure there is ongoing
viable habitat for threatened and declining woodland birds. The development will
fragment this habitat
and will adversely impact on visually intrude on the
landscape and environmental quality of the
issues have been discussed earlier. The Tribunal is satisfied the
applicants’ concerns are adequately addressed by varying
5(a)(iv) of the conditions of consent in the manner discussed earlier. The
Tribunal is satisfied that with those changes
the development complies with zone
objective (c).
Section 120(h) – probable environmental impacts on
remnant patches of Yellow Box – Blakely’s Red Gum woodland, Swift
Parrots and Small Ant Blue Butterflies.
NoD addressed environmental impacts as follows:
representations raised a number of environmental concerns. The site and
surrounding environmental values and potential impact
of the development were
carefully considered during the assessment. The DA was supported by ESOs and
entities with environmental
focus advice advising of conditional support. This
notice of decision has been made consistently with such advice. It was however
identified that the ESOs have a construction period focus and to provide ongoing
environmental outcomes, and additional commitment
to protecting those areas and
values was considered required. A condition has been imposed to require an
ongoing management plan
to achieve such outcomes. To offer greater certainty,
the Authority considers the ongoing management plan be required in the Crown
impact on Swift Parrots and remnant patches of woodland has been discussed
earlier. The Tribunal is satisfied these issues are
adequately addressed by the
revised condition it proposes to substitute for condition 5(a)(iv) of the
conditions of consent.
5(c) requires the lessee to submit an ongoing plan of management that is
consistent with the DA information and identifies,
among other things:
environmental and cultural management outcomes consistent with
current ESO decisions (see condition 7 below) and includes subject
constraints and management practices. Generally this shall exclude the site
sensitive areas from use and detail ongoing management
practices of such
sensitive areas.
note to condition 5(c) states the management plan will be referred to relevant
entities, including the Conservator, EPA and Heritage
Council for advice. Once
the management plan is endorsed as sufficient, it will be required to be lodged
against the title.
The Conservator has advised that ‘provided the
works are undertaken in a manner consistent with the conditions in addition to
the mitigation measures contained in the supporting application for an ESO, they
are unlikely to cause a significant adverse environmental
impact’. The
opinion is granted subject to the following conditions:
a) All works are to be undertaken in accordance with the endorsed
b) Connectivity between this site and adjacent known populations of Small
Ant-blue Butterfly (Acrodipsas myrmecophila) must be maintained,
maintaining habitat preferences for the species by:
Maintaining
active regeneration of Eucalyptus
young trees suffering dieback
Maintaining
an unmanicured understorey (grasses and forbs, logs, fallen branches, twigs and
“no mow” areas and/or ecological focused mowing (i.e. suitable
timing and frequency) to achieve a unmanicured
understorey with retention of a
native understorey with variable natural grass heights
suitably qualified ecologist is to be engaged to inspect trees prior to removal
to check for the presence of Coconut Ant (Papyrius
nitidus) or Small Ant-blue
Butterfly larvae.
d) All currently identified (with the exception of nest CA1) and any new
Coconut Ant nests discovered during development must be protected
and clearly
marked as “no-go” areas – in particular, nest CA4, which has
been identified as having potential to
be indirectly impacted due to proximity
to the development footprint.
e) Options for the translocation of the directly impacted remnant tree and
associated nest CA1 must be explored in consultation with
species experts and
the ACT Parks and Conservation Service.
the changes to condition 5(a)(iv), the Tribunal is satisfied the probable
environmental impacts of the development are adequately
addressed by the
conditions of consent.
The applicants seek leave to re-open their case
before the matter was listed for the final day of submissions, the applicants
lodged an application for leave to re-open their
case. The application was
considered at the start of the hearing on 26 June 2025, resulting in leave being
the following issue raised by the application requires
8. DA 20213879 lacks proper Australian Company
Number, ACN
ACAT refused the DA for the Federal Golf Club development because the DA
was not properly signed. (Canberra Times, 13 June 2025, p
14) The DA's for
InvoCare’s private crematorium complex are deficient because they did not
have a proper Australian Company
Number, ACN.
The deficiency of the DA 202138789 has been pointed out in comments to the
DA, listed in the T-documents, pages 144, 149, 176, 180,
224, 687, 689, 1179,
decision in question is
Friends of Federal Fairways v ACT Planning and Land
[2025] ACAT 44.
The issue in
Federal Fairways
concern the absence of an ACN but rather turned on whether the development
application had been properly authorised for the
purposes of section 139 of the
Planning Act. The decision is on appeal to the Supreme Court.
respondent and the party joined submitted the decision is wrong and concerns
matters the ACAT does not have jurisdiction to decide
within the scope of the
respondent and party joined
submitted it would be procedurally unfair to permit
an issue to be raised for the first time about whether the development
application
was duly authorised after the evidence had closed. Among other
things, the party joined submitted it would have called evidence on
the issue if
it had been given notice that the applicants intended to make that case. The
Tribunal agreed and refused the applicants
leave to reopen their case to raise
that issue.
The correct or preferable decision
Tribunal was satisfied, for these reasons, that the decision to approve, subject
to conditions, development application number
202138789/s144C/s144E/s144G should
be varied in accordance with orders pronounced on 26 June
......................................
Member M Orlov
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
T-docs p 1070; Ecological
Impact Assessment; Fig 1 Locality Plan
T-docs p 429; Capital Ecology
Ecological Impact Assessment, Appendix D. EPBC Act Significant Impact Criteria
T-docs p 386; Capital Ecology
Ecological Impact Assessment, 3.1 vegetation
T-docs p 408 (DA Capital
Ecology vegetation mapping); p 536 (DA general arrangement plan); p 547 (DA Site
Master Plan)
T-docs p 1063; Capital Ecology,
Ecological Impact Assessment, Landscaping
T-docs p 103; Notice of
T-docs pp 99-100; DA NoD
Reasons for the decision
Applicant’s Joint Revised
Application, Section 2 Table 3 (c)
T-docs p 91; NoD Conditions
T-docs p 275; Margaret
Blakers’ representation; Transcript of proceedings on 21 May 2024 pp
45.45-46.5, p 55.15-25; Transcript
of proceedings on 2 May 2024, p 14.20-40, p
Transcript of proceedings on
4 March 2024, pp 60 - 62
T-docs pp 1097-1114 (EPBC
referral); Transcript of proceedings on 4 March 2024, p 44.30-45, p 45.45, p
47.35-40, p 50.10
Transcript of proceedings on
4 March 2024, p 65.15-35
Transcript of proceedings on
21 May 2024, p 21.15-35; p 22.5-10; pp 26.35-27.5
T-docs p 106; DA NoD, Entity
Advice and Requirements ‘3 Conservator’
T-docs p 91; Condition
Transcript of proceedings on
22 March 2024, p 28.30-45
T-docs pp 380-446 (report
dated 21 December 2022) and pp 1048- 1096 (report dated 16 December 2019)
Transcript of proceedings on
22 March 2024, p 51.5-20 and p 52.10-40
Exhibit PJ 6 Figure 3.
Capital Ecology 21 May 2024
Planning Act s 123(b)
T-docs pp 1391-2. The
development application is taken to be lodged when the application fee is paid.
The application was lodged
on 23 August 2021 but the application fee was paid on
2 September 2021.
Planning Act s
144(2)(a)(ii)
Ibid. s 113(4)
Ibid. s 315(f)
T-docs p 35
T-docs p 26
Burns J agreed with their
Honours’ orders and reasons at [79], adding only that he did not see any
conflict between their Honours’
reasons and what he said in
Exhibit A3 (Separation
Guidelines) p 2 (Introduction)
T-docs p 1452
T-docs p 36
Applicant’s Revised
Application, filed 20 February 2024 at p 6
T-docs p 35
T-docs p 28
RTF format (381 KB)
Signed PDF/A format