Inquest into the death of Baby X [2024] ACTCD 4 (11 September 2024)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Matter Title:
Inquest into the death of Baby X (a pseudonym)
[2024] ACTCD 4
Decision Date:
Coroner Archer
See [51]–[52], [53]–[57]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– death of a baby aged two days – injuries
sustained during a prolonged labour – disagreement regarding position
baby before birth – use of ultrasound to identify the position of the baby
– delayed recognition of the subgaleal
haemorrhage – public safety
issues adequately addressed by changes to Canberra Health Service policies and
procedures –
decision not to conduct a hearing
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
Counsel Assisting:
File Number:
CD 164 of 2019
CORONER ARCHER:
X was born at the Canberra Hospital (“TCH”) the morning of 12
October 2017. Baby X’s birth mother was LX.
It was her first pregnancy,
and Baby X was conceived by in-vitro fertilisation. Baby X’s non-birth
mother was LI.
X died in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit at TCH (“NICU”) on 14
October 2017, two days after he was born. As is
developed further in these
reasons, Baby X died from injuries sustained during his birth, which, I find,
were inadequately treated
in NICU. The inadequacy of his treatment contributed
to the cause of his death.
– BACKGROUND
X’s death was not immediately reported to the Coroner.
19 July 2019, a letter from Canberra Health Services (“CHS”) was
received by the Chief Coroner, notifying the Court
of Baby X’s death. An
investigation was directed by the Chief Coroner, noting that aspects of Baby
X’s treatment in NICU
involved him undergoing a “procedure”.
Those procedures included the resuscitation (involving ventilation and the
administration
of fluids and blood products) that occurred after his birth. The
Chief Coroner formed the view that the circumstances in which Baby
X underwent
those procedures should be “better ascertained”: see
Coroners Act 1997
(ACT) (“the Act”).
“death”. For there to be a death, there must be a “life”
in being. There is no doubt that Baby X was alive after his birth. I am
satisfied that the jurisdiction of the Court extends to the
consideration of
events that occurred before his birth, being matters relevant to the
circumstances in which the procedures described
at [4] were carried out.
assumed jurisdiction in relation to Baby X’s death, a Coroner was required
to hold an inquest into the manner and cause
of his death and make the findings
required by
of the Act. That section of the Act relevantly provides:
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find,
if possible—
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the person has
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
(i) state whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection
with the inquest or inquiry; and
(ii) if a matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the matter.
Decision Not to Conduct a Hearing
arriving at the findings a Coroner is required to make, I have a discretion as
to whether to hold a hearing
of the Act). I can dispense with a hearing in
the circumstances and according to the processes set out in
34A Decision not to conduct hearing
(1) A coroner may decide not to conduct a
hearing into a death if, after consideration of information given to a coroner
to the death of a person, the coroner is satisfied that—
(a) the manner and cause of death are sufficiently disclosed; and
(b) a hearing is unnecessary.
(2) A coroner must not dispense with a hearing into a death of a person, if
the coroner has reasonable grounds for believing the death
in care or death
in custody.
(3) A coroner who decides not to conduct
a hearing into a death must give the Chief Coroner and a member of the
deceased's immediate
family written notice of the decision, including the
grounds for the decision.
a decision not to conduct a hearing is made by a Coroner, an application can be
made to the Chief Coroner for a review of that
of the Act).
received representations from LX and LI, Baby X’s parents, that I should
conduct a hearing.
formed the view that the holding of a hearing was unnecessary. I provided Baby
X’s parents and the Chief Coroner with written
notice of that decision and
my reasons for it. In summary, it was my view that:
(a) there is sufficient evidence available to me that allows me to make the
findings that are required by
(b) most of that evidence is not subject to contest;
(c) the only real issue in contest is the positioning of Baby X’s head
before his birth (details of which are developed below).
The resolution of that
issue is not necessary to allow me to make findings as to the manner and cause
of Baby X’s death; and
(d) so far as the circumstances of the injuries sustained by Baby X during the
birthing process go beyond a possible error in clinical
judgment and give rise
to a matter of public safety, those concerns of public safety have been
adequately addressed by the changes
made by CHS to relevant process and
procedures: see [55]–[57].
4 April 2024, LI and LX made an application to the Chief Coroner to request a
review of my decision not to conduct a hearing. Pursuant
of the Act,
the Chief Coroner requested that I reconsider my decision. After reconsidering
my decision, I notified the Chief Coroner
that I remained of the view that a
hearing was unnecessary in the circumstances. The Chief Coroner, having had
regard to the material
gathered in this inquest, was not satisfied that a
hearing should be conducted. Written notice of the Chief Coroner’s
was provided to the applicants, LI and LX, on 12 April 2024.
findings that follow are made based on the following material received by me
during the inquest:
(a) Expert material
Professor Andrew Korda, dated 25 August 2020;
Professor Korda, dated 31 July 2022;
Professor Mike O’Connor, dated 23 July 2020;
Professor Simon Mitchell, dated 31 August 2020;
Statement by
Associate Professor Boon Lim, dated 14 April 2023;
Statement by Dr
ID, dated 14 April 2023; and
Post-Mortem report, Dr Renn Montgomery and Dr NG, dated 8 January
(b) Treating clinicians
(Obstetrics and Gynaecology Registrar), unsigned but taken on 21 March 2021;
Dr GC (on-call
Consultant Obstetrician), dated 27 September 2023.
(c) Reviews and procedures
Analysis Investigation Report, dated 15 February 2018;
Goodfellow External Review, dated 2 February 2018;
Action Statement
OG Department Meeting on 26 September 2017;
recommendations actioned;
Canberra Health
Service Procedure,
Labour and Birth: Care during First, Second, Third and
Fourth Stage
, No CHS21/320, issued 25 May 2021;
Canberra Health
Service Guidelines,
Assessment of the Newborn
, CHS22/368, issued 4
October 2022; and
The CHS Clinical
Neonatal Neurology
25 October 2017 CHHS
(d) Medical records from TCH and CHS
Procedural History
X’s death was referred to the Chief Coroner on 19 July 2019. The
conducting of the inquest was assigned to Coroner Peter
Morrison. The case was
amongst a significant collection of older inquests that were handed to me when I
became the Territory’s
“dedicated coroner” in March of 2022.
report of Professor Korda was requested by the Coroner on 13 July 2020. His
report was received on 3 December 2020.
Baby X’s death, proceedings were brought in the ACT Supreme Court by Baby
X’s parents. I was advantaged in my investigation
from having access to
the reports of Professors Mitchell and O’Connor, which were prepared in
the context of that litigation.
inquest obviously touched upon the interests of several people and entities: Dr
FL (an Obstetrics and Gynaecology Registrar, who
attended upon Baby X’s
birth), Dr GC (the on-call Consultant Obstetrician, who was consulted during the
birthing process and
became actively involved in Baby X’s delivery), and
CHS, who had overall responsibility for the operation of TCH.
8 May 2023, Counsel Assisting the Coroner, Ms King, wrote to LX and LI’s
solicitor and the ACT Government Solicitor (“ACTGS”).
A copy of that
letter was subsequently sent to the solicitor for Dr GC on 6 September 2023. It
was a shared understanding that ACTGS
would represent the interests of Dr FL,
who was, at the relevant time, an employee of the Territory. The letter of 8 May
out the submissions that Counsel Assisting was intending to make in
respect of the facts relevant to the findings required by
of the Act in
some details. Parties were invited to indicate whether a hearing would be
required in light of those submissions. At
the time of that letter, a statement
had not been obtained from Dr GC.
Submissions
were received on behalf of LX and LI, dated 13 June 2023. They were signed by Ms
Whalan SC and Mr Jullienne. The submissions
expressed agreement with the matters
put by Counsel Assisting, save for “factual deficiencies with respect of
the instrument
delivery.” Those deficiencies were said to affect the
proper determination of the manner of Baby X’s death and “obscure
the public health and safety features of what occurred prior to and at the time
of Baby X’s delivery.” It was submitted
that a primary issue, in
that context, was the decision-making surrounding the determination of whether
Baby X’s head was occipito
anterior (“OA”) or occipito
posterior (“OP”). The misdiagnosis of the position of Baby X’s
as it was submitted, an important factor in causing a failed vacuum
delivery, which was the main cause of the subgaleal haemorrhage
that contributed
to the cause of Baby X’s death. The submissions called for the Coroner to
obtain a statement from Dr GC and
to require Dr FL to answer more directly how
she came to her diagnosis as to the orientation of Baby X’s head, and what
precise details of her discussions with Dr GC were as to that issue.
Subsequently,
a statement from Dr GC was obtained by the Court, through a solicitor engaged to
act on her behalf. The statement indicated
that, in Dr GC’s view, a
hearing was not required. The statement maintained the position already
understood, that Dr GC was
of the view that Baby X’s head was in the OA
GC’s statement was provided to ACTGS and the solicitors for Baby X’s
parents on 11 November 2023. Further submissions
from the parents, dated 14
November 2023, were received by the Court. Again, it was submitted that the
“Primary Factual Issue”
(that is, the orientation of Baby X’s
head) had to be resolved for the findings required by
to be made. The
resolution of that issue, as it was submitted, could only be made after a
hearing had been conducted and relevant
witnesses had been called.
– THE CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING BABY X’S
BIRTH AND TREATMENT POST-BIRTH
summarise the features of Baby X’s birth that are significant to my
X was conceived by IVF. LX’s due date was 10 October 2017. The pregnancy
was unremarkable. On 30 September 2017 (38+4 weeks
gestation), LX presented to
TCH with early contractions. An examination of LX was conducted. No obvious
abnormalities were observed.
LX was sent home and an induction of labour was
planned at 40 weeks gestation.
11 October 2017, LX was admitted to TCH for induction of labour. Cervidil was
administered at 1210 hours. Cardiotocography (“CTG”)
was performed
at 1500 hours, 1845 hours and 2020 hours, all of which showed normal
LX’s membranes
ruptured spontaneously at 2045 hours. A vaginal examination commenced at about
2245 hours. The examination was
stopped at LX’s request. The position of
the baby was not able to be assessed.
FL, an Obstetrics and Gynaecology Registrar, accompanied by Dr E, also an
Obstetrics and Gynaecology Registrar, conducted an examination
of LX, including
a vaginal examination, at about 2350 hours. The medical records suggest that Dr
FL may have been told that the baby
was in the OP position. Dr FL, in her
statement, said that she was unable to recall how the issue of the baby’s
position was
0300 hours on 12 October 2017, a vaginal examination was conducted by a midwife.
Her notes indicate that she found the cervix to
be fully dilated and there was
moderate caput.
She also found that
the baby’s head was in an OP position.
0620 hours, Dr FL and Dr E returned to examine LX. The vaginal examination
showed the cervix to be fully dilated with the baby’s
head in a deflexed
OP position. Syntocinin was administered at 0330 hours, and LX began pushing at
0410 hours.
that examination, Dr FL spoke with Dr GC, the Consultant Obstetrician. The
doctors have different recollections of the conversations
that then took place.
Dr FL said that she told Dr GC that the baby was in the OP position, and that
they then entered LX’s
room. Dr GC then conducted her own vaginal
examination and spoke to Dr FL outside the room and said that the baby was in
the OA position.
Dr FL recalls challenging Dr GC, who, in Dr FL’s words,
“dismissed” her.
is agreed that Dr GC recommended that Dr FL attempt a vacuum extraction in the
labour ward under her supervision. Dr GC’
recollection is that after her
examination, she (Dr GC) drew a diagram illustrating how the suction cup should
be placed on the baby’s
posterior fontanelle. Dr GC has no recollection of
Dr FL stating her belief that the baby was in the OP position. Dr GC says she
accepts that it may have been stated. If it had been
“it was not stated in a way that caused me to consider
this was a strongly held belief and there was no indication that Dr FL
unhappy about applying the vacuum cup based on an OA presentation... there was
no demurrer to my assessment... If Dr FL had questioned
the lie firmly and asked
if we should confirm this I would have been happy to do an ultrasound.”
Kiwi vacuum cup (“vacuum cup”) was sourced, and Dr FL placed the cup
on Baby X’s head. Dr FL recalls Dr GC advised
her in respect of the
position for placement and told her (Dr FL) to “just avoid the
caput.” Dr FL said the vacuum cup
was placed by her “on the basis
that the baby was in an OP Position.” Dr FL recalls that she had one pull
of the vacuum
cup, without much descent being achieved. Dr GC then examined LX
again and then they both attempted to deliver using the vacuum cup,
without success. Dr GC concedes her hands were involved in this second pulling
attempt. Dr FL’s recollection is that
between the two attempts,
“there was no pop off, though suction was lost.”
GC then advised that LX would need to be taken to the operating theatre to try
forceps delivery and proceed to a caesarean section
if required. In theatre, one
attempt was made to deliver Baby X with forceps. Dr FL applied the forceps and
both doctors pulled without
achieving descent of the head. As it was clear that
the head was severely impacted, Dr GC determined that a caesarean section was
required. Dr FL created a standard incision and used her hands, without success,
to disimpact the head. Dr GC then took over. She
used her hands to disimpact the
head, though again without success. A nurse inserted her hand vaginally, but the
head could still
not be disimpacted. Dr GC extended the incision. One of Baby
X’s arms was freed. Dr FL said that she took over “as the
operator” and, with the assistance of a nurse, Baby X was born at 0738
hours on 12 October 2017. Professor Korda’s
opinion, on the basis of the
medical records, was that it took about 18 minutes to deliver the baby’s
head. It is highly likely
that Baby X was deprived of oxygen for a period during
this process.
notes were made by clinicians of Baby X’s position during the caesarean
section procedure.
Post-birth Treatment
X was born moribund with Apgar scores of 0 at 1 minute, 2 at 5 minutes, 3 at 10
minutes, 3 at 15 minutes, and 4 at 25 minutes
of life. He was taken to NICU for
treatment. He was resuscitated (by way of mask ventilation and CPR) and then
intubated. At 10 minutes,
Baby X was noted to have fixed dilated pupils
unresponsive to light. It took him 24 minutes to breathe spontaneously. The
soon after birth was of Hypoxic Ischaemic Encephalopathy
Significantly,
during the birthing process, Baby X suffered severe injury to his scalp, causing
a large subgaleal haemorrhage.
subgaleal haemorrhage was detected by Dr UD, the senior staff neonatal
paediatrician, at 1515 hours, when Baby X went into cardiac
arrest. It was only
then (once the subgaleal haemorrhage had been detected) that Baby X had started
to receive fluid transfusions,
including blood products. The consequence of the
delayed recognition of the subgaleal haemorrhage is addressed below.
process of recording scalp examinations using a form called the ‘neonatal
scalp examination record’ did not commence
until 1700 hours on the 12
October 2017. Blood gases were performed an hour or so after birth, but they
were not repeated. Cooling
therapy (commonly employed after birth to achieve
target temperatures) was used. Cooling therapy is contraindicated in the context
of significant blood loss (by virtue of the subgaleal haemorrhage sustained by
1445 hours on 13 October 2017, an MRI scan was done, which showed a 1.7cm
subgaleal haematoma and multiple acute infarcts in both
cerebral hemispheres and
ischemia in the basal ganglia.
X’s poor prognosis was discussed with his parents. He was extubated and
passed away at about 2127 hours on 14 October 2017,
at age 2 days and 14 hours.
Autopsy Findings
following significant features were observed at autopsy:
(a) Circular ecchymosis over the left frontal scalp, which appeared to be a mark
created by ventouse
application.
(b) Associated extension around the left orbit, left pre-auricular and
post-auricular regions.
(c) Mild extension to the right side of the scalp.
(d) Marked left peri-orbital oedema.
(e) Extensive massive subgaleal haemorrhage (involving the entire skull).
Internal Organs
(f) Moderate to marked congestion of most organs.
(g) Area of extensive acute infarction within the left parieto-occiptal
(h) Other areas showed signs of microscopic infarction.
The final post-mortem report concluded that:
“There are two
pathologies present in this case: Intrapartum asphyxia causing severe hypoxic
encephalopathy and massive subgaleal
haemorrhage with
Both occurred on background of
prolonged/obstructed labour. Both are interlinked pathologies and the precise
explanation of which
pathology occurred first leading to subsequent events of
multi organ failure is not possible. The sequence of events evolved acutely,
no chronic fetal or placental causes are identified.”
Expert Evidence
Andrew Korda, Professor of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, provided a report dated
25 August 2020, at the request of Coroner
Morrison. He did not have available to
him the other expert reports that are referred to below. Professor Korda
reviewed the records
of Baby X’s birth. He relevantly concluded that:
(a) The attempted vacuum extraction and the attempted forceps delivery were
performed appropriately and abandoned appropriately.
(b) The difficulty in disengaging the severely impacted head during the
caesarean section led to a prolonged period of hypoxia, which
led to the hypoxic
ischaemic encephalopathy and the subgaleal haemorrhage.
(c) The extent of the injury observed at autopsy was consistent with the 18
minutes of hypoxia sustained during the difficult delivery.
(d) There was an unreasonable delay in performing the caesarean section.
(e) The incision used initially during the caesarean section was inadequate.
(f) There may have been possibilities surrounding moving to a general
anaesthetic to encourage uterine relaxation that were not taken
Korda did not analyse the impact of the injuries observed after birth, nor the
treatment provided to Baby X in NICU. The
report proceeded on the assumption
that Dr GC had confirmed that Baby X was in the OP position, when in fact (she
had not confirmed)
that was not so. This was brought to his attention on 22 July
2022. He maintained his view that the baby was in the OP position.
Mike O’Connor, Obstetrician and Gynaecologist, prepared a report for Baby
X’s parent’s lawyers, dated
7 September 2020. He relevantly opined
(a) Baby X died from severe HIE, as well as the consequences of a severe
subgaleal haemorrhage.
(b) The OA position is the normal position of a baby’s head. The OP
position is more frequently associated with prolonged labour,
complications, and associated adverse neonatal outcomes.
(c) Baby X was “almost certainly” in the OP position, as found by Dr
FL and the attending midwife.
(d) The autopsy showed an ecchymoses over the frontal region of Baby X’s
skull, showing where the vacuum cup was placed. The
position of the ecchymoses
confirms that the vacuum cup was not applied correctly (it should be over the
(e) The baby’s head was deflexed, causing the presenting foetal skull
diameter to be larger than normal.
(f) The effect of the misplacement of the cup was to draw the head further into
deflexion, and thus increasing the foetal skull diameters
presenting to the
(g) Incorrect placement of suction cups has been associated with the production
of a subgaleal haemorrhages, as it had in this case.
(h) Use of an ultrasound would have resolved any dispute about the baby’s
(i) Use of a suction cup would have been indicated if the head was in the OP
position, provided it was correctly placed.
(j) Dr FL applied the suction cup to the fontal region of the head instead of
the occiput because her diagnosis of the baby’s
position “was
overruled” by Dr GC.
(k) Baby X would have been delivered by vacuum if the baby’s position had
been correctly diagnosed.
(l) The attempted vacuum delivery came too late in the birthing process. It
should have occurred in the theatre to facilitate a quick
transition to
caesarean section.
(m) Dr GC should have elected to perform an emergency caesarean after the vacuum
had failed twice.
(n) The recognition of the subgaleal haemorrhage was delayed. If Dr UD (who
eventually diagnosed the subgaleal haemorrhage) had been
present at birth, it is
more probable than not that the subgaleal haemorrhage would have been detected
and appropriately treated
(with blood products) then.
Simon Mitchell, Consultant Neonatologist, examined the evidence around the
subgaleal haemorrhage. He concluded that:
(a) There was evidence that suggested Baby X sustained a severe subgaleal
haemorrhage at the time of delivery.
(b) Photographs of Baby X taken at 0805 hours on 12 October 2017 (27 minutes
after birth) show extensive bruising and soft tissue
swelling to the scalp. This
appearance was a clear sign of a significant subgaleal haemorrhage.
(c) Blood gases taken at one hour of age showed significant metabolic acidosis,
which may have been partly due to the hypoxic-ischaemic
insult around the time
of delivery, but also contributed to by the extent of the blood loss from the
subgaleal haemorrhage.
(d) The failure to repeat blood gas until 5.5 hours later led to a failure to
recognise the persistence of the severe metabolic acidosis
and a failure to
administer appropriate blood/blood product transfusions. It also led to
incorrect treatment being administered,
notably therapeutic cooling.
(e) Baby X’s ultimate collapse due to hypovolaemic shock should have been
(f) The hypoxic injury suffered by Baby X was attributable to the prolonged
hypoperfusion insult (cerebral blood flow being compromised
by the large blood
loss) suffered after birth, rather than any hypoxic-ischaemic insult prior to
(g) Baby X would likely have survived and avoided most of his neurological
injury if the subgaleal haemorrhage had been identified
and appropriately
of the reports of Professors Mitchell and O’Connor were conducted on
behalf of CHS by Dr ID, Paediatrician, and Professor
Boon Lim, Senior Staff
Specialist Obstetrician and Gynaecologist with CHS.
Relevantly,
Professor Lim reviewed the aspect of Professor O’Connor’s report
that deals with the placing of the vacuum
cups, and generally agreed with
Professor O’Connor’s conclusions. He accepted that the incorrect
placement of the cup
increased the foetal skull diameter, thus increasing the
obstruction.
ID reviewed Professor Mitchell’s report. She expressed the following
(a) That the pathology evidence (which was not referred to by Dr Mitchell) does
not support the case for there being an identified
need for a transfusion at the
time of admission to NICU. Therefore, cooling and a fluid bolus were reasonable
at the time of admission
but not thereafter
(b) There was an unacceptable delay in diagnosing the existence of a subgaleal
haemorrhage.
(c) No recorded scalp examination occurred before 1700 hours.
(d) There were signs of neurological injury early in the NICU admission. Dr ID
notes that Professor Mitchell, in reaching his conclusions
evidence of hypoxic insult at the time of admission to NICU, may have relied on
MRI findings that were provisional
(not having been reviewed by senior staff).
The relevant and final MRI report did point to ischemic damage (hypoxic
ischaemic encephalopathy),
suggesting that, in her view, Professor
Mitchell’s conclusion that hypoperfusion injury was the sole cause of the
brain injury
is not reasonable.
(e) The blood gas that
performed showed signs of HIE.
(f) Both pathologies (HIE and subgaleal haemorrhage) are likely to have
contributed to the neurological injuries.
(g) Otherwise, Dr Mitchell’s opinions are reasonable.
The Divergence between Dr GC and Dr FL
accounts given by Dr FL and Dr GC reflect differing recollections as to the
positioning of Baby X during birth and how that impacted
the birthing process.
As noted, Dr FL and a midwife formed the view that Baby X was in the OP
position. Dr GC came to a contrary
view. Dr FL is of the view that being
overruled by Dr GC caused her to place the suction cup in the wrong position on
GC suggested a variety of reasons why it was more likely that the baby was in
the OA position, including that:
(a) It is difficult for a cup to be placed over the orbital area if a child is
in the OP position, because the “frontal part
of the skull will be
pressing against the public bone” making it virtually impossible
“for the operator to pass their
fingers and a vacuum past the pubic
(b) She (Dr GC) made no note of the position of Baby X during the caesarean
section procedure, which would be expected if the baby
was in the OP position.
GC concluded that Dr FL placed the cup incorrectly “regardless of what the
position was, and that that was more likely to
be the case if the baby was OA
rather than OP.” Dr GC conceded she may be wrong about her conclusions.
O’Connor was of the view that Baby X was in the OP position. Professor
Korda seems to be of the same
placing of the vacuum cup is an antecedent event that forms part of the
background circumstances of the birthing process. The
balance of evidence
suggests that Baby X was in the OP position. It is my view that I do not need to
finally resolve the issue as
to what position Baby X was in to make findings as
to the manner and cause of Baby X’s death. Whilst determination of that
issue may be necessary in proceedings where findings of negligence are required,
or blame is to be apportioned, that is not the case
in coronial proceedings. The
vacuum cup was placed on Baby X’s head by Dr FL under direction by Dr GC.
The incorrect positioning
of the cup may have been a cause of the subgaleal
haemorrhage observed after birth. The attempt at vacuum delivery was a major
of the subgaleal haemorrhage.
Cause and Manner of Death
make the following factual findings as to cause of Baby X’s
(a) Baby X suffered injuries during a prolonged labour at TCH, in which birth
was delayed by difficulties associated with his head
being impacted.
(b) Consistent with the autopsy findings, two pathologies played a role in Baby
X’s death, namely:
(i) hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (HIE); and
(ii) massive subgaleal haemorrhage.
(c) Consistent with the post-mortem report, both of those pathologies were
interlinked and contributed to the cause of Baby X’s
death. It is
difficult to say with certainty:
(i) which preceded the other; and
(ii) what caused each pathology to develop.
(d) Contrary to Professor Mitchell’s opinion, I am not satisfied that the
subgaleal haemorrhage, in and of itself, caused Baby
X’s death. In that
regard, I accept the findings made by Dr Montgomery and Dr NG, who conducted the
autopsy, and the opinions
of Professor Korda and Professor O’Connor.
I make the following findings as to the manner of Baby X’s
(a) Both pathologies were associated with asphyxia and other mechanical factors,
including the failed vacuum delivery, that occurred
during a prolonged and
obstructed labour and failures in Baby X’s care after birth:
(i) the HIE was most likely caused by asphyxia during the prolonged labour; and
(ii) the main identifiable cause of the subgaleal
haemorrhage was the unsuccessful attempt at vacuum extraction.
(b) Whilst the hypoperfusion caused by the subgaleal haemorrhage may have added
to the extent of neurological injury, HIE was occasioned
during the birthing
process, and it was life-threatening at the time of birth. In that regard, I
prefer the opinions of Professors
Korda and O’Connor rather than that of
Professor Mitchell.
(c) I generally accept Professor Mitchell’s opinions as to the inadequacy
of Baby X’s treatment in NICU, notably, that:
(i) recorded scalp examinations were delayed;
(ii) cooling was contraindicated in the case of significant blood loss; and
(iii) inadequate steps were taken to assess whether scalp injury could have
caused blood loss, including the failure to undertake
scalp examination and
repeat blood gases.
(d) The delayed recognition of the subgaleal haemorrhage caused hypovolaemic
shock and probably added to the extent of Baby X’s
neurological injury.
(e) I am unable to say whether the failure to identify the subgaleal haemorrhage
was the difference between Baby X dying or surviving
(with a level of
neurological damage).
(f) The vacuum delivery was appropriately attempted.
(g) There is a difference of opinion (between clinicians) as to whether Baby
X’s head was, before the caesarean section procedure,
in a deflexed
occipito-posterior position or in an occipito-anterior position. The balance of
the expert evidence supports Baby X
being in an occipito-posterior position.
(h) Inadequate steps were taken to determine the foetal position.
(i) The vacuum cup was positioned incorrectly, causing Baby X’s head to be
further deflected, possibly adding to the degree
of impaction of Baby X’s
(j) I am satisfied that a subgaleal haemorrhage was caused by the vacuum cup
(k) I do not accept that had the vacuum cup been correctly placed, inevitably
the extraction would have been successful. In my view,
such a finding would be
purely speculative. HIE might still have resulted from what was clearly a
difficult and prolonged birth.
Consistent with the findings at autopsy and
Professor O’Connor’s opinion, there were signs that the impacting of
head was an issue before the vacuum delivery was attempted.
(l) Consistent with Professor Korda’s and Professor O’Connor’s
opinions, I find that the move to deliver Baby X
by caesarean section was
unreasonably delayed.
(m) I am unable to say whether the earlier identification and treatment of the
subgaleal haemorrhage would have saved Baby X’s
life. The failure to
provide him with adequate care after his birth deprived him of a chance of
– MATTERS OF PUBLIC SAFETY
birthing process was attended by a number of clinical decisions, actions, and
judgements that were wrong or in error. Those failings
are reflected in the
factual findings above.
the purposes of
of the Act, those failings do not give rise to matters
of public safety unless they point to:
(a) conduct that suggests an ongoing failure to practice medicine
satisfactorily; or
(b) underlying systemic failings.
this occasion, there are two issues that, in my view, give rise to matters of
public safety.
Issue 1 – The Delayed Recognition of the
Subgaleal Haemorrhage
the failure to make adequate scalp observations in NICU resulted from a failure
of clinical care, the policy and procedure
guidelines within NICU at the time
did not mention the requirement to perform scalp observations on babies who had
experienced an
instrument-based delivery. Before Baby X’s death, a scalp
observation matrix had been developed by CHS, but it was not implemented.
now in force and provided for in the policy document “
Assessment of the
”. The guideline is comprehensive and applies to all newborns.
It directs attention to the examination of the head and lists
abnormalities that
should be positively excluded. Relevantly, they include subgaleal
haemorrhage/haematoma. Once that assessment
has taken place and a bleed is
suspected, a further assessment is to be performed by the medical neonatal team.
The CHS Clinical
Procedure document “
Neonatal Neurology”
makes specific provision for head examination in the context of
instrument delivery, including vacuum delivery. The general head injury
associated with instrumental birth are identified. Signs of hypovolaemia are
detailed. Significantly, the procedure document
mandates head observations
hourly for four hours after birth.
Issue 2 – Use of
Ultrasound to Identify the Position of the Baby
equipment was available at the time of Baby X’s delivery. It could and
should have been employed if there was an
acknowledged difference of opinion
amongst relevant clinicians as to the baby’s position. Relevant CHS
governance – “
Labour and Birth: care during First, Second, Third
and Fourth Stage
” – now mandates consideration of the use of
ultrasound where there “is a discrepancy or uncertainty regarding the
position of a foetus.”
my view, these changes to relevant procedure represent a reasonable response to
the public safety issues arising from my consideration
of the manner and cause
of death questions. I make no comment as to their effectiveness in addressing
the clinical shortcomings that
were apparent in this case.
clinical management of Baby X’s birth was attended by a series of clinical
shortcomings and failures. My findings in that
respect contain comments adverse
to CHS, Dr FL and Dr GC. Consistent with my obligations under s 55 of the Act, I
provided CHS, Dr
FL and Dr GC with a copy of the proposed comment and written
notice as to
how they may respond.
on behalf of the Territory responded to the notice and acknowledged that aspects
of the treatment and care received by Baby X
were inadequate.
indicated that she shared CHS’s sentiments but did not wish to formally
respond to the s 55 notice in respect of her.
Dr GC made additional submissions
which invited consideration of whether the attempted vacuum delivery should be
found to be the
only cause of the subgaleal haemorrhage. Consistent with
Professor Mitchell’s report, I find that the main identifiable factor
the cause of the subgaleal haemorrhage was the unsuccessful attempt at kiwi
vacuum extraction. Dr GC also suggested that the findings
should reflect the
degree of impaction of Baby X’s head was a substantial cause for the
delayed delivery. That issue is sufficiently
addressed in my findings.
X’s death was a tragedy, and I acknowledge the ongoing impact his death
has had on his family, particularly his parents,
LX and LI. I extend my sincere
condolences to Baby X’s family for their loss.
I certify that the preceding sixty-one [61] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the reasons for findings of his Honour Coroner
Markus Ching
Date: 11 September 2024
As Baby X’s death was not
initially referred to the Coroner, an autopsy was not ordered by the Coroner. An
autopsy was performed
on 18 October 2017 at TCH by Dr Renn Montgomery and Dr
Cardiotocography (CTG) is a non-invasive foetal monitoring
technique used during pregnancy to monitor foetal heart rate and uterine
contractions
Swelling of the scalp in a newborn. It is most often brought on by pressure from
the uterus or vaginal wall during a delivery. Swelling
and bruising usually
occur on the top of the scalp where the head first enters the cervix during
Hypoxic Ischemic
Encephalopathy (HIE) is a limitation of oxygen and blood flow around the time of
birth. HIE causes brain injury.
Other terms for HIE include birth asphyxia,
perinatal asphyxia and neonatal encephalopathy.
Subgaleal haemorrhage is an
accumulation of blood in the subgaleal space.
The autopsy report
commented that “subgaleal haematoma occurs when scalp tissue detaches from
the skull bone because of effects
of applied suction or by the tangential
shearing of the scalp from the skull.... Due to lack of containing membranes or
boundaries,
there is a large potential space for blood to accumulate. This level
of blood loss may principate hypovolaemic shock, disseminated
intravascular
coagulation (DIC) metabolic acidosis and death. The accumulation tends to be
gradual and may not become clinically
apparent until hours to days
post-delivery”.
report noted that “there [was] definitely evidence of underlying severe
intrapartum asphyxia... Due to the prolonged obstructed
labour, the duration and
severity of organ hypoxia was prolonged and this was most evident on brain
examination, which showed hypoxic
encephalopathy”.
Disseminated intravascular
coagulation.
Professor Mitchell concedes
that Baby X was showing clinical signs of encephalopathy from around 10 minutes
after delivery, which
“reflected an acute/profound hypoxic-ischaemic
insult immediately prior to delivery” which may have given rise “to
some neurological injury”.
Dr Korda’s opinion as
to the position of Baby X’s head seems to have been based on an incorrect
assumption about what
Dr GC had concluded as to that issue. However, he
maintained that point of view having considered the reports of Professors
and O’Connor. Dr Korda didn’t give weight to the failed
vacuum delivery as a matter that was significant to the adverse
outcome that
ultimately resulted.
RTF format (361 KB)
Signed PDF/A format