Ware v DPP [2025] ACTCA 15 (23 May 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
[2025] ACTCA 15
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Loukas-Karlsson, Baker and Taylor JJ
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– Appeal against conviction – adequacy of
primary judge’s directions to jury on consent – where no objection
to directions at trial – reasonableness of an accused person’s
belief as to consent – use of hypothetical example
in directions to jury
– application for leave to appeal under r 5531 of the
Court Procedures
(ACT) is refused – appeal dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), rr 5412(2), 5531
Supreme Court Act 1933
Cases Cited:
Alford v Magee
[1952] HCA 3
(1952) 85 CLR 437
[2024] ACTSC
Hofer v The Queen
[2021] HCA 36
95 ALJR 937
Hudson v DPP
[2024] ACTCA 28
Langi v The Queen
[2023] ACTCA 38
Liberato v The
[1985] HCA 66
159 CLR 507
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
224 CLR 300
Texts Cited:
Explanatory Statement,
Crimes (Consent) Amendment Bill 2022
Joshua Ryan Ware (Appellant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
Representation:
R Thomas (Appellant)
K McCann (Respondent)
Kim Bolas Legal Group (Appellant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
File Number:
ACTCA 4 of 2024
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: ACT Supreme Court
Before: Berman AJ
Date of Decision: 1 December 2023
Case Title: DPP v Ware
[2024] ACTSC 52
Introduction
appellant, Joshua Ryan Ware, was tried before a jury in relation to two counts
of engaging in sexual intercourse without consent,
contrary to
(ACT). The offences were alleged to have been
perpetrated against the appellant’s neighbour (the complainant) on 6
2023 and 28 January 2023, respectively.
4 December 2023, the jury returned verdicts of guilty in respect to both counts.
28 February 2024, Berman AJ (the primary judge) sentenced the appellant to three
years’ imprisonment for each offence, cumulative
as to one year, resulting
in a total aggregate sentence of four years, with a non-parole period of three
[2024] ACTSC 52
(the sentence judgment).
20 March 2024, the appellant filed a Notice of Appeal against the conviction.
That notice provided for a single ground of appeal
as follows:
That the decisions on the two charges of “sexual intercourse with
consent” are unsafe and unsatisfactory having regard
to the evidence.
appellant filed an amended Notice of Appeal on 2 May 2024, which did not alter
the ground of appeal relied upon.
17 October 2024, the appellant filed an application in proceeding seeking leave
pursuant to r 5412(2) of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) (the CPR)
to amend the Notice of Appeal to add a new ground as follows:
That the learned judge erred in law in directing the jury in that he failed to
direct the jury as to the meaning of the phrase /
requirement that the accused
‘did not say or do anything to ascertain whether the other person was
consenting’ and in
particular, he did not direct the jury on the
accused’s case and the evidence relevant to that issue.
of the CPR provides that a ground of appeal relating to the failure to give
a direction must not be allowed unless objection was
taken at trial by the
appellant. As there was no objection to the directions given by the primary
judge concerning this issue at
any stage during the trial, the appellant was
required to seek leave pursuant to r 5531 to rely upon this proposed amended
of appeal. The appellant contended that such leave should be granted
because s 67(5) of the
(which concerned the reasonableness of
the accused’s belief as to consent), was “a new and complex
provision”, such
that “a further direction was not apparent at the
time of trial”.
for the respondent, whilst opposing both the grant of leave to permit an
amendment of the Notice of Appeal and the grant of
leave under r 5531,
appropriately accepted that the question of leave ultimately turns on the merits
of the appeal and thus the issue
ought to be determined as part of the appeal
the hearing, the appellant did not press the original appeal ground which
alleged that the verdicts were “unsafe and unsatisfactory”
regard to the evidence. Accordingly, the amended ground of appeal is the only
ground that remains for this Court’s determination.
The prosecution
summary of the prosecution case is conveniently set out in the sentencing
judgment of the primary judge as follows:
1. In 2022, the victim in this matter, a woman who I will give the
pseudonym “Sarah Bright”, was a single mother caring
for her two
children. She had had some problems with drugs in the past, but as at
28 December 2022, she had been clean for a while.
I give her a pseudonym
not to depersonalise her, but to protect her privacy.
2. That evening, her children were staying with her mother, so she contacted
a neighbour of hers, the offender in this matter, Joshua
Ware, to see what
he was doing. He was going fishing with his cousin's partner and invited
Ms Bright to join them. As well as trying
to catch fish, the three of them
consumed methylamphetamine. It was not long before Ms Bright redeveloped a
dependency to that drug.
3. Thereafter, she and the offender spent time together consuming drugs which
were usually supplied by the offender. He developed
feelings towards
Ms Bright. He made that obvious, but she did not reciprocate.
4. On 6 January 2023, the two of them were in Ms Bright's home. They
consumed methylamphetamine together and fell asleep on a couch
loungeroom. Around dawn that day, she woke up but felt unable to move. The
offender was behind her. He pulled her pants and
underwear down and engaged in
penile/vaginal intercourse with her [Count 1: sexual intercourse without
consent]. Ms Bright neither
said nor did anything to indicate that she was
consenting to this happening. The offender ejaculated inside her whilst not
5. A few days later, Ms Bright made a note on her mobile phone in which she
described the circumstances in which that sexual intercourse
Thereafter, she continued to associate with the offender. He would buy her gifts
and express his feelings for her but from
her point of view, their relationship
revolved around the use of drugs. Further acts of sexual intercourse occurred,
Ms Bright saying
that each of those were without consent.
6. The final occasion on which they had sex was 28 January 2023. The offender
invited Ms Bright to his home where they consumed methylamphetamine
They were seated on a couch. The offender began moving towards Ms Bright, who
moved away from him. He picked her up, carried
her to his bed, removed her pants
and commenced penile/vaginal intercourse with her [Count 2: sexual intercourse
without consent].
At one stage, he told her to get on top of him. She did what
he asked because she was afraid of him. Eventually he, as before, ejaculated
inside her whilst not wearing a condom. Once again, she neither said nor did
anything to indicate that she was consenting to what
was happening.
7. A few days later, Ms Bright spoke to officers from Housing ACT. She had
previously made an application to be moved because her
ex-boyfriend knew where
she lived, and she was afraid of him. When she checked up on how her application
was going on this occasion,
she told them that she had been raped by the
offender, one of her neighbours.
8. Police were called. Ms Bright participated in two interviews with them and
ultimately, the offender was charged with two offences
of having sexual
intercourse with Ms Bright without her consent. One relating to the first
occasion on which they had intercourse,
and the other relating to the final
appellant’s account
Record of interview
appellant’s record of interview with police was tendered in the
prosecution case.
that interview, the appellant stated that, on the first occasion he and the
complainant had sexual intercourse, on 6 January 2023,
they had fallen asleep
while cuddling on the couch. While initially unsure, he concluded that they had
both woken up at the same
time. He stated that he “might have initiated
things” on that first occasion but that “she didn’t say no
she was conscious”. When questioned as to whether a conversation took
place, he replied “nothing was being said”.
He clarified that
“if she had said no [he] would have stopped” and “she
didn’t push me away”. He stated
that she “touched [his]
penis” and was making “enjoying noises” which indicated to him
that the intercourse
was consensual.
interview was terminated prior to any specific discussion about the sexual
intercourse which occurred on 28 January 2023. However,
the appellant stated
generally that “sometimes she was riding me” and “I
didn’t rape her because sometimes
she was actually on top of me doing
things herself”.
The appellant’s evidence at trial
appellant gave evidence at trial. The appellant’s evidence was generally
consistent with his record of interview. He maintained
that each act of sexual
intercourse was consensual.
relation to the incident on 6 January 2023, the appellant stated that after
using methamphetamine, he and the complainant had fallen
asleep in a
“spooning position” on the couch. He said that they both woke up at
approximately 6am and that the complainant
commenced “rubbing up against
[him]”, which, he explained, meant that she was rubbing her bottom against
his crotch.
He then began rubbing her legs. The appellant said that he
interpreted the complainant’s actions as meaning that she was interested
in having sexual intercourse. He began rubbing her “vagina area” and
he removed her pants. He stated that he pulled the
complainant’s pants
down and that she assisted him by lifting herself up. The appellant gave
evidence that the complainant
was lying on her back on the couch, he moved over
the top of her, she lifted her legs up and he “put [his] penis in her
He stated that they continued having sexual intercourse for
“maybe about half an hour”.
relation to the incident on 28 January 2023, the appellant stated that, after
smoking methamphetamine, he and the complainant were
seated together on his
couch. The appellant said that he “started rubbing her leg” and the
complainant then moved towards
him and they “cuddled for a minute”.
The appellant gave evidence that he was unable to recall specific details but
“somehow ended up having sex” on the couch. He suggested to the
complainant that they move to his bed and “she
said yes”. He then
asked her if she wanted him to carry her and she replied “okay”. The
appellant specifically
recalled that he believed his “left hand was under
her back... and [his] right hand was under her legs”. He stated that
carried her to his bedroom, they “had a bit of a giggle” as he was
struggling to carry her. He gave evidence that
he placed the complainant
“in the middle of the bed, she raised her legs” and “[he] got
on top”. They resumed
having penile vaginal intercourse until he
“started to get a cramp”. The appellant recalled suggesting that
they change
sexual positions and that she “hop on top”, to which she
agreed. He stated that the complainant was “riding [him]”
were both making “arousal sounds”.
appellant said that he believed the complainant was consenting on all occasions
they had sexual intercourse because “she
never said no. She never pushed
me away at any time. I never forcefully made her do anything that she
didn’t want to do”.
He also stated that she did things which implied
consent such as assisting him to remove her pants, rubbing his crotch with her
and replying “yes” when he asked if she wanted to move into
his bedroom.
cross-examination, the appellant stated that he had performed oral sex on the
complainant prior to having penile vaginal intercourse
with her on 6 January
The directions
given by the primary judge
primary judge’s directions in relation to the appellant’s evidence
were as follows:
Now, let me speak about Mr Ware giving evidence to you yesterday. You’ve
been told he didn’t have to do that; quite right,
members of the jury. He
did not have to give evidence. There is no obligation on an accused person to
give evidence at his or her
trial. An accused person is entitled to remain where
they are, not enter the witness box, and to make the prosecution prove its guilt
if -prove his or her guilty if it can (sic). But Mr Ware did give evidence and
his evidence should be treated like every other witness.
Just because he got in the witness box, he wasn’t taking on some burden of
proving that what he is saying is true. He doesn’t
have to prove that his
version is true before you can find him not guilty. He doesn’t even have
to prove that his version of
events is reasonably possible. Before you can
convict the accused, it’s the prosecution who has to prove things.
the prosecution who has to prove to you that what Mr Ware said in his
evidence is not a reasonably possible version of events.
And it’s not enough for you to convict Mr Ware that you might prefer the
version given by [the complainant] to the version
that he gave. It’s not a
case where you weigh up the two versions and say, ‘Which is more likely?
Which sounds more believable?’
you can’t convict him unless you are
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the truth and accuracy of the version of
events given
by [the complainant].
Now, when you analyse it, if you believed what Mr Ware said to you in evidence,
then you’d have to acquit him. If you believed
that he was telling the
truth, and, of course, the immediate response is that he’s not guilty of
these two charges; but that
also applies if you think ‘I’ve got a
bit of difficulty accepting what he said but I think it’s reasonably
it’s true.’ If you think that, you’ve got to acquit
him too. If what he says is a reasonably possible version of
events, then it
can’t be the case that the prosecution has proved [the
complainant]’s version of events beyond reasonable
doubt. So you must
acquit Mr Ware if you believe what he says. You must acquit him if you think
what he says might reasonably be
But what happens if you say to yourself, ‘I can’t believe a word Mr
Ware said.’ Well, if that’s the case,
you just put his evidence to
one side. It does not automatically follow from you saying, ‘I don’t
believe a word Mr Ware
said’ that he is guilty. If that’s your
conclusion about what Mr Ware said, you simply put his evidence to one side and
look at the evidence that you do accept and decide whether the prosecution has
proved he is guilty beyond reasonable doubt. In making
that assessment, in
answering that question, ‘Has the prosecution proved beyond reasonable
doubt.’ If you don’t
believe what Mr Ware said to you in evidence,
you just ignore it and you look at the remaining evidence in answering that
primary judge’s directions in relation to consent were as follows:
Now, the prosecution has to prove that [the complainant] did not consent to that
sexual intercourse, and then looking at the question
of consent, you would, of
course, look at the definition I have given you on the final page of that
document. [The complainant] consented
to sexual intercourse with the accused if
she gave informed agreement to that sexual act, that agreement was given freely
and voluntarily,
and she communicated her agreement by saying or doing
And then, [the complainant] would not have consented to sexual intercourse with
the accused only because she did not say or do anything
to resist the act, or
she had previously consented to having sexual intercourse with the accused.
Well, that one doesn’t really
apply to count 1 because this is the first
time they had had sexual intercourse, but there is another one that we could add
members of the jury, and I should have added it. A person is also not to
be regarded as having consented to a sexual act just because
she did not sustain
a physical injury. So we could add that one down as (c) on that page there
So, members of the jury, it was [the complainant]’s evidence that she did
not agree. She did not give any agreement, let alone
an informed agreement to
the accused putting his penis into her vagina. It was her evidence that she did
nothing to suggest any agreement
to that happening. She did not communicate her
agreement by saying or doing something in the terms of that document I have
you. So when you look at that definition I gave you, if you accept her
evidence beyond reasonable doubt, that means she did not consent
to the accused
having sexual intercourse with her. And in fact, her evidence was that she was
incapable of saying anything or doing
anything to resist what the accused was
doing. But as I have made clear to you, the fact that the person does not say or
do anything
to resist an act of sexual intercourse does not mean that she must
have consented to it.
In fact, it’s the other way around. Before a person can be said to have
consented to a sexual act, as I have written down there,
1(c), she has to have
communicated her agreement by saying or doing something. And it was [the
complainant’s] evidence that
she said and did absolutely nothing. So if
you accept her evidence regarding the circumstances in which the accused had sex
her on the sofa beyond reasonable doubt, in particular, if you accept that
she said or did nothing, and she did not consent, then
you would find this
element proved and you would move onto the next element, which is the third
element the prosecution has got to
On the other hand, if you were to find that the
accused’s version, Mr Ware’s version is a reasonably possible
of what actually occurred, then you would find that the prosecution has
not satisfied you of this element and therefore you would
find him not guilty on
this count. So if you say to yourself, ‘Look, it’s reasonably
possible that [the complainant]
did consent to sexual intercourse, as evidenced
by her rubbing her buttocks against his penis and helping him remove her
if that’s a reasonable possible version of events, then you
would find that the second element has not been proved beyond reasonable
and the result of that is that you would then find Mr Ware not guilty.
And as with all issues that come up of this kind, it’s not a case of whose
case sounds better or which version of events sounds
more believable. You could
only convict Mr Ware on count 1 and both counts, really, if the prosecution
satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that what [the complainant] said was both
honest, in the sense that she believed it was true and accurate in the sense
it really is what happened in her living room that night or early that
morning, I suppose.
Okay. So what happens if you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the second
element? Well, as I have said, we move onto the
third. Now, the first thing I
have to say to you about this third element is the prosecution can prove it in
one of four ways. It
doesn’t have to prove all of those four dot points.
Any one is enough. All the prosecution has to do to satisfy you for the
element is to prove any one of those four dot points. And let’s go through
them one by one. They’re pretty straight
forward, but I will say a few
things about them.
The first way that the prosecution can prove this third element is if it proves
that Mr Ware knew that [the complainant] was not
consenting to sexual
intercourse. Well, you might say to yourselves, ‘How are we supposed to
know what he knew? We’re
not mind readers.’ Well, let me tell you,
members of the jury, that there is nothing unusual in what you’re being
to do. Almost every criminal offence that you can think of requires a jury
to consider what a person believed or knew or understood.
So when I say to you,
you have to examine what Mr Ware’s state of mind was, I am not asking you
to do anything unusual in that
The first point, the first dot point is satisfied if the prosecution proves that
Mr Ware knew that [the complainant] was not consenting
to sexual intercourse and
when I say Mr Ware, of course I mean Mr Ware. It’s Mr Ware over there. His
state of mind that you
examine in considering whether the prosecution has proved
that he knew [the complainant] was not consenting to sexual intercourse.
The second way the prosecution can prove this third element is this. The
prosecution could prove that Mr Ware realised that there
was a possibility that
[the complainant] was not consenting to sexual intercourse, but he went ahead
anyway. Again, it’s what
Mr Ware realised which is important here. Did he
realise there was a possibility that [the complainant] was not consenting to
intercourse, but he had sexual intercourse with her anyway.
The third way, the third dot point would be satisfied by the prosecution if the
prosecution proved beyond reasonable doubt that Mr
Ware didn’t even think
he didn’t care
whether she was consenting or not. In circumstances where
the risk that she was not consenting would have been obvious to someone
Ware’s mental capacity, had he turned his mind to it.
And then the fourth way that the prosecution can prove this third element is a
bit different to the first three. The first three
require you to think about
what was going on in Mr Ware’s mind They require you to look at what was
going on in the mind of
the accused. But the fourth dot point is a bit
different. What do you do if you think it’s reasonably possible that Mr
actually believed [the complainant] was consenting to sexual intercourse.
What do you do if you think, ‘Well, maybe Mr Ware
actually did believe
that [the complainant] was consenting to sexual intercourse’ so you think
it’s reasonably possibly
that he had that belief.
Well, if that’s your conclusion, you couldn’t find in favour of the
prosecution on any of the first three dot points.
But it’s not the end of
the matter because the fourth dot point is there. It arises where you think it
is reasonably possible
that Mr Ware believed that [the complainant] was
consenting to the sexual intercourse and the prosecution proves this fourth dot
point if it proves that he had no reasonable grounds for any belief that [the
complainant] was consenting to sexual intercourse.
Another way of saying the
same thing is that this dot point is proved if any belief that the accused had
that [the complainant] was
consenting was not a reasonable belief in the
circumstances.
Of course, if he had that belief, it would still not be a reasonable one if he
did not say or do anything to ascertain whether [the
complainant] consented. Now
let me give you an extreme example of what this fourth dot point’s all
that a man is having sex with a woman who is yelling
out, ‘Stop’ loudly to him, who is struggling, who is screaming,
is crying, who is calling out for help. Now it’s hard to imagine how
anyone could but even if that man actually believed
that that woman was
consenting to having sexual intercourse with him, a jury might well find that he
did not have any reasonable
grounds for that belief. You understand?
If there’s some strange man around and he actually believed that a woman
he was having sex with who was yelling out, ‘Stop’,
struggling,
screaming, crying and calling out for help, if that man actually did believe
that the person he was having sex with was
consenting, a jury might well find
that he did not have any reasonable grounds for that belief and so if he was
facing trial the
jury would just find probably that fourth dot point satisfied
by the prosecution.
Now I’m certainly not suggesting that a woman would have to do all those
things before a jury could find that the man did not
have reasonable grounds for
believing she was consenting and, in fact, as I’ve already made clear, the
fact that a person does
not say or do anything to resist an act of sexual
intercourse does not mean that she must have consented to it, so I’m only
using that extreme example to illustrate what this fourth dot point is all
to ascertain whether the
woman was consenting, any belief by him that she was consenting would not be a
reasonable one.
The law specifically provides this, members of the jury. The law specifically
provides that a person’s belief that another
person was consenting to
sexual intercourse cannot be a reasonable one where the person did nothing or
said nothing to find out whether
the other person was consenting. Now, members
of the jury, I know what I’ve said about these elements can be
complicated. I
know there’s a lot of things I’ve said which might be
difficult to understand so please remember that one of your duties
is to apply
the legal principles that I have been telling you about but you can only do that
if you understand what I have said about
these legal principles.
primary judge also provided the jury with a document entitled ‘Elements of
the Charges Faced by the Accused’. The
content of the document was agreed
to by the parties and a copy was provided to each member of the jury on the
second day of the
trial. The elements of the offence of sexual intercourse
without consent were recorded in the document as follows:
1. The accused had sexual intercourse with the complainant, and
2. She did not consent to that sexual intercourse, and
The accused knew that the complainant was not consenting to sexual intercourse,
He realised that there was a possibility that the complainant was not consenting
to sexual intercourse, but he went ahead anyway,
He didn’t even think about whether the complainant was consenting to
sexual intercourse, not caring whether she was consenting
He had no reasonable grounds for any belief that the complainant was consenting
to sexual intercourse.
The accused’s belief is not a reasonable one if
he did not say or do anything to ascertain whether the complainant
The complainant consented to sexual intercourse with the accused if:
She gave informed agreement to that sexual act, and
That agreement was given freely and voluntarily, and
She communicated her agreement by saying or doing something.
The complainant would not have consented to sexual intercourse with the accused
only because:
She did not say or do anything to resist the act, or
She previously consented to having sexual intercourse with the accused.
(Emphasis added)
directing the jury to begin their deliberations, the primary judge enquired with
the parties as to whether any redirection
was required. Neither counsel asked
for any redirection nor raised any concerns about any part of the primary
judge’s charge
to the jury, or the written elements
Appellant’s
submissions
appellant submitted that, consistent with the language of the Explanatory
Statement of the
Crimes (Consent) Amendment Bill 2022
(ACT), the newly
introduced s 67(5) of the
cast an evidentiary onus on an
accused to identify evidence which indicates that they said, or did, something
to ascertain that the
other person was consenting. The appellant submitted that
“once that evidentiary onus is satisfied... the prosecution bears
of satisfying the jury, beyond reasonable doubt, that the accused did not say,
or do something, to ascertain whether the
other person consented”.
appellant submitted that the jury required instruction as to how to approach the
facts in relation to this issue. In particular,
the appellant contended that the
jury required instruction as to the “standard” which applied when
considering whether
the appellant had discharged the “onus”.
appellant submitted that s 67(5) of the
is ambiguous, in that
there is no “guidance as to what words, or actions, will satisfy the
provision”. The appellant argued
that the directions given by the primary
judge were insufficient because they did not direct the jury that they were
required to
consider the reasonableness of the appellant’s belief that the
complainant was consenting with reference to the specific evidence
he gave about
the sexual activity subject to the counts on the indictment. In this respect,
the appellant emphasised that the primary
judge had a duty to explain “how
[the law] applied to the facts of the particular case”:
[1952] HCA 3
(1952) 85 CLR 437
appellant submitted that the “correct Direction” that should have
been given in the present case was:
(i) The accused bears an evidentiary onus in relation to s 67(5);
(ii) Where that evidentiary onus is satisfied, the prosecution bears the onus of
proving, beyond reasonable doubt, that anything
said or done by the accused was
not said or done to ascertain whether the other person consented;
(iii) The test to be applied in determining whether anything said or done by the
accused person was done to ascertain whether the
other person consented, is
whether, within the context of the relationship and, or interaction, a
reasonable person in the position
of the accused would have believed the words
or actions were made for the purpose of ascertaining whether the other person
was consenting.
Respondent’s
submissions
respondent submitted that the appellant’s proposed amended ground of
appeal represented a misconception of the function
of a trial judge and the role
of a jury. The respondent contended that whether the appellant held a belief as
to the complainant’s
consent and whether that belief was reasonable in the
circumstances were questions of fact for the jury. Citing
Langi v The
[2023] ACTCA 38
, the respondent submitted that the primary
judge “would have been in error to attempt to inform the jury as to what
actions by an accused person would satisfy a reasonable belief in
addition, the respondent submitted that the appellant’s contentions
reflected an erroneous interpretation of ss 67(4) and
(5) as casting an
obligation upon an accused to specifically point to or adduce evidence about a
belief in consent, which the prosecution
must then exclude beyond reasonable
respondent further submitted that, even if the primary judge’s directions
as to the appellant’s reasonable belief
warranted criticism, the Court
would not be satisfied any error was a “departure from a trial according
to law to the prejudice
of the accused” such as to constitute a
miscarriage of justice: see
Hofer v The Queen
[2021] HCA 36
95 ALJR 937
Weiss v The Queen
[2005] HCA 81
224 CLR 300
the alternative, the respondent relied on the proviso and contended that if
error were established, the appeal should nonetheless
be dismissed on the basis
that “no substantial miscarriage of justice has actually occurred”:
Supreme Court Act 1933
the respondent also relied on the decision of this Court in
Hudson v DPP
[2024] ACTCA 28
, concerning r 5531 of the CPR, and the
importance of the fact that trial counsel did not seek any redirection at
Determination
Section 67 of
Subsections
67(4) and (5) of the
provide as follows concerning the
reasonableness of an accused person’s belief as to consent:
a person does not consent to an act
(4) An accused person is taken to know that another person does not consent
to an act mentioned in a sexual offence consent provision
if any belief that the
accused person has, or may have, that the other person consents to the act is
not reasonable in the circumstances.
(5) For subsection (4), without limiting the grounds on which it may be
established that an accused person’s belief is not reasonable
circumstances,
the accused person’s belief is taken not to be
reasonable in the circumstances if the accused person did not say or do anything
to ascertain whether the other person consented.
(Emphasis added)
above provisions were inserted into the
(Consent) Amendment Bill 2022
(ACT) (the Bill), which came into effect on 12 May
2022. The Explanatory Statement of the Bill explained the introduction of sub-ss
(4) and (5) as follows:
Sections 67 (4) and 67 (5) introduce a hybrid objective/subjective
test in a trial of fact and remove the Morgan defence principle.
provisions have been drafted to give effect to the recommendations of
the ACT Government’s Response to the Justice and
Community Safety
Inquiry on the draft
Crimes (Consent) Amendment Bill 2018
the subsequent New South Wales Law Reform Commission’s
Report 148 of 2020,
Consent in relation to sexual offences.
Section 67 (4) introduces the concept of ‘reasonable
belief’ in addition to the fault elements of knowledge and
recklessness
in the existing legislation. This applies an objective test by
a trier of fact to consider and determine whether an accused person’s
belief that consent had been given was reasonable in the circumstances. Under
this provision, a trier of fact is required to apply
a test of reasonable
community standards, and consider whether a reasonable person, given all the
circumstances of the case, would
have reason to believe that consent had
been given.
This section gives effect to the removal of the Morgan
defence. Under the Morgan defence an honest but mistaken belief by the
that consent was given – no matter how misguided or
unreasonable – may be used as a defence. Section 67 (4)
clear for a trier of fact, that any belief that consent had been given
must be reasonable in the circumstances.
Section 67 (5) introduces a new provision whereby – for an
accused person’s belief about consent to be deemed reasonable
circumstances – the accused person must have taken steps to
ascertain the other person’s consent. This provision
important component in establishing a communicative model of consent through the
This new provision makes it clear that the person seeking consent
has a responsibility to take steps to ascertain consent
Importantly, the clause shifts the focus of the inquiry at
trial away from whether the complainant resisted or otherwise
demonstrated
an absence of consent.
Under section 80D of the
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions)
a jury has discretion whether or not to
consider if an accused
person’s mistaken belief that a person consented to a
act was reasonable in the circumstances. Provisions
(5) of this Bill remove
that discretion and make it a requirement that
juries must consider this element.
sections 67
(4) and (5), where an accused person holds a belief
(subjective) that consent was given, but that belief is (objectively)
unreasonable
by community standards, a trier of fact may find the accused person
guilty of the sexual act.
Under these provisions, a trier of fact will be required to consider all
the circumstances of the case, including whether an accused
person said or did
anything to find out whether the other person consented to the act and, if
so, what the accused person said or
A person’s distorted view about appropriate sexual activity is not an
excuse for sexual assault. The objective test prevents
an accused person from
relying on abhorrent views that fall below the accepted standards of the
is clear from the above that, contrary to the appellant’s submissions,
and (5) should not be conceptualised as a ‘defence’.
The onus of establishing that an accused knew or was reckless about
complainant’s lack of consent to the acts of sexual intercourse remains on
the prosecution at all times. Even where an accused
does not give evidence, the
burden remains on the prosecution to establish that the accused did not do or
say anything to ascertain
consent, or the accused’s honest belief in
consent was not “reasonable in the circumstances”.
Accordingly,
the appellant’s contention that a jury considering sexual assault charges
should be instructed that the appellant
“bears an evidentiary onus for his
assertion that he said, or did, something to ascertain whether the complainant
was consenting”
must be rejected.
The adequacy
of the primary judge’s directions in the present
the reasons outlined above, the appellant’s contention that the primary
judge erred by not instructing the jury in relation
to an “evidentiary
onus” concerning s 67(5) of the
must be rejected. The
appellant has not established that there was any other error in the directions
given to the jury.
trial in the present case was not complicated or lengthy. There was no dispute
that sexual intercourse took place on 6 and 28
January 2023. The central issue
at trial was whether the complainant consented to sexual intercourse on both of
those occasions.
The factual conflict between the parties was as to the
circumstances in which sexual intercourse occurred. The complainant’s
evidence was that she did not consent, that she did not say or do anything to
indicate consent, and that the appellant did not say
or do anything to ascertain
her consent, on either occasion.
contrast, the appellant’s account was that the complainant was actively
engaging in sexual intercourse on each occasion.
In particular, the appellant
gave evidence that in respect of the first count, the complainant rubbed her
buttocks against his penis
and helped him remove her pants so that they could
have consensual intercourse. In respect of the second count, the appellant gave
evidence that the complainant said “yes” when he suggested they move
to his bed and they giggled when he struggled to
carry her. The appellant said
that when on the bed the complainant “raised her legs” and he
“got on top”
and when he suggested that she “hop on top”
she agreed and did so. The appellant said they were both making “arousal
the jury accepted that the complainant’s evidence was both credible and
reliable beyond reasonable doubt, it would follow
that any belief the appellant
had in consent was either not honest or not reasonable. On the
complainant’s account, the appellant
had not done or said anything to
ascertain her consent in relation to either of the charged acts.
the other hand, if the jury had a doubt as to the complainant’s account
and/or if they thought that it was possible that
the appellant’s account
was true, the prosecution would have failed to demonstrate that the complainant
did not consent to
sexual intercourse on either occasion and would also have
failed to demonstrate that the accused did not have an honest and reasonable
belief as to consent on either occasion. Importantly, the prosecution made no
submission to the jury that they would convict the
accused of either offence if
they considered that the account given by the appellant in his record of
interview or in his evidence
at trial was true, or could possibly be true.
discussed at [33] above, the onus of establishing that an accused knew or was
reckless about a complainant’s lack of consent
to an act of sexual
intercourse remains on the prosecution at all times.
jury could not have been misled as to the onus or standard of proof to be
applied. The primary judge gave the jury a clear and
unequivocal
direction (
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
159 CLR 507)
informing the jury that they “must acquit [the appellant] if you believe
what he says. You must acquit him if you think what
he says might reasonably be
true”. The primary judge also directed the jury in accordance with the
decision in
(1987) 11 NSWLR 12)
, informing
the jury that they could not convict the accused unless they were satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt of the complainant’s
credibility and reliability.
In the circumstances of the present case, it was not necessary for the primary
judge to say more.
to the appellant’s submissions, it was not necessary for the primary judge
to provide any further instructions concerning
what the jury might have
considered to be reasonable grounds for a belief as to consent. In enacting ss
67(4) and (5), the legislature
determined that the question of reasonableness
was not to be defined, but was to be left as an open-textured question to be
by the jury in each individual case, by reference to the application
of community standards. In these circumstances, as the respondent
submitted, the
primary judge would have been in error if he had attempted to list particular
words, or conduct, which would satisfy
a reasonable belief in consent: see
at [8]-[9].
primary judge provided the jury with a somewhat extreme, hypothetical of a man
who honestly believed that a woman was consenting,
even though she was crying,
yelling at him to stop, and was calling out for help, as an example of an
accused who had an honest,
but unreasonable belief as to consent. This example
demonstrates the risks of providing hypothetical examples in a case of this
Such an extreme hypothetical may risk distracting the jury from their
consideration of the facts and circumstances of the matter
before them. Where a
trial judge considers that further explanation of reasonableness is required,
the safer course is for the trial
judge to remind the jury of the particular
matters that have been the subject of the submissions of each party.
appellant did not make any complaint about the primary judge’s use of this
hypothetical, either during the trial, or on
this appeal. Nor could any
submission that this hypothetical gave rise to the risk of a miscarriage of
justice be sustained. The
extremity of the hypothetical provided by the primary
judge was such that it could only have operated to the prejudice of the
prosecution,
and could not be relied upon as the source of any unfairness to the
heart of the appellant’s complaint is that the primary judge did not
provide the jury with instructions as to how to go
reasonableness in the event that the jury accepted his account, or considered
that there was a reasonable
possibility that his account was true. In his
written submissions in reply, counsel for the appellant submitted:
His Honour’s Directions simply do not direct the jury as to how they were
to approach the application of s 67(5) to the evidence.
appellant’s evidence sufficient to satisfy s 67(5) in the sense that
he had said, or done, something to ascertain whether
the complainant was
consenting? If so, did he bear the onus of proof and if so, upon what standard?
What was the required nature
of the evidence to satisfy the requirements of s
67(5)? Was it relevant that the prosecution did not put to the applicant what he
said occurred did not constitute words, or actions, within s 67(5)?
of these rhetorical questions were answered, clearly and succinctly, in the
primary judge’s
direction, which, as noted above,
instructed the jury that they “must acquit [the appellant] if you believe
what he says. You
must acquit him if you think what he says might reasonably be
unequivocal effect of this direction when considered in the context of the
summing up as a whole is further supported by the absence
of any request for
redirection by the appellant’s trial counsel. The absence of any request
for redirection is a “cogent
indication” that counsel perceived that
the jury had been properly instructed in relation to issues of consent: see
at [123] and the cases cited therein. In these
circumstances, leave under r 5531 of the CPR should be refused.
Accordingly,
the appellant has not established the error alleged in the proposed amended
ground of appeal.
the appellant should be granted leave under r 5412(2) to amend his Notice of
Appeal, leave under r 5531 of the CPR
to rely on a ground of appeal
relating to directions that were unchallenged in the proceedings below should be
refused. It follows
that the appeal must be dismissed.
the above reasons, the following orders are made:
(1) Leave is granted to the appellant under r
5412(2) of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) to rely on the amended
ground of appeal filed on 17 October 2024.
(2) The application under r 5531 of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
for leave to rely on a ground of appeal relating to directions that were
unchallenged in the proceedings below is refused.
(3) The appeal is dismissed.
I certify that the preceding fifty [50] numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Judgment of the Court.
Associate: O Ferguson
Date: 23 May 2025
RTF format (264 KB)
Signed PDF/A format