KHANDELWAL v TERRITORY PLANNING AUTHORITY (Administrative Review) [2025] ACAT 48 (1 July 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
KHANDELWAL v TERRITORY PLANNING AUTHORITY (Administrative
[2025] ACAT 48
Catchwords: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
- approval of development
application for new two storey house and maintenance of old house providing dual
occupancy in RZ1 zoned
area – whether neighbouring property will have
reasonable solar access – whether neighbouring property will have
levels of privacy – operation of Technical Specifications
there are appropriate setbacks and
levels of privacy for old house – whether inconsistency in treatment of
applications and if this is relevant to the
decision – whether there was
an incomplete decision – whether there was failure to properly advertise
the shadow diagrams
and the effect of this
Legislation cited:
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
Legislation Act 2001
Planning Act 2023
Subordinate
Legislation cited:
Territory Plan 2023
Part A, Administration and Governance
Part E, Zone Policies, E1 Residential Zones Policy
Part G, Dictionary
Planning (Residential Zones) Technical Specifications 2024 (No.3)
Planning (General) Regulation 2023
Planning Minimum Development Application Documentation Guideline 2024 (No. 2)
Cases cited:
Landau v Territory Planning Authority
[2025] ACAT
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) AT 17/2025
RISHI KHANDELWAL
First Applicant
Second Applicants
TERRITORY PLANNING AUTHORITY
KEETHINGHA SATHIMOORTHY
First Party Joined
HARAN RATNASINGHAM
Second Party Joined
Senior Member R Orr PSM KC
Senior Member L Hawkins
The Tribunal orders that:
decision of the respondent made on 29 January 2025 is varied by the addition of
the following conditions:
Development Application is amended to provide that:
(a) the southern wall of the first floor of the proposed new dwelling is
relocated to the north of its current position so that it
is no closer than 5.8
metres from the southern boundary of the site at the south-western corner, and
at any point of that wall. (It
is noted that this represents a shortening of the
upper floor rooms and stairwell space by at least 500mm and as much as
(b) a 1.8m full screen fencing be installed between the proposed new dwelling
and the existing dwelling on the site; and
(c) the eastern wall of the study room in the proposed new dwelling be
repositioned in an easterly direction by at least 500mm.
amended plans reflecting condition 10 are resubmitted to the Territory Planning
Authority and approved by the Authority as
complying with condition 10 and the
Territory Plan.
......................................
Senior Member R Orr PSM KC
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Khandelwal and Surbhi Khandelwal (
Rishi and Surbhi
) are the owners of a property in O’Connor. Their neighbours
immediately to the north, Keethingha Sathimoorthy and Haran Ratnasingham
parties joined
Keethingha Sathimoorthy and Haran
Ratnasingham)
submitted a development application in relation to their
subject property
) on about 2 November 2024 (
development
application
proposed development
January 2025 that application was approved subject to conditions by the
respondent, Territory Planning Authority (
applicants seek review of that decision in the tribunal, and lodged an
Application for review dated 19 February 2025 (
Application for
Grounds of review
Application for review lists four grounds, which have been maintained by the
applicants in these proceedings. As set out in the
Application for review and
elsewhere, and summarised by us, these four grounds are as follows.
Ground 1 Impact and shadowing issue
a failure in acknowledging, assessing and addressing the extent and nature of
the impact of the proposed development. Of particular
concern is the shadowing
of the property of the applicants by the proposed development by the parties
joined, including that the
shadow diagrams show that the proposed development
will significantly block sunlight to the applicants’ property in the
period, especially in the morning. This issue raises concerns about
compliance by the proposed development with the
Planning Act 2023
Planning Act
) and the Territory Plan 2023 (
Territory Plan
particular Part E, Zone Policies, E1 - Residential Zones Policy (
Residential
Zones Policy
), in particular the Assessment Outcomes (
), and also the Planning (Residential Zones) Technical
Specifications 2024 (No.3) (
Technical Specifications
Ground 2 Lack of consistency in relation to impact and
second issue is lack of consistency in assessing development applications. The
applicants refer to a comparable application by
them where there is relatively
insignificant overshadowing, and no objections, but the respondent raised
overshadowing concerns to
get the size and scale of the property reduced. This
raises in effect the same provisions of the Territory Plan as ground 1, and
more general issue of consistent and fair decision making.
Ground 3 Incomplete decision outcome
third ground concerns incomplete decision outcome and notification. It is said
that the notice of decision states that the development
application is approved
subject to minor design changes, but does not indicate the changes
Ground 4 Failure in due process
fourth ground is that the development application was submitted and accepted for
assessment without the minimum supporting information,
in particular the shadow
diagrams, and without extending the public notification period when that
material was provided.
Summary of this Tribunal decision
decision of the Tribunal in relation to these grounds is in summary as
Ground 1 Impact and shadowing issue
principal requirement in relation to ground 1, impact and shadowing, is that
‘reasonable solar access to dwellings and private
open space ... on
adjoining residential blocks is achieved’ and ‘reasonable levels of
open space ... on adjoining residential blocks
is achieved’.
The Technical
Specifications also deal with solar access, and it is clear the proposal does
not comply with these, though there was
significant discussion at the hearing as
to whether this is to a minor or more significant
Shadowing is principally
caused by the upper storey of the new proposed building, and it was conceded
that this did not comply with
the Technical Specifications for setbacks in
relation to the proposal from the property of the applicants.
applicants argued in particular that the shadow diagrams provided with the
proposal showed significant shadowing of their property
at the winter solstice,
and throughout the winter months, especially in the morning. Also, as noted, the
proposal does not comply
with the Technical Specifications for solar access or
the setback of the upper storey. They suggested that their proposal had been
more closely scrutinised than this proposal.
respondent argued in particular that the fact that the applicants’
proposed house will be cut into the ground and that there
will be a fence
between the properties would in any event be a substantial contribution to the
shadowing on their property. It was
difficult to assess these issues but it was
clear that the new building proposed in the development application would still
an impact on solar access of the applicants.
respondent argued that the failure to comply with the Technical Specifications
is minor. The relevant plans were provided to the
Tribunal just before the
hearing, and there were some omissions in the plans approved by the respondent
which make assessment of
this difficult, but the applicants and the Tribunal put
forward a basis for finding that the failures were not minor.
respondent argued that the proposed development ‘generally complies’
with most of the Territory Plan (and the Technical
Specifications), that the
applicants have taken an ‘overly strict approach’ to compliance with
the Territory Plan (and
the Technical Specifications), and that the Territory
Plan does not have as a requirement that any development have no impact on
Territory Plan does not require that there be no impact, but it does provide as
an outcome that ‘adverse impacts of development
on surrounding uses both
within a site and on adjoining sites) is
minimised’,
and that there be
reasonable solar access on adjoining
in this case the
applicants’ block. Our consideration leads us to the conclusion that the
proposal does not currently provide
reasonable solar access to the applicants,
nor does it meet the Technical Specifications, and that this should be remedied
extent by an amendment to the development application to setback further
the upper storey of the proposed new building so as to increase
the solar access
of the neighbours, while not significantly interfering with the current design
of that house. We also find that
the proposal should be amended to deal with the
proximity of the proposed new dwelling to the old dwelling.
Ground 2 Lack of consistency in relation to impact and
to appeal ground 2, the documents before us suggest that in relation to the
applicants’ development application, the respondent
did take a rigorous
approach to these issues. Consistency is an important attribute of
decision-making, but as the respondent notes,
each development application is
different, and should be considered in light of its own particular
circumstances. We do not think
that the treatment of the applicants’
proposal, or any other development application, is of itself a ground for
challenging
the decision on the proposed development at issue here. But as noted
this decision adds further conditions based on our assessment
requirements.
Ground 3 Incomplete decision outcome
to appeal ground 3, the Notice of decision contains a range of conditions (see T
documents pages T51-56), some of which can be
characterised as minor design
changes. The respondent notes these as those relating to retaining walls (page
T52) and conditions
made consistently with entity advices (pages T52-54). As the
respondent states there is no requirement for such minor, or standard,
conditions to be accompanied by revised designs or documentations. This decision
adds further conditions.
Ground 4 Failure in due process
to appeal ground 4, it seems that shadow diagrams were publicly notified on
on 29 November; this
suggests that the diagrams were notified on the website for close to 15 days.
The applicants eventually obtained
the diagrams and made representations on the
basis of them. This Tribunal in these proceedings has considered the diagrams in
detail, and added conditions based on them. Therefore, we do not think any
failure to include the diagrams for the full period of
notification is a basis
for overturning the decision.
now set out more detailed reasons.
Nature of this review
Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the Application for review. The respondent did
not raise any issue in this regard.
The decision to approve the development application is subject to merits review
in these proceedings, in which the Tribunal is looking
for the correct and
preferable decision. Under section 68(3) of the
ACT Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2008
), in such review proceedings the Tribunal
must (a) confirm the decision; or (b) vary the decision; or (c) set aside the
and— (i) make a substitute decision; or (ii) remit the matter
that is the subject of the decision for reconsideration by the
decision-maker in
accordance with any direction or recommendation of the tribunal.
Tribunal process
Application for review had attached to it the Notice of decision dated
29 January 2025. The Application also had attached to it
provided by the applicants which set out their more detailed reasoning in
relation to the grounds of review, together
with a number of attachments
(exhibit A1).
directions hearings on 21 March 2025 and 9 April 2025, the applicants also
provided submissions dated 8 May 2025, which
also attached some documents
(exhibit A2). The applicants also provide submissions, in reply to the
respondent’s submissions,
which were dated 27 May 2025 (exhibit A3).
Khandelwal appeared at the hearing and represented the applicants. Mr Khandelwal
adopted his various documents, gave further
evidence, was asked questions on
that material, and made further submissions.
respondent provided the relevant T documents for the decision (exhibit T1). Just
before the hearing additional important T documents
were also provided (exhibit
T2). They also provided a Statement of findings dated 5 March 2025 (exhibit R1).
The respondent provided
the tribunal with a letter dated 8 April 2025 which set
out some details about the advertisement of the notification of the development
application (exhibit R2). A witness statement by Walid Elhassan dated 22 May
2025 was provided. Mr Elhassan gave further evidence
at the hearing and was
questioned on that evidence (exhibit R3). Respondent’s submissions dated
26 May 2025 were also filed
(exhibit R4). They also usefully provided a
document entitled ‘Respondent’s note on relevant
Planning Act
Territory Plan 2023
provisions’ (exhibit R5)
respondent’s note
). After the hearing the respondent also provided
a copy of the relevant shadow diagram for 9am on the winter solstice showing the
boundaries of the applicants’ property (exhibit R6). The respondent was
represented by Nathan Sinnathurai instructed by the
ACT Government
the directions hearing on 21 March, the parties joined, the proponents of the
development application, were added as parties to
the proceedings. The parties
joined subsequently indicated that they did not intend to participate in these
proceedings. The tribunal
registry wrote to the parties joined, at the request
of the Tribunal, and indicated the benefits of participating, and the risks
not participating. The parties joined did not provide any evidence or written
submissions, but participated in the hearing on
30 May 2025, and made oral
submissions.
Tribunal conducted a hearing of this matter on 30 May 2025 which commenced with
a view of the relevant sites, and then at the
hearing evidence was adopted,
further evidence was given, questions in relation to the evidence were put, and
further submissions
were made by the parties.
Tribunal has taken into account all the material provided to it by the
The proposal
development application proposal is described in the Notice of decision
‘Proposal for dual occupancy and lease variation –
Partial demolition of the existing dwelling and construction of a new
dwelling with attached garage to form dual occupancy, new driveway and verge
crossing, landscaping, and associated works.
Lease variation to specify two
dwellings on the block’.
block has an area of 855 m2. An existing dwelling of 103 m2 on the block will be
retained. The new dwelling will be 164 m2 with
the living areas, the kitchen,
the study, and a rumpus room on the ground floor and with four bedrooms
upstairs, two of which will
have access to the upper
The block for the proposal
runs east west, with a slope down the hill from the top western side to the
lower eastern side. The applicants’
block is to the south of the proposal
and also runs east west, with a slope down the hill from the top western side to
eastern side.
Ground 1 Impact and shadowing issue
Territory plan requirements
Elhassan indicated initially in his statement that the assessment should be
against version R10 of the Territory Plan, effective
6 August 2024 to
26 September 2024.
hearing the respondent indicated that the assessment should be at the time of
the determination of the development application,
not the date of the
application.
In the Tribunal this
should be on the basis of the current Territory Plan. The current version is R25
dated 6 June 2025.
Planning Act
provides that a decision-maker may approve a development
application only if the proposal is consistent with the Territory Plan.
provides that the Territory, the Executive, a Minister or a territory
authority must not do any act, or approve the doing of an act,
inconsistent with the
Territory Plan
provides that in deciding a development application the decision‑maker
must consider the following:
(a) any applicable desired outcomes in the territory plan;
(e) the suitability of the proposed development in the context of the site and
the site surrounds, including the permissible uses
for those areas;
(g) the interaction of the proposed development with any other adjoining or
adjacent development proposals for which a development
application has been
submitted or development approval given;
(h) any representation about the development application received by the
territory planning authority and not withdrawn;
key aspect of the Territory Plan is the Residential Zones Policy, Policy
Outcomes, RZ1- Suburban zone (
Policy Outcomes
) which provide specifically
in paragraph 4:
development respects valued features of the neighbourhood and landscape
character of the area and does not have
unreasonable negative impacts on
neighbouring properties
. [Emphasis added]
the following Assessment Outcomes (
Assessment Outcomes
) then provide as
functionality and usability of the development is appropriate for its intended
purpose/use.
proposed use and scale of development are appropriate to the site and zone.
impacts of development on surrounding uses (both within a site and on adjoining
sites) is minimised and residential amenity
protected. This includes between
residential uses and between non-residential and residential
Assessment Outcomes go on to
height, bulk and scale of the development is appropriate, noting the desired
zone policy outcomes and the streetscape. This includes
consideration of
building envelope and setbacks.
solar access to dwellings and private open space within a block and on adjoining
residential blocks is achieved. This includes
solar access into main living
spaces within a dwelling.
levels of privacy to dwellings and private open space within a block and on
adjoining residential blocks is achieved.
Planning Act
, provides that the chief planner may make technical
specifications to support design guides and the
Territory Plan
. The Planning (Residential Zones) Technical
Specifications 2024 (No. 3) (
Technical Specifications
) has been made and
is relevant here.
Technical Specifications
Technical Specifications are not part of the Territory Plan. There are some
statements about these Technical Specifications in
the Territory Plan, Part A,
Administration and Governance, and also at the beginning of the Technical
Specifications themselves.
These commence by providing first that the
primary assessment
consideration for a development application is
the assessment outcomes in the Territory Plan’. Second, these go on to
that: ‘In demonstrating compliance with the assessment outcomes
consideration
be given to the relevant planning technical
specifications which
. They note
that not all outcomes are covered by a specification. Third, they provide that
the specifications ‘are used as a
possible solution or to provide
’. Fourth they provide: ‘Where a proposed development
with a relevant provision of the planning and technical
specifications
the development
comprehensively
addresses the
assessment outcome,
further assessment
regarding the specific provisions
will not be
statements were discussed in the respondent’s note and in the hearing. We
think the following principles emerge.
(a) We agree with the respondent that the statements give priority to the
Territory Plan and assessment outcomes, in this case the
Residential Zones
Policy, over the specifications, in this case the Technical
Specifications.
(b) In the assessment, consideration ‘may’ be given to the
specifications which ‘may’ serve as a benchmark,
which means that
there is a discretion to give consideration, and that this is not
Similarly, they are a
possible solution and may provide guidance; they are not requirements; there may
be other solutions.
(c) These and other factors do suggest that the assessment outcomes are more
general, qualitative, and outcomes focussed, and the
specifications more
specific and quantitative. The content of the relevant Assessment Outcomes and
Technical Specifications here
shows this.
(d) The statement as to the effect of compliance (point 4 in paragraph [37]
above) is a little hard to understand. It does seem to
be setting out conditions
for when further assessment is not required. In our view the structure of the
provision suggests that if
these conditions are met, further assessment
‘is not required’, but that there is still a discretion to undertake
further assessment. The first requirement is that the development complies
with the specifications. As noted the specifications are
generally specific and
quantitative so compliance can generally be determined. We note that there is no
explicit suggestion that
compliance is anything other than full compliance, and
that partial compliance may be enough. The second requirement is that the
development comprehensively addresses the assessment outcome. Comprehensively in
this context suggests ‘of large scope’,
and addresses suggests
‘to deal with’.
Whatever way this is interpreted, it is clear that even full compliance with the
specifications is not of itself enough to give rise
to the conclusion that
further assessment is not required.
(e) The respondent suggested that there is a presumption in favour of the
development application being considered to satisfy assessment
outcomes where
the applicable specifications for those outcomes are met and the development
application has explained (or it is readily
apparent) how it has satisfied those
We agree that talking
of a presumption may be a useful way to look at this. But we think this
statement is otherwise overbroad. As
noted meeting conditions means only that
further assessment is not required, but we agree with the respondent that this
in many cases in effect means
be approved. But further,
there are two conditions, one is that the development complies with the
specifications, the second is that
the development comprehensively addresses the
assessment outcome. Both need to be met.
relevant parts of the relevant Technical Specifications are as
Assessment Outcome 15
solar access to dwellings and private open space within a block and on adjoining
residential blocks is achieved. This includes
solar access into main living
spaces within a dwelling.
Specification
Solar building envelope
15.1. Buildings
are sited wholly within the solar building envelope formed by planes projected
over the subject block at 31
to the horizontal from the height of
the ‘solar fence’ on any northern boundary of an adjoining
residential block. The
height of the solar fence is:
a) For single dwellings on large blocks:
the primary building zone – 2.4m.
other parts of the boundary – 1.8m.
b) For single dwellings on mid-sized and compact blocks:
the primary building zone – 3m.
other parts of the boundary – 2.3m.
multi-unit housing except for buildings exceeding 3 storeys in RZ5:
the primary building zone – 3m.
other parts of the boundary –
This does not
apply to those parts of a boundary where the adjacent part of the adjoining
residential block comprises only an access
driveway (i.e., a “battle-axe
does not apply to the part of the building that is specified in a district
technical specification to be built to the boundary.
Assessment Outcome 16
levels of privacy to dwellings and private open space within a block and on
adjoining residential blocks is achieved.
Specification
Separation between walls – multi-unit housing –
RZ1 and RZ2
16.1. Unscreened
elements and an external wall on the same block or an adjoining block are
separated by 3m or more. External walls
at the lower floor level on the same
block or an adjoining block are separated by 1m or more.
Applicants’ evidence
noted ground 1 of the appeal concerns the impact of and overshadowing by the
proposal. The applicants have consistently raised
their concerns in relation to
the significant overshadowing, loss of solar access and loss of privacy.
refer to the shadow diagrams submitted with the development
application.
These show major
shadowing of the applicants’ property at the winter solstice at 9.00 am,
and less but still significant shading
at 12.00 noon. The shadowing recedes in
the afternoon.
to the applicants’ submissions are other shadow diagrams, showing the
effect of their development application on the
property to the south of
applicants argue that the overshadowing of their property will definitely affect
the energy rating of their property, lead to
higher utility bills not to mention
creating a dark and gloomy environment for the impacted property as it blocks
the northern sun.
Furthermore,
they refer to the loss of privacy arising from windows of the double storey
proposed residence directly overlooking into
effect their position is that reasonable solar access to their adjoining
residential block is not achieved (Assessment Outcome
15), and that reasonable
levels of privacy to their adjoining residential block is not achieved
(Assessment Outcome 16). They argue
that the bulk and scale of the proposed
development has unreasonable negative and adverse impacts on them and is not
appropriate
(Policy Outcomes 4, Assessment Outcomes 5, 6, and 14), and that the
adverse impact of the development on them, an adjoining site,
has not been
minimised (Assessment Outcome 6)
also note that
section 186(e)
Planning Act
provides that a decision-maker
must consider the suitability of the proposed development in the context of the
site and the site
surrounds, and (g) the interaction of the proposed development
with any other adjoining or adjacent development proposals for which
development approval has been given, and the applicants’ concerns fall
within this requirement.
Section 186(h)
provides for consideration of any
representation about the development application received by the Authority and
not withdrawn; the
applicants made such a representation.
Respondent’s evidence
Elhassan states in relation to Assessment Outcome 4 ‘that in his opinion
the proposal for a dual occupancy complies fully
with the territory plan’,
and ‘ensures an appropriate level of functionality and usability across
the subject site
development’.
his view in relation to Assessment Outcome 5 the scale, use and associated
design and siting of the proposed development are considered
‘reasonable
in the context of block size’ and the ‘proposed development is
consistent with the surrounding built
form and align with the objectives of the
In evidence at the
hearing he referred to a site analysis plan of the area which showed some dual
occupancy blocks. It is not clear
that these are two-storey buildings, but even
if so we note that they are north of a road, and therefore in winter are shading
and not neighbouring
Elhassan suggests that in accordance with Assessment Outcome 6 the development
minimises any adverse impacts on surrounding blocks
and that ‘the dense
landscaping outlined in the Landscape Plan will enhance and preserve the green,
leafy character of the
relation to Assessment Outcome 14 Mr Elhassan states that the new dwelling
complies with the required setbacks at both levels,
and the proposed tandem
garage will be constructed along the side boundary in accordance with the
relevant planning provisions. The
upper level does not warrant the installation
of high sill windows or obscure
As discussed above and
below it was conceded that the upper storey of the new house did not in fact
meet the relevant setback from
the boundary to the applicants’
relation to Assessment Outcome 15 insofar as it concerns the adjoining block he
states that ‘the [adjoining] lot is cut by
approximately 2.3 metres, and
when combined with the presence of the 1.8 metre high common boundary fence, the
proposed development
will not result in any additional or unreasonable
overshadowing impacts’ and as such ‘the solar access to the
neighbour’s dwelling and private open space will not be
adversely affected by the
relation to Assessment Outcome 16 concerning the adjoining block he states that
‘the neighbouring dwelling has a U-shaped
design that encloses its private
open space’ and that ‘this layout inherently protects the space from
overlooking or
visual intrusion, ensuring that the development does not
unreasonably impact the amenity or privacy of the adjacent
Consideration
Tribunal is of the view that there is a basis for the concerns of the
applicants. The shadow diagrams in the development application
significant shade at 9.00am on the winter solstice of over what is the
applicants’ house, including a living area.
This continues through the
morning, and through the winter months of the year. This suggests that there
will not be reasonable solar
access to their dwelling on their adjoining
residential block, including solar access into main living spaces.
Surrounding built forms
respondent refers to a number of factors which suggest there is reasonable solar
access. As noted above it was suggested that
proposed development is consistent
with the surrounding built forms. There are some dual occupancies nearby; but if
they are two
storeys, as noted, they are north of a road, not neighbouring
applicants’ proposal, which had less shadowing on its neighbouring
southern home, and where the applicants stated that
in discussions with the
respondent this had in fact been reduced during the assessment
Landscaping
noted it was suggested that ‘the dense landscaping outlined in the
Landscape Plan will enhance and preserve the green, leafy
character of the
street’. The Landscape Plan provided just before the hearing does support
this conclusion. But this will not
promote any solar
noted, it was stated that the new dwelling complies with the required setbacks
at both levels, but this does not of itself meet
the additional specific
requirements for solar access and
Further, during the
hearing the respondent conceded that the upper storey of the new building was at
places setback 5.3m when a setback
Cut for applicants’ house
noted, reference was made to the fact that the applicants’ proposed house
will be cut into the current ground level by approximately
2.3 metres, and when
combined with the presence of the 1.8 metre high common boundary fence, the
proposed development will not result
in any additional or unreasonable
overshadowing impacts’.
There was limited evidence as to the applicants’ proposed development
before the Tribunal. Neither the applicants nor the respondent
provided plans,
except for the shadow plans for this proposal provided by the applicants
attached to their submissions. As these
are focussed on the shadowing by the
applicants’ proposal, it is difficult to gauge from them the effect of the
proposed development
the subject of this case on the applicants’ property.
Mr Elhassan discussed the cut but at the hearing he could not point to
evidentiary basis for this, which limited the weight of this evidence, which the
respondent conceded was
appropriate.
Further, as Mr
Khandelwal noted, the degree of cut on his proposed development should not be
accepted as an absolute in the assessment.
He said that if the proposal was
approved he would be forced to reconsider his intentions for his block and its
development.
This approach seems
reasonable, and it is appropriate for us to take it into account.
is true that there is a proposed fence between the proposed development block
and the applicants’ block,
and that this will have some impact on solar access as shown by the shadow
diagrams, but these also show a greater impact by the
. These diagrams do not
support the view that the building will have no greater impact than the
Technical Specifications
the hearing the respondent relied extensively on the Technical Specifications.
Their position was in summary that the proposal
did not meet specification 15.1,
set out above, at its top
But that this was only a
‘minor’ failure, and therefore met the Technical Specifications, and
Assessment Outcome 14,
and the Territory Plan in this respect.
noted, the Technical Specifications do not in their terms allow for minor
failures or digressions. They provide for specific quantitative
requirements,
and it seems odd to add to them a general, qualitative assessment, such as
whether the proposal ‘reasonably meets’
them, or comes close to
meeting them. And as noted failure to meet them does not have any consequences
of itself, it simply requires
assessment under the Policy and Assessment
Outcomes, in which assessment the Technical Specifications can be used as
relevant guidelines.
the course of the hearing it became evident that there were some omissions in
the plans approved by the respondent. These omissions
make complete assessment
of the impacts on solar access, and privacy, difficult, Firstly, at T documents
page 241 the upper floor
plan failed to show the distance of separation to the
southern boundary. Mr Elhassan reported to the hearing that he had assessed
distance to be 5.3m at the south eastern
By scaled measurement of
T documents page 241 the Tribunal assesses that the distance could be of the
order of 5.1m at the south
eastern corner. Secondly at T documents page 242 the
east elevation in our opinion fails to include the correct solar envelope, which
at the east wall would involve a greater breach than the west elevation breach
of the parapet section shown at T Documents page 243.
The west elevation is also
shown at T documents page T244, section A, where the envelope breach is
portrayed at the line shown on
the upper floor plan at T documents page
as discussed at the hearing, there is a sound basis for finding that the failure
is not minor. The applicants put to Mr
Elhassan that the solar encroachment was
in fact greater at other sections, and he indicated that he could not answer
The Tribunal also raised
with Mr Elhassan that there are a significant indications the failure was
greater than he suggested, and
he stated that on this basis he would probably
say that this is not a minor
encroachment’.
as noted, to have an effect, compliance with the Specification also needs the
proposal to
comprehensively
address the Assessment Outcome. The shadow
diagrams and failure to meet the specific Technical Specification provide a
basis for thinking
that while the assessment outcome of reasonable solar access
has been addressed to some extent, it has not been comprehensively addressed.
This is especially so if there is a way to do so and maintain the basic
characteristics of the proposal, which in our opinion there
is, as discussed
General compliance by the proposal
respondent emphasised that the proposed development ‘generally
complies’ and complies with ‘most of the guide
and technical
specifications’;
correct but the applicants’ principal concern from the beginning has been
the overshadowing since it is this which
most affects them, which seems a
reasonable and appropriate position.
Overly strict approach?
respondent also suggested that the applicants took an ‘overly strict
approach’ to compliance with the Territory
Some comments may have
done so, but as noted the applicants focussed on the overshadowing, and it does
not seem unreasonable to us
that the respondent address this concern in some
way, or at least explain why the concern of the applicants was mistaken, neither
of which occurred till the hearing. The respondent argued that the Territory
Plan does not have a requirement that development must
minimise the impact on
any other adjoining property. We do not agree. There is a specific requirement
in Assessment Outcome 6 which
provides that ‘adverse impacts of
development on surrounding uses (both within a site and on adjoining sites) is
and residential amenity protected’. We do agree that the
Territory Plan does not have as a requirement that any development
impact on others.
Conclusion of consideration
key requirement is however in Assessment Outcome 15 ‘reasonable solar
access to dwellings and private open space on adjoining
residential blocks
...[including] main living spaces’, and the detailed provisions in the
Technical Specifications are a guide
to this. The shadow diagrams show a
significant impact on the applicants; the issues raised by the respondent do not
rebut or justify
this; the proposal does not meet the Technical Specifications
for setback of the top floor by a significant amount; and the proposal
meet the specification for the solar envelope which protects the applicants by
at last a minor amount and probably a significant
amount. These considerations
and those outlined above lead us to the conclusion that the development
application does not currently
provide reasonable solar access as required by
Assessment Outcome 15. This ground of review is made out. In our view the
development
application should be amended in this regard to require the parties
joined to increase the solar access of the neighbours, while
not significantly
interfering with the current design of their proposed new dwelling. The evidence
was that the southern top floor
was 5.3 metres from the southern boundary. We
propose requiring that the southern top floor wall be moved further away from
the boundary
with the applicants’ property, and therefore their proposed
development. These are amendments to the proposal which can be
accommodated within the existing design. We therefore vary the approval decision
to require the southern wall of the first
floor of the proposed new dwelling be
relocated to the north of its current position so that it is no closer than 5.8
metres from
the southern boundary of the site at the south-western corner, and
at any point of that wall. (It is noted that this represents a
shortening of the
upper floor rooms and stairwell space by at least 500mm and as much as
will also assist with compliance of Assessment Outcome 16 requiring reasonable
levels of privacy to dwellings and private open
space on adjoining residential
blocks. The respondent noted that the privacy of the existing dwelling on the
site from the proposed
new building on that block is safeguarded through the use
of high-sill and opaque windows on the upper floor of the new dwelling
the existing residence. They suggested this is not necessary for the part of
dwelling facing the adjoining site because the
proposal there inherently
protects the space from overlooking or visual intrusion, and is further away and
complies with Technical
Specification
Mr Elhassan also mentioned
that the fence between the properties, the cut on the applicants’ proposed
building, and the distance
between the windows and the applicants’ rooms
addressed this issue and would make it difficult for someone in the subject
to see into the applicants’
do not think it is appropriate therefore to require high sill or opaque windows
or other adjustments to the first storey windows
facing the applicants, but the
further setback of the top storey as required by the proposed condition will
address this issue to
some extent.
Proximity of current house and new house
another issue, the Tribunal raised at the directions hearing on 21 March 2025
and the final hearing the awkward relationship between
the existing dwelling and
the proposed new dwelling on the site, which goes to the residential amenity of
those who live in the existing
building when the fourth bedroom is demolished,
and its proximity to the new building.
Residential Zones Policy requires that the height, bulk and scale of the
development is appropriate, and this includes consideration
of setbacks, and
that reasonable levels of privacy to dwellings within a block is
appears that the old building will have a rear access door within approximately
2 meters of a double sliding rumpus room door of
the new building, without
screening, and a 1-metre separation between the wall, in an awkward shape,
creating a small space there.
Mr Elhassan’s statement made reference to a
fence between the two buildings, but at the hearing we could not locate a plan
for this. The respondent was asked if consideration was given to imposing
conditions to separate or provide privacy between the two
Mr Elhassan indicated
that the Authority had approved in the past something within this nature, that
they looked at each development
on its merits, and he thought that this was an
acceptable outcome.
think that this issue is significant enough to be remedied. First, we think that
the proposal should be amended to provide for
a 1.8 metre full screen fencing
between the two dwellings. As noted Mr Elhassan thought that there was already a
requirement for
such a fence, and that this would have provided a better
outcome. Second that the design of the proposed new dwelling be amended
the eastern wall of the study is repositioned in an easterly direction by at
least 500mm (reducing the size of the study
by at least 500mm and opening a
greater physical separation between the dwellings at that location). These are
again amendments to
the proposal which can be readily accommodated within the
existing design. We vary the decision to provide conditions to this
Ground 2 Lack of consistency in relation to impact and
discussed, the second issue is lack of consistency in assessing development
applications.
applicants refer to a comparable application by them where there was less
overshadowing of their southern neighbour, there was
no objection, but the
respondent raised overshadowing concerns to get the size and scale of the
proposal reduced. The applicants
provided relevant emails in relation to this
issues arise here. These facts suggest that in relation to the applicants’
development application, the respondent did
take a more rigorous approach to
these issues, in contrast to the approach taken in relation to their
neighbours’ application.
The respondent sought to justify this on the
basis that each development application is different, and is considered on its
own particular
circumstances and merit, and raises its own issues which need to
be addressed in an appropriate
In our view consistency is
an attribute of good decision-making. Of course each approval application should
be considered on its
merits, but where the same issue is raised, proposals
should generally be addressed in the same way.
any rate, we have set out above what we regard as the appropriate approach to
this issue for this proposal. In this review we taken
this approach. We have had
some regard to the applicants’ proposal in the discussion above in
relation to ground 1. We impose
additional conditions to address this
But we do not think that the treatment of the applicants’ proposal, or any
other development application, of itself is a ground
for challenging the
decision on the development proposal at issue here. This has to be considered in
light of the specific requirements
in relation to that proposal. That other
proposals were dealt with in a different way, more thoroughly or less
thoroughly, is not
directly relevant to this review. Therefore this ground is
not made out.
Ground 3 Incomplete decision outcome
noted, the third ground concerns alleged incomplete decision outcomes and
notification. It is said that the outcome notification
states that the plan is
approved subject to minor design changes but does not state, indicate, or attach
any documents to demonstrate
the changes requested.
Notice of decision is in the T documents at pages T46-67, and also attached to
the Application for review. Appendix A at pages
T51-56 contains a range of
conditions, some of which can be characterised as minor design changes. The
Respondent notes these as
those relating to retaining walls (page T52) and
conditions made consistently with entity advices (pages T52-54). As the
notes there is no requirement for such minor, or standard, conditions
to be accompanied by revised designs or documentations. This
ground is therefore
not made out.
Tribunal has made some additional conditions which will require amended
documentation.
Ground 4 Failure in due process
noted, the fourth ground is that the development application was submitted and
accepted for assessment without the minimum supporting
information, in
particular the shadow diagrams, and without extending the public notification
period when that material was provided.
Planning Act
provides that the Authority must publicly notify a
development application by giving public notice of the making of the application
on the authority website, giving notice to adjoining owners, and displaying a
sign on the land. It must be notified for the public
notification period
As this is not a significant development under the
Planning Act
, the period
is 15 working days.
Section 175(4)
provides that the validity of a development approval is not
affected by a failure by the Territory Planning Authority to comply with
sets out the requirements for a development application. A development
application must be in the form required by the Authority
by notice on the
Authority website; and accompanied by the plans, drawings, specifications,
assessments and other information and
documents sufficient to address each
provision of the
Territory Plan
relevant to the proposed development; and
other related requirements.
provides for guidelines about this to be made by the Authority. The
Authority referred the Tribunal to the Planning Minimum Development
Application
Documentation Guideline 2024 (No. 2). This sets out a table which shows the
minimum documentation required and for dual
occupancy, which is what this
development is, for shadow diagrams is a halfway house where they are
‘required if relevant
or requested’. It is not clear what relevant
means here, but the diagrams were clearly relevant to the applicants in this
The text then states that: ‘Shadow diagrams are required for all
buildings or structures over three storeys in height or when
a development
extends beyond any relevant building or solar envelopes, as specified in the
Planning Technical Specification (if used)’.
As noted this development
does extend beyond the solar envelope, and therefore it seems the diagrams were
respondent’s letter to the tribunal of 8 April 2025 states that public
notification of the development application commenced
on 11 November 2024 and
ended on 29 November 2024. Letters were sent to neighbouring lessees on
5 November, a sign was placed on
development site on 8 November, and the
application was published on the public register on 8 November. The letter then
states that:
‘Additional shadow diagrams were uploaded to the public
register on 14 November, 2025’. The respondent clarified at the
that these were additional documents, but the only shadow documents
applicants state that shadow diagrams were wholly missing from the website, and
were not included in the public register until
after 14 November
this basis it seems that shadow diagrams were publicly notified on about 14
November 2025. The notification period ended on 29
November; this suggests that
the diagrams were notified on the website for close to 15 days.
applicants agreed that they eventually obtained the diagrams and made
representations on the basis of them. The respondent notes
that other interested
persons could have also requested these. The diagrams and the representations of
the applicants were considered
in the assessment process.
importantly, this Tribunal in these proceedings has considered the diagrams in
some detail, and made orders based on them amending
the decision.
we do not think any failure to include the diagrams for the full period of
notification is a basis for overturning the
decision. This ground is not made
......................................
Senior Member R Orr PSM KC
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
Date(s) of hearing:
First Applicant:
Mr R Khandelwal
Second Applicant:
Mr R Khandelwal, authorised representative
Respondent:
Mr N Sinnathurai, instructed by ACT Government Solicitor
First Party Joined:
Second Party Joined:
Assessment Outcomes 15 and
Technical Specifications
Assessment Outcomes 6
Assessment Outcomes15
Transcript of proceedings on 29
May 2025, page 9;
Planning Act
sections 504
, and Schedule 5,
T documents, page 9
T documents, page 184
Statement of Walid Elhassan, at
Transcript of proceedings on 29
May 2025, page 8; respondent’s note at [13], citing
Landau v Territory
Planning Authority
[2025] ACAT 19
, at [51]. We think this is correct subject
to specific circumstances not relevant here, see for example
Legislation Act
and related common law principle
The numbering used here is
of the current version. Earlier versions had different numbering but were the
same in substance, see for
example version R10 effective 2 August 2024
Emphasis added, except for
the word ‘comprehensively’ which is emphasised in the Territory
Plan, Part A
Respondent’s note at
[8]; see also Territory Plan, Part A, Hierarchy of Territory Plan components
Legislation Act 2001
section 146
Macquarie Dictionary
(online), ‘to deal with’
Respondent’s note at
T documents, pages 220 and
Applicants’
submissions
Applicants’
submissions, page 1
Applicants’
submissions, page 1
Statement of Walid Elhassan,
Statement of Walid Elhassan,
T documents, page 213;
transcript of proceedings on 29 June 2025, at page 84
Statement of Walid Elhassan,
Statement of Walid Elhassan,
Statement of Walid Elhassan,
Statement of Walid Elhassan,
Applicants’
submissions, attached shadow diagrams of applicants’ proposal; transcript
of proceedings on 29 May 2025,
Additional T documents, page
239; statement of Walid Elhassan, at [49]
Statement of Walid Elhassan,
Transcript of proceedings on
29 May 2023, at page 113 and pages 115-116
Statement of Mr Elhassan, at
Statement of Mr Elhassan at
[67]; transcript of proceedings on 29 May 2025, at page 88
Transcript of proceedings on
29 May 2025, at pages 14-15
See T documents page 238
which refers to a ‘1.8m colorbond fence to the front building line’
between the two properties’
T documents, pages 220 and
Additional T documents, page
Transcript of proceedings on
29 May 2025, at page 93
Transcript of proceedings on
29 May 2025, at page 52
Transcript of proceedings on
29 May 2025, at page 108
Respondent’s
submissions, at [12]; transcript of proceedings on 29 May 2025, at page 113
Transcript of proceedings on
29 May 2025, at pages 113-114
Transcript of proceedings on
29 May 2025, at page 114
Statement of Mr Elhassan, at
[65] and [69]
Statement of Mr Elhassan, at
[69]; transcript of proceedings on 29 May 2025, at pages 92-95
Assessment Outcomes 14 and
16. The Territory Plan, Part G, Dictionary provides that multi-unit housing
means the use of land for
more than one dwelling. The Technical Specifications
deal with setbacks, see for example 16.1 and 16.3
Transcript of proceedings on
29 May 2025, at pages 80 and 87
Transcript of proceedings on
29 May 2025, at page 81
Applicants’
submissions
Respondent’s
submissions at [29]
Planning (General)
regulation 36
Transcript of proceedings on
29 May 2025, page 124
Transcript of proceedings on
29 May 2025, at page 110
Application, detailed
reasoning document
RTF format (1.39 MB)
Signed PDF/A format