ZA v Director General, Community Services Directorate [2025] ACTCA 43 (17 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
ZA v Director General, Community Services Directorate
[2025] ACTCA 43
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
(1) Unless the appellant has served a sealed copy of the notice of appeal
on the respondent at the respondent’s address for
service in the
proceedings below and filed an affidavit proving service of those documents by
4pm on 31 October 2025, the appeal
is dismissed for want of
prosecution immediately thereafter and the order of the Chief Justice on
5 May 2025 is confirmed.
(2) In the event that the affidavit required by order 1 is filed, the
Registrar is to list the proceedings for directions and notify
(3) The Registrar is to give notice of the terms of the orders and notes
made today.
(4) Note that there was no appearance by the appellant at 9:27am.
Catchwords:
– PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE – Dismissal for want of
prosecution – where appellant sought determination of appeal on
– where appellant appeared at directions hearing and then failed to appear
on four occasions over three months and
failed to serve appeal documents on
respondent – r 5603 of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
– power exercised by court on its own initiative – guillotine order
– appeal dismissed for want of prosecution
unless affidavit proving
service filed within specified timeframe
Legislation Cited:
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), rr 5409, 5603
ZA (First Appellant)
ZO (Second Appellant)
Director General, Community Services Directorate (Respondent)
Representation:
No appearance (First Appellant)
No appearance (Second Appellant)
No appearance (Respondent)
Self-represented (First Appellant)
Self-represented (Second Appellant)
No appearance (Respondent)
File Number:
ACTCA 11 of 2025
Decision Under Appeal:
ACT Supreme Court
McCallum CJ
Date of Decision:
Case Title:
ZA v The Director-General of Community Services Directorate (CYFS)
Court File Number:
SCA 15 of 2024
appeal was commenced on 14 May 2025 by the filing of a notice of
appeal. The appeal sought to challenge an order made by the
Chief Justice on
5 May 2025. The respondent to the appeal is identified as
“Director General, Community Service Directorate
11 June 2025, the matter was listed before a senior deputy registrar
and there was no appearance by either party.
2 July 2025, the first appellant (the appellant) appeared before a
senior deputy registrar and the matter was adjourned until
16 July 2025, the appellant appeared before a senior deputy registrar
and was directed to file an affidavit showing that the appeal
documents had been
served on the parties at their addresses for service used in the proceedings
below by 30 July 2025.
6 August 2025, the proceedings were listed before a senior deputy
registrar and there was no appearance by either party.
20 August 2025, the proceedings were listed before a senior deputy
registrar and there was no appearance by either party. The proceedings
listed before me on 8 September 2025.
8 September 2025, there was no appearance by either party. I adjourned
the proceedings to today, 17 October 2025, and noted that
appellant had not appeared and that the order made on 16 July 2025 had
not been complied with.
appears that my intention was to adjourn the proceedings until three months
after the last step was taken in the proceedings so
that the power to dismiss
the proceedings in r 5603 of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
was enlivened if there was no evidence of the appeal documents having been
court file indicates that notice of the orders on 8 September 2025 and
the listing for today was sent to the appellant at the
email address provided
with the notice of appeal and also by post to her address for service.
proceedings today were listed at 9:15am. At 9:27am, the matter was called
outside court and there was no appearance.
the notice of appeal, the appellant said:
The appellant wants to
present the appeal case in writing ONLY
written document to be filed
by email only
Appellant/s will NOT appear in person due to this matter will be determined by
written documents only.
(Emphasis in original.)
it is possible for appeals to be determined on the papers, that does not avoid
the obligation in r 5409 to serve a notice of
appeal and a stamped copy of
the case summary on each respondent to the appeal. The obligation upon an
appellant is to effect service
no later than seven days after the notice of
appeal is filed.
the circumstances of the present case, that required service by
21 May 2025 and that obligation was the subject of the further
made by the court on 16 July 2025.
last occasion on which the appellant appeared for the purposes of the
proceedings was on 16 July 2025.
applies if an appellant (r 5603(2)):
(a) has not done anything required to be done under these rules during a period
of 3 months after the day the requirement arises;
(b) otherwise has not prosecuted the appellant’s appeal with appropriate
effort during a period of 3 months after the day
the last step in the proceeding
one of those thresholds is satisfied, then the powers of the court are as set
out in r 5603(3). The powers include dismissing the
proceedings or,
“on its own initiative”, making what is in effect a guillotine
order, requiring something to be done
within a specified time and providing
that, if it is not done, then the proceedings will be dismissed. Alternatively,
it may make
a non-guillotine order and subsequently order that the appeal be
regard to the terms of the rule, in the circumstances of this case where, as a
result of the apparent absence of service of
the appeal documents, no respondent
has appeared or made any application for dismissal of the proceedings under
r 5603, it is only
the power in r 5603(3)(b) which is available,
namely a power of the court to act “on its own initiative”.
the circumstances, I am satisfied that the appellant has not prosecuted the
appeal with appropriate effort during a period of three
months following
the appearance on 16 July 2025. Further, I consider that it is
appropriate to make an order which, if not complied
with, will result in the
appeal being dismissed for want of prosecution.
orders of the Court are:
(1) Unless the appellant has served a sealed copy of the notice of appeal on the
respondent at the respondent’s address for
service in the proceedings
below and filed an affidavit proving service of those documents by 4pm on
31 October 2025, the appeal
is dismissed for want of prosecution
immediately thereafter and the order of the Chief Justice on
5 May 2025 is confirmed.
(2) In the event that the affidavit required by order 1 is filed, the
Registrar is to list the proceedings for directions and notify
the parties.
(3) The Registrar is to give notice of the terms of the orders and notes made
(4) Note that there was no appearance by the appellant at 9:27am.
I certify that the preceding nineteen [19] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of his Honour Justice
RTF format (187 KB)
Signed PDF/A format