Todd HEATHER & Desiree HEATHER v Michaela Rachel BROWNING & Michael Langdon BARRY [2009] ACTRTT 4 (12 February 2009)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: Todd HEATHER & Desiree HEATHER –v- Michaela Rachel
BROWNING & Michael Langdon BARRY [2009] ACTRTT (4)
884 of 2008
Catchwords: Pet clauses and the need for endorsement.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES
TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT
884 of 2008
TODD HEATHER and DESIREE HEATHER
(Applicant/Tenants)
MICHAELA RACHEL BROWNING and MICHAEL LANGDON
(Respondent/Landlord)
special pet clause in the tenancy agreement is valid on its own terms without
the need for any endorsement under
Residential Tenancies
to any agreement reached between the parties to the contrary, the tenants are
required to immediately remove one of the cats
from the premises.
..................................
Alan Anforth,
February 2009
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
) NO: RT 884
TODD HEATHER and DESIREE HEATHER
(Applicant/Tenants)
MICHAELA RACHEL BROWNING and MICHAEL
(Respondent/Lessors)
REASONS FOR DECISION
matter concerns a residential tenancy at premises in Ainslie in the ACT. The
tenancy commenced on 27 March 2007 for an initial
fixed term of 12 months at a
rent of $720.00 per week and now continues as a periodic tenancy. A bond of
$2880.00 was lodged with
the Office of Rental Bonds.
tenancy agreement contains a special clause pertaining to the presence on the
premises of a cat owned by the tenants. That special
clause was not endorsed by
the Tribunal pursuant to
Residential Tenancies Act 1997
Act) and read as follows:
The tenant agrees to be responsible for any damage caused by the
cat (1) during the tenancy and repair any damage to the property
caused by the
tenants are still in the premises.
original cat that was the subject of the special clause died and the tenants
acquired two new kittens. The landlords have taken
exception to the presence of
a second cat and have issued the tenants with a Notice to Remedy dated 3
November 2008 requiring the
removal of one of the kittens from the premises upon
threat of eviction for non-compliance.
11 November 2008 the tenants applied to the Tribunal for an order concerning the
validity of the Notice to Remedy. The application
was framed as follows:
1. Please identify the Issues In Dispute
We have recently acquired two cats. Our tenancy agreement contains a pet
clause allowing us to have a cat. We have been served with
a Notice to Remedy
because of there being multiple pets, rather than just one. The Notice to Remedy
informs us that if the breach
is not rectified the agent may issue a Notice to
Vacate. We feel the difference between one cat and two cats is immaterial in
of risk to the property owner and the pet clause should be amended to
allow for two cats.
2. Please state the nature of relief you seek (what sort of order you want
the Tribunal to make).
We would like the Tribunal to agree that the presence of a second cat in the
property does not present a material difference to the
tenancy and that we
should be permitted to amend the tenancy agreement pet clause to allow us to
have two cats.
. Please give a brief history of the dispute, (why you are making the
application).
We first occupied the property on 27 March 2007. We had an old cat at the
time and this was allowed in a pet clause in the tenancy
agreement. The clause
states that we will pay for any damages caused by the cat and that we will have
the property fumigated when
we leave. The cat died in early 2008 and after
several months we decided to get a new cat.
When looking for a new cat we had the opportunity to buy two kittens from the
same litter. We have two daughters (aged 9 and 10) and
they each wanted to have
"their own" cat. We assumed at the time that the pet clause would still stand,
i.e., we would still pay
for damage to the property caused by cats and the
property will be fumigated, regardless of there being two cats instead of one.
We felt there was no material difference.
We brought the cats home on 8 Aug 2008 and they have lived in the house since
then. There was a periodic inspection of the property
on 29 October 2008. We
made no secret about there being two cats. Following the inspection we received
a Notice to Remedy - dated
3 Nov, but mailed on the
. The Notice requires us to get rid of one of the
cats by the 17
Nov or face a Notice to Vacate.
We wrote an email to the owners, asking them to re-consider allowing the
second cat, which we sent to the agent for on-forwarding.
We have had no
acknowledgement of this email.
We feel that the presence of a second cat in the house does not materially
affect the owner's property - especially given that the
existing pet clause
means we have agreed to be responsible for any damage caused and to fumigate the
property when we leave.
We note that the periodic inspection on 29 Oct did not identify any issue
with the maintenance of the property or any damage.
We also note that the Tribunal previously changed a pet clause, so we believe
there is a precedent for the Tribunal intervening in
the revision of tenancy
agreements in regard to pet clauses. The following is an extract from Scorgie v
[2007] ACTRTT 16
(25 June 2007). "The dispute over the presence of the
tenant's dog came before a differently constituted Tribunal in matter RTT
In that matter the Tribunal made an order on 23 September 2004
amending the lease to delete the pet exclusion clause and to substitute
which permitted the tenant to keep her existing dog."
Our daughters are distraught at the prospect of one of them losing their pet.
Even in the relatively short period of time the cats
have lived with us, the
children have become very attached to them.
We believe that there is no risk of loss to the landlord in the tenancy being
allowed to continue and ask for the agreement to be
amended to allow for 2 cats,
instead of one.
landlords filed the following submission in response to the tenants’
applications:
The owners of the property contest the application on the
following grounds:
The tenants Todd & Desiree Heather have 2 cats at the property. They only
have permission for 1 cat (as per attached pet clause).
The tenant/s did not seek the owner's permission for an additional cat (this
was discovered on a recent routine inspection of the
property) and a Notice to
Remedy was served requiring the tenants to remove the additional cat.
The owner/s Michaela Browning & Michael Barry reluctantly leased the
property allowing a cat (as Michaela Browning is allergic
to cats). The owner's
took into consideration that it was an old cat.
The owner's do not give permission for 2 cats at the property; whilst they
have given permission for 1 cat as on the original tenancy
It was also discovered that the cats are using the house hold toilets (there
is a kitty litter set up over one of the toilets). The
owners were horrified at
this! Not only is this a hygiene issue but should the kitty litter fall into the
toilet it would also cause
plumbing issues.
The letter from the tenants requesting permission for 2 cats was forwarded to
the owners - they do not give permission for 2 cats.
We have included a ruling made by the Tribunal i(RT 2294/06) ordering the
tenancy is terminated by way of surrender as the tenant
had a dog at the
property without permission.
matter was listed before the Tribunal on 4 December 2008. Both tenants appeared
in person and Ms Badenock with Ms Chivers, real
estate agents, appeared for the
that occasion the tenants tendered a statutory declaration from Ms Heather and
from Christopher Edwards to the effect that on or
Heather spoke with Ms Chivers of Badenock Real Estate who offered the tenants a
deal to the effect that
if the tenants entered a new fixed term lease for 2
years the landlords would consent to the second cat. Ms Chivers denied the
allegation.
There was no suggestion that the offer was ever given effect to by
the parties.
matter was adjourned to 16 January 2009.
the resumed hearing both tenants appeared and Ms Chivers, real estate agent,
appeared for the landlords. Ms Chivers tendered a
letter from the tenants to
Badenock’s dated 6 March 2007 in which the tenants sought consent for the
original old cat only.
this occasion the Tribunal discussed with the parties the fact that there were
inconsistent decisions of the Tribunal on the issue
of whether a pet clause of
any description could have effect unless it was endorsed under
section 10.
was explained:
endorsement was necessary then the present pet clause was effective on its own
terms and the tenants had permission for
one cat, and for two cats if the
Tribunal accepted that the parties had arrived at any relevant subsequent oral
variation of the
tenancy agreement:
endorsement was required then the existing pet clause was void and there was no
contractual or statutory impediment to the
tenants having two cats.
was agreed that the Tribunal would reserve its decision until after the
A.C.T. Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
came into force on 2
February 2009 so as to provide both parties with access to the appeal structure
provided by that Act should
they wish to avail themselves of it.
Notwithstanding
the demise of the Residential Tenancies Tribunal on 2 February 2009 following
the coming into existence of the A.C.T.
Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(ACAT), regulation 48
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal (Transitional
Provisions) Regulations 2009
provides that the resolution of matters
commenced and heard under the former Residential Tenancies Tribunal are to
finalised by that
Tribunal with its former powers.
present matter is a “tenancy dispute” within the meaning of section
71H of the Act as it stood prior to the amendments
brought about by the
inception of the ACAT.
8 of the Act relevantly provides that the prescribed terms of the Schedule to
the Act are taken to form the terms of the tenancy
8(1) A residential tenancy agreement—
(a) must contain, and is taken to contain, terms to the effect of the
standard residential tenancy terms mentioned in schedule 1;
(b) if the lessor and tenant agree—may contain a fair clause for
posted people; and
(c) may contain any other term—
(i) that is consistent with the standard residential tenancy terms; or
(ii) that is inconsistent with a standard residential tenancy term if the
term has been endorsed by the tribunal under section 10.
9 of the Act provides that any term in a tenancy agreement that is inconsistent
with the prescribed terms is void to the extent
of the inconsistency:
9(1) A term of a residential tenancy agreement is void
(a) it is inconsistent with a standard residential tenancy term; and
(b) it has not been endorsed by the tribunal under section 10.
(2) A term of a residential tenancy agreement is void if it is inconsistent
with this Act (other than a standard residential tenancy
10 provides for the endorsement by the Tribunal of terms in an tenancy agreement
that would otherwise by void by reason of
sections 8 and 9:
10(1) The parties to a residential tenancy agreement may apply in
writing to the tribunal for endorsement of a term of the agreement
inconsistent term
) that is inconsistent with a standard residential
tenancy term.
(2) If the parties apply for endorsement of the inconsistent term, the
tribunal must do 1 of the following:
(a) endorse the inconsistent term;
(b) substitute the equivalent standard residential tenancy term for the
inconsistent term.
(3) In making a decision under subsection (2), the tribunal must
(a) the criteria determined under subsection (6); and
(b) whether the inclusion of the inconsistent term in the residential
tenancy agreement was obtained by fraud or undue influence.
(4) The tribunal must not endorse a term that is inconsistent with this Act
(other than a standard residential tenancy term).
(5) The tribunal must not endorse a term mentioned in
section 15 (5) in relation to a tenant unless satisfied that the
tenant owes
an amount to the commissioner for housing.
(6) The Minister may determine criteria for subsection (3) (a).
(7) A determination is a disallowable instrument.
far as the Tribunal is aware there are no criteria determined by the Minister
under section 10(6).
terms 52 and 53 of the Schedule to the Act, which form the standard terms of the
tenancy agreement, are the provision traditionally
relied upon to justify the
position that a tenant is entitled to keep such pets as they wish unless an
anti-pet clause is endorsed
by the Tribunal:
52. The lessor shall not cause or permit any interference with the
reasonable peace, comfort or privacy of the tenant in the use by
the tenant of
the premises.
Unless otherwise agreed in writing
, the tenant shall have
exclusive possession of the premises, as described in the Agreement, from the
date of commencement of the
Tenancy Agreement provided for in the Agreement.
Scorgie v Chew
[2007] ACTRTT 1
the presently constituted Tribunal made
the following observations about pet clauses:
37. This issue raises for consideration whether a residential
tenancy agreement can preclude pets from the premises or whether a special
endorsement is required for such clauses. Further there is the issue of the
effect of the order of the previously constituted Tribunal
which allowed only
the existing dog.
38. The argument in favour of the right to have pets proceeds from the
general right of a tenant to the exclusive right of occupancy
of the premise
pursuant to prescribed term 53 of the Act and the right to quiet enjoyment of
the premises pursuant to prescribed
term 52 of the Act. It is said that these
provisions confer on the tenant the right to use the premises as a home and that
to have a dog is an incident of the right to treat the premises as a
39. But prescribed term 53 does not provide an unqualified right to exclusive
possession of the premises. The right is subject to
any qualification to that
agreed by the parties and recorded in writing
. Prescribed term 52
then only guarantees a tenants uninterrupted right to such use of the premises
as the tenancy agreement confers.
Prima facie it is not obvious why the right of
possession and use of the premises by the tenant could not be expressly
in a residential tenancy agreement to preclude pets.
40.Section 10 only requires endorsement of terms of a residential tenancy
agreement which are inconsistent with a prescribed term.
But if prescribed term
53 permits the pet exclusion clause then such a clause is not inconsistent with
a prescribed term and no endorsement
is required pursuant to section 10.
41. Damage done by pets is a common cause of complaint in residential tenancy
matters. If it becomes necessary to replace carpets
and lawns and the like due
to pet damage, the damage is likely to exceed any bond lodged by the tenant. For
this reason the presently
constituted Tribunal cannot see why as a matter of law
or public policy a landlord should not be able to impose a pet exclusion clause
as a condition of accepting any particular tenant.
42. Nevertheless the fact is that the previously constituted Tribunal did
amend the pet clause in the lease and specifically purported
to do so as an
endorsement pursuant to section 10. That decision was not the subject of any
appeal and is thus an operative decision.
43. The substituted pet clause, fairly read, did not permit anything more
than the existing dog to remain at the premises. The necessary
implication of
the manner in which that order is framed is that the tenant did not have the
right to bring other dogs to the premises.
This proposition has been directly
and strongly put by the landlord in their submissions and the tenant has not
mounted any significant
defence to this allegation.
44. The Tribunal has sympathy with the landlords position. The tenant did not
disclose the existing dog when she entered a lease with
the pet exclusion clause
as a special condition. After then having the benefit of decision of the
Tribunal to allow her to keep her
existing dog, the tenant then deliberate
obtained two further dogs and brought them to the premises without any
consultation with
the landlords.
45. The Tribunal takes the view that this conduct on the tenant's part was a
breach of the amended term of the lease and otherwise
reflects poorly on her
46. But the presence of the dogs at the premises does not of itself give rise
to any claim for damage from the landlord (other than
possible nominal damages).
It is still necessary to show that the dogs actually caused damage to the
carpets, yard and sprinklers
as alleged by the landlords. Each of these issues
are addressed below.
essential rationale in
was that the extent of use of the premises
conferred by the tenancy agreement is primarily governed by prescribed term 53,
is expressly said to be subject to any agreement in writing between the
parties. The special pet clause in the present tenancy agreement
agreement in writing. On this assumption, the special pet clause cannot be
inconsistent with prescribed term 53 and so
cannot offend sections 8-9 and
thereby require endorsement under section 10.
Prescribed term 52 only protects the tenants against interferences with their
such use of the premises as they have by reason of
prescribed term 53.
Prescribed term 52 is not a separate source of rights concerning the scope of
use of the premises by the tenants.
presently constituted Tribunal cannot see why, as a matter of simple statutory
construction, the special pet clause does not have
force and effect according to
its own terms under prescribed term 53 without the need for endorsement.
Nevertheless it is the case
that differently constituted Tribunals have differed
in their view on this issue, and it is the present practice of the Tribunal
endorse all pet clauses. In fact the Tribunal receives and endorses dozens of
such clause each week at considerable cost to the
administration, and no doubt at considerable cost to the time of real estate
agents and the well being of trees.
the presently constituted Tribunal touched upon the rationale for
allowing landlords to prohibit pets without the need for endorsements.
pointed out that pets can, and in fact often do, cause considerable damage both
inside houses and in the yards. This damage
can go well beyond any bond lodged
by the tenant and thus leave the landlord exposed to the vicissitudes of debt
recovery against
recalcitrants tenants in these circumstances.
the experience of the presently constituted Tribunal of some 13 years of hearing
these disputes in NSW and the ACT, it is simply
not the case that all pet owners
are responsible in the manner in which they control their pet’s propensity
to cause damage.
It is however unfortunately common that vacating tenants take
umbrage at the suggestion by the landlord that the smells in the carpets
curtains, the stains and fleas in the carpets, the scratches on the woodwork and
gauzes, the chewed irrigation tubes, the holes
in the lawns and the faeces and
often adorns the yard should be attended to by the tenant at their own cost,
which can be quite large
and sometimes beyond the economic capacity of the
tenant to pay.
is entirely understandable to the present Tribunal why a landlord would choose
not to expose themselves to this scenario, more
often than not with an
unsatisfactory outcome.
problem in the present case however arises from the fact of an inconsistent
position adopted within the Tribunal. Hitherto the
resolution of this
inconsistency lay with the Supreme Court but the cost of any party appealing to
the Supreme Court on the point
was prohibitive and so the inconsistency issue
remained unresolved. Under the ACAT structure that took effect on 2 February
there is now an internal appellate structure in which this matter can
hopefully be resolved.
for the existence of the new internal and hopefully accessible appellate
structure in the ACAT the present Tribunal would probably
have applied the
comity principle and adopted the prevailing norm of the Tribunal of requiring
all pet clauses to be endorsed. But
given the existence of the internal and
accessible appellate structure within ACAT the present Tribunal proposes to
adopt its own
view of the matter as per
and leave the parties to
exercise whatever appellate rights they so choose.
Accordingly
the Tribunal is of the view that the special pet clause is valid without the
need for endorsement and the tenants are
limited to one cat under that
Tribunal notes the assertion by the tenants they were offered a deal by the
landlord’s agent that they could keep two cats
if they entered a further
two year fixed term lease. The landlords agent denied this. The Tribunal has not
seen any evidence that
the tenants have in fact acted any such offer and entered
a further two year lease, and given the consistent opposition by the landlord
the presence of the two cats, it seems unlikely that any such offer was
February 2009
RTF format (122 KB)
Signed PDF/A format