Inquest into the death of Peter Hanisch [2025] ACTCD 2 (9 April 2025)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Matter Title:
Inquest into the death of Peter Hanisch
[2025] ACTCD 2
Decision Date:
Coroner Archer
[80] – [81], [88] – [92]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– Coronial proceedings after death from aortic
dissection – Misreading of Computed Tomography (CT) – Failure to
identify error by treating clinicians and radiologist – Reasonable
prospects of saving life if aortic dissection promptly treated
safety issue – Processes for reviewing reports of CT scans.
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
File Number:
CD 255 of 2021
CORONER ARCHER:
22 August 2021, Mr Peter Hanisch died at the Calvary Hospital (as it was then
known). I will, with respect, refer to him as Peter.
He was 69 years old at the
time of his death.
was at home with his wife Julia Evans on the morning of 19 August 2021. They
were both in COVID quarantine at the time. He collapsed
after a sudden onset of
chest discomfort. An ambulance was called, and he was transported to the (then)
Calvary Hospital (‘Calvary’).
The cause of his collapse was not
immediately apparent. His differential diagnosis was stroke, pulmonary embolism
and aortic dissection.
A Computed Tomography (‘CT’) Angiogram was
conducted on the date of his admission, which showed the presence of a thoracic
aortic aneurysm and a dilated aortic root. The radiologist, in error, did not
identify when reporting on the CT scan that the aortic
aneurysm had in fact
dissected. The error was not subsequently identified in circumstances that are
addressed below.
went into atrial fibrillation in the early morning of 21 August 2021. A Medical
Emergency Team (‘MET’) call was
made, his condition was stabilised,
and he was monitored and treated in the ward. At around 1728 hours on 22 August
2021, Peter was
found unresponsive in his bed. He was last seen by treating
staff at about 1500 hours. A MET call was made. Despite resuscitation
he was not able to be revived. He was declared deceased at 1745 hours.
course of Peter’s treatment is analysed in detail below.
autopsy established that the cause of Peter’s death was thoracic aortic
aneurysm with dissection. Findings are made by me
(below) as to the cause of
Peter’s death in those terms.
find that, if there had been timely treatment of the aortic dissection, there
were very reasonable prosects of saving Peter’s
matter of public safety arises from my investigation. I recommend that the
Canberra Health Service (CHS) develop and publish guidance
as to peer review
systems and procedures for imaging services provided within CHS and by private
providers providing such services
on behalf of CHS.
death was reported to the Coroner by Calvary as the cause of his death was
unclear. As no medical certificate as to
the cause of death had been issued, the
Coroner assumed jurisdiction to investigate the death pursuant to s 13(1)(e) of
Coroners Act 1997
(‘the Act’).
Required Findings
assumed jurisdiction, the Coroner was required to hold an inquest (in the ACT,
this is synonymous with conducting an investigation)
into the manner and cause
of Peter’s death and make the findings required by s 52 of the Act. That
section of the Act relevantly
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find,
if possible—
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the person has
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
(i) state whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection with
the inquest or inquiry; and
(ii) if a matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the matter
Peter Hanisch
died at the age of 69. He was a loving and supportive husband to Julia Evans and
a proud father to his three children. Peter
was a passionate and dedicated
teacher with a 36-year career in science and mathematics. He was highly regarded
by his colleagues
and students for his passion for education and his ability to
inspire others. After retiring from full-time teaching in 2017, Peter
committed to fostering a love for science and mathematics through relief
teaching and private tutoring.
the time of his passing, Peter and Julia were planning their retirement.
death occurred during the COVID pandemic. COVID restrictions in place at the
time at Calvary meant that during his admission,
visitors were not permitted. He
died without his family having seen him since he was transported from the family
Aortic Dissections – Background
aortic dissection is a relatively rare, but often fatal, condition. Aortic
dissections occur most commonly in men over the age
of 60. Dissections are
categorised broadly into two types – Stanford type A and Stanford type B.
The former (present in Peter’s
case) involves the ascending aorta. They
are the most common and usually the more serious dissections. Type B dissections
the descending aorta.
dissection usually happens as a result of a tear in the inner wall of the
aorta – the major artery that runs from the heart
to the rest of the
body. Such a tear allows blood to force its way between the inner and middle
walls of the aorta, causing them
to dissect. This can cause the aorta to
rupture, causing severe blood loss and
. The rupture can be
catastrophic or happen over a period of time. In Peter’s case, the rupture
was progressive and occurred
over several days.
are a number of recognised causes of aortic dissection, including hypertension
(the most common risk factor), atherosclerosis,
aortic aneurysms (weakened and
bulging artery), genetic conditions and an aortic valve defect (bicuspid aortic
valve). Aortic dissection
is a life-threatening medical emergency. Early
diagnosis and treatment are important to maximise the patient’s chance of
The method of repair involves either open heart surgery or
endovascular surgery (using a catheter). Each process involves the insertion
grafts into the affected area of the artery. In some cases, a replacement of a
damaged aortic valve may be necessary.
symptoms of the condition
(a) A sudden and severe chest pain;
(b) Pain in the stomach;
(c) Shortness of breath;
(d) Fainting or dizziness;
(e) Low blood pressure;
(f) Diastolic heart murmur or muffled heart sounds;
(g) Rapid weak pulse;
(h) Heavy sweating;
(i) Confusion;
(j) Loss of vision; and
(k) Stroke-like symptoms, including weakness or paralysis on one side of
the body or difficulty talking.
tomography (‘CT’) is considered to be in the first line of
diagnostic processes in cases of suspected aortic
dissection. It allows
production of detailed images of the aorta, showing pathology typically
associated with dissection.
prognosis associated with the condition depends on a range of factors, including
where the dissection is, its size, pathologies
concerning the general integrity
of the aortic wall and the timing of any surgical intervention. Acute dissection
is associated with
high morbidity and mortality, particularly when diagnosis and
treatment are delayed, although in recent years, outcomes have improved.
recently updated study has described prognosis for type A dissections in these
Stanford type A dissections
Mortality without treatment
fatal complications, such as cardiac tamponade, aortic
rupture, myocardial
infarction, and stroke. Without intervention, the mortality rate increases by 1%
to 2% per hour within the first
24 to 48 hours, reaching nearly 50% by the end
of the first week.
Surgical mortality
With prompt surgical repair, the in-hospital mortality rate for type A
dissections is around 15% to 30%, depending on factors such
as patient age,
presence of comorbidities, and intraoperative complications. Despite successful
surgical intervention, long-term
mortality remains high due to risks of
recurrence, progressive aortic disease, and associated complications.
Long-term outcomes
The 5-year survival rate after surgical repair is approximately 70% to 80%,
while the 10-year survival rate decreases to around 50%
to 60%. Late mortality
is often due to complications such as aortic aneurysms, re-dissection, and
cardiovascular events.
The Course of the Inquest
inquest was originally allocated to Coroner Louise Taylor (as she then was).
Coroner Taylor’s direction, an autopsy was undertaken by Professor Johan
Duflou, a senior forensic pathologist. His report,
dated 1 October 2021,
indicated that the cause of Peter’s death was an ascending thoracic aorta
dissection. Blood was found
in the pericardial sac, around the coronary arteries
and down into the abdominal aorta. Microscopic examination confirmed that it
likely a dissection had occurred some days before death and, according to
Professor Duflou, likely around the time of the clinical
presentation at
Calvary. Professor Duflou identified the presence of an aneurysm of the thoracic
aorta, and that there were changes
‘consistent with hypertension and
coronary artery atherosclerosis’. There was no indication that the
administration of
an AstraZeneca vaccine on 26 July 2021 caused or contributed
to Peter’s death.
a subsequent email to the Court, Professor Duflou provided an elaboration of his
From both the autopsy findings and clinical information as per medical records,
it appears highly likely to me that the deceased
had an initial dissection in
the days leading up to death, and that this occurred around the time preceding
his admission to hospital.
This has not resulted in rupture through into the
pericardial sac at this time – I say this because such rupture would be
identifiable on CT angiogram, and because the tissue reaction identified
at autopsy involving the pericardium did not give any indication
of healing (or
organisation). On the other hand, such healing was evident and in keeping with
the timing of symptoms within the aorta
itself. The inference which I believe
can be made is that the deceased had an initial dissection in the time preceding
to hospital, and then while in hospital and likely in the time
preceding his sudden collapse and cardiorespiratory arrest in the
afternoon of
22 August he had a further dissection which resulted in blood now entering the
pericardial sac preventing the heart
form pumping. I note there was an apparent
deterioration also in the early hours of 21 August – whether this was an
in the extent of dissection at that time is unable to be determined.
Expert Radiological Review
CT scans of 19 August 2021 (‘the CT scans’) were referred to a
radiologist, Dr Mohamed Nasreddine,
for review. No other supporting material was provided to him and no indication
given of any of the surrounding circumstances or the
post-mortem results. Dr
Nasreddine was asked to report on what he could see on the scans and what should
have followed in the clinical
setting if the findings he made had been reported
on 19 August 2021. Dr Nasreddine summarised his findings as to the observable
in these terms:
(a) Intramural haematoma of the thoracic aortic and likely abdominal aortic
(b) Mediastinal fat stranding in keeping with interspersed haematoma.
(c) Presumed intimal defect involving the posterior wall of the ascending aorta.
This most likely reflects the site of origin of
(d) Aneurysmal dilatation of the ascending aorta with root dilatation.
(e) Extension of intramural haematoma into the origin of the extracranial
vessels and possibly right coronary artery.
effect of Dr Nasreddine’s report was that the dissection could be seen on
Nasreddine went on to say that ‘in the clinical setting, the above imaging
findings when noted would prompt the radiologist
to contact the treating ED
doctor or treating team (depending on patient admission status/location at time
of diagnosis).’
respect of practical issues concerning the process of reading the scans, Dr
Nasreddine noted that all medical imaging studies ideally
interpreted:
(a) On the basis of the clinical presentation and pre-test probability of a
particular differential diagnosis;
(b) With optimised imaging protocols and parameters. The post contrast aortogram
is optimally timed. However, I note that the post
contrast CT study is not
cardiac gated which introduces motion artefact and resultant blurring of the
image, particularly at the
ascending and arch of the aorta. A cardiac gated CT
study would improve diagnostic accuracy and confidence of the imaging findings.
Not all CT scanners are equipped with cardiac gating functionality;
(c) On appropriate:
conditions (dimmable lights)
platform (RIS-PACS, advanced imaging software)
(d) With minimal interruptions, if any;
(e) With adequate resourcing;
(f) With appropriate study review time allocation.
Nasreddine was subsequently asked to repeat the reading of the scans but briefed
with relevant Calvary records and Professor Duflou’s
post-mortem report.
He was asked if the additional material changed the opinion he had previously
expressed. He confirmed his opinion
remain unchanged.
Further Investigation
case was amongst a significant collection of older inquests that were handed to
me when I became the ‘dedicated Coroner’
in March of 2022.
request was made of Calvary to provide information regarding Peter’s
clinical management after his admission. A statement
dated 28 July 2022 was
received from Dr TA, a consultant neurologist who was Peter’s admitting
neurologist.
letter dated 5 December 2022, a solicitor provided a response on behalf of the
radiologist who reported on the scans, Dr CD. On
the radiologist’s behalf,
it was conceded that the scans had been misread and that ‘the imaging does
show a mural thrombus
causing a thickened aortic wall, which he would usually
report as a likely dissection’. An apology was made on his behalf,
was noted that this was the only instance to the radiologist’s knowledge
where he had ‘failed to report a significant
finding apparent on the
films’, having reported many thousands of images over 26 years of doing
such work. His view was that
the compromise in the clarity of the images caused
by the lack of cardiac gating in this instance did not materially impact on the
reporting process – the correct diagnosis ’was evident on the
non-gated images’.
arriving at the findings a Coroner is required to make, I have a discretion as
to whether to hold a hearing (s 34 of the Act).
I can dispense with a hearing in
the circumstances and according to the processes set out in s 34A of the
34A Decision not to conduct hearing
(1) A coroner may decide not to conduct a
hearing into a death if, after consideration of information given to a coroner
to the death of a person, the coroner is satisfied that—
(a) the manner and cause of death are sufficiently disclosed; and
(b) a hearing is unnecessary.
(2) A coroner must not dispense with a hearing into a death of a person, if
the coroner has reasonable grounds for believing the death
in care or death
in custody.
(3) A coroner who decides not to conduct
a hearing into a death must give the Chief Coroner and a member of the
deceased's immediate
family written notice of the decision, including the
grounds for the decision.
family was formally notified of my decision not to conduct a hearing when my
provisional findings were sent to them.
Ms Evans confirmed that in her view a
hearing was not required. The ACT Government Solicitor (‘ACTGS’)
acting on behalf
of Calvary Health Care and the Territory indicated that their
clients agreed a hearing was unnecessary. Similar responses were received
solicitors acting for Dr CD and ACT X-Rays Pty Ltd (‘ACT X-Ray
Services’).
Provisional Findings and the Section 55 Process
17 December 2024, provisional findings were sent to the ACTGS, Ms Evans, and the
solicitors acting for Dr CD and ACT X-Ray Services.
Those findings contained a
comment adverse to a person identifiable from my proposed findings, namely Dr
CD. On 18 December 2024,
a solicitor acting for Dr CD indicated he did not wish
to provide any response to the s 55 notice. By letter dated 17 January 2025
ACTGS provided a response on behalf of the Territory. No submission was made by
ACTGS in respect of the error made by Dr CD.
On 20 January 2025, ACT X-Ray
Services advised it would not make any submission in relation to the proposed
findings. Ms Evans made
submissions as to a number of issues.
The Evidence
Part 1 – Available Information
making the findings below, I have relied on the following material obtained
during the investigation process:
(a) Medical records from Calvary of the admission, starting 19 August 2021;
(b) Police coronial report, dated 31 August 2021;
(c) ACT Ambulance Service records;
(d) Autopsy report, dated 1 October 2021 (subsequently updated to correct
typographical errors), and subsequent email communication
with Professor
(e) Letter from Ms Julia Evans, dated 5 October 2021;
(f) “Blind” report from Dr Nasreddine, dated 16 November 2021;
(g) Further report from Dr Nasreddine, dated 4 April 2022;
(h) Letter from Dr TA, consultant neurologist, dated 28 July 2022;
(i) Letter from the Chair of the Calvary Hospital Clinical Review Committee,
dated 17 November 2022;
(j) Letter from legal firm on behalf of Dr CD, dated 5 December 2022;
(k) Letter from ACTGS, dated 28 February 2024;
(l) Statement of Dr CD, dated 31 July 2024;
(m) Letter from ACTGS, dated 9 December 2024;
(n) Letter from ACTGS, dated 14 March 2025; and
(o) Email correspondence from Ms Julia Evans, variously dated.
Part 2 – Chronology of Events
health was generally good, although, relevantly, there was a history of
hypertension and hyperlipidaemia (high cholesterol).
Both conditions were
medicated, although there was some evidence of non-compliance with prescription
and his wife Julia were staying at home on Thursday 19 August 2021. Peter had
been deemed a ‘close contact’ for
COVID contact-tracing purposes
because of a COVID issue at the Lyneham High School, where he taught. Julia was
a secondary contact.
Peter had been vaccinated and had tested negative to COVID.
He had been administered his second dose of AstraZeneca vaccine on 26
without any obvious adverse reaction.
collapsed shortly before 1014 hours. A 000 call was made at 1014 hours. On
arrival at his home, a history was taken by the paramedics.
Peter stated that
his legs just ‘gave out’. He was shaking. He was given a Glasgow
Coma Scale rating of 15.
complained of left sided weakness, vague chest discomfort and lower back pain.
An intravenous sedative was given. Peter was transported
to Calvary, as it was
the nearest public hospital.
presented at the Emergency Department at Calvary at 1143 hours.
follows is an attempt to construct an outline of Peter’s care, noting that
the medical notes were often illegible and untimed.
was triaged at 1143 hours. Notes made by a doctor at 1148 hours indicated that
the differential diagnosis was ‘? Dissection’,
and of neurological
causation (post AstraZeneca neurological complications or transverse
were specified as possibly
explaining the observed pathology). Scans were ordered, including a CT
Peter was admitted to the ward, he remained (until his death) in COVID
isolation. As noted, that meant, apart from anything else,
that his wife and
family were unable to visit him.
chest x-ray was ordered at 1246 hours and reported at 1312 hours by Dr CD, a
radiologist. Peter’s lungs and pleural spaces
were said to be clear. His
heart was said to be enlarged and there was ‘unfolding of the
CT angiogram of the chest and abdomen was ordered at 1334 hours and undertaken
at 1448 hours. The results were reported by Dr CD
at approximately 1527 hours.
The full text of the relevant part of the report reads:
The heart is enlarged. There is prominent coronary artery calcification. There
is little pericardial calcification. No pericardial
effusion is seen. There is
scattered atheroma in the aorta. There is dilatation of the aortic root up to
53mm in diameter. The ascending
aorta measures up to 44mm in diameter. The
descending aorta measures up to 35mm in diameter. No dilatation of the abdominal
is seen. No dissection is seen. Apart from minor atheroma the aortic
branches appear normal.
note made by a senior medical registrar at 1600 hours was that the CT showed,
’no dissection’ indicating that the report
of Dr CD had been read.
The initial impression reflected in the same note was that there may have been
spinal cord pathology. The
upward movement in the D-dimer test result was noted
as possibly indicating coagulation
perhaps related to an
AstraZeneca reaction.
matter was referred for neurological review, which occurred soon after at 1620
hours. The notes of that review confirmed the outcome
of the scans (‘no
dissection’). They also indicate that the scans were discussed with the
radiologist Dr CD. The poorly
written and difficult-to-decipher note in the
treatment records was made in these terms:
d/w Dr CD (radiologist) re CT angiography in view of elevated d dimer –
will r/v CTPA & amend report.
that conversation, the CT scan report was amended at 1635 hours in these terms:
The pulmonary arteries enhance normally. No emboli are seen.
CD was asked to provide his recollection of that conversation and of his review.
In a statement dated 31 July 2024, he indicated:
do not have a clear independent recollection of the conversation with the
hospital clinician recorded at 1620 hours on 19 August
2021 in Mr Hanisch's
clinical notes at Calvary Public Hospital.
read that clinical entry, and the addendum to the CT Angiogram that I recorded
at 1635 hours on 19 August 2021, I believe that
I was asked by the clinician to
review the images of the CT Angiogram to check Mr Hanisch's pulmonary arteries,
in light of Mr Hanisch's
elevated D‘dimer level.
did so and observed no abnormality. I recorded the addendum to the CT Angiogram
report which stated 'The pulmonary arteries enhance
normally. No emboli are
I am certain about is that the hospital clinician did not ask me to review the
CT Angiogram images to re-check Mr Hanisch's aorta,
nor did any hospital staff
do so at any time after I provided my initial report on the CT Angiogram.
9 December 2024, the Court received correspondence from ACTGS indicating that
they had received instructions from Dr BD as to that
conversation. The relevant
part of that response is extracted in full:
Context or detail regarding the conversation between Dr CD and a neurology
clinician (as per clinical records provided)
The handwritten clinical note recorded at 1620 on 19 August 2021
was made by Dr BD under the heading “Neurology AT BD”,
meaning Advanced Trainee (in neurology). At the time of making the note and
during Mr Hanisch’s admission to Calvary
Public Hospital (Calvary), Dr BD
was employed by Canberra Health Services and seconded to Calvary Health Care.
Dr BD continues to work in neurology but has moved to NSW and is no longer
employed by Canberra Health Services. Dr BD has confirmed
and provides the
following information and understands the responses below will be provided to
the Coroner:
BD did not independently recall the details of the conversation she had with Dr
CD. However, she was reminded that she had spoken
with him on reviewing the note
the time Dr BD spoke with Dr CD, Dr CD’s report on the chest and abdomen
angiography was available in Mr Hanisch’s
clinical records;
BD recalls the report did not confirm the presence of an aortic dissection,
because if it had, the neurology team would not have
been contacted or involved
in Mr Hanisch’s care;
handwritten progress note reads “d/w (discussed with) Dr CD (radiologist)
re. (regarding) the CT angiography in view of
elevated d-dimer. Will review CTPA
and amend report”.
BD recalls walking to Dr CD’s office but does not now recall the specific
details of the conversation she had with him;
reviewed the notes she made, Dr BD recalls that she suggested Dr CD re-review
the CT-angiogram specifically to look at the
pulmonary arteries due to Mr
Hanisch’s elevated D-dimers;
and Dr TA considered that Mr Hanisch may have had a pulmonary embolus because he
complained of chest pain, and they also considered
he may have had an embolus
due to his elevated D-dimer;
elevated D-dimer is a non-specific finding;
Hanisch’s admission and the conversation with Dr CD occurred in the
context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Dr BD recalls there
were a lot of cases in
which vaccine related issues were considered or questioned. She recalls that Mr
Hanisch had had an Astra-Zeneca
vaccination not a long time before his
presentation to Calvary;
recalls that the suggested review of the angiogram was an opportunity to
consider or comment on Mr Hanisch’s other blood
vessels, specifically the
pulmonary arteries;
Dr BD understands it was specifically an aorta scan due to the initial
presentation and suspected diagnoses (of an aortic dissection),
she remembers
that she discussed with Dr CD whether he could also look at lung blood vessels
reference in the note to the CTPA refers to this request as a CTPA is a
pulmonary angiogram;
Dr BD’s notes states “will r/v (
) CTPA & amend
report” she cannot recall whether Dr CD did say that he was going to amend
the report or whether the reference
is intended to mean that he will review the
CTPA and amend the report as required.
stated plan after that consultation and further report was to admit Peter to
‘neurology’ to do a CT of the brain,
head and neck and an MRI of the
spine. That CT was done at 1805 hours on 19 August 2021. No pathology was
reported, except for some
minor degenerative changes to the intervertebral disc
joints. The report was signed by a radiologist other than Dr CD. No other
was performed before his death.
Thereafter,
the focus of those clinicians who reviewed Peter erred towards a neurological
explanation of Peter’s history and
symptoms (stroke or ‘spinal
infarct’, ‘transverse myelitis’ were expressions used in the
notes). Serial electrocardiograms
(‘ECG’) were performed without
evident abnormality of the heart.
condition appeared to be generally stable. He complained of a sharper chest pain
at around 1300 hours on Friday 20 August
2021. An ECG suggested atrial
fibrillation. Both symptoms were in fact consistent with an aortic dissection.
Later that evening (the
notes are untimed), a spike in body temperature was
noted. An ECG performed at around that time showed ‘nil acute ischaemic
changes’. Sometime after 1800 hours (the note is again untimed),
Peter’s troponin levels had risen from 6 to
His chest pain was reported to
have responded to Endone and Paracetamol. Later again that evening (at a time
unknown), Peter’s
troponin levels had increased to 26. His
cardiorespiratory rate had also increased.
0220 hours on Saturday 21 August 2021, a MET call was made following an episode
of rapid atrial fibrillation. Again, that symptom
was consistent with the aortic
dissection that had apparently been excluded by the CT. Peter was stabilised on
a dose of metoprolol.
Blood screens
were ordered. The recorded impression was ‘?
Haemolysis’
or underlying
malignancy. Subsequently, his heart rate and blood pressure were
stabilised.
was reviewed at 1215 hours on 21 August 2021 by the neurology team. The moderate
rise in troponin was noted. He was still febrile.
His C-reactive protein
(‘CRP’) was
The impression was of
worsening thrombocytopaenia.
Sepsis was considered. The plan was to treat the suspected infection (with IV
gentamycin) and administer an anticoagulant (clexane)
to address stroke risks
associated with the atrial fibrillation. It was noted that if the troponin
levels increased further, then
cardiology review and admission to the cardiac
unit might be required (including a further ECG on Monday).
reviews that occurred for the remainder of the day on 21 August 2021 painted a
similar picture. His MEWS score
at 1600 hours was “0” indicating a lower risk of deterioration. He
was ambulant and self-caring, and his sleeping was
not compromised. COVID
isolation procedures remained in place. A phone call was made by pathology to
the ward at about 1730 hours
indicating his troponin level had increased to 47.
The resident medical officer (‘RMO’) was informed. His clinical
was discussed between nursing staff and the RMO at around 2100 hours.
further changes were noted during the day on Sunday 22 August 2021. Nursing
notes at 0340 hours indicated that Peter made no complaint
of chest pain. He was
described as ambulant and self-caring.
last (near) contemporaneous nursing note was made at around 1435 hours on 22
August 2021. A sample of blood was collected. Some
difficulty was experienced in
the process of collection and concerns were expressed in the notes as to whether
pathology would want
the process of collection repeated. The pathology report
for Peter records this request time as 1250 hours. Troponin was not added
pathology request.
was reviewed by Dr TA sometime that afternoon. The exact time of the review is
not recorded in the notes. The notes of that review
appear after the nursing
note just referred to [55]. It was suggested in correspondence sent by ACTGS on
14 March 2025 (‘the
14 March 2025 letter’) that this review occurred
at around 1352 hours when Dr TA is recorded as first accessing the pathology
results relevant to the request made at 1250 hours. The pathology results had
been reported at 1349 hours. The differential diagnosis
at this time was of
possible sepsis of unknown origin, spinal pathology or stroke
Atrial fibrillation was
noted, as was Peter’s complaint of ongoing back pain since admission. The
plan was to continue fluids,
withhold the antibiotics, chase blood cultures and
seek out cardiology review, an ECG and an MRI of the spine. There is nothing to
indicate in those notes that Peter’s condition had changed significantly
or that he was at risk of imminent collapse.
notes written in retrospect at 2100 hours on 22 August 2021 indicated that the
shift handover occurred at about 1320 hours.
Peter was described as alert and
orientated. He was engaging with medical staff about issues concerning his care,
including arranging
for a visit by the physiotherapist. During the afternoon, he
activated the nurse call button at one stage because the IV machine
was making a
noise. He complained of leg pain and was wanting the MRI brought forward, and
wanted to see a physiotherapist. The pathology
results relevant to the request
made at 1250 hours were accessed again by Dr TA at 1601 hours. It was put in the
14 March 2025 letter
that the reason for accessing the results was ‘to
give further consideration to Mr Hanisch’s diagnosis’. No note
appears in respect of that consideration.
was discovered unconscious at 1720
Peter was not able to be
revived. He was declared deceased at 1745 hours.
notes of the Intensive Care Unit registrar who attended on the MET call
considered the possible cause of death. He noted that
Peter ‘was at risk
of dissection’, given the thoracic aneurysm and dilated aortic root.
However, other causes were considered
possible, including acute myocardial
infarction, pulmonary embolism or other vascular event. The notes raised
pulmonary embolism
and ‘type A dissection’ as possible causes of his
death. Dr TA attended the ward after Peter’s passing and requested
troponin be added post-mortem to the request made at 1250 hours. The notes
record that the troponin result was reported to him
at 1924 (after Peter’s
death). The level was 145ng/L.
the uncertainty as to the cause of Peter’s death, the matter was referred
to the Coroner.
Part 3 – Family Input into Care
COVID restrictions prevented Peter’s family from seeing him during his
admission, it was difficult for the family (particularly
Julia) to obtain a
clear picture of the care Peter was receiving and the progress of diagnostic
processes. Their source of information
was largely from Peter himself, although
Julia was able to speak to two doctors and a ward nurse to obtain some
impression of what
was occurring. The symptomatology described by Peter
suggested to the family that his underlying condition was cardiac-related and
that that should have been the focus of diagnostic processes. Julia was told
that the delay (to Monday 23 August 2021) in performing
was due to COVID concerns.
concerns raised by Peter’s family after his death, in particular their
belief that opportunities to save Peter’s life
had been lost, are
addressed below.
Part 4 – Clinical Review after Death
internal review was conducted by Calvary after Peter’s death. At the time
of that review, the incorrect reading of the CT
scan was not known. The cause of
death was recorded as ‘unknown’. Once Dr Nasreddine’s reports
were received, the
Emergency Department Mortality & Morbidity Committee
reported that whilst aortic dissection was one of the possible diagnoses
considered, that diagnosis was ruled out in light of the CT scan. The Committee
went on to say that the changes ‘on the
CT scan itself are quite subtle
and only detectable by a radiologist. There was nothing that would have prompted
the clinicians in
the Emergency Department to question the initial
Part 5 – Response to Questions Asked by the
was provided the autopsy report on 10 May 2022 and the reports of Dr Nasreddine
on 15 June 2022. By letter dated 6 July 2022,
the General Manager of Calvary
indicated that the Acting Director of Neurology at Calvary and Dr TA
(Peter’s admitting neurologist),
had been asked to reply to the
Court’s request for information. It was noted that imaging services at
Calvary were provided
by a third-party provider, ACT X-Ray Services and that the
company had been asked for a response. ACT X-Ray Services is part of the
Canberra Imaging Group (‘CIG’).
TA’s response of 28 July 2022 was received by letter from the General
Manager of Calvary to the Coroner dated 9 August 2022.
In that letter, the
General Manager indicated that ACT X-Ray Services had not responded to her
request for information, and she invited
the Court to contact them directly. In
respect of whether there had been a review of the quality of radiology services
provided at
Calvary, it was indicated that ‘we are undertaking a review of
radiology services in the Emergency Department’. It was
indicated that the
review was likely to be concluding ‘in the coming months and Calvary will
provide the report to the Coroner
at the earliest possibility’. The report
was never provided.
report was received from the Acting Director of Neurology at Calvary.
letter dated 5 December 2022, a law firm wrote to the Court to indicate that
they acted for CIG (i.e. ACT X-Ray Services) and Dr
CD (the radiologist). It was
said that the response provided was of CIG, but it was ‘also informed by
instructions from Dr
The Response of Dr TA
TA responded to the questions that had been to him put by the Court. Relevantly,
he indicated that:
(a) Sometimes verbal briefings were provided by radiologists to treating
clinicians prior to the production of a radiology report.
(b) Although chest pain symptoms continued after the report of the scans was
received, they fluctuated over the course of the admission
and the lower limb
pathology (‘although not well documented’) was ‘thought to
represent ischaemic
myelopathy’.
(c) The actual images were not reviewed again ‘as the validity of the
report was not questioned’.
(d) An echocardiogram was planned for Monday 23 August 2021. This may have aided
the detection of the dissection.
(e) Calvary could not provide ‘telemetric
monitoring’
outside the
coronary care unit. During COVID, access to those beds was rare.
(f) A small troponin increase would not necessarily trigger coronary unit
(g) Neurologists are not usually familiar with interpretation of CT scans of the
thorax and abdomen.
The Response of CIG / Dr CD
following passage appeared in the response:
We are first instructed by Dr CD to make a clear statement that he has reviewed
the imaging in question and considers that the dissection
is in fact apparent on
the images. Although it is not a simple dissection which gives an appearance of
a false lumen, he agrees with
Dr Nasreddine that the imaging does show a mural
thrombus causing a thickened aortic wall, which he would usually report as a
dissection. Dr CD does not know why he did not report this appearance at
the time but suspects that the volume of work required affected
standard of reporting.
response also relevantly noted that:
(a) After arriving at work at Calvary between 0800 and 0830 hours, Dr CD would
report approximately 40 images that had accumulated
overnight and then report
continuously during the day.
(b) Briefings might be given to clinicians in several circumstances:
(i) If the findings are significant and require urgent treatment;
(i) If the radiologist requires additional information from the treating
clinician; or
(ii) If the clinician requires clarification of the radiological advice given.
response further observed that:
(c) If there are no significant findings, the report is issued without a verbal
(d) Dr CD’s practice was to discuss significant findings with the
referring doctor.
(e) Given the service he worked for had a number of different radiologists
rostered on different days, it was difficult to build
relationships with
clinicians.
(f) Some clinicians were proactive in approaching the radiologist and some were
response also addressed the question of whether reports were or should have been
subject to peer review. The following matters
were noted:
one radiologist was rostered at Calvary on any given day.
(b) The hospital’s imaging program did not allow images to be sent to
other CIG radiologists in private rooms.
(c) Although images could be sent to radiologists at TCH, there was at the time
of the response no arrangement or protocol supporting
such a referral.
to whether it was desirable that one radiologist operated alone and
independently, the response indicated that was a matter for
Calvary to comment
noted above, Dr CD did not consider that the lack of cardiac gating had
practical significance in this case. The diagnosis was
evident, although the
appearance of the dissection ‘was not that of a simple dissection’.
CD did not initially address the conversation with clinicians that did occur
after the scans were first reported. This was later
addressed in his statement
of 31 July 2024.
Part 6 – Calvary Governance
response from CIG indicated that it was their intention to take steps to prevent
such an error happening again:
Both CIG and Dr CD are committed to taking steps to avoid the error happening
again by steps such as:
and discussing the case with all radiologists working with CIG and emphasising
the need to be proactive in communications
to clinicians;
the case with the Calvary Hospital management and in particular matters such
importance of communication between the clinicians and radiologists and
increasing the amount of communication which occurs;
Encouraging
clinicians to request reviews of images if the clinical circumstances are
discordant with the imaging report;
the staffing of the imaging department, the possibility of allowing CIG
radiologists access to films taken at Calvary Hospital
and exploring the option
of a protocol with the Canberra Hospital for any situation where a second
opinion is required.
expressed intentions met a practical obstacle when, on 31 May 2023, Calvary was
taken over by the ACT Government
and is now known as the North Canberra Hospital (‘NCH’).
letter dated 11 August 2023, the Court sought advice from the Territory as to
whether the system for radiology reporting would
continue under the new
governance arrangements. A response was received from ACTGS on 28 February
We are instructed as follows:
the time of Mr Hanisch’s death, radiology reporting services including
x-ray and angiograms (but excluding MRI services)
were provided to Calvary
Public Hospital by the Canberra Imaging Group, operating under the name
“ACT X-Ray Services”.
X-Ray Services ceased providing radiology services to NCH in November 2023.
took over the provision of the radiology reporting services previously provided
by ACT X-Ray Services on an interim basis on
Monday, 13 November 2023. The terms
under which Q-Scan currently provide those reporting services to NCH are
identical to those that
were in place with ACT X-Ray Services (save for changes
Radiography
is conducted by staff employed by the hospital and Q-Scan provides the radiology
reporting services. This was also the
arrangement with ACT X-Ray Services at the
time of Mr Hanisch’s death.
x-ray and CT services are available twenty-four hours a day. A Q-Scan
radiologist is currently rostered on during business
hours at NCH each weekday
to report on imaging. NCH also utilises an offsite after-hours radiology service
provided by Everlight
Radiology. All after-hours CT and ultrasound reporting is
undertaken by Everlight Radiology offsite.
had a pre-existing relationship with Q-Scan who already provided MRI services to
Calvary prior to the transition. This arrangement
for the provision of MRI
services has continued with NCH following the transition.
Negotiations
with respect to ongoing radiology reporting service provision by Q-Scan are
continuing. It is anticipated that the new
arrangement between NCH and Q-Scan
will include a mix of on-site and tele-radiology services.
Historically,
there have been difficulties in arranging for peer and second review of imaging
and radiology reports given the sensitive
nature of the material to be shared to
enable this and the use of different information systems at different locations
(bearing in
mind, there has historically been only one radiologist on site at
Calvary or NCH).
Territory’s Digital Data and Technology Solutions division is currently
working with Q-Scan and NCH on arrangements to integrate
the Q-Scan reporting
platform with the Digital Health Record used by the Territory. Once this project
is complete, Q-Scan radiologists
will be able to send imaging to other Q-Scan
radiologists, enabling second review of images and peer review of their reports.
is currently anticipated that this system will be operational by the end of
March 2024.
Additionally,
NCH is seeking to adopt a ‘hybrid model’ of radiology services by
employing a staff radiologist, in order
to have one staff radiologist and one
Q-Scan radiologist providing services to NCH. This will also facilitate peer
review of reporting
and second review of imaging.
recruitment initiatives to date have not yielded any eligible applicants, NCH is
currently negotiating a cross-Territory staff
radiologist model with Canberra
Health Services.
part of the s 55 process and given the dynamics of governance and service
provision at NCH, an update was requested as to the implementation
of the system
for radiology services at NCH. This response was provided in the 14 March 2025
Radiology services at NCH continue to be provided pursuant to a contractual
arrangement with private provider Q-Scan. ... There is
currently one radiologist
in attendance each day at NCH. Peer review of imaging is subject to the terms of
the contractual arrangement
and specifically 2% of total cases are to be subject
to peer review on a weekly basis.
The integration will enable second review of images by off-site Q-Scan
radiologists and enhance peer review. It had previously been
anticipated that
this system would be operational by the end of March 2024, however resourcing
and configuration delays within both
Canberra Health Services (CHS) and Q-Scan
have resulted in delay. The current expected completion date is 31 March 2025.
There is a current project underway to develop a networked Medical Imaging
service within CHS. It is intended that NCH and TCH will
merge their radiology
services once NCH’s contract with Q-Scan expires or is discontinued. Once
the services are merged, radiology
services at NCH will likely be governed by
the tertiary hospital service and will align with the policies and procedures of
the radiology
department at the Canberra Hospital (TCH).
After hours radiology services at both NCH and TCH are currently provided
pursuant to a contractual arrangement with private provider
Everlight Radiology.
Historically, after hours radiology services at Calvary Public Hospital and NCH
were provided by ACT X-Ray.
However, following the expiration of this contract,
NCH effectively joined the pre-existing contractual arrangement between TCH and
Everlight. Peer review of imaging by Everlight is conducted in accordance with
Everlight’s internal governance structures.
Everlight provide monthly peer
review reports to NCH and TCH, the February 2025 report to NCH reflected peer
review of 2.8% of all
NCH radiology reports for that month.
CHS instructs that there is no formal policy/procedure in place for second
review of images and most second reviews occur if the
reporting clinician
requests a review. Radiology Services at CHS conduct a monthly peer review
meeting during which cases are reviewed
in retrospect for the predominant
purpose of providing learning opportunities and staff development.
Findings – Manner and Cause of Death
on the evidence before me, I make the following findings as to the manner and
cause of Peter’s death:
(a) The cause of the symptoms requiring Peter’s hospitalisation on 19
August 2021 was a dissection of a thoracic aortic aneurysm.
(b) The dissection that was observed at autopsy did not occur at one time. It is
likely to have started on 19 August 2021 around
the time of Peter’s
collapse at home. A complete dissection occurred close to the time of
Peter’s death on 22 August
2021, resulting in blood entering the
pericardial sac, preventing the heart from pumping.
(c) Aortic dissection was identified as a possible cause of Peter’s
symptoms at the time of his admission. Diagnostic processes
included a CT scan
with angiogram of the chest.
(d) The CT scan performed at 1448 hours on 19 August 2021 was partly but
significantly misread by the radiologist Dr CD.
(e) Dr CD correctly identified that there was an aneurysm and dilation of the
aortic root. He failed to report that the aneurysm
had dissected.
(f) The dissection was observable on the CT scan. Whilst the diagnosis was
evident, the appearance of the dissection was not that
of a simple
dissection.
(g) Consistent with the concession made by Dr CD, the imaging does show a mural
thrombus causing a thickened aortic wall, which Dr
CD would usually report as a
likely dissection.
(h) The lack of cardiac gating on the relevant CT machine had no practical
significance in this case.
(i) There was a discussion between Dr CD and treating clinicians that caused the
scans to be reviewed. The content of that discussion
is not clearly recalled.
The clinical notes and Dr BD’s proof of evidence do not suggest that Dr CD
was specifically asked
to review his conclusions as to the appearance of the
aorta, although coagulation issues were raised. A possible pulmonary embolus
raised in that conversation. The conversation did cause Dr CD to look at the
images again and to re-consider aspects of his report,
which was subsequently
amended. That re-consideration did not result in the original error being
identified.
(j) I am unable to find why the error in reading the CT scan occurred. The
explanations offered by Dr CD are noted. There was no
evidence before me
suggesting the error was indicative of an ongoing shortfall in clinical
competence.
(k) It could not have been reasonably anticipated that clinicians other than
radiologists would have been able to detect the dissection
by looking at the
scans themselves, given:
(i) that the dissection was not routine in its presentation on the scans; and
(ii) that the principal responsibility for Peter’s care lay with the
neurology team, who were not as familiar with CT scans
showing signs of
pathology in the thoracic aorta.
(l) After the scans were incorrectly reported, and over the next three days,
alternative explanations of the symptomology exhibited
by Peter were explored.
(m) That symptomology included:
(i) chest discomfort or pain (intermittently reported);
(ii) a sore back (intermittently reported);
(iii) elevated temperature (from the evening of 20 August 2021);
(iv) atrial fibrillation (from 21 August 2021 addressed by medication);
(v) infection/sepsis;
(vi) increased D-dimer readings consistently indicating coagulation issues; and
(vii) increased troponin levels.
(n) Whilst it is possible with the benefit of hindsight to attribute those
symptoms to the limited dissection that had occurred until
that point,
clinicians reasonably considered other explanations in light of the report of
the CT scans and Peter’s presentation.
(o) Causes associated with the heart were considered on 21 August 2021, during
the neurology review that occurred at 1215 hours.
An echocardiogram was to occur
on Monday 23 August 2021.
(p) Leading up to the MET call of 21 August 2021, Peter did not present as
critically unwell. He was ambulant and able to communicate
with clinicians and
nursing staff. After his condition was stabilised on that day, he did not
present as being critically unwell.
(q) The earlier increase in troponin levels could have had a number of
explanations and did not unequivocally speak of major heart
pathology. However,
the increase that was reported after Peter’s death in respect of the
modified request at 1250 hours did
clearly raise issues of underlying heart
related pathology. A troponin level of 145 ng/L is significantly elevated and
strongly suggests
recent heart muscle damage, potentially indicating a heart
attack (myocardial infarction) or other cardiac issues, requiring immediate
medical attention. A worsening of the aortic dissection could have caused the
elevated reading.
(r) Given there was a documented concern to test troponin to see changes over
time [52], and Peter’s troponin levels had been
increasing, the decision
not to include troponin in the request of 1250 hours is questionable. What could
have been done if the troponin
test had been conducted earlier and included in
the pathology report accessed at 1349 hours is a matter of speculation. A
CT angiogram may have been ordered or the scheduled echocardiogram may
have been expedited. If that testing and imaging actually
indicated aortic
dissection (the extent of the dissection that occurred at this time must have
been of a lesser order of magnitude
than the dissection proximate to
Peter’s death), emergency remedial surgery may have been undertaken.
Whether that surgery
could have been scheduled and whether it would have been
successful in treating the dissection are matters of speculation.
(s) Given the poor quality and general paucity of the clinical and nursing notes
generally and particularly on 22 August 2021, it
is difficult to determine the
progress of the collapse that occurred that afternoon. The MET alert was made at
1728 hours. Peter
is likely to have been unconscious for some unknown period of
time before that alert. He was pronounced deceased at 1745 hours.
(t) There is no suggestion that the resuscitation attempts were conducted in
anything other than a competent way. The delay in the
commencement of CPR and
the acuity of the underlying pathology meant Peter’s prognosis was very
(u) Peter died of a thoracic aortic aneurysm with dissection.
(v) I find that the failure to diagnose and treat the dissection that occurred
on 19 August 2021, and which progressed after that
date, contributed to the
cause of Peter’s death.
Formal Findings
the purposes of s 52 of the Act, I find that Peter Hanisch died on 22 August
2021 at about 1745 hours at the Calvary Hospital,
Bruce, in the Australian
Capital Territory. The cause of his death was a thoracic aortic aneurysm with
dissection.
Section 3BA of the Act – The Failure to Diagnose the
Aortic Dissection
the inquest, Julia expressed her belief that had Peter’s aortic dissection
been diagnosed in a timely way, Peter’s
life might have been saved. As I
have said in another inquest, whilst consideration of that issue will inevitably
involve an element
of speculation, I believe that s 3BA of the Act does oblige
me to attempt to answer that
passages extracted above [18] suggest that had the dissection been identified at
the time of his admission to Calvary, then statistically
Peter stood a good
chance of surviving for a period after any remedial surgery was undertaken.
Given he survived for a period of
time after the initial dissection, it is more
likely that the initial dissection was more limited in size. The evidence from
autopsy suggests that the walls of the aorta were not otherwise seriously
compromised. The level of atherosclerotic disease within
the aorta was
moderately advanced but age appropriate. Peter’s heart was enlarged. This
may or may not have serious immediate
consequences in respect of his life
expectancy. The fact that the aortic valve ring was dilated may suggest that
consideration would
have been given to its replacement during surgery. This
would add to the seriousness of the surgery and increased the scope of
complications
arising. Peter was older and the hypertension he suffered would
have had to be controlled at the time of surgery and afterwards.
light of these factors, I conclude that if there had been timely treatment of
the aortic dissection, there were very reasonable
prospects of saving
Peter’s life. I am unable to say what his long-term prognosis may have
family have also asked whether, notwithstanding the error made by Dr CD, there
was sufficient evidence to suggest that
aortic dissection should have
specifically been diagnosed or a cardiac cause of his symptoms
identified.
at the matter retrospectively, there was, as noted above [80], symptomology
consistent with the aortic dissection that Peter
suffered. Aortic dissection was
one of the conditions initially suspected. Clotting was suspected and a request
was made of Dr CD
for a review of the CT in light of that issue. However, the
mistake originally made in reading the scans was not identified.
the error made in reading the CT scan and the inconsistency in how some of these
symptoms presented, it was not unreasonable
for clinicians to look for
alternative diagnoses. It is noted that differential diagnoses and planned
diagnostic tests (notably the
echocardiogram request) were circling back towards
possible cardiac causes of his symptoms at the time of Peter’s death. As
noted earlier, access to a troponin result on 22 August 2021 may or may not have
caused surgical intervention prior to Peter’s
Matters of Public Safety
CD’s failure to correctly interpret the CT scan taken at the time of
Peter’s admission contributed to the cause of
Peter’s death. There
appears to have been an acceptable level of communication between Dr CD and
treating clinicians, and a
follow up re-examination of the CT scan was
requested, but with a focus that did not compel checking of the initial
reporting’s
and of itself, the mistake made by Dr CD does not suggest that a matter of
general public safety arises. However, the letter of
14 March 2025 indicated
that within CHS there is no formal policy governing when a peer review of a
radiology report occurs. Nor
was the Court provided with any indication that
peer review procedures within CHS are such as to generate a statistically valid
of the accuracy of image reporting. Out of hours imaging is provided by
a contracted provider. Their policies in respect of peer
review are apparently
unknown to the Territory although peer review reports are provided by that
provider to NCH and TCH.
is unclear from the evidence whether it was appropriate for the report of Dr CD
to be subject to peer review or not. Expressed
generally, there is no guidance
in existence within CHS as to when peer review should be undertaken.
review in radiology is crucial for quality assurance and is claimed by the Royal
Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists
to be a central feature of
its various quality and standards initiatives.
is recommended that CHS develop and publish guidance as to peer review systems
and procedures for imaging services provided within
CHS and by private providers
providing such services on behalf of CHS. That guidance should apply to all
imaging produced within
the CHS including:
(a) out of hours imaging; and
(b) imaging undertaken by private providers at TCH and NCH.
express my sincere condolences to Peter’s family for the loss of a
much-loved husband and father. I acknowledge the additional
stress caused by the
longevity of coronial proceedings and thank Julia in particular for her patience
and guidance in my inquest.
I certify that the preceding ninety-three [93] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Findings of his Honour Coroner
Associate: Lucy James
Date: 9 April 2025
Tamponade involves blood
filling the pericardial sac compromising the ability of the heart to
David Levy et al,
‘Aortic Dissection’,
National Library of Medicine
(webpage, 6
October 2024) Stat Pearls Publishing.
Dr Mohamed Nasreddine
graduated from the University of NSW in 1999 with a MBBS BSc (Med). He commenced
his RANZCR training at Princess
Alexandra and Westmead Public Hospitals,
obtaining RANZCR Fellowship in 2008. He completed MRI and Breast Imaging
fellowships at
Westmead Public Hospital and at the Breast Cancer Institute in
2007, prior to becoming a staff specialist in 2008. In addition to
substantive role at a major trauma centre, he has long term attachments with the
Forensic Medicine Service in NSW and the ACT.
The Glasgow Coma Scale is used
to measure a person’s level of consciousness. A score of 15 is the highest
score that can be
obtained suggesting no compromise.
Transverse myelitis is an
inflammation of both sides of one section of the spinal cord. The condition
causes interruptions of the messages that the spinal cord nerves send
throughout the body. Amongst other symptoms it can cause pain,
muscle weakness,
paralysis and sensory problems.
A D-dimer test measures the
presence of D-dimer, a protein fragment from blood clots. A positive result can
indicate that a blood
clot has formed and is the process of breaking down. It
was possible that the elevated result was associated with the dissection
was present.
Troponin test can confirm damage to the heart muscle. The more damage there is
to the heart, the more troponin is released
into the blood. A level in this
range can indicate heart damage. Elevated troponin is associated with aortic
dissection (as well
as other heart related conditions) as dissection may cause
ischemic damage to the heart: see for example; Mislav Vrsalovic,
“Prognostic
effect of cardiac troponin elevation in acute aortic
dissection: A meta-analysis” (2016) 214
International Journal of
medication given to lower blood pressure and heart rate.
A break down in red blood
A liver function
Low platelet
The Modified Early
Warning Score is made up of 6 pieces of information, including heart rate,
blood pressure, and breathing rate
as a means of identifying risks of
deterioration.
ischaemic attack.
of the last observation and the making of the MET call vary within the notes.
The MET notes indicate the call was made
at 1728 hours with an arrival time of
1730 hours.
The planned MRI
was in fact for the spine, not the heart. Dr TA in his response does indicate
that a ‘cardiology consult’
was planned for Monday 23 August 2021.
Spinal cord infarction
(death of tissue caused by reduced blood
Constant monitoring
of the heart undertaken to improve the chances of catching an abnormal heart
rhythm when it happens.
Health Infrastructure Enabling Act 2023
Section 3BA of
the Act provides that as far as is practicable, the objects of the Act must, for
an inquest into a person’s
death, be carried out in a way that recognises
that the family and friends of a deceased person have an interest in having all
questions about the circumstances of the person’s death
Ms Evans was
provided with the opportunity to comment on the provisional findings. Ms Evans
reiterated that the neurology team should
have involved a “cardiac
specialist to assist with forming a view regarding Peter’s
treatment”.
RTF format (363 KB)
Signed PDF/A format