Alananzeh v Zgool Form Pty Ltd [2025] ACTCA 19 (25 June 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
Alananzeh v Zgool Form Pty Ltd
[2025] ACTCA 19
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
McCallum CJ, Mossop and Loukas‑Karlsson JJ
Catchwords:
TORT – NEGLIGENCE
– EXCESSIVE OR INADEQUATE DAMAGES
– Appeal on basis that primary judge erred in the manner that she reduced
damages for
vicissitudes – primary judge reduced whole award of damages by
25 percent on account of vicissitudes rather than only reducing
component of
damages relating to future economic loss – reduction for vicissitudes
cannot apply to a past loss – respondents
conceded error – appeal
TORT – NEGLIGENCE
– EXCESSIVE OR INADEQUATE DAMAGES
– Appeal on ground that primary judge erred when discounting buffer for
future economic
loss – buffer awarded on basis that appellant will obtain
funds to retrain, and have money to live on while retraining, for
a period of
two years – where appellant had pre-existing asymptomatic medical
condition – where primary judge dealt with
possibility of appellant
becoming symptomatic by increasing vicissitudes discount – no clear
delineation between cases where
appropriate to award a buffer and those where
appropriate to conduct a numerical calculation – no error in basing buffer
future economic loss upon numerical considerations that informed calculation
of past economic loss – no error in reducing buffer
to take into account
vicissitudes
TORT – NEGLIGENCE
– ESSENTIALS OF ACTION FOR NEGLIGENCE
– Cross‑appeal by second respondent as to existence and scope of
duty of care
– where appellant a formwork worker, first respondent a
formwork subcontractor employing the appellant, second respondent the
contractor and third respondent the default insurer – where primary judge
found that second respondent assumed a duty
of safety for its subcontractors
pertaining to conditions of the site where those subcontractors were being
directed to work –
no error disclosed in primary judge’s reasoning
Legislation Cited:
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
ss 43(1)(c)
Scaffolding and Lifts Regulation 1950
Workers Compensation Act 1951
Cases Cited:
Alananzeh v Zgool Form Pty Ltd
[2024] ACTSC 16
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR
Lawson v Flavel
[2001] WASCA 272
Contractors Pty Ltd v Fox
[2009] HCA 35
Malec v JC Hutton
(1990) 169 CLR 638
Sheldrick v State of New South Wales
[2007] NSWCA 105
Stevens v Brodribb Sawmilling Co Pty Ltd
Sungravure Pty Ltd v Meani
[1964] HCA 16
(1964) 110 CLR 24
Sydney Water
Corporation v Abramovic
[2007] NSWCA 248
; Aust Torts Reports
Transfield Services (Australia) Pty Ltd v Wieland
Villasevil v Pickering
[2001] WASCA 143
Wynn v NSW Insurance Ministerial Corporation
[1995] HCA 53
(1995) 184 CLR
Texts Cited:
Assessment of Damages for Personal Injury and
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 4
Ahmad Alananzeh (Appellant)
Zgool Form Pty Ltd (First Respondent)
Xmplar Formwork Pty Ltd (Second Respondent)
Workers Compensation Default Insurance Fund Manager (Third
Respondent)
Representation:
D Shillington (Appellant)
No appearance (First Respondent)
A Muller SC (Second Respondent)
D Crowe (Third Respondent)
Law Partners Personal Injury Lawyers (Appellant)
No appearance (First Respondent)
Wotton and Kearney (Second Respondent)
Moray and Agnew (Third Respondent)
File Number:
ACTCA 22 of 2024
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: Supreme Court of the ACT
Before: McWilliam J
Date of Decision: 26 June 2024
Case Title:
Alananzeh v Zgool Form Pty Ltd
[2024] ACTSC 16
Introduction
appellant, Ahmad Alananzeh, was injured on 21 April 2021 while working as a
labourer at a construction site at Denman Prospect
in Canberra. He brought
common law proceedings for personal injury in the Supreme Court against his
employer, Zgool Form Pty Ltd,
the first respondent (Zgool), and the formwork
contractor on the site, Xmplar Formwork Pty Ltd, the second respondent (Xmplar).
subsequently joined, as a defendant in the proceedings, the Workers
Compensation Default Insurance Fund Manager, the third respondent
Insurer), because the first respondent did not hold the required workers
compensation insurance.
claim was heard by a judge of the court (the primary judge), and he was awarded
damages of $243,900: see
Alananzeh v Zgool Form Pty Ltd
[2024] ACTSC 16
(hereafter ‘J’). He appealed against the assessment of damages on
the basis that the primary judge erred in the manner
that she reduced damages
for vicissitudes. Xmplar filed a cross‑appeal, which challenged the
primary judge’s findings
in relation to the existence and scope of the
duty of care owed by Xmplar, the findings in relation to breach of that duty,
the findings
in relation to contributory negligence, and the manner in which the
primary judge dealt with a reduction in damages for vicissitudes.
The position of the parties
before the primary judge and in the Court of Appeal
did not appear at the hearing before the primary judge or in the Court of
Appeal. The judgment that the primary judge entered
was against both Zgool and
Xmplar. Although her Honour indicated that she would have made an apportionment
of 50 percent liability
as between Xmplar and Zgool, she did not do so,
apparently on the basis that Zgool was likely to have no funds and, hence, the
of apportionment would not, in practice, arise.
position of the Default Insurer was that it would only be liable if the
appellant could not make a claim against Xmplar. That
was because of the
operation of s 170 of the
Workers Compensation Act 1951
(ACT), which
limited the circumstances in which a person could make a claim against the
Default Insurer to circumstances in which
the person could not make a claim
against any other person apart from the uninsured employer: s 170(1)(b). As
a consequence, the
primary judge did not enter any judgment against the Default
position of the parties remained the same in the Court of Appeal. Zgool did not
appear. Xmplar sought to overturn the primary
judge’s findings as to its
liability. The Default Insurer sought to maintain the primary judge’s
finding that Xmplar
was liable because, in those circumstances, it would bear no
Consequences of the
position of the parties
of the unusual features of this case was the skeletal state of the evidence
concerning the duty of Xmplar. This can be understood
when regard is had to the
position of the parties just explained. So far as the appellant was concerned,
he had the benefit of a
non‑delegable duty of care owed by his employer,
Zgool. Given that his employer had not appeared, even if he did not succeed
against Xmplar, if he established a breach of duty by his employer, then that
liability would be picked up by the Default Insurer.
Xmplar had no incentive to
fully describe the construction project, the relationship between Xmplar and the
head contractor for the
project, the respective responsibilities of the head
contractor, Xmplar and Zgool, or the systems in place to discharge those
responsibilities.
To do so ran the risk of providing the foundation for a duty
of care owed by it to the appellant and the scope of such a duty, which
have included measures that would have avoided the accident. At the hearing
before the primary judge, the approach taken by
Xmplar involved tendering some
medical evidence and other documentary evidence relevant to damages and calling
no witnesses itself.
That left the primary judge with a case against Xmplar in
relation to which there was only limited evidence and an invitation to
the case against Xmplar upon the basis of inferences drawn from that limited
evidence. That is the approach that the primary
judge took.
The decision of the primary
primary judge dealt with the proceedings by identifying 10 issues that she
needed to resolve. Her Honour found the following:
(a) the accident had occurred in the manner alleged by the appellant (
(b) Zgool and Xmplar owed a duty of care to the appellant (
(c) Zgool did not take reasonable care by failing to take reasonable precautions
against the risk of injury to the appellant (
(d) Xmplar failed to take reasonable precautions to guard against the risk of
harm to the appellant (
(e) Zgool and Xmplar had not breached a statutory duty arising under
Scaffolding and Lifts Regulation 1950
(f) the failure to take reasonable precautions was a necessary condition of the
happening of the harm for the purposes of
Civil Law (Wrongs)
(ACT) (CLW Act) (
(g) there should be no reduction for contributory negligence (
(h) notwithstanding an underlying susceptibility to a degenerative condition in
the appellant’s spine, his current pain symptoms
and restriction were
causally related to the accident (
primary judge then undertook an assessment of damages (
), with any
question of apportionment being
. The only aspects of the
assessment which are challenged relate to the reduction for vicissitudes, which
was applied to all heads
of damages rather than being confined to the award for
future economic loss, and whether or not any reduction should be made on account
of contributory negligence.
Appeal Ground 1: Reduction
for vicissitudes
appeal relates to the manner in which the primary judge reduced damages on
account of vicissitudes. As pointed out earlier, the
primary judge reduced the
whole of the award of damages by 25 percent on account of vicissitudes rather
than the component of damages
relating to future economic loss. Before reduction
on account of vicissitudes, the amount to be awarded was $325,200. The primary
judge reduced the award by 25 percent to $243,900. Had she only reduced the
award for future economic loss of $100,000 by 25 percent,
the total award of
damages would have been $300,200.
appellant contends in ground one of his Notice of Appeal that the primary judge
erred when discounting the assessment of all heads
of damages for vicissitudes.
Xmplar and the Default Insurer concede that the discounting of all heads of
damages involved an error
and that any reduction for vicissitudes should be
confined to the component of the award relating to future economic loss. That
is clearly correct.
reduction for vicissitudes could not apply to a past loss because any
vicissitude that undermined the entitlement to a particular
category of past
damage would have already manifested itself and, hence, could be assessed with
greater precision.
far as future losses are concerned, it is conventional to make a discount for
vicissitudes so as to take into account the possibility
that adverse events,
unrelated to a plaintiff’s accident, may occur after the trial and affect
a plaintiff’s earning
capacity. The principal possibilities are sickness,
accident, unemployment and industrial disputes: H Luntz,
of Damages for Personal Injury and Death
(LexisNexis Butterworths,
ed, 2002) at [6.4.6];
Wynn v NSW Insurance Ministerial
Corporation
[1995] HCA 53
(1995) 184 CLR 485
at 497‑498. While contingencies may
affect other heads of damages, they are not routinely allowed in the Territory.
they would be dependent upon establishing their appropriateness in the
circumstances of any particular case.
is conventional to apply a 15 percent reduction in damages arising in the future
from a loss of earning capacity on account of
vicissitudes, subject to
adjustment in the circumstances of any individual case. The conventional figure
of 15 percent is adopted
in the Territory, as in New South Wales. In Western
Australia, the
conventional discount is lower: Luntz at [6.4.5]
Villasevil v Pickering
[2001] WASCA 143
Lawson v Flavel
[2001] WASCA 272
Transfield Services (Australia) Pty Ltd v Wieland
[2014] WASCA 41
the present case, the primary judge acknowledged the convention in the Territory
of discounting by 15 percent for vicissitudes,
but considered that a higher
discount was warranted here because the appellant had an underlying degenerative
condition that might
get worse (addressed below). That reasoning was relevant
only to future economic loss. There was no basis laid for any reduction
contingencies of the other heads of damages awarded for future loss.
consequence of this ground of appeal being established is that the reduction of
25 percent should only have been applied to the
component of damages for
future economic loss. Subject to the other grounds of appeal, that would result
in the award of damages
being increased from $243,900 to $300,200.
Appeal Ground 2: Discount
of buffer for future economic loss
second ground of appeal is that the primary judge erred by discounting the
buffer that she allowed for future economic loss which
had been awarded on the
basis that the funds would provide the appellant with money to retrain and give
him some money to live on
for a period of two years.
order to understand this ground of appeal, it is necessary to explain the
primary judge’s approach to damages for future
economic loss. The primary
judge referred to evidence that the appellant suffered from L5/S1 disc
desiccation and a disc bulge which
impinged on the
nerve root: J[147]. She
recorded a “general consensus among the medical experts” that there
was an underlying susceptibility
or degenerative condition that was asymptomatic
before the accident: J[152]. She did not accept the opinion of
Dr Anthony Smith that
the appellant had recovered from the accident
within three months. She found that the current pain symptoms and restriction of
were causally related to the accident.
when assessing damages, her Honour considered again the consequences of the
pre-existing condition. Consistently with the
approach dictated by
Hutton Pty Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR 638
, her Honour considered that “there
was some possibility that the plaintiff would have suffered an aggravation
rendering his
degenerative condition symptomatic”. She found that the
evidence before the court was not of sufficient detail to permit any
in a calculation based upon percentage chances but instead considered that
“a less artificial and fairer approach”
was to deal with the
possibility of an aggravation by way of increasing the discount for
vicissitudes. Her Honour said (at [166]):
the best that I can with the evidence that is before the Court, I consider that
a less artificial and fairer approach is to
deal with that accepted possibility
as warranting a greater discount when taking account of vicissitudes (25% rather
than the discount
of 15% commonly applied in this jurisdiction). Sickness is
part of the vicissitudes of life and there is a real likelihood that
this injury
would have occurred regardless of the negligence, particularly where the work
involved was heavy physical work in the
construction industry, an occupation
which is unlikely to sustain longevity of employment in the same way as less
physically demanding
her reasons, the primary judge addressed damages for loss of earning capacity.
So far as the future was concerned, the difference
between the parties was
relatively modest. The appellant sought a buffer for future economic loss of
$250,000. Xmplar argued that
an award of $58,292, being a loss of earnings over
a 12-month period, would be appropriate. The reasons of the primary judge on
issue were as follows (at [191]‑[197]):
this case, the plaintiff graduated from a university in Jordan with a degree in
Special Education and had worked there as a teacher
for several years with
children with special needs. That is work that involves lighter or less physical
argued that this type of employment was available in Australia and that all the
plaintiff really needed to do to make himself
employable in that field was to
become proficient in English sufficiently to take the requisite International
English Language Testing
System, known as the IELTS test.
plaintiff confirmed that he did intend to take the IELTS test, which would
assist his employment prospects, including resume working
with special needs
persons in Australia. He indicated that it would not be exactly the same work he
did in Jordan, which involved
a degree of physicality, as he was not able to do
that with his movement restrictions. Significantly, the plaintiff did not
that he had no capacity to work. Indeed, he impressed me as an
intelligent man who is capable of work.
plaintiff’s underlying rationale for a buffer for future economic loss was
essentially that the plaintiff needs funds and
time to retrain, whether that was
in the English language or other training in a field of employment and that a
period of 2 years
was an appropriate amount of time.
accept the plaintiff’s language skills in English are a significant
barrier, although I am cognisant that a plaintiff who
is injured and in pain,
with no money to attend to his medical treatment and relying on friends for
accommodation, will equally have
no money to undertake English language or
training courses. Following the accident when he was housebound, the plaintiff
that he would revise words in English to improve his vocabulary.
consider that the accident and the subsequent symptoms have likely delayed the
plaintiff attending to his retraining or English
tuition, and that it may take 2
years to get the plaintiff back in a properly employable position in the open
labour market. I have
allowed a buffer of $100,000 inclusive of superannuation,
on the basis that such funds will provide him with the money to retrain,
give him some money to live on while he does it, for a period of two years.
making the decision to include superannuation as part of the buffer, I have had
regard to the plaintiff’s submission that
on other occasions, the Court
has seen fit to award superannuation as an additional component. However, as
cases such as
Tattersall v Dormakaba Australia Pty Ltd
[2023] ACTSC 390
demonstrate, that is not always the case. Here, where the buffer is
inherently imprecise and the rationale for the buffer based on
retraining and upskilling, I was not persuaded that embarking upon a
mathematical calculation of superannuation on top of
a buffer was the
appropriate course.
reasoning was that the appellant had suffered an impairment of his working
capacity as a result of the aggravation of his back
condition. However,
notwithstanding his impaired earning capacity, that would not be productive of
economic loss after he had sufficient
English skills to obtain employment
consistent with his earlier qualifications.
figure of $100,000 inclusive of superannuation was arrived at in light of the
earlier findings about his past economic loss, which
included findings about his
earning capacity at the time of the accident. Those findings reflected a
considerable degree of uncertainty
as to the amount that would have been earned
but for the accident. The relevant period was from the date of the accident
2021) until the date of the judgment
(26 June 2024), a period of approximately three years and two months.
The uncertainties with
which her Honour was dealing are reflected at
J[182]-[186].
plaintiff had only been working in Australia for 4 weeks at the time of the
injury. The agreed rate of pay was $45 per hour, less
expenses for food,
accommodation and travel. There were no payslips in evidence, or evidence of any
earnings the plaintiff may have
before coming to Australia. ... He submitted
that the past economic loss should be assessed on the basis that he would
continue to
have earned what he earned in the four-week period before the
in deference to the preferred approach outlined in the principles above of a
mathematical calculation where the evidence enables
it, the parties each
contended for damages for past economic loss of between approximately $40,000 to
$125,000 based on hourly rates
of between $25 and $35 nett per hour and full
working weeks. Those figures were inclusive of the weekly compensation paid by
which totalled $17,576.65, and were to the time of trial, but the delay
from hearing to judgment has been taken into account in what
defendant argued a failure to mitigate loss, but I have not accepted that
submission due to the fact that it was not pleaded and
only raised after the
plaintiff had given evidence.
a case where the plaintiff had only 4 weeks of work, in a job without formality
or permanency, with no records to support the figures
claimed, with speculative
amounts estimated as to nett working rates and no clear evidence that
superannuation would have been payable
had the arrangement, such as it was,
continued, I consider that there are too many imponderables in this case to take
a mathematical
approach to economic loss.
have allowed a buffer of $100,000 for past economic loss, inclusive of any
superannuation that would have been payable and any interest.
considerations that have informed that amount are:
(a) An approximate average weekly earnings figure of $800 nett. Some weeks he
may have worked more and earned more, but some weeks
he may have earned
nothing). For example, the employment obtained by the plaintiff is unlikely to
have involved payment for holidays
or for down time on a construction site when
manual formwork could not be completed due to scheduling or other construction
or matters outside the plaintiff’s control, such as weather or
pandemic lockdowns, noting that this is precisely what occurred
in Canberra
later in 2021.
(b) An approximate overall working period in the construction industry from the
date of the accident of about 3 years, due to the
vagaries and uncertainties of
the industry itself and the type of work the plaintiff was doing.
(c) Any superannuation payable is likely to have been modest at best.
(d) The iCare figure of $17,576.65 which has already been paid and which I have
accepted does not need to be repaid, which also has
the consequence that no
component for the tax component (
damages) arises.
the uncertainties as to the manner in which the appellant would have been
employed, her Honour addressed the matter by way of
a buffer but then identified
at [186] the numerical considerations which fed into that exercise. Given the
acceptance that the workers
compensation payments of $17,576.65 did not need to
be repaid, the buffer of $100,000 awarded reflects economic loss accruing at
rate of approximately $37,000 per year (($100,000 plus $17,576.65)/3.166 years =
$37,137.29).
is in light of the approach to past economic loss that the approach to future
economic loss needs to be assessed. The boundary
between those cases in which it
is appropriate to award a buffer and those in which it is possible to make an
award of damages based
on a numerical calculation is not clearly defined. As all
assessments of future economic loss involve a balancing of the different
possibilities in accordance with
, the extent to which it is
possible to calculate the extent of damages based upon rates of loss of earnings
will depend upon the
facts of the individual case. At one end of the spectrum is
a case in which there is an established track record of a particular
income and the likelihood is that, subject to vicissitudes, this will continue
into the future. At the other end of the
spectrum is a case in which there is an
impairment of earning capacity but the nature of the impairment is such that,
although it
is possible that it will manifest itself in a manner that generates
economic loss over the balance of the plaintiff’s working
life, it is not
clear when that will occur or the extent of loss arising on any particular
occasion. The former is obviously a case
where mathematical calculation of
damages is necessary. The latter is a case in which a buffer is an available
manner of awarding
damages. Between these two extremes are cases in which there
are uncertainties of varying degrees and, hence, it is more or less
possible to
indicate the mathematical basis upon which an award of damages is arrived at.
the present case, although the primary judge characterised what she was doing as
awarding a buffer, she did so by reference to
the stated numerical
considerations and immediately following her findings about past economic loss.
She also quarantined from her
assessment of the extent of the buffer all issues
relating to vicissitudes. This was not a usual approach but cannot of itself be
said to involve an error. The manner in which her Honour made an award of
damages fell between a fully calculated approach and a
purely buffer approach.
second ground in the appellant’s Notice of Appeal raises whether it was
appropriate for the primary judge to reduce the
buffer awarded on account of
vicissitudes in circumstances where she identified her award as a buffer, and
the period by reference
to which it was calculated was only two years.
it was the case that her Honour adopted a pure buffer approach, then a further
reduction for vicissitudes would be inappropriate
because a buffer would involve
an assessment of all of the possibilities, including the possibilities of death,
sickness, unemployment
or industrial dispute. However, where, as here, a more
numerical approach to the assessment of a buffer was adopted, it is not
impermissible
to identify a factor such as vicissitudes as excluded from the
assessment of the buffer but then take it into account by a mathematical
adjustment.
already noted, the assessment of the deduction for vicissitudes involved an
increase from the 15 percent conventionally adopted
to 25 percent: J[166].
That was intended to reflect the possibility that the appellant’s
“underlying susceptibility or
degenerative condition” would have
manifested itself during the period of two years by reference to which the
buffer was calculated
and, hence, caused economic loss in any event. The reasons
for that were explained by her Honour in the passage quoted at [18] above,
involved characterising the prospect of injury in any event as a “real
likelihood” given that “the work involved
was heavy physical work in
the construction industry”. Having regard to the nature of the
“underlying susceptibility
or degenerative condition” in the
appellant’s spine, the nature of the trigger for its aggravation and the
in which he was engaged, it cannot be said that there is any error
on the part of the primary judge in increasing the reduction for
vicissitudes
beyond that conventionally applied, or in the extent of that increase. The fact
that the period by reference to which
the buffer was calculated was only two
years does not indicate any error. There was inevitably uncertainty in light of
the medical
evidence as to the precise chance of the condition manifesting
itself in a manner that caused economic loss. While the medical evidence
disclosed the condition, it did not descend into statistical likelihoods or
timeframes. A reduction of future economic loss of an
additional 10 percent on
account of this vicissitude is a significant one. It is reflective of more than
a 10 percent chance of the
condition manifesting itself in the two year period
upon which damages were calculated. This is because a 10 percent reduction
a 10 percent chance of a manifestation at the beginning of the period,
whereas the condition could manifest itself at any time during
the period, and
hence to warrant a 10 percent reduction there must be a higher chance of it
manifesting at some time during the period.
However, given the existence of the
condition, the nature of the work being performed and the ability of the
condition to be aggravated
by a fall, it has not been shown that the figure
fixed upon by the primary judge involved any error.
Existence and scope of duty of care
grounds of cross-appeal assert that the primary judge erred in finding that it
owed the appellant a duty of care, or
alternatively, that the scope of the duty
of care extended to ensuring that the surfaces where each formwork worker was
to work were safe and checking the surfaces prior to allowing the
appellant access to them. Notwithstanding the ground of appeal,
in submissions,
Xmplar accepted that it had a duty of care to the appellant. However, it
contested the primary judge’s findings
as to the scope and content of that
duty of care.
judge’s approach
primary judge addressed whether or not Xmplar owed a duty of care to an employee
of an independent contractor at J[41]-[75].
primary judge identified that the head contractor, Core Building Group (ACT) Pty
Ltd (Core), was the principal on the project.
Xmplar was a subcontractor to Core
and Zgool a subcontractor to Xmplar. Her Honour referred to the decisions of the
High Court in
Stevens v Brodribb Sawmilling Co Pty Ltd
(1986) 160 CLR 16
at 47-48 and
Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd v Fox
[2009] HCA 35
. Her Honour identified from
the distinction between the
duty owed by an employer as distinct from a subcontractor organising an
activity. She also identified
that the duty does not extend to retaining control
over a system of work if it is reasonable to engage the services of independent
contractors who are themselves competent to control the system of work. The
primary judge at [45] quoted from
Sydney Water Corporation v Abramovic
[2007] NSWCA 248
; Aust Torts Reports 81‑913 at [98]-[99], where
Basten JA (with whom Mason P agreed, Santow JA in dissent) noted that a
may owe a duty to a worker who is an employee of an independent
contractor, observing that the cases suggested that satisfaction
of one of the
following criteria may give rise to such a duty:
(a) the principal directs the manner of performance of the work;
(b) the work requires the coordination of the activities of different
contractors;
(c) the principal has or ought to have knowledge of the risk and the employer
does not and cannot reasonably be expected to have
such knowledge;
(d) the principal has the means to alleviate the risk and the employer cannot
reasonably be expected to do so; and
(e) although the employer has or should have the relevant knowledge and can be
expected reasonably to take steps to alleviate the
risk, it does not, to the
knowledge of the principal, do so.
Honour emphasised the statement in
Sydney Water
that the degree of
control which the principal retains over the workplace and the statutory
responsibility with respect to safety
at the workplace may be critical
considerations in relation to (e).
primary judge identified that Xmplar had argued that there was insufficient
evidence that it had any obligation to direct the
system of work adopted by
Zgool or its employees, to supervise the activities of the appellant, to provide
him with manual or mechanical
assistance, or manage the surface on which he was
required to walk.
primary judge identified that the contract between Xmplar and Core had been
relied upon by Xmplar in its defence, but no party
had put it into evidence. Her
Honour was therefore left with the contents of Xmplar’s defence and a
documents were:
(a) a Core risk assessment form dated 21 April 2021 at 6:45am;
(b) the Xmplar Work Incident Report dated 21 April 2021;
(c) an email sent by Core to other Core employees on 21 April 2021 at 4:39pm;
(d) an Xmplar record of a toolbox meeting; and
(e) several insurance claim forms.
Honour then examined each of those documents in some detail.
Core risk assessment form recorded who had attended a pre-start meeting on the
morning of the accident. The primary judge found
that Benny Mirto, an employee
of Xmplar, had attended the meeting and confirmed that he had 20 workers on
site. He had signed beneath
a statement addressed to “workgroup members
and visitors” that said:
I have participated in this Pre-Start meeting explaining the Safe Work Method
Statements (SWMSs), Temporary Traffic Management Plans
for this job and
understand the hazards, risks and control measures necessary for the safe
completion of the job. I agree to follow
the conditions of this Pre-Job Risk
Assessment. Should safety conditions change I shall stop work and immediately
inform my supervisor
Honour found that Mr Mirto’s confirmation that he had 20 workers on site
was an indication that he was responsible for communicating
the information he
had received to those 20 people. Her Honour inferred from Mr Mirto’s
signature “that he had a sufficient
degree of control to stop work if the
safety conditions changed”.
Work Incident Report was completed by a Jonathan Brereton and by Mr Mirto, and
had been set out earlier in the primary judge’s
reasons as follows:
Incident Type: Injury/Fall on deck
Names of affected ...Sub-Contractor [the option circled]: [the plaintiff]
Detailed Description...: Ahmad fell on deck while carrying a piece of ply.
There was moisture on ply.
Felt pain in hip/leg [immediately].
Person completing this section: Jonathan Brereton 21 April 2021 9.45 am.
Risk Rating: ...Low [the option circled]
Control Measures:
Details of Events after Incident ... Reported fall to Core, [whose] management
called an ambulance. Services arrived approx. 8.20,
Ahmad taken to hospital for
Corrective Actions Required: Asses[s] work areas each morning and continually
for moisture, [squeegee] or sweep wet decks prior to
By Whom: Site team, Benny Mirto
When: Immediate [the option circled]
Person Completing this Form: Benny Mirto, 21 April 2021 9.45am
email was one sent by the Core project manager for the development on the
afternoon following the accident. It was set out in
the primary judge’s
reasons. It set out the procedure to be followed when accessing formwork decks
that were “deemed
to be icy, frosty and wet”. It identified that all
access points would be isolated with a yellow chain and no access signage,
site management would assess the condition of the formwork each morning to
ensure that safe access and egress was available.
That would be carried out with
all “trade supervisors” required to work on that deck each day, and
only once all groups
agreed that the deck was safe to access would the yellow
chain be removed. It said that “trade supervisors must maintain constant
supervision and monitoring of their work area to ensure that safety is
prioritised and maintained during the working day”.
It was not clear
whether the reference to trade supervisors was to employees of Core or to
employees of subcontractors on the site.
record of the toolbox talk meeting related to a meeting that followed the
accident. There were 16 signatures recorded in the document,
which her Honour
found were the people for whom Xmplar was responsible and who had attended the
meeting. The record identified Benny
Mirto as the supervisor or foreman, and
that the meeting had taken 10 minutes and that it related to the fall on the
deck. Under
the heading dealing with the issues raised or discussed, the
following appeared:
Tool Box men on ice deck
Go through SWM on water on deck or ice.
Man slip on ice or water that was on deck
Each day to be look[ed] at by Xmplar Forman [sic] and Core before work. Core
will give instruction off [sic] when deck work can
Honour referred to the caution with which she considered the post injury
records. However, she recorded that the procedure that
was either adopted or had
already been in existence “included not just Core personnel but the Xmplar
foreman taking responsibility
for when work was able to start”: J[65]. She
found that this was not inconsistent with the appellant’s evidence that,
before the accident, the person from Xmplar was the person who told him to start
primary judge also inferred that Xmplar had responsibility for communicating the
relevant safety measures to its numerous subcontractors
immediately after the
appellant’s fall on the deck. Her Honour found that was consistent with
Xmplar having responsibility
for safety measures on site. That was reinforced by
the fact that only Mr Mirto from Xmplar attended the safety briefing given
Core, not representatives of the subcontractors to Xmplar such as Mr Ismail
Alzghoul, the director of Zgool (hereafter Mr Alzghoul,
referred to by the
primary judge as Mr Zgool) and the person who worked alongside the
primary judge also referred to the insurance claim forms later completed by
Xmplar, noting that they carry less weight than contemporaneous
J[67]. However, in the absence of any oral evidence from Xmplar, the primary
judge took into account the description of
the incident in that form. That
included an assertion that “workers had been instructed to squeegee the
decks prior to working
in their areas as the decks were wet due to ice”.
The primary judge relied upon that to establish that Xmplar knew as a fact
before the accident occurred that the decks were wet due to ice. However, she
also accepted the evidence that the appellant had not
been told by anyone from
Xmplar to do anything to the flooring. The primary judge found that there was
insufficient evidence to establish
that Xmplar had explained anything to Mr
Alzghoul so as to make good the submission that some instruction had been
translation”: J[69]. Her Honour drew an inference that
nothing that Mr Mirto would have said in relation to his responsibilities
site, any communication he had with Mr Alzghoul or the appellant, or the content
of that communication would have assisted
Xmplar’s case: J[71].
primary judge found that, even if the statements in the workers compensation
form were accepted as indicating that Xmplar had
provided an instruction about
squeegeeing the decks, that would have demonstrated that Xmplar believed it
exercised a degree of instructive
control over Zgool’s employees in
respect of the work that Xmplar was coordinating before the incident:
the documents identified, the appellant’s evidence and Xmplar’s
defence, the primary judge found (at [73]):
(a) Xmplar held a Major Works Subcontract with Core to perform formwork at the
(b) Xmplar was in a position of coordinating the activity of formwork between a
number of different sub-contractors; on the day in
question, up to 20 workers
were within its coordination, only two of which came from Zgool.
(c) Xmplar was responsible for receiving the safety control measures from Core
at the pre-start meeting on the morning of 21 April
(d) Whether as part of that briefing or independently, Xmplar knew as a fact
that there was ice or water on the decks that day which
needed to be wiped down
(given that it told its insurer that directions had been given in respect of
that matter). That is, Xmplar
was aware of an unnecessary risk of injury arising
from the general work area in which it was going to direct that work be
(e) Xmplar was the entity which had accepted, by Mr Mirto’s signature, the
obligation (that is, the responsibility) to stop
work and inform the supervisor
if safety conditions changed.
(f) Xmplar was the entity which directed where Zgool, as one of its
sub-contractors, was to work on the site that day, and the entity
which directed
Mr Zgool and the plaintiff to start work (being the plaintiff’s evidence).
(g) Xmplar was thus in a position of being able to exercise control over when
the plaintiff started work, where the plaintiff worked,
and what needed to occur
at a particular work area before work started.
conclusion reached by the primary judge was set out at [74]-[75] as follows:
the authorities as set out above, those indicia are sufficient to identify and
establish the requisite duty of care owed
by Xmplar to the plaintiff. There was
a level of oversight that might be described as creating a risk. Xmplar was
coordinating
the activities of the formwork sub-contractors and directing them
to start work on an area that was exposed to the elements. Xmplar
had attended
the pre-job risk assessment meeting and had received knowledge that its
sub-contractors did not have in that regard.
By directing sub-contracted labour
hire workers to commence work on level 4, Xmplar was putting those workers in a
position where
there was a foreseeable risk. Xmplar therefore assumed a duty to
exercise reasonable care with regard to the safety of the area
in which it was
directing work to be undertaken.
the rolled-up way in which negligence was pleaded against the defendants
collectively, it is necessary to make an additional
finding that the duty of
care did not extend to telling the plaintiff how to carry the building materials
(with 1 or 2 men) or how
to lay them, or to providing mechanical assistance to
undertake the work. Those are matters that it was reasonable for an independent
contractor to expect the sub-contracted employer to manage and supervise.
in the judgment (at [93]), the primary judge referred back to her earlier
findings and said:
In the particular circumstances here, I have found that Xmplar had assumed a
duty of safety for its sub-contractors insofar as it
related to the conditions
of the site where those subcontractors were being directed to work.
Submissions
submissions of Xmplar referred to the primary judge’s finding at [93] and,
more broadly, challenged a number of findings
made by the primary judge. Those
findings were:
(a) Xmplar had a sufficient degree of control of the site to stop work if the
safety conditions changed;
(b) Xmplar had accepted or adopted responsibility for safety measures on
(c) Xmplar had a degree of instructive control over the employees of Zgool in
respect of work areas it was coordinating;
(d) Xmplar was aware of an unnecessary risk of injury arising from the general
work area in which it was going to direct that work
be performed; and
(e) Xmplar was at least in the same position of knowledge and foreseeability as
then pointed to a series of matters which it said ought to have been given
greater weight:
(a) that Xmplar itself was a contractor and the evidence did not establish that
it was in a position to control the site;
(b) the appellant’s evidence was that any direct instruction from Xmplar
was provided to him by Mr Alzghoul, speaking in Arabic
to the appellant;
(c) the appellant was aware of the risk posed by ice on the ground prior to his
fall and had taken steps to guard against that risk;
(d) Xmplar was not controlling the particular work tasks performed by the
appellant or the manner in which he performed them;
(e) there was no evidence of a lack of expertise on the part of Zgool; and
(f) the relationship between Xmplar and the appellant was not one of employment
or akin to employment.
contended that its duty did not extend beyond ensuring that its activities did
not create an unreasonable risk of injury for
other workers on site such as the
following facts inform the scope of the duty of care.
head contractor was Core. Xmplar had a written contract with Core described as
“Major Works Subcontract – Design and
Construct (ACT and NSW)”
dated 15 January 2021. Xmplar’s defence (at [3.3]) referred to
it being relied upon “as
is fully set out” in the defence. This
appears to be intended to say, “as if fully set out”.
Notwithstanding this
pleading and the fact that incorporation by reference of
the terms of the contract in the pleading may have constituted significant
admissions, no party sought to refer to the terms of that contract on the
contrast, the contract between Xmplar and Zgool was an undated verbal agreement
pursuant to which some invoices were sent: Defence
[4.1]. The only workers
provided by Zgool were Mr Alzghoul and the appellant. The fact that the only
contract between Zgool and Xmplar
was verbal and the appellant’s own
contract with Zgool was, so far as the evidence disclosed, a basic verbal one,
indicate the small and unsophisticated nature of the labour supply
business operated by Zgool.
were numerous other formwork subcontractors to Xmplar. There was no evidence to
indicate that any of those subcontractors were
more sophisticated than
the day of the accident, Mr Mirto attended the pre-start meeting. He signed in
as having 20 workers on site. Given the existence
of a labour hire relationship
with Zgool and the fact that no representative of Zgool is shown as having
attended that meeting, the
inference was open that the Zgool employees were
amongst the 20 who formed Xmplar’s workgroup on behalf of whom Mr Mirto
Instructions
were given to Mr Alzghoul by the Xmplar supervisor to start work on the day of
the accident. “[H]e asked everyone
to go to their work zone, because he
have big teams and he divided the teams and asked them to go to their
was no evidence that Mr Alzghoul or the appellant received any directions or
instructions from Core about where to work or procedures
to be followed by Mr
Alzghoul or the appellant. It was never suggested to the appellant that he or Mr
Alzghoul received any instructions
from a representative of Core as distinct
from Xmplar.
those circumstances, there was no error on the part of the primary judge in
reaching the conclusion that she did at J[73](a), (b),
(c), (f), (g) (set out at
[44] above).
far as J[73](d) and (e) are concerned, the position is as follows.
Knowledge of ice on the deck
: The appellant had given evidence, which was
not challenged, that on the relevant morning “It was so cold that day, and
the ground there is a layer of frost”. There was no evidence that Core
gave any instruction to Mr Alzghoul or the appellant
in relation to the
risks posed by ice or moisture on the top deck. It was in that context that the
primary judge considered the terms
of the insurance claim form.
can be accepted that the document was prepared substantially after the accident
and that it was prepared by somebody who was not
directly involved in what
occurred. However, it could reasonably be inferred that the person signing the
form had made enquiries
sufficient to make the representations on the form.
statement in the form is consistent with someone having had prior knowledge of
the wetness of the area due to ice. In circumstances
where there was no evidence
of any instructions having been given by Core, it was open to the primary judge
to rely upon this evidence
as an admission by Xmplar of knowledge of wetness due
a usual case, the contents of a business record such as a claim form authored by
someone without direct knowledge of what occurred
and prepared months after the
relevant event would carry little weight if it was contradicted by other
evidence. That is illustrated
by the fact that the primary judge did not accept
the assertion in the same form that instructions had been given to Mr Alzghoul
and the appellant to squeegee the deck prior to working in their area. That was
because that assertion was directly contrary to the
evidence given on oath by
the appellant. However, in the circumstances of the present case, the same
statement in the claim form
impliedly admitted knowledge of wetness due to ice
and was the most significant evidence on the issue in the case. In the absence
of any contradictory evidence given by a witness in the case or arising from
some other document that was in evidence, it was open
to rely upon this
enough, Benny Mirto was a person who was “presumably able to put the true
complexion on the facts” if it was,
in fact, the case that Xmplar did not
know about the wetness of the deck due to ice. In the absence of evidence from
him or a sufficient
explanation for his absence, the primary judge was entitled
more confidently to draw the inference of knowledge. That reflects the
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
at 308. That was another case where
evidence on the critical point was “meagre in the extreme”. Although
a direction
had been given to the jury in that case about the failure to call
the relevant employee of the defendant, the direction was also
required to
that any inference favourable to the plaintiff for which there was ground in the
evidence might be more confidently drawn when a
person presumably able to put
the true complexion on the facts relied on as the ground for the inference has
not been called as a
witness by the defendant and the evidence provides no
sufficient explanation of his absence.
Jones v Dunkel
, the jury should have been told that they were entitled to
conclude that, had the employee gone into the witness box, the evidence
“would not have assisted the defendants by throwing doubt on the
correctness of the inference which ... was open on the plaintiff’s
evidence.” So too, here. It was open to the primary judge to draw an
inference of knowledge from the terms of the insurance
claim form. The terms of
that form were not, in the context of other evidence in the case, so uncertain
as to preclude an inference
being drawn. Similarly, the primary judge was not
obliged to accept the whole of what was stated on the form in circumstances
that was contradicted by other evidence in the case.
Obligation accepted by signature
: This issue related to the extent to which
Xmplar had the capacity to control the work of its subcontractors where a safety
arose. Having regard to the fact that:
(a) Xmplar employed a range of subcontractors;
(b) there were not less than 20 formwork workers for which it was responsible on
(c) there was no evidence of any other formwork contractor not under its control
on the site;
(d) there was no evidence of Core having given instructions or direction
directly to Zgool or any other of Xmplar’s subcontractors;
(e) following the accident, Xmplar’s Mr Mirto gave specific instructions
in a toolbox talk to 16 formwork workers on site,
it is implausible to suggest that Xmplar had no capacity to address hazardous
conditions such as moisture or ice in areas where its
formwork subcontractors
were working. Any additional support for this proposition drawn from the terms
of the statement which was
signed by Mr Mirto at the morning meeting was
limited. However, the fact that he did sign the statement and did so by
reference to
the 20 workers for whom he was responsible is certainly consistent
with Xmplar having some overall responsibility for, and capacity
to address,
safety concerns which existed. It was inconsistent with the proposition that
responsibility for taking precautions against
foreseeable risks was pushed up to
Core or pushed down to Zgool so as to leave Xmplar with no relevant duty.
far as the matters which Xmplar contends should have been given greater weight
([48] above) are concerned, none of those matters
demonstrates that the
conclusion reached by the primary judge was in error. That Xmplar was a
contractor was considered by the primary
judge. That it did not have overall
control of the site was not a determinative matter having regard to its
responsibility for formwork
and the provision, by a number of different
subcontractors, of formwork workers. It is true that instructions were provided
Alzghoul to the appellant because of the appellant’s limited
English. However, the evidence, such as it was, indicated that
all instructions
came from Xmplar. There were no relevant instructions that came from Core. It is
also true that the appellant was
aware of the risk posed by ice or moisture, but
that does not affect the fact that Xmplar directed where the different formwork
should work. There was no evidence of a lack of expertise or a direction
as to the precise tasks that should be carried out by the
Zgool workers or the
manner of doing so. However, it is clear that Zgool was allocated to a
particular area on the top deck and required
to carry out a formwork task.
Finally, it is true that the relationship between the appellant and Xmplar was
not one of employment
or akin to employment. However, part of the responsibility
of Xmplar involved overall coordination of the work of the formwork
subcontractors
that it had engaged to work on the site. That included allocating
where they were to work and, in doing so, considering the precautions
needed to be taken as a result of conditions outside the control of the
individual teams of workers.
these reasons, the ground of the cross-appeal alleging that the primary judge
erred in her finding concerning the existence and
scope of the duty of care is
not made out.
Breach of duty of care
ground of cross-appeal asserts that the primary judge erred in finding that it
did not take reasonable precautions
and, hence, breached its duty of care.
judge’s approach
issue was dealt with by the primary judge at J[92]-[97]. Her Honour relied upon
the reasoning that she had adopted in relation
to the claim against Zgool. In
relation to Zgool, her Honour had reasoned:
(a) it knew that its employees would be carrying heavy items;
(b) it knew that its employees were working in an area that had been exposed to
the elements and that it was likely that the surface
may be slippery due to
frost, ice or dew;
(c) if a person were to slip on the surface, the likely seriousness of the harm
was not insignificant, particularly when the person
was carrying heavy building
materials; and
(d) the burden of taking precautions, by the use of a squeegee or a mop, was
Honour had found that Xmplar had assumed a duty of safety for its subcontractors
in relation to the conditions on the site where
they were being directed to
work. Xmplar was in the same position of knowledge and foreseeability as
reasonable precautions for Xmplar to take involved ensuring that the surface of
level 4 was safe to walk on, and that could have
been achieved by any one
of a number of measures that were low-cost and within the bounds of a reasonable
burden such as use of a
squeegee, mop, or towel: J[94]. A simple barrier could
have been erected to prevent workers walking in areas that had not been
or checked.
Honour indicated that, had she found that Xmplar had told Zgool to squeegee the
deck, she would not have accepted that a single
instruction would have been
sufficient if it had not ensured that action was actually taken: J[96]
Submissions
submitted that the evidence did not establish who gave any instruction
concerning the mopping of the deck or when it was given.
It submitted that the
appellant’s evidence was that he had not been given any relevant
instruction. However, it was possible
that Xmplar had given such an instruction
to Zgool. Xmplar challenged the inference drawn by the primary judge arising
from its failure
to call evidence on the point. It submitted that it was clear
that Zgool would call no evidence because it had not taken an active
part in the
proceedings. It had been established that any communication from Xmplar to the
appellant would have been via Zgool. As
a consequence, the failure to call Mr
Mirto or any other employee was simply because they could not give evidence of
what had been
communicated to the appellant. Having regard to the pathway for
communication, that was not surprising.
fundamental point made by Xmplar was that the primary judge should not have
concluded that Xmplar gave no direction about mopping
the deck. That was because
it was not possible to rule out the possibility that a direction had been given
to Mr Alzghoul, the representative
of Zgool, and simply not passed on to the
only evidence of the giving of an instruction was in the insurance claim form,
which the primary judge had relied upon to establish
knowledge of the deck being
wet due to ice. The manner in which her Honour dealt with this is summarised at
[42] above. Important
for this conclusion was that she accepted the
appellant’s evidence that he had not been told by anyone from Xmplar to do
to the flooring. That conclusion was supported by the appellant’s
evidence that the supervisor from Xmplar (by inference, Mr
Mirto) had asked
everyone to go to their work zone and told Mr Alzghoul that he and his assistant
needed to do a particular area,
but had not given any instructions at the start
of the day that they should do anything to the ground. Evidence was adduced in
cross-examination
that sometimes the appellant would understand what was said in
English, but sometimes he would not understand what was said in English
would rely upon Mr Alzghoul to give instructions in Arabic. The appellant said
that Mr Alzghoul used to take instructions from
the supervisor from Xmplar, and
then Mr Alzghoul would deliver them to him and they would work together. No
positive suggestion was
put to him that he ever received any instruction as to
how to proceed if the deck on level 4 was wet or icy. No positive suggestion
put to him that the evidence that he gave (that the supervisor from Xmplar had
instructed them where to work but had not instructed
them about doing anything
to the ground before they commenced work) was incorrect. In those circumstances,
it was open to the primary
judge to take the approach that she did
(a) The appellant’s evidence was inconsistent with the assertion in the
insurance claim document that instructions had been
(b) There was no effective challenge to the appellant’s evidence because
although there was a suggestion, which was accepted,
that some matters were said
in English and then repeated in Arabic to the appellant, that evidence was not
then used to challenge
the appellant’s earlier evidence that no
instruction about work on the ground had been given.
(c) Apart from the insurance claim document, there was no evidence of such an
instruction having been given.
fact that there was no evidence from Mr Mirto and no explanation as to why he
was not called made it easier for the primary judge
to reach the conclusion that
she did. Xmplar sought, very carefully, to limit the evidence adduced on this
issue. The risk that such
an approach gives rise to is that, at the end of the
case, there may be just sufficient evidence for the trial judge to make the
finding that Xmplar sought to avoid because Xmplar had not called evidence to
directly rebut that finding. That is the risk that
manifested itself in the
present case. No error has been demonstrated in the conclusion reached by the
primary judge.
-appeal: The
appellant’s credit
ground of appeal was not pressed.
Contributory negligence
ground of cross-appeal asserts that the primary judge erred in failing to reduce
damages for contributory negligence.
judge’s approach
primary judge addressed this issue at J[136]-[145]. Her Honour set out the terms
of s 102 of the CLW Act. Her Honour found that
the evidence did not
establish many of the features relied upon by Xmplar to establish contributory
negligence. She made three findings
(a) It was not established that the appellant was given any instructions to
squeegee the ice or frost on the deck prior to commencement
(b) There was no evidence that the appellant was given induction training which
covered site safety rules and the need to de-ice
and squeegee the decks under
cold or frosty conditions. Instead, the induction discussion involved work hours
and break times.
(c) Because the content of any induction or training was not established, it was
not possible to find that the appellant failed to
adhere to the requirements
identified in it.
Xmplar and the Default Insurer contended before the primary judge that the
appellant should have avoided walking over an area
that he knew had the presence
of icy frost, as this was a visible hazard not a latent risk.
appellant’s evidence was that he did not see the obviously frosty or wet
surface. However, he was aware of it because he
said that he had made several
trips across the plywood deck, walking slowly and carefully at the beginning so
as not to slip.
Honour identified that s 43(1)(c) of the CLW Act requires that, before
negligence (including contributory negligence) is established,
it must be the
case that in the circumstances, the reasonable person “in the
person’s position” would have taken
those precautions. She then
examined the circumstances of the appellant. The appellant did take precautions
for his own safety by
wearing work boots and a safety helmet, not running, and
not going to an area where he was not permitted to walk. As an employee,
required to carry heavy building materials and deliver those materials to a
particular location. Her Honour pointed out that
it was not put to the appellant
that he could have taken a different path that would have avoided the frost. It
was not a situation
where the appellant could simply walk a different way, given
that he was on level 4 of the building and part of that area was not
Honour rejected the allegation by Xmplar that the appellant should have refused
to carry the plywood if he thought it was unsafe,
saying (J[144]):
Otherwise, the allegation by Xmplar that the plaintiff should have refused to
carry the plywood if he deemed the system unsafe and/or
if he considered that he
required mechanical or human assistance is unrealistic and not a precaution that
a reasonable person
in the position of the plaintiff
would have taken.
Such a submission shows a complete lack of any appreciation for the power
imbalance between employer or host employer/principal
sub‑contractor and
employee. It is unrealistic to expect that a reasonable person in the
circumstances of this employee, on
a new job under time pressure and facing a
language barrier, and dependent on the employment for income, would initiate any
conversation
over whether to continue to work in the circumstances of the wet or
frosty surface with which he was presented that morning. Ultimately,
formed the view that in the circumstances, it was not a failure by the plaintiff
to take reasonable care for his own safety
in walking where he did.
Submissions
submitted that this was not a case of mere inadvertence on the part of the
appellant and that, as between the appellant and
Xmplar, there was no employment
relationship. The submissions referred to the decision of the New South Wales
Court of Appeal in
Sheldrick v State of New South Wales
[2007] NSWCA 105
, which took the following quote from the earlier High Court judgment of
Sungravure Pty Ltd v Meani
[1964] HCA 16
(1964) 110 CLR 24
An inadvertent or thoughtless act may also amount to a negligent act for the
very reason that it is done without thought for or consideration
consequences that may follow from the doing of it ...
submitted that the appellant was not only aware of the presence of ice on the
ground but he had, at an earlier time in the
moments prior to his injury,
exercised greater caution in his movement than he was exercising at the time of
his injury.
submissions made on behalf of Xmplar do not demonstrate any error on the part of
the primary judge. The evidence of the appellant
given in cross-examination was
that he had done four or five trips across the level 4 deck. He had not slipped
on any of those previous
trips. He said:
I was walking slowly and carefully at the beginning but then when they started
pushing us like, ‘Come on, come on’ I
went to get the far one and
then when I carried it I slipped.
evidence was not consistent with an inadvertent or thoughtless act indicative of
negligence. Rather, although he was aware of
the risk, it was one which he tried
to avoid, ultimately unsuccessfully. The approach taken by the primary judge has
not been shown
to be wrong.
a result of the appeal, the award of damages should be increased from $243,900
to $300,200. Except insofar as the cross-appeal
also asserts that the primary
judge erred in discounting all heads of damages on account of vicissitudes, the
cross-appeal must be
orders of the Court are:
(1) Appeal allowed.
(2) Set aside order 1 made by the Supreme Court on 26 June 2024 and in its
place, order: “Judgment for the plaintiff against
the first and second
defendants in the sum of $300,200.”
(3) Except as required by order 2, the cross-appeal is dismissed.
(4) The second respondent is to pay the appellant’s and the third
respondent’s costs of the appeal and their costs of
the cross-appeal.
(5) A party may apply for a variation of order 4, but must make any application
within seven days.
I certify that the preceding eighty-nine [89] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Court.
Date: 25 June 2025
RTF format (366 KB)
Signed PDF/A format