Beck v PM [2015] ACTCC 1 (11 December 2015)
CHILDRENS COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
[2015] ACTCC 1
Hearing Dates:
1-3 September 2015; 1-2 December 2015
Magistrate Fryar
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– incest – victim young person’s half
brother - acts of indecency on or in the presence of person under the age
years – victim young person’s niece – admissibility of
tendency evidence – doli incapax.
Legislation Cited:
Criminal Code 2002
Evidence (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1991
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Prosecution)
Ms T Beck (Informant)
PM (Young person)
Representation:
Mr J Moffett (Young person)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Prosecution)
Mr D Rutherford (Young person)
File Number(s):
CH 895 of 2014
CH 896 of 2014
CH 897 of 2014
CH 947 of 2014
956 of 2014
MAGISTRATE FRYAR:
1. The young person has been charged with three counts of acts
of indecency where the complainants are his young nieces, and two counts
incest where the complainant is his younger half brother. After a protracted
hearing, on 11 December 2015 I found the charge of
act of indecency on LF, and
two charges of incest on DC proved. The two charges of act of indecency on OB
were dismissed. These are
my reasons for those findings.
2. I agree with the
summation of the prosecutor in relation to the elements of each of these
offences. Although each of these matters
are serious indictable offences,
because appropriate consents to the jurisdiction of this court were given the
maximum penalty that
can be imposed in relation to each offence is two years
imprisonment.
3. I will first deal with charge CH15/897, that on 5 November
2014 the young person did commit an act of indecency upon LF who was
person under the age of 10 years namely five years of age. LF is the now
six-year-old daughter of the young person’s
half sister. The age of LF and
the fact that the alleged act was indecent were not matters in issue before me.
The real issue is
whether the young person in fact intentionally committed any
4. LF gave evidence to the court, initially through the playing of
her Record of Evidence in Chief Interview given to the police on
Thursday, 6
November 2014, and then in person over CCTV, when she was also cross-examined.
For such a young child she was, in my
view, a very competent witness. LF gave
evidence that the young person tried to tickle her on the private spot, and that
her undies and pants off and tickled her everywhere in her private
spot. It is clear from her demonstration through pointing and
her description of
“privates” given to the police officers that her evidence was that
the young person tickled LF under
her clothing on her genital region. She said
this occurred in the young person’s bedroom when she was playing with him
Xbox and the door was closed.
5. The complainant’s evidence was
corroborated by her almost immediate complaint to her mother and then later to
her grandmother
(the young person’s mother) and corroborative evidence
concerning opportunity and the fact concerning the door being closed.
also persuasive evidence from the grandmother’s neighbour Ms D, that was
not challenged, that she saw the young person
carrying LF out from his room, and
that LF was distressed and calling for her mother. Ms D described LF as being
frightened and scared
and then really quiet.
6. It is clear from the evidence
of LF’s mother and grandmother that the complaint she made to them was
substantially to the
effect of the evidence given by her in court. I find that
the complaint was made at a time and in the manner that would indicate
allegation was reliable. Accordingly I am entitled to use what was said in that
complaint as evidence of the truth of what
LF alleged against the young
7. Further, the complainant’s conduct at the time was entirely
the sort of conduct and demeanour I would expect of a young child
who had been
assaulted in that way and accordingly in my view the complaint adds cogency to
LF’s evidence.
8. The issue concerning the allegation with regard to
the use of a wooden spoon is in my view of no moment. I draw no adverse
from the fact that the young person has not given evidence or that he
declined to speak to the police, but on the whole of the evidence
before me in
relation to this matter I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the young
person did commit the act as alleged
by LF in the manner that she alleged, and
that each of the elements of the offence are proved.
9. I will next deal with
the charges of incest in relation to DC, the young person’s half brother.
Charges CH14/895 and CH 14/
896 are in identical terms, that between 30
September 2014 and 5 November 2014, the young person did engage in sexual
intercourse
with DC, the said DC then being a person aged 10 years but under the
age of 16 years, namely 10 years of age, and who was to his
knowledge his half
10. The fact that DC was of lineal descent to the young person, that
the young person knew that at the time, and that DC was between
the ages of 10
and 16 at the time of the alleged offences are again matters that were not in
dispute. In relation to the element
of the offence being sexual intercourse, I
agree again with the prosecutor’s summation that oral contact with the
is sufficient to make out that element.
11. DC’s taped Record
of Evidence in Chief Interview given to the police on Thursday, 6 November 2014
was played to the court
and he commenced giving sworn evidence over the CCTV
system. However before his evidence in chief was completed DC refused to
to answer, in particular, the question the prosecutor was asking about
the specifics of the acts he alleged the young person performed.
After several
adjournments of the hearing DC then refused to participate in the proceedings
any further.
12. Clearly the defence were not given the opportunity to test
his evidence through cross-examination and accordingly the weight I
can place on
the evidence given by DC must be significantly limited. Of course that does not
mean that no regard at all can be given
to his evidence and in my view the
particulars of the acts complained of are clear from his interview with police
and the drawings
he made during that interview , that is that the young person
touched DC’s penis with his hands and his mouth.
13. In any event that
is not where the matter ends. There is evidence of the early complaint he made
to his mother which is consistent
with the allegations made in his Taped Record
of Interview and the drawing he made in the police notebook. In relation to the
evidence, counsel for the young person submitted that he was not able
to cross-examine the mother about it because he was not able
to cross-examine DC
can find beyond a reasonable
doubt that DC made a complaint to his mother
consistent with his interview with, and the drawing made for, police. Further
are the observations made by DC’s sister SA and Ms D in relation to
DC’s demeanour when he was making the complaint to
his mother which, in my
view, are also consistent with the allegation made being true.
14. Concerning
any delay in making the complaint, I am mindful of the directions set out in
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
, in particular
that there may be good reasons why a victim of a sexual offence may not make, or
may hesitate in making, a complaint
particularly pertinent where the alleged victim is a child and the perpetrator
is the older
sibling of that child, such as is the case here. It was not
necessarily raised in submissions but I do not place any weight on the
of delay in complaint.
15. Finally there is another aspect concerning my
assessment of evidence in relation to these offences and that is the tendency
On 5 June 2015 I determined that the evidence in each of the incidents
was cross-admissible in relation to the others. I also expressed
the view that
if it could be proved that the young person had a tendency to be sexually
interested in his child relatives and to
act on that sexual interest by touching
or stimulating the genitalia of the child relative, and to invite them into his
room to play
games so that he could molest them, they are tendencies that are
sufficiently extraordinary to possess significant probative value
in assessing
whether or not he committed the offences.
16. Given that I found that the
incident in relation to LF occurred as alleged, in my view that is sufficient to
also prove beyond
a reasonable doubt that the young person does in fact have
those tendencies outlined above. It would be wrong to say that simply
the young person engaged in such conduct in relation to LF that he is the kind
of person to have also committed the offences
in relation to DC and LK. However
the similarities of both LF and DC being the young person’s child
relative, that he acted
on a sexual attraction to them by stimulating their
genitalia, and that he took the opportunity to do so by inviting them into his
room to play games, are sufficient in my view to be taken into account in
considering the likelihood that the young person also committed
the offences
against DC as alleged.
17. Accordingly having regard to the fact that I am
satisfied the young person did possess those tendencies, to the evidence of
complaint, and having regard (albeit in a limited way) to DC’s
evidence, I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the
young person did
commit both offences against DC as alleged.
18. Finally the young person was
charged with two counts of acts of indecency upon OB, charge CH14/ 947, that
between 1 December 2012
and 28 February 2014 the young person did commit an act
of indecency upon a person, namely OB, the said OB then being a person under
age of 10 years, namely 8 years of age; and charge CH14/956 that between 31
October 2014 and 5 November 2014 the young person
did commit an act of indecency
upon a person, namely OB, the said OB then being a person under the age of 16
years, namely 10 years
19. The element of the offences of OB’s
age at the relevant times was not an issue in dispute. The real issue was
whether the incidents in fact occurred.
20. There was a
problem with OB completing her evidence. After completing her examination in
chief, including the playing of her Taped
Record of Evidence in Chief Interview,
there was some cross-examination and a court recess. Following the recess OB
refused to come
back into the remote witness room and her cross-examination was
unable to be completed. Indeed the hearing was adjourned for some
upon resumption it was agreed that OB would not be forced to attend court again.
21. Counsel on behalf of the young person submitted that OB’s evidence
should be given no weight at all on the basis that he
could not complete his
cross-examination of her. I do not agree with that submission but do agree that
the weight that can be afforded
to the evidence she gave must be significantly
limited as a result.
22. Throughout her evidence it was clear that one of the
issues in relation to OB’s evidence was her credibility, and indeed
whether she had concocted her allegation to avoid getting into trouble for the
behavioural difficulties she had at school. I note
that her disclosure was not
until sometime after the disclosures of the other children and at the same time
she was having significant
problems at school.
23. The prosecution submit
that there was some corroborative evidence from her mother and grandmother
concerning her demeanour, that
she denied that she had concocted the story, and
that she was a rather feisty child and was not afraid of getting into trouble so
the motivation for concoction suggested by the defence was not applicable.
Further it was submitted that her evidence together with
the tendency evidence
is sufficient to prove that the acts occurred as she alleged.
24. Counsel for
the young person submitted however that it was convenient and conceivable that
OB made the story up to avoid punishment
by her mother and that, together with
the chronology of her complaint, was sufficient to raise a reasonable
25. The issue regarding doli incapax was enlivened in accordance with
s.26 of the Criminal Code 2002 in relation to part of the time
period attached
to CH14/ 947. I am satisfied having regard to the evidence of the young
person’s sister and the young person’s
mother in this respect (such
evidence was not challenged) that at all relevant times the young person did in
fact know that such
conduct as alleged would be seriously wrong. Accordingly I
find that the young person was not doli incapax in relation to that particular
26. I must say I did not find OB a compelling witness, and after due
consideration of the matter, although I am not saying that I
am satisfied that
she concocted the story, I am of the opinion that I am unable to safely say
whether her version of events is true
and accurate or not. Accordingly I cannot
find the offence proved beyond a reasonable doubt and so I must find the young
guilty and dismiss charges CH14/ 947 and CH14/956.
certify that the preceding twenty-six [26] numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Decision of her Honour Magistrate
Associate: Margot Deegan
Date: 31 March 2016
RTF format (181 KB)
Signed PDF/A format