In the matter of three deaths of AFP appointees in the Australian Capital Territory [2023] ACTCD 12 (4 October 2023)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
PUBLISHED SUMMARY OF
Case Title:
In the matter of three deaths of AFP appointees in the Australian
Capital Territory
Inquest into the Death of Richard Roberts
Inquest into the Death of Samantha Baglin
Inquest into the Death of Dominic Coleman
[2023] ACTCD 12
Decision Date:
Coroner Archer
See [Summary page 2], [16], [71] – [101]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– mental health, death by suicide with AFP
firearm – gun safety and mental health – mental health governance
the AFP – matters contributing to the cause of death.
Legislation Cited:
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Coroners Act 1997
sections 34A
Firearms Act 1996
Cases Cited:
R v Coroner Doogan
ex parte Lucas-Smith
[2005] ACTSC 74
Texts Cited:
The AFP Commissioner’s Order on Operational Safety (CO3)
Abernethy, Baker, Dillon and Roberts
Wallers Criminal Law and Practice
in NSW 4th ed
Freckelton & Ranson
Death Investigation and the Coroner’s
(Oxford University Press)
ANAO Report No. 31 2017-18
Phoenix Australia
AFP Structural Review, Reform and Policy Development
on Mental Health: Final Report
January 2018
Counsel Assisting:
File Numbers:
Ms P Bindon
CD 271/2018
CD 302/2018
CD 148/2019
CORONER ARCHER:
This summary sets out the findings made in respect of the deaths of three
people who were appointees of the Australian Federal Police
(AFP) at the time
Each took their life by the use of an AFP issued firearm.
Richard Paul Roberts (Richard) was a Protective Services Officer (PSO) with
the AFP. He was 57 years old when he took his own life
on 28 October 2018 at the
AFP headquarters at Barton ACT. He had over 20 years of service with the
Samantha Baglin (Sam) had similar period of service with the AFP. She took
her own life at AFP Headquarters at Barton ACT. She died
on 9 December 2018 and
was 44 years old at the time of her death.
Dominic Coleman (Dominic) was at the time of his death an appointee of the
AFP and an Air Security Officer (ASO) since
He was on duty as an ASO in
Canberra when he took his life on 2 July 2019 in a hotel room he was staying at.
He was 52 years old.
Each death was tragic. Each of the deceased were deeply loved by their
family and friends and held in high regard by their colleagues.
The matters were investigated together because of common features of their
death including their employment, access to firearms and
the fact that each was
most probably suffering a mental illness at the time of their
The manner and cause of
their death was also clear in each case.
In each instance a hearing was dispensed with.
I make the findings required by section 52(1) of the Act as follows:
(a) Richard Roberts died on 28 October 2018 in the Core 5 armoury located in
room G.5.8 on the ground floor of the EBB, AFP Headquarters,
Barton, ACT. He
died of injuries caused by a gunshot wound self-inflicted with the intention of
taking his own life.
(b) Samantha Baglin died on 9 December 2018 in the Core 5 armoury located in
room G.5.8 on the ground floor of the EBB, AFP Headquarters,
Barton, ACT. She
died of injuries caused by gunshot wound self-inflicted with the intention of
taking her own life.
(c) Dominic Coleman died on 2 July 2019 in a hotel room in Forrest, ACT. He died
of injuries caused by a gunshot wound self-inflicted
with the intention of
taking his own life.
In each matter a finding is made that matters of public safety arise.
Recommendations are made as to how those safety issue might
be addressed.
Those recommendations, made pursuant to
section 52(4)
Coroners Act
, are common to each matter:
AFP consider simplifying the circumstances in which a COHNF is required to be
submitted to remove ambiguity and/or reduce the
need for an AFP appointee to
exercise judgment about whether submission is required. In particular, if the
COHNF is intended to be
one of the central means by which mental health issues
are raised, then it should be required whenever an AFP appointee is diagnosed
with or treated for such conditions.
AFP consider amending CO3 to refer explicitly to:
need for AFP appointees to submit a COHNF in the circumstances required;
ability of the AFP Chief Medical Officer or Principal Psychologist or the AFP
appointee’s manager to direct an AFP appointee
to submit a COHNF, given
the revocation powers under
obligation of the AFP appointees to participate in any applicable regular mental
health review processes as part of the overall
framework of ensuring safe use of
AFP consider incorporating into CO3, provision for the temporary removal of
access to AFP equipment, including firearms, for periods
when an AFP appointee
will not, or should not, be required to use it (such as periods of approved
AFP consider ways in which existing paid leave entitlements be used for
situations in which supervisors or managers consider it
necessary for an AFP
appointee not to attend work due to concerns about wellbeing or fitness for
I have made a decision not to publish the full text of the decision. I am
satisfied that the publication of the full text of this
decision would cause
great distress to some of the families involved. A detailed and public record of
the decision of each of the
deceased to take their own lives may cause others to
undertake acts of self harm.
I am able, by publication of this summary, to sufficiently expose the
findings I have made both as to the manner and cause of death
and the matters of
public safety that arose from the inquest.
The full text of the decision will be placed on the court file. Pursuant to
Coroners Act 1997
, being of the opinion that it is
desirable in the public interest to do so, I by order prohibit the publication
or disclosure of
the evidence in the inquest not contained in this summary.
A. JURISDICTION & REQUIRED FINDINGS
of the deaths fell within the terms of section 13(1)(a) of the
Coroners Act
(“the Act”) being deaths that were “unnatural”
or “violent”. The coroner was required to hold
an inquest into the
manner and cause of the death of each of the deceased and make the findings
required by section 52 of the Act.
That section of the Act relevantly
52 Coroner’s findings
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find, if possible—
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the person has
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection with the
inquest or inquiry; and
matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the matter
B. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
2. In each case, the referrals to the
ACT Coroner’s Court were made on the day of the respective deaths.
3. A substantial brief of evidence was produced by investigators acting on
behalf of the coroner. On two occasions during the investigation
the coroner
wrote to the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police (AFP) asking
questions relevant to the issues in the inquest
that arose from the evidence
that was then available. The AFP responded to those requests by letters dated 28
June 2019 and 1 December
4. The totality of the material produced by
investigators was ultimately distributed to the families with some limited
to meet concerns around the release of sensitive information.
5. Ms Prue Bindon of counsel was appointed counsel assisting.
decision was made by Coroner L. E. Campbell to aggregate the inquests and
conduct them as
The matters were reallocated to me after my appointment as the dedicated coroner
in March 2022.
7. By that time, the process of evidence gathering was at an
end and counsel assisting had been requested to prepare submissions.
Decision to Dispense with a Hearing
34A of the Act relevantly provides:
34A Decision not to conduct
(1) A coroner may decide not to conduct a hearing into a death if, after
consideration of information given to a coroner relating
to the death of a
person, the coroner is satisfied that–
(a) the manner and cause of death are sufficiently disclosed; and
(b) a hearing is unnecessary.
(3) A coroner who decides not to conduct a hearing into a death must give to
the Chief Coroner and a member of the immediate family
of the deceased written
notice of the decision including the grounds for the decision.
on the information received in the brief of evidence, Coroner L.E. Campbell was
satisfied, subject to the views of interested
parties, that the manner and cause
of each deceased’s death were sufficiently disclosed and, therefore, a
hearing was unnecessary.
That provisional view not to conduct a hearing and the
reasons for that decision were provided to the AFP and representatives of
family. The AFP and families of Richard and Sam expressed a desire not to have a
hearing. The family of Dominic sought a
On 6 August 2021 the
coroner, through counsel assisting, communicated by letter to each family,
Coroner L.E. Campbell’s view
that a hearing was unnecessary and that it
would be dispensed with.
Submissions
assisting, the families of Richard, Sam and Dominic and the AFP made submissions
as to the findings that should be made.
respect of matters going to the narrative of each death and detail surrounding
relevant governance issues, the submissions of counsel
assisting were detailed
and, save for some factual issues that were raised by the Baglin and Coleman
families, accepted by the parties.
assisting made submissions urging me to make recommendations in relation to
certain public safety issues that arose from the
families supported or did not oppose the making of those recommendations. The
AFP opposed the making of some of the recommendations
to the extent set out
below. In addition, the Coleman and Baglin families urged me to find
(respectively) that the AFP and Sam’s
husband contributed to the relevant
death. I declined to make such findings.
C. MATTERS OF PUBLIC SAFETY –
CORONERS ACT 1997
SECTION 52(4)
Introduction
terms of section 52(4) of the Act establish the parameters of a coroner’s
power to examine issues of public safety. To comment
on a matter, it must
‘arise’ in connection with the inquest or inquiry.
adequacy of the AFP’s governance in respect of mental health issues in
2018 and 2019 provides the broader context to the
inquest before me and is
addressed below [18]. The AFP has provided information [25] to the court about
the progress of much needed
reform and change in this space. Whilst
consideration of that issue provides a necessary backdrop to the consideration
of each death
[27], a fair and comprehensive review of that issue is beyond the
scope of being a matter ‘arising’ from each death.
each appointee whose death I am considering used their own AFP issued revolver
to take their own lives. Regulation of access
to AFP firearms by certain of its
employees is, in my view, a public safety issue that arises in connection with
each inquest. That
being so, I am required to comment on that matter.
submissions of counsel assisting crystalized the public safety issues that arise
from the material in the inquest. Interested
parties, including the families
and the AFP had an opportunity to indicate a position in relation to the
comments and recommendations
that counsel assisting invited me to make.
Background Issues – Mental Health Governance within
employee mental health issues is obviously a matter of ongoing concern for
management within the AFP. As first responders
dealing routinely with events of
a confronting and traumatising character, the AFP is faced with the challenge of
ensuring that staff
well-being and mental health is properly addressed. This
challenge is shared by all employers of first responding emergency services
officers, front line workers and those regularly dealing with sensitive and
distressing material. Safe Work Australia’s
Work-Related Mental
Disorders Profile 2015
found that first responders, including the police,
were the occupational group most likely to attract compensation claims based on
mental health injury.
2016 the AFP’s performance in addressing mental health needs has been the
subject of a number of reviews. In September
2016, the AFP developed a draft
Mental Health Framework and associated Mental Health Strategic Action Plan.
inform the development of that strategy, the AFP engaged Phoenix Australia
Centre for Posttraumatic Mental Health (Phoenix Australia)
to undertake a review
of mental health governance within the AFP. The work of Phoenix Australia
included surveying employees of the
AFP to gain their views as to matters of
governance and culture within the AFP that affected its capacity to effectively
mental health of it’s workforce. Some of the outcomes of that
survey relevant to these inquests were:
8. Adequacy of current wellbeing supports:
There were strong perceptions
that mental health support services are poorly integrated and under resourced,
and that this has worsened
in recent years.
9. Attitudes to mental health reflect stigma:
There were widespread
perceptions that it is hard for people to raise their hands if they are
concerned about their mental health.
Appointees worry about confidentiality,
adverse career impacts, and losing composite pay. There is a general perception
that management
does not promote help-seeking or take action to support the
health and wellbeing of staff.
12. Psychological assessment:
There were perceptions that current
psychological assessment procedures are bureaucratic, inconsistently applied,
and do not reflect
a genuine concern for appointee wellbeing. Staff were
supportive of increasing wellbeing assessment, commensurate with role and risk
of exposure to critical incidents, provided it would lead to meaningful
findings from the review conducted by Phoenix Australia included that:
(a) whilst there were supports available to AFP staff, there was little internal
co-ordination of those supports and accountability
as to performance; and
(b) managers were not well equipped to deal with mental health issues that were
identified in the workplace.
2017- 2018 the Australia National Audit Office (“the ANAO”)
undertook a performance audit of the AFP’s management
of the mental health
of its employees:
Managing Mental Health in the Australian Federal
The audit report was
tabled in March 2018. Some of the conclusions reached by the ANAO were critical
of the AFP, for example:
While currently developing a mental health framework, the AFP has not
established a clear governance structure for decision-making,
information
sharing and oversight in relation to employee mental health arrangements.
Reporting into the governance structure is
not comprehensive or risk-based,
making it difficult to identify emerging mental health related risks and to
utilise this reporting
to inform decision making in resource prioritisation to
address increasing mental health risks.
The AFP does not have in place an organisational health and wellbeing strategy
which incorporates policies, programs, and practices
to address mental health
risks. The AFP is developing a draft Mental Health Framework and Mental Health
Strategic Action Plan, and
finalisation of these is dependent upon the outcome
of a review of AFP mental health services that was not yet finalised at the time
of drafting this report.
The AFP does not currently have in place mechanisms or sufficient data to
appropriately align resources with key mental health risks.
The AFP formally recognised mental health as a strategic risk to the
organisation and began developing treatment actions in October
strategic risk identification has not led to substantive engagement by all
functional areas. Employee mental health has
not been consistently identified as
a risk in the AFP’s functional risk assessments and it is not evident that
the AFP is co-ordinating
the management of mental health as a shared risk (that
is, between Organisational Health and functional areas).
series of recommendations were made by the Auditor General that were accepted by
AFP Health and Wellbeing Strategy 2018-2023
was launched by the AFP
Commissioner in November 2018.
its December 2021 response to the coroner, the AFP outlined the progress of the
implementation of improvements arising from the
ANAO process. In the AFP’s
submissions made at the end of my investigative process (December 2022), further
information was
provided to the court about the implementation of that strategy
and commitments that the Federal Government had made to fund a new
model known as SHIELD:
12. The AFP continues to place significant focus on improving mental health
outcomes for AFP appointees. Since the AFP’s last
response to the Coroner
in December 2021, the AFP has continued to implement a number of key measures
and improvements to its wellbeing
framework...
13. In late 2020, the Government committed $65 million to the AFP over four
years to implement a new AFP health model known as SHIELD.
As a result of the
steps taken by the AFP over the past two years to implement SHIELD, there has
been a significant increase in the
proactive health and wellbeing services aimed
at prevention and early intervention.
14. SHIELD has shifted the AFP’s health and wellbeing program from a
limited, centralised model focused on rehabilitation to
the SHIELD model which
delivers expanded services in each Regional Command, with an emphasis on
delivering a holistic approach to
supporting AFP members’ health,
including prevention and education.
15. The SHIELD services are delivered in each Regional Command and provide AFP
appointees with access to professionals according
to their needs, such as a
doctor, nurse, exercise physiologist or psychologist. AFP appointees can arrange
in-person or online health
check, consultation, or education session through a
simple booking system.
16. SHIELD services in each state and territory offer access to a dedicated team
of clinicians and health professionals who understand
the unique nature of the
AFP’s work. The Phoenix Review (2018) reported an ideal ratio of 1:250 in
respect to mental health
practitioners to AFP members. As of 7 December 2022,
the number of SHIELD psychologists has increased by 72%, and the ratio of
mental health practitioners (inclusive of psychologists, nurses, and
social workers) is now 1:217.
17. To date, 9 out of 10 SHIELD Hubs have commenced. SHIELD Southern Command
will commence enhanced services in May 2023.
for what follows below, I make no findings as to the sufficiency of the
(a) mental health strategy and governance in the years before the deaths I am
considering,
(b) mental health governance during the period covered by the dates of the
deaths before me; or
(c) the adequacy of its implementation of the recommendations of the ANAO review
at the time of and after the deaths of Richard,
Sam, and Dominic.
issues were beyond the scope of the findings that could be said to arise from
the inquest. However, the cultural and governance
issues that are identified in
the reviews outlined above form part of the essential background to the deaths I
am considering. This
is particularly so in relation to the reluctance each of
the deceased had to divulge their mental health difficulties within the
workplace or to AFP mental health clinicians because (at least in part) of a
lack of trust and out of fear of being stigmatised.
Gun Safety and Mental Health
Access to Firearms within the AFP
to AFP equipment including firearms is controlled by two sets of requirements:
(a) Administrative access: access is limited to those granted authorisation by
the AFP to be issued with and possess an official
firearm; and
(b) Physical access: access is limited by measures in place to regulate physical
storage of official firearms.
Part 1 – Administrative Access to Firearms
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
(“the AFP Act”) provides
the legal framework for the operation of the AFP generally and provides the
structure around
which the AFP internally regulates the use and possession of
firearms by AFP appointees (a concept that includes operational police).
AFP Commissioner has the power under section 38 of the AFP Act to issue written
orders in respect of the general administration
of, and the control of the
operations of, the AFP.
AFP appointee is required by section 39 of the AFP Act to comply with the AFP
Commissioner’s orders.
an order, the AFP
Commissioner's Order on Operational Safety
(“CO3”), has been issued by the AFP Commissioner with respect to
operational safety, and was in force at the time of
each of the deaths which are
the subject of these findings. It sets out the AFP's policy and procedures in
relation to operational
safety and use of force practice, reporting, training,
assessment, qualification, and administration. CO3, with some redactions,
publicly available document. AFP appointees must comply with CO3
(a) they have applied for a variation from compliance, and approval in writing
of the variation has been granted, in accordance with
(b) they have been granted a medical exemption; or
(c) they are an exempted AFP appointee under Schedule 1.
to firearms is not predicated on the likelihood of that person having to use a
AFP appointees are
under an obligation to maintain an operational safety qualification. To be
entitled under CO3 to access firearms
appointees must maintain an operational
safety qualification (which is an annual competency testing process which tests
and theoretical
competency).
are some exemptions that apply to the need to maintain an operational safety
qualification. Relevantly for present purposes:
(a) AFP appointees whom the AFP Chief Medical Officer or Principal Psychologist
has recommended for medical, psychological, or organisational
health reasons be:
(i) exempt from completing the operational safety assessment; or
(ii) exempt from carrying an item or items of AFP equipment.
(b) AFP appointees who have applied for a variation from compliance with CO3,
and approval in writing of the variation has been granted.
respect of an exemption for medical, psychological, or organisational health
reasons, the procedure is:
(a) The AFP Chief Medical Officer or the Principal Psychologist may request, in
writing, evidence from the AFP appointee’s
treating health practitioner to
assist in making a
recommendation.
(b) If a recommendation for exemption is made, the AFP Chief Medical Officer or
the Principal Psychologist must in writing:
(i) advise the AFP appointee of the recommendation including the reason,
duration, and process to be followed to address the issues
leading to the
recommendation;
(ii) advise the AFP appointee’s supervisor, manager, and Manager Security
of the recommendation including the duration and
process to be followed to
address the issues leading to the
recommendation.
(c) The manager of the AFP appointee must then consider revoking the AFP
appointee’s operational safety qualification in accordance
with section
If the manager decides
not to revoke the AFP appointee’s operational safety qualification, the
AFP’s Chief Medical Officer
or Principal Psychologist must be advised of
the reasons for the decision. The manager may also consider granting the AFP
a variation from compliance in accordance with section
(d) The AFP appointee’s operational safety qualification may be reinstated
by the revoking officer, a manager or higher. The
reinstating officer must not
do so unless the AFP Chief Medical Officer confirms in writing that the issues
leading to the revocation
Psychological Testing and Operational Safety
Qualification
Psychological
testing does not directly form part of the operational safety qualification
process. However, that statement is subject
to the following
qualifications:
(a) OSA Declaration of Health
Prior to attending an operational safety assessment, AFP appointees are (and
were at the time of each of the deaths) required to submit
Declaration of Health” form to identify any medical or psychological
issues that would put themselves or others
at risk by participating in the OSA
(b) Change of Health Notification Form (COHNF)
appointees are (and were at the time of each of the deaths) also required to
submit a “Change of Health (medical or psychological
illness/injury)
Notification Form” whenever a medical issue arises which may give rise to
risk to themselves, colleagues, or
the public. This requirement derives not from
CO3 but from the AFP National Guideline on Health for AFP appointees.
Relevantly, the
COHNF contains the following instructions:
Appointees are required to submit a COHNF if they:
Have an injury
and or illness which may affect their ability to undertake their role
Require a health
exemption for OSA and OH do not already have this information
recommended to do so by an Organisational Health clinician
Examples of illness/injury which may require a COHNF:
Commencement of
medication that may affect your cognition and decision-making capability
injury that affects your ability to undertake the physical requirements of your
role safely
You are not
required to complete this form if you have previously provided this information
to Organisational Health. ....
cases where a temporary health exemption is required, Occupational Health will
advise AFP Security of the temporary health exemption,
in accordance with the
above AFP Governance. The reasons for the exemption are not included in this
notification.
received, the COHNF will be reviewed by an Occupational Health delegated
clinician who will identify any potential health risks
which may affect the
ability of the appointee to undertake their role safely. The appointees may be
to provide additional information.
there are no identified potential health risks, the appointee will be notified
by email and the COHNF retained to form part of
the appointee’s
Occupational Health record.
AFP indicated that the COHNF “serves to ensure that members notify the AFP
in a timely manner when there are any factors
that may impact on their ability
to hold an operational safety qualification”. In the view of the AFP, it
enables the AFP Chief
Medical Officer and medical team to identify potential
health risks and provide appropriate and timely health advice to the affected
person in order to reduce potential health risks.
Revocation of Access to a Firearm
provides a mechanism for revoking administrative access to a firearm. Section 22
relevantly provides:
22.7 An AFP appointee's operational safety qualification may be revoked at any
time by an appointee performing the role of Manager
or above including if:
b. the appointee is considered to be unfit or unsuitable to carry or use AFP
22.8 If an AFP appointee is suspended from duty the suspending officer must, in
writing, advise the appointee's Manager of the suspension
including the reason
and process to be followed to address the issues leading to the suspension.
22.9 The Manager of an AFP appointee who is suspended from duty must immediately
revoke the appointee's operational safety qualification.
22.10 If an AFP appointee’s operational safety qualification is revoked
for any reason, apart from the appointee being unable
to demonstrate competence
in an operational assessment item, the revoking officer must, in
the appointee of the revocation including the reason and process to be followed
to address the issues leading to the revocation;
the appointee’s supervisor of the revocation including the reason and
process to be followed to address the issues leading
to the revocation;
COSP of the revocation including the reason and process to be followed to
address the issues leading to the revocation;
Manager Professional Standards of the revocation including the reason and
process to be followed to address the issued leading
to the revocation;
the CMO and Principal Psychologist of the revocation;
Manager Security of the revocation including the reason and process to be
followed to address the issues leading to the revocation;
the relevant issuing Registrar of the revocation and the requirement for the
appointee to immediately return their personally
22.18 The AFP CMO or the Principal Psychologist may for medical, psychological
or organisational health reasons:
that an AFP appointee’s operational safety qualification be revoked;
recommend that an AFP appointee be exempt from completing the operational safety
assessment;
that an AFP appointee be exempt from carrying an item or items of AFP
22.21 The Manager of an AFP appointee who is subject to a recommendation under
sub-section 22.18(a) or 22.18(b) must consider revoking
the appointee’s
operational safety qualification in accordance with section 22.10 of this Order.
Part 2 – Physical Access to Firearms
addressing how AFP appointees access their firearms, the legal context in which
that occurs must be understood. The three deaths
occurred in the ACT. The
possession and use of firearms is regulated by the
Firearms Act 1996
(ACT) (“the
Firearms Act
”). The lawful possession of the firearms
that were issued by the AFP to each of the deceased would normally only be
if they were licenced to possess a firearm of that type. However, the
Firearms Act
exempts an AFP member from it’s terms in respect of
“possessing or using firearm in exercise of person’s functions
member”. Therefore, unless an AFP appointee possesses or uses an AFP
issued firearm in accordance with their duties, they
will be exposed to
potential criminal liability. When a person is possessing or using their firearm
in the exercise of their functions
as an appointee is defined by CO3, other
relevant AFP governance and relevant Commonwealth, state, or territory laws
(that might
impose restrictions on the possession and use of firearms in
particular situations).
and use of firearms by appointees whilst they are on leave without some
authority otherwise being granted would expose
them to potential criminal
liability, as they are not possessing the firearm in the exercise of their
functions as a member (appointee).
AFP Governance – General Matters
requires that AFP appointees are individually accountable for the security of
AFP equipment issued to them.
also requires that all AFP equipment must be stored in accordance with the AFP
National Guideline on Controlled Items attachments
A and B (“the National
Guideline”), unless complying storage facilities are not available and
approval has been granted
for alternative storage.
National Guideline details obligations for all business areas, supervisors and
AFP appointees for the procurement, issue, custody,
management, disposal and
reporting of controlled items. It provides that AFP appointees issued with or in
possession of controlled
items must only be in possession of a controlled item
while on operational duty or where approval is received from their supervisor.
operational safety qualified AFP appointees have, in accordance with AFP policy,
a security pass that is configured to allow them
to access to an AFP armoury
where they are to store their personally issued AFP
At the time of
Richard’s and Sam’s death, an AFP appointee simply needed to swipe
the security pass in order to access
the relevant armoury.
early 2018, several months prior to Richard’s death, the AFP implemented a
“dual swipe” trial for accessing AFP
armouries in Cairns and
Brisbane Airports. It was implemented in direct response to other critical
incidents involving the loss of
life in AFP premises.
December 2018, in response to the deaths of Richard and Sam, the AFP took urgent
action to implement the enhanced armoury access
control measures at all major
AFP sites. The enhanced armoury access control measures restrict access to AFP
armouries through one
of two methods:
(a) Time restricted method
: an armoury operating with time restriction
capability means that during core business hours a qualified appointee may
armoury. However, outside core hours, the card reader to access the
armoury is deactivated and after-hours access must be approved
by a supervisor
in writing to the AFP Operations Coordination Centre AOCC; and
(b) Dual-swipe access method
: an armoury fitted with dual-swipe access
capability requires two qualified appointees to swipe their security pass across
reader within seconds of each other before access may be granted. This
process applies at all times (including during core business
hours) and provides
an opportunity for appointees to observe the entering appointee's general
wellbeing. The same must occur to exit
the armoury.
of June 2019, enhanced armoury access controls had been implemented nationally
across all major AFP sites (22 locations), applying
to 33 individual armouries
covering 80% of all sworn police and PSOs.
remaining sites, the AFP advised that risk is mitigated by the small team
environment, different controls (as there is not an
AFP access-controlled
armoury) or reliance upon partner access control and security
requirements.
With respect to
ACT Policing specifically, the AFP
ACT Policing has undertaken a review of personal firearms storage, issue and
return, and has not implemented enhanced access control
measures to its
armouries due to the existing firearms storage configuration across ACTP sites.
While review recommendations are
to be finalised, ACT Policing operates on a
24/7 small team environment which involves regular critical incident debriefing;
support and supervision of staff and 24/7 visibility over the majority of
firearms storage containers in open environments.
Additionally,
on 21 January 2019, the AFP commenced a National Firearms Access Review. The
purpose of the National Firearms Access
Review was to examine extant national
level policy, practices, processes, and governance in relation to firearms
storage and access
by qualified AFP appointees, and to recommend/implement
reforms to reduce corporate risk and strengthen safeguards for at-risk
National Firearms Access Review was finalised in June 2019. The AFP advised that
the following changes were made as a result of
(a) Risk assessment treatment plans were conducted regarding sites where
firearms were stored.
(b) A list of endorsed firearm storage containers was published internally.
(c) Reporting measures were implemented which allow supervisors and managers
within the AFP to monitor compliance with firearms surrender
procedures when an
appointee is not authorised to retain possession of a firearm.
(d) Revision of the National Guideline on Controlled Items to enhance processes
around approval of home or off-site storage of controlled
Possession of Firearms – Specific Operational Need
AFP has advised that, at the time of Dominic’s death, the standard
procedure was for ASOs to store their firearms at an
appropriate AFP armoury. In
the case of ASOs staying overnight in Canberra, the appropriate armoury would be
the armoury at the AFP
Airport Station. That procedure remains in place.
the time of Dominic’s death, the documentation of relevant procedure for
ASOs to follow in this context was piecemeal and
lacking in specificity.
evidence in the inquest diverged as to storage of firearms when not in use. Some
appointees suggested that normal practice was
for AFP appointees to utilise an
AFP armoury located either at an AFP Office or at an AFP Airport Station to
store their firearms
while not in use. However, some AFP appointees stated that
this practice was not
followed, and appointees would sometimes
store their firearms in their hotel room. Dominic’s colleagues indicated
was no standard operating procedure to govern this.
evidence of some AFP appointees also confirmed that to access an AFP armoury at
an AFP Office or AFP Airport Station located in
the travel destination, ASOs
make a request to the relevant “Duty Sergeant”. Other appointees
were of the understanding
that all ASOs have swipe access cards for the
armouries and can access them independently. In any event, it appears that AFP
located in the AFP Airport Stations are not notified generally about
incoming/outgoing ASOs who will need to store their firearms
AFP confirmed that there is no mechanism or process by which the storage of
firearms by ASOs on arrival at an overnight location
can be automatically
checked and verified. Rather, the system “requires appointees to comply
with the directions and obligations
with regard to firearms storage set out in
relevant governance”.
Dominic’s death, the AFP conducted a full review of governance,
procedures, recruitment, tactics, and training relating
to the ASO capability,
which included updating governance and standard operating procedures for SRG DO
(which has subsumed what was
previously the ASO operations).
Specifically:
(a) in relation to ASO firearm handling, there is a revised directive which
provides a more robust process for securing firearms
at armouries;
(b) further training and mandatory reporting have been rolled out to ensure that
all AFP appointees are fully aware of requirements
around weapons storage, and
that those requirements are reinforced as part of recurring compulsory training;
(c) governance around these topics is being revised to place greater emphasis on
the obligation of AFP appointees to report failures
by other AFP appointees to
follow governance around firearm use and storage. A breach of these governance
obligations is potentially
a serious professional standards issue.
Part 3 – Removal of Physical Access to a Firearm
the event that an AFP appointee’s operational safety qualification is
revoked, CO3 requires that:
(a) the revoking officer must inform the issuing Registrar of the need for the
AFP appointee to immediately return their personally
issued AFP equipment;
(b) the AFP appointee must immediately return all personally issued AFP
equipment to the issuing Registrar in accordance with section
(c) the supervisor of the AFP appointee must ensure the appointee returns all
personally issued AFP equipment in accordance with
section 18 or, if the
appointee is unable for medical or other justifiable reasons to do so, the
supervisor must take possession
of the equipment and ensure it is returned;
(d) the Manager Security must be notified of the revocation in accordance with
clause 22.10(f) and the Security Access Control team
will deactivate the
appointee’s security pass armoury access.
this regard, the AFP provided a copy of the procedure that the Security Access
Control team follows with respect to security passes.
It is apparent from the
procedure that once the Security Access Control team receives instructions from
one of the relevant sources,
revocation of physical access to armouries can be
effective immediately (at least in the vast majority of locations where access
to armouries is by way of security
Ultimately,
the practical steps for revoking physical access to a firearm may not be
difficult to manage where access to armouries
is by way of security pass.
Everything hinges on the Security Access Control team receiving an email from
the appropriate person
for a reason recognised in the procedure.
armouries where access is not by way of security pass, the position is somewhat
less clear as to the last step in revoking physical
access (given that the step
mentioned in paragraph [61 (d)] above would not apply). If in those locations,
firearms are stored in
lockers within the relevant AFP station, the equivalent
of the Security Access Control team deactivating the appointee’s security
pass would presumably be the AFP appointee surrendering the key to the locker(s)
to someone authorised to take custody of it. Logically,
if the AFP appointee
must return the firearm to the Registrar, the Registrar would also be in a
position to take custody of the locker
is worth noting again that in the December 2021 AFP Response, the AFP indicated
that as a result of the National Firearms Access
Review new reporting measures
were implemented which allow supervisors and managers within the AFP to monitor
compliance with firearms
surrender procedures when an AFP appointee is not
authorised to retain possession of a firearm. The specific detail of these
was not provided.
Access to Firearms by Each of the Deceased
Part 1 – Administrative Access
Sam, and Dominic were AFP appointees and therefore required to maintain an
operational safety qualification. Dominic’s
duties as an ASO required him
to carry a firearm.
the time of their deaths each had a valid operational safety qualification, and
no exemptions were in place. Therefore, each had
administrative access to
of the deceased were obliged to report the change of health circumstances that
were required by the COHNF process. As has been
addressed [in the full text of
these reasons], it is clear that the disclosures that Richard and Dominic were
required to make were
not made. Clearly, they did not want the AFP to know.
Sam’s case, her mental health challenges were known to her supervisors.
She had been “stood down” but not
Supervisors adverted
to the question of whether Sam should have access to her firearm and came to the
conclusion that revoking access
was not necessary. Therefore, no conclusion was
reached for the purposes of section 22.7 of CO3 that she was unfit or suitable
carry or use a firearm (notwithstanding she was considered to be unfit to be
Part 2 – Physical Access
Sam and Richard used their security passes to access the armoury at the EBB
where their firearms were stored. In Dominic’s
case he possessed the
firearm in the context of his ASO duties and most probably avoided leaving his
gun at the armoury located either
at an AFP Office or at an AFP Airport Station
to facilitate an act of self harm that he had planned.
D. COMMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS
address the possible public safety issues arising from the above in the same
structure adopted by counsel assisting in submission.
The COHNF System & CO3
assisting submitted that the COHNF system has several vulnerabilities:
(a) It places the onus entirely on the AFP appointee to come forward and
disclose the relevant information. Richard, Sam and Dominic
should have
submitted a COHNF to disclose the mental health conditions present at the time
of their deaths, but none of them did
so. All of them appear to have
intentionally avoided disclosing their mental health issues to the AFP.
(b) The terms of the COHNF in place at the time did not make clear that mental
health issues (as distinct from deterioration in physical
health) were required
to be disclosed. It is stated that the COHNF must be submitted when AFP
appointees “have an injury and
or illness which may affect their ability
to undertake their role safely”. The examples given include “major
“[c]ommencement of medication that may affect your
cognition and decision-making capability” and “[i]llness or
that affects your ability to undertake the physical requirements of your role
safely”. However:
(i) a mental illness does not necessarily affect an AFP appointee’s
ability to undertake their role safely (especially if it
is being effectively
(ii) even if it does, AFP appointees themselves may not necessarily recognise
that to be the case; and
(iii) AFP appointees may not necessarily be apprised of the full details of any
medication they are prescribed including its impact
on cognition or
decision-making capability.
(iv) The requirement to submit a COHNF is not referred to anywhere in CO3. This
seems anomalous given that the grounds for revocation
(i) the AFP Chief Medical Officer or Principal Psychologist has recommended that
it be revoked; and
(ii) where the AFP appointee’s manager considers the appointee to be
“unfit or unsuitable to carry and use AFP equipment”.
(v) CO3 contains no reference to the requirement to submit a COHNF.
accept these submissions. I make the following recommendations:
Recommendation 1
AFP consider simplifying the circumstances in which a COHNF is required to be
submitted to remove ambiguity and/or reduce the
need for an AFP appointee to
exercise judgment about whether submission is required. In particular, if the
COHNF is intended to be
one of the central means by which mental health issues
are raised, then it should be required whenever an AFP appointee is diagnosed
with or treated for such conditions.
Recommendation 2
AFP consider amending CO3 to refer explicitly to:
(a) the need for AFP appointees to submit a COHNF in the circumstances required;
(b) the ability of the AFP Chief Medical
or Principal
Psychologist or the AFP appointee’s manager to direct an AFP appointee to
submit a COHNF, given the revocation
powers under section 22;
(c) an obligation of AFP appointees to participate in any applicable regular
mental health review processes as part of the overall
framework of ensuring safe
use of force.
making of these recommendations was supported by the AFP.
Regular Mental Health Reviews
assisting submitted that the AFP consider expanding the regular mental health
review process to all AFP appointees who are
not exempt from CO3. This
recommendation was supported or not opposed by each of the families.
noted [36], mandatory psychological assessment is not part of the annual
operational safety assessment process. The AFP indicated
in its December 2021
response that they do not intend to introduce such a process because
“members are motivated to pass”
and “linking the OSA process
with psychological screening is unlikely to encourage candour and open
engagement with the
screening.”
The AFP went on
to say that the psychological health of an AFP could be addressed in other
(a) the current COHNF system, “which serves to ensure that members notify
the AFP in a timely manner when there are any factors
that may impact on their
ability to hold an operational safety qualification”; and
(b) the “current periodic mental health review process” which is
intended to be expanded “to a greater number of
AFP appointees when
additional mental health clinicians are engaged under
their December 2022 submissions the AFP indicated that it had “introduced
a periodic mental health review process for high-risk
roles. Those reviews are
focused on AFP appointees in business areas that are considered ‘high
risk’ due to the presence
of significant psychosocial hazards in the
workplace”. The submissions went on to say that “there would likely
be resourcing
and quality implications in requiring all AFP appointees to
undertake regular mental health assessments unless exempt under CO3”
that the proposal would require an additional estimated 2553 reviews take place
each year and the employment of an additional
seven psychologists to perform
reply counsel assisting submitted that:
(a) whilst increasing support to people within that category was a commendable
goal, the coverage provided by the new processes would
depend on what is
considered to be a “high risk role”;
(b) the AFP submissions did not make clear whether the roles played by each of
the deceased would be considered “high risk
roles”. It is likely
that Sam and Dominic performed such roles. It is not as clear in respect of
(c) Psychological services could be provided by external psychologists.
(d) Given that annual operational safety assessment involves certification of
fitness and competence to maintain their operational
safety qualification, then
it is hard to see why psychological fitness is not seen as equally necessary to
the vulnerabilities of the AFP workplace to psychological disorder, improving
the provision of psychological services is clearly
a commendable goal. The
provision of a greater level of psychological and/or psychiatric care to each of
the deceased was likely
to have been of therapeutic benefit (and perhaps
considerable benefit).
the submissions made by counsel assisting seek to link improved firearm safety
to a process of psychological assessment that
would occur annually in the
context of maintaining operational safety qualification. It is not clear on the
evidence before me what
the practical benefits of that proposal would have
(a) It involves a point of time assessment of the person’s psychological
health which may not have relevance to their fitness
to have access to a
(b) It may involve the devotion of resources (either by the need to employ extra
salaried psychologist or the retention of external
consultants) that may be
better employed elsewhere.
(c) It is not clear what levels or types of “psychological
unwellness” would operate to exclude an employee from operational
qualification and therefore access to firearms. If the threshold (or at least
one threshold) is “risk of self-harming
behaviour” there is a great
deal of evidence that suggests that suicide is hard to predict. Assessment tools
to detect risks
of self-harming behaviour have proven to be generally
unreliable.
note the issue was enjoined properly only at the stage of submissions. Evidence
on the issue properly attributed was not received,
noting also that a hearing
was not conducted.
am not satisfied that the available evidence allows me to make me the
recommendation in the terms suggested by counsel assisting.
Temporary Removal of Firearms
the time of their deaths, Sam and Richard were on forms of leave. In Sam’s
case, she had been “stood down” for
welfare reasons (against a
background of severe psychological distress). Richard was not considered to be
physically well enough
to be at work. Under CO3 an AFP appointee either has a
valid operational safety qualification (and access to firearms) or they do
(because of a failure to qualify or because the qualification had been revoked).
Revocation of access to firearm seems to carry
a significant stigma within the
AFP, a consideration that influenced the decision not to remove Sam’s
firearm. In light of
these considerations, counsel assisting submitted:
In any event, at least in situations such as those affecting Mr Roberts and Ms
Baglin where it was already clear that they were not
fit to be at work for
health or welfare reasons, it seems unnecessary to impose an obligation on the
manager to make a further “judgment
call” about how likely an AFP
appointee is to self-harm in order to then activate the revocation steps under
CO3. If the AFP
appointee should not be performing duties at work, there would
seemingly be no useful operational purpose served by the appointee
having access
to a firearm.
This suggests that there may be merit in CO3 including a further category of
situation in which an operational safety qualification
is not revoked but rather
(administrative and physical) access to a firearm is nonetheless temporarily
removed for a period when
it is known that the AFP appointee will not, or should
not, be required to use it. Being on leave (whether annual leave, long service
leave, personal leave, parental leave or otherwise) fits obviously into such a
families either indicated support for this recommendation or did not oppose it.
In answer to this submission, the AFP indicated
they opposed the substance of
the recommendation. The AFP acknowledged that the proposal had the potentially
significant advantage
of normalising the removal of firearms across the AFP. In
addition, the proposal has the benefit of protecting AFP appointees “from
the risk they might inadvertently commit an offence under, for example, the
Firearms Act 1996
put against these benefits was that the proposal would inhibit “the
ability of the AFP to quickly deploy AFP appointees
in response to an emergency
situation or incident”. The relevant Enterprise Agreement provides that an
employee is not to be
recalled to duty on any form of approved leave unless
warranted by “exceptional” circumstances. It was put (I assume
correctly) that the AFP does recall AFP appointees from leave at short notice
for operational reasons. For that reason, “a
broad prohibition on AFP
members access to firearms while on leave would impose an additional
administrative process to deploy AFP
appointees”.
submissions made by the AFP on this issue bear scrutiny. If a person is recalled
to duty, they are no longer on leave. Even if
it is considered a possibility
that someone such as Sam or Richard would be recalled from leave, the suggestion
advanced by counsel
assisting would require that access to an armoury would be
granted when a person is so recalled only if approved by a supervisor.
proposal of counsel assisting requires the AFP to do no more than discourage
it’s employees from potentially breaching
the criminal law by possessing
firearms when not on duty. This could be achieved a number of ways; for example,
by a stop being placed
on swipe access when on leave or by human intervention
(by notification to those with responsibility for monitoring access to the
armoury when a person is on leave).
administrative burden such a system would impose are not obviously substantial,
involving no more than a notification that would
occur when the call to duty is
made that would allow these barriers to be removed.
proposal to generally deny access to firearms when on leave would obviate the
need for supervisors to consider the issue of access
to firearms when
considering whether to grant leave on welfare grounds.
noted, and as conceded by the AFP in submission, normalising the process would
not having access to firearms.
This shift in culture is an important step in improving gun safety within the
accept counsel assisting’s submission on this issue. I make the following
recommendation:
Recommendation 3
AFP consider incorporating into CO3 provision for temporary removal of access to
AFP equipment, including firearms, for periods
when an AFP appointee will not,
or should not, be required to use it (such as periods of approved
An Additional Form of Discretionary Paid Leave
who supervised Sam felt it important for welfare reasons that she should not be
at work. She was “stood down”. Counsel
assisting submitted that in
those circumstances there should be consideration of an additional form of
discretionary paid leave when
a supervisor or manger deems it necessary for an
appointee not to attend work including situations where there is a concern for
person’s welfare.
families either supported or did not oppose the making of this recommendation.
AFP supported the intent of the recommendation but did not support the creation
of separate leave entitlement on the grounds that
it would involve a complex
process that would require variation of relevant Enterprise Agreements. The AFP
indicated that it was
considering how existing leave entitlements to
miscellaneous leave can be more flexibly accessed in the circumstances
contemplated
by counsel assisting. Considering that indication, and consistent
with the reply submissions made by counsel assisting, I make the
recommendation:
Recommendation 4
AFP consider ways in which existing paid leave entitlements be used for
situations in which supervisors or managers consider it
necessary for an AFP
appointee not to attend work due to concerns about wellbeing or fitness for
Security Clearances for Psychologists
Coleman family made submissions in the following terms:
fact that psychologists did not have security clearance raises the question
issues arising from
traumatic incidents, it is necessary to describe and discuss them. This would
deal with the root cause of the
trauma or mental condition being treated.
Without security clearance, adequate clinical investigation of the root cause of
discussion of it and adequate treatment of it is not feasible.
coroner should recommend that the AFP need either to have in-house psychologists
who have the security clearance or make it a
requirement of their contract with
the provider that security-cleared psychologists are available where the
particular patient needs
to discuss classified/sensitive information. This would
be an effective and useful recommendation.
AFP provided a detailed response to this suggestion outlining the level to which
AFP mental health clinicians are security cleared
and pointing to recent
developments that have seen some mental health clinicians embedded into
operational areas to increase their
understanding of the work demands of those
areas, and increasing the opportunities for them to engage with members as to
their psychological
needs. It was indicated that notwithstanding these
initiatives “the AFP recognizes that the level of security clearance of
mental health clinicians may be a barrier for some members to engage with a
clinician.” The response indicated that the AFP
is currently reviewing the
viability of increasing the security clearance level of a significant percentage
of clinicians.
make the following recommendation:
Recommendation 5
AFP further progress its review of the viability of increasing the security
clearance level of a significant percentage of mental
health clinicians and
contracted psychologists.
E. REPORTING OF THESE FINDINGS
57 of the Act permits a coroner to report his or her findings to the Attorney
General. Relevantly, the section provides:
(3) A report by a
coroner to the Attorney-General—
(a) must be in writing; and
(b) must set out the coroner’s findings about any serious risks to public
safety that were revealed in the inquest or inquiry
to which the report relates;
(c) may make recommendations about matters of public safety if the
recommendations—
(i) relate to the coroner’s findings about a cause of death, fire, or
disaster; and
(ii) would, in the coroner’s opinion, improve public safety.
(4) If a report under this section contains comments or recommendations
to public safety, the
Attorney-General or another Minister must—
(a) present the report to the Legislative Assembly not later than the first
sitting week after the end of 6 months after the day
the Attorney-General
receives the report; and
(b) present a response to the report on the same day the report is presented to
the Legislative Assembly.
Attorney-General referred to is the Attorney General for the ACT. The AFP
provides policing services to the ACT pursuant to an
agreement between the AFP
and the ACT Government last signed in September 2022.
The recommendations made here have
implications for the AFP in the national and ACT aspects of its operation. I
will provide the
report of my findings to both the ACT and Commonwealth
Attorneys-General, the Federal Police Commissioner, and the Chief Police Officer
for the ACT for a response in a manner that, so far as is possible, satisfies
the requirements of section 57 and the Policing Agreement.
F. CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS
disposition of the inquest into the deaths of Richard, Sam and Dominic has taken
an inexcusably long period of time.
I have observed in other cases, section 3BA of the Act requires inquests to be
carried out in way that recognises that the death
of a person and an inquest
into the person’s death, has a significant impact on the person’s
family and friends. That
statutory obligation has not been discharged in this
behalf of the Coroner’s Court an apology is made to the family for that
delay and the poor levels of communication with them
as to the progress of the
acknowledge the considerable assistance that counsel assisting, Ms Prue Bindon,
has played in the conduct of this inquest.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and seven [107] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Published Summary of Findings
of his Honour
Coroner Archer. ..................
Associate: Samuel Collett
An AFP appointee has the
meaning given in
section 4(1)
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
(Cth). Relevantly, it includes all AFP employees including AFP members
(police officers). In these reasons the terms “appointee”
“member” are both used to reflect the use of that term in the source
material being discussed or to reflect the use
of that term in a given context
by parties in these proceedings (for example, in submission).
In response to the September
11 attacks, the Commonwealth instituted an Air Security Officer (ASO) program
under the Australian Federal
Police in December 2001.
AFP legal advises that since
2000 there have been 10 known deaths by suicide of serving AFP employees. This
figure includes the 3
deaths subject to this inquest.
The aggregated inquests are
hereafter referred to as a singular inquest. Likewise, the investigation in each
case and the brief produced
in respect of each death under consideration is
referred to in the singular.
The names that are used in the judgment reflect the preferences of the families
of the deceased. The families were afforded the opportunity
of providing a
biographical history and an in-court reflection about their loved one.
AFP Structural Review, Reform
and Policy Development on Mental Health: Final Report January 2018 pg
ANAO Report No. 31
A reference to an
attachment is deleted.
inquest has been concerned with storage issues that arose in respect of members
engaged in the national aspect of the AFP’s
operation. Comment is made at
[103] in respect of how and to what extent the findings I have made have
relevance to the AFP in its
role in providing community policing services in the
During this
investigation the AFP were asked why it was necessary for all AFP appointees to
maintain their operational safety qualification
(and thereby have access to
firearms). The response was that it is to ensure the AFP has the ability to
deploy use of force qualified
appointees rapidly, and beyond the cohort of its
workforce which is deployed for day-to-day policing activities where the use of
firearms may be
contemplated.
CO3 section
CO3 section
CO3 section
CO3 section
CO3 section
June 2019 AFP
Response at p 5.
AFP Response at p 13. For example, a small AFP Protection Defence Establishment
site has no dedicated armoury. Revised
access control measures have been enabled
via the senior officer having sole access to a safe key, with firearms signed in
at the commencement and finalisation of a shift. General individual
access is not permitted. The site involves a small team environment
supervision of members’ ongoing welfare is
June 2019 AFP
Response at p 14.
AFP Response at p 12.
December 2021 AFP Response at p
So much appears to have
been illustrated by the events that transpired in the death of AFP employee
Malcolm Scott as was observed
Finding into Death without Inquest
of Judge Sara Hinchey, State Coroner of 4 November 2017 at [29]: “AFP
staff were sent to AFP Headquarters to conduct a welfare
check on Mr Scott,
after attempts to contact him via his phone had failed. Mr Scott's swipe card
access to the Armoury was removed.”
The AFP has confirmed
that there were no specific documented procedures around “stand
down” at the time Sam was stood
down, nor around excluding “stood
down” employees from entering the workplace (or armouries
specifically).
The ability
of the AFP Chief Medical Officer or delegate to direct an AFP appointee to
complete and submit a COHNF is referred to
in the AFP National Guideline on
health for AFP appointees but not
December 2021 AFP
Response at pp 4-5.
“SHIELD” is described as follows in the December 2021 AFP Response
at p 1: “In October 2020 the federal government
announced funding to the
AFP of $65.3 million over four years for the delivery of the SHIELD program.
SHIELD revolutionises the delivery
of health services to AFP members, reserves,
former members, and families through forward-leaning approaches in education,
prevention,
early intervention, treatment, transition support and a centre of
excellence. These services are designed to identify the early signs
of distress
in staff members and to either deliver best practice interventions or facilitate
access to appropriate care. Under SHIELD,
AFP members will have access to a
range of clinical health professionals (including Psychologists, Social Workers,
and Mental Health
Nurses) who understand the nature of the AFP's operating
environment. SHIELD clinicians will be embedded throughout the AFP workforce
rather than being restricted to a clinic. This approach is designed to increase
opportunities for early intervention, and to increase
access and visibility of
these support
resources.”
Agreement between the ACT Government and the Australian Federal Police for
the provision of policing services to the Australian Capital
September 2022
RTF format (356 KB)
Signed PDF/A format