Sarah Curnow and ACT Health Directorate [2021] ACTOFOI 7 (29 July 2021)
Sarah Curnow and ACT Health Directorate
[2021] ACTOFOI 7
(29 July 2021)
Decision and reasons for decision of ACT Ombudsman,
Manthorpe PSM
Application Number
AFOI-RR/20/10058
Decision Reference
[2021] ACTOFOI
Sarah Curnow
ACT Health Directorate
Decision Date
of Information Act 2016
access – whether disclosure of information is
contrary to the public interest – Cabinet information – legal
professional
privilege – promote open discussion of public affairs and
enhance government’s accountability – contribute to positive
informed debate on important issues or matters of public interest – allow
or assist inquiry into possible deficiencies
in the conduct or administration of
an agency or public official – reveal the reason for a government decision
and any background
or contextual information that informed the decision –
reveal environmental or health risks or measures relating to public
safety – intergovernmental relations – deliberative process of
government – agency’s ability to
obtain confidential information
Freedom of Information Act 2016
the decision of the ACT Health Directorate (
dated 3 December 2020.
Background of
Ombudsman review
15 October 2020, Sarah Curnow (
the applicant
) lodged an access
application under s 30 of the FOI Act. The application sought:
Australian Health Protection Principal Committee papers by or
circulated to the Chief Health Officer, or their representative, between
and 31 July 2020 concerning the following matters in Victoria:
Elimination/suppression
Public Health
workforce capacity.
3 December 2020, the AHD decided to refuse access to 73 documents, which it had
identified as coming within the scope of the request.
4 December 2020, I received an application from the applicant seeking my review
of the decision under s 74 of the FOI Act.
22 April 2021, the AHD identified a 74
document and decided to
refuse access to it on the same basis.
provided my preliminary views to the parties in a draft consideration on 26
March 2021. My preliminary view was that the AHD had
not discharged the onus
borne under s 72, which required that it establish the information was contrary
to the public interest information.
25 May 2021, I received an application from the Commonwealth Department of
), under s 77(2) of the FOI Act, requesting that it be able
to participate in the review. My Office decided to allow the CDoH to participate
in the review under s 77(3) of the FOI Act on 8 June 2021.
on 8 June 2021, I received an application from the Victorian Department of
) under s 77(2) of the FOI Act requesting that it be able to
participate in the review. My Office decided to allow the VDoH to participate
the review under s 77(3) of the FOI Act on 8 June 2021.
applicant made submissions on 4 December 2020 and then, in response to my draft
consideration, on 31 March 2021.
CDoH made submissions on 11 June 2021 and, on 28 June 2021, provided me with an
annotated copy of documents with suggested redactions.
VDoH made submissions on 11 June 2021 and, on 30 June 2021, provided me with an
annotated copy of documents with suggested redactions.
person enjoys a right of access to government
information.
However, the FOI Act
creates an exception to this right because it allows for refusal of access to
information that is ‘contrary
to the public interest
information’.
FOI Act defines ‘contrary to the public interest
information’
information—
(a) that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
schedule 1; or
(b) the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
interest under the test set out in section 17.
party seeking to prevent disclosure of government information bears the onus of
establishing that it is contrary to the public interest
information.
the FOI Act contains a clear statement on behalf of the Legislative Assembly,
requiring that:
... this Act be administered with a pro-disclosure
bias and discretions given under it be exercised as far as possible in favour of
disclosing government
information.
1 of the FOI Act lists categories of information which are taken to be contrary
to the public interest information, while
Schedule 2 lists public interest
factors weighing both in favour of and against disclosure. These factors must be
balanced to determine
whether information is contrary to the public
Information
at issue and issue to be decided
Accordingly,
the information at issue in this review is all of the information that the AHD
refused the applicant access to.
making my decision, I need to determine whether the information at issue is
contrary to the public interest information. Unless
I am satisfied the
information at issue
contrary to the public interest information, I
must decide that the applicant should be given access to it.
making my decision, I had regard to:
the FOI Act, in
particular ss 6, 7, 9 and 72
applicant’s original access application, review application and
submissions, including submissions responding to my draft
consideration
decision letter and letters to me before and after my draft consideration, which
included submissions
responses the
CDoH and the VDoH provided to the AHD, when it conducted third party
consultation before making its original decision
submissions
provided by the CDoH
submissions
provided by the VDoH
(ACT) (Evidence Act)
relevant cases,
Re Jane Suzanne Arnold on behalf of Australians of Animals v
Queensland; the Australian National Parks and Wildlife
Attorney-General’s Department v
Dan Conifer and
National Disability Insurance
Jon Stanhope
and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate
for the AHD’s decision
the decision notice dated 3 December 2020, the AHD decided that Schedule 2,
ss 2.1(a)(i) and (ii) were applicable factors favouring disclosure in the
public interest. These factors are the promotion of open
discussion of public
affairs and enhancement of government’s accountability, as well as
contribution to positive and informed
debate on important issues or matters of
public interest.
deciding to refuse access to all of the in-scope information, the AHD’s
Information Officer said:
Prior to the COVID-19 outbreak, the
Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) was a pre-existing body
under the Council
of Australian Government. When the National Cabinet for
Australia’s Coronavirus Response (National Cabinet) was established,
documents prepared by AHPPC, including meeting minutes, were thereafter treated
as Cabinet-in-Confidence.
All documents... include meeting papers which were designed to provide advice
and guidance on the deliberative process of the AHPPC
with State Governments and
the Commonwealth Government. ACTHD is not the author of these documents but is
privy to hold this information
due to its representation at this Committee.
Reasons for my draft consideration
provided my preliminary views to the parties in a draft consideration on 26
March 2021. My preliminary view was that the AHD had
not discharged the onus
borne under s 72, which required that it establish the information was contrary
to the public interest information.
Specifically,
I found that the following factors favoured disclosure:
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(i) – promote open discussion of public affairs and enhance the
government’s accountability
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(ii) – contribute to positive and informed debate on important
issues or matters of public interest
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(v) – allow or assist enquiry into possible deficiencies in the
conduct or administration of an agency or
public official
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(viii) – reveal the reason for a government decision and any
background or contextual information that informed
the decision
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(xi) reveal... health risks or measures relating to public health and
preliminary view was that I should afford the first two factors considerable
weight and the subsequent three factors moderate weight.
submissions made by the CDoH and the VDoH, in response to my draft
consideration, did not raise any objection to my findings regarding
factors. The CDoH and the VDoH argued instead that I should give overriding
weight to the factors favouring non-disclosure.
submissions I received in response to my draft consideration from the AHD did
argue that I had afforded too much weight to the
factors favouring disclosure.
The AHD submitted that:
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(i) should receive no weight because government accountability in the FOI
Act refers to the ACT Government and
the information at issue relates to events
in Victoria
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(ii) should receive moderate weight
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(v) should receive no weight because ‘no decision, action or
inaction of the ACT Government flowed from
the information and it is difficult
to conceive how release of information will allow or assist inquiry into
possible deficiencies
in the conduct or administration of an ACT Government
agency or ACT Government public official.’
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(viii) should receive moderate weight, as the fact that information was
provided to the public in the form of
updates diminishes the value of releasing
the information at issue, which is of a similar nature.
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(ix) should receive low weight as the fact that information about health
risks was provided to the public in the
form of updates diminishes the value of
releasing the information at issue, which is of a similar nature.
will address these submissions in my considerations of each applicable factor
my draft consideration, I did not accept that disclosure could reasonably be
expected to prejudice:
Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(x) intergovernmental relations
Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(xii) an agency’s ability to obtain confidential information
Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(xvi) a deliberative process of government.
in my draft consideration, I expressed the view that the AHD had not discharged
the onus imposed by s 72 of the FOI Act in
establishing that disclosure could
reasonably be expected to prejudice intergovernmental relations.
my preliminary view was that I could not reasonably expect prejudice to an
agency’s ability to obtain confidential information,
information at issue is confidential. As my view was that the AHD had not
discharged the onus imposed by s 72 of the FOI
Act in establishing that
disclosure could reasonably be expected to prejudice intergovernmental
relations, I rejected the applicability
of this factor.
my preliminary view was that disclosing the information at issue in this matter
could not reasonably be expected to prejudice
a deliberative process of
government because I was not satisfied that the information was not already
publicly available.
Considerations
Information taken to be contrary to the public interest under Schedule
the time of my draft consideration, no party had suggested the information at
issue is information that is taken to be contrary
to the public interest under
Schedule 1. However, in response to my draft consideration, the AHD referred to
Schedule 1, s 1.6 of
the FOI Act.
CDoH also contended that information in document 38 is contrary to the public
interest under Schedule 1, s 1.2 of the FOI Act.
information
the AHD’s decision notice of 3 December 2020 referred to the treatment of
information as ‘Cabinet-in-Confidence’,
it did not purport to refuse
access based on Schedule 1, s 1.6. Instead, AHD relied on Schedule 2 factors,
which it balanced as per
the test in s 17.
submissions, in response to my draft consideration, contained the following
The FOI Act clearly articulates the deliberative
information of Cabinet is taken to be contrary to the public interest to
under Schedule 1.6
its decision notice of 3 December 2020, the AHD noted that the ACT Territory
Records Office:
... confirmed that National Cabinet documents do not
routinely become ACT Cabinet documents unless they are presented to the ACT
however, not to subvert another jurisdiction’s legislation, [AHD]
considers that the release of this confidential and sensitive
information would
prejudice intergovernmental relations...
decision of 3 December 2020 was for this reason based on balancing Schedule 2
factors, including intergovernmental relations,
rather than on the applicability
of a Schedule 1 factor.
AHD was advised that National Cabinet documents are not routinely ACT Cabinet
documents and the AHD’s decision did not find
that Schedule 1, s 1.6
applied to the information at issue. Given that the AHD has not subsequently
been able to point me to any
legal authority supporting the alternative view it
now seeks to raise, I am not satisfied that the onus imposed by s 72 has been
discharged. The AHD has not established that the information at issue is
contrary to the public interest under Schedule 1, s 1.6.
professional privilege
Information
that would be privileged from production in a legal proceeding is taken to be
contrary to the public interest under the
Evidence Act
establishes:
Evidence must not be presented
if, on objection by a client, the court finds that presenting the evidence would
result in disclosure
(a) a confidential communication made between the client and a lawyer; or
(b) a confidential communication made between 2 or more lawyers acting for
the client; or
(c) the contents of a confidential document (whether delivered or not)
prepared by the client, lawyer, or someone else;
for the dominant purpose of the lawyer, or 1 or more of the lawyers,
providing legal advice to the client.
the CDoH’s response to my draft consideration, it was submitted that
document 38 (at pages 163 and 164) contains information
that would be
privileged from production in a legal proceeding.
Considering
this submission, I re-examined document 38 and I accept that the second agenda
item is information that would be privileged
from production in a legal
proceeding under
Evidence Act
. It is therefore taken to be
contrary to the public interest information.
Public interest
decided that the only information at issue which is taken to be contrary to the
public interest is the information in document
38, which falls under Schedule 1,
, I then considered whether the balancing test set out in s 17(1) of the
FOI Act renders any of the information at issue contrary
to the public interest
information.
determine whether information is contrary to the public interest information,
the FOI Act prescribes the following five steps:
identify any
factor favouring disclosure that applies in relation to the information
(a relevant factor favouring disclosure), including
any factor mentioned in
schedule 2, section 2.1;
identify any
factor favouring nondisclosure that applies in relation to the information
(a relevant factor favouring nondisclosure),
including any factor mentioned
in schedule 2, section 2.1;
balance any
relevant factor or factors favouring disclosure against any relevant factor or
factors favouring nondisclosure;
decide whether,
on balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public
balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public interest,
allow access to the information.
is an additional required step under s 17, which is ensuring that I do not take
into account any of the specified irrelevant
response to my draft consideration, the VDoH submitted that ‘where
information that has been shared with the AHPPC has become
public, this has
caused confusion and interfered with the [VDoH’s] response to the
17(2)(b) of the FOI Act prohibits me from considering whether access to the
information at issue could result in misinterpretation
or misunderstanding of
that information.
s 17(2)(d) of the FOI Act prohibits me from considering whether access to the
information could result in confusion or
unnecessary debate.
Accordingly,
I have not considered whether the information is information that is likely to
be confusing, misinterpreted, misunderstood
or provoke unnecessary debate.
the VDoH made comments on the annotated copy of documents I received that
demonstrated some of the redactions it was seeking
were invalid because they
were based on irrelevant factors.
a redaction was sought by the VDoH on the basis that disclosure could lead to
misinterpretation, misunderstanding, confusion
or provoke unnecessary debate, I
decided that the redaction cannot be supported because I cannot consider those
submissions under
the FOI Act.
Factors favouring
factors favouring disclosure are relevant to this review. These are:
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(i) – promote open discussion of public affairs and enhance the
government’s accountability
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(ii) – contribute to positive and informed debate on important
issues or matters of public interest
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(v) – allow or assist inquiry into possible deficiencies in the
conduct or administration of an agency or
public official
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(viii) – reveal the reason for a government decision and any
background or contextual information that informed
the decision
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(xi) – reveal... health risks or measures relating to public health
and safety.
AHD’s original decision identified the first two of these factors, but it
did not indicate that any consideration had been
given to the appropriate
weighting for them.
Promote open discussion of public affairs
and enhance the government’s accountability
reasonable expectation that disclosure could promote open discussion of public
affairs and enhance the government’s accountability
favours disclosure
under the FOI Act.
my draft consideration, I found that the information at issue could reasonably
be expected to promote this public interest factor
by enabling members of the
public to discuss the public health situation in Victoria during the period in
response to my draft consideration, the AHD submitted that ‘the
government’ referred to in the FOI Act is the ACT Government.
that because the ACT Government is not mentioned in the information at issue,
the information could not reasonably be expected
to enhance the
government’s accountability. It therefore submitted that this factor
should receive no weight. This was in contrast
to the AHD’s original
finding, in its decision of 3 December 2020, which submitted that this factor
was applicable.
accept that ‘the government’ in Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(i) of the FOI
Act is the ACT Government. However, I do not accept
that this factor lacks
the position of the AHD, CDoH and the VDoH is that the sharing of information,
including the information at issue, is of
critical importance because it informs
government responses to COVID-19. The ACT Government has certainly taken steps
in response
to COVID-19 and, in doing so, has seemingly relied on information it
has received from other jurisdictions. The ability of people
who live in the ACT
to access information that has influenced ACT Government decision-making could
reasonably be expected to promote
open discussion of public affairs and enhance
the government’s accountability to a degree that warrants moderate weight
this review.
Contribute to positive and informed debate on
matters of public interest
reasonable expectation that disclosure could contribute to positive and informed
debate on a matter of public interest favours disclosure
under the FOI
my draft consideration, I found that the information at issue could reasonably
be expected to promote this public interest factor
by shedding light on
Victorian public health during the period in scope. However, I observed that
much of the information was publicly
available and that this factor should only
receive moderate weight as a result.
response to my draft consideration, the AHD agreed that this factor is
applicable and should receive moderate weight.
Allow or assist
inquiry into possible deficiencies in the conduct or administration of an agency
or public official
reasonable expectation that disclosure could allow or assist inquiry into
possible deficiencies in the conduct or administration
of an agency or public
official favours disclosure under the FOI
my draft consideration, I found that the information at issue could reasonably
be expected to promote this public interest factor
to a considerable
response to my draft consideration, the AHD submitted that I should reconsider
this finding because
no decision, action or inaction of the ACT
Government flowed from the information and it is difficult to conceive how
release of the
information will allow or assist inquiry into possible
deficiencies in the conduct or administration of an ACT Government agency
Government public official [because] [t]he ACT Government is not mentioned or
referred to in the information... and because
of the nature of the
information... and its relationship to the ACT Government.
I observed in my draft consideration that I am not required to make a finding
recognises that the opportunity to inquire into whether there are deficiencies
is, in itself, in the public interest,
and fundamentally important for
government accountability and transparency in a representative democracy.
Information provided to the ACT Government to inform its public health response
during the period in scope could reasonably be expected
to assist a person
inquiring into any possible deficiencies in the AHD’s conduct or
administration of various matters, including
travel restrictions on persons
entering the ACT. I do accept that there is no specific evidence of any
deficiency. My decision is
to find that this public interest factor could only
reasonably be expected to be advanced in a general sense and therefore to only
moderate degree.
Reveal the reason for a government decision and
any background or contextual information that informed the decision
reasonable expectation that disclosure could reveal the reason for a government
decision and any background or contextual information
that informed the decision
favours disclosure under the FOI
my draft consideration, I noted that the information at issue is information
the period in scope, which
was relied on by the AHPPC when assessing the national relevance of the
situation. I commented on the
factor recognising the importance of transparency
opportunity to observe
the government decision-making process,
including information relied on to make decisions. This opportunity is of
fundamental importance
for the proper working of a representative democracy and
the FOI Act recognises this in its objects. My preliminary view was that
disclosure of the information at issue could reasonably be expected to promote
this public interest factor to a considerable degree.
response to my draft consideration, the AHD submitted that:
AHPPC, National Cabinet and jurisdictional governments publicly provided
information that was being updated constantly in multiple
different ways.
Therefore, the value of releasing information in AHPPC discussion papers for
this purpose is greatly diminished.
my view, this line of reasoning should not be preferred over that which I
expressed in my draft consideration, having regard to
the objects of the FOI
Act. First, the FOI Act gives a general right of access to government
information and does not create an exception
in circumstances where the
government considers that it has provided suitable summaries in public updates.
I therefore do not accept
that the value of the information is diminished per
se. My preliminary view was that I should afford this factor moderate weight.
consider that this strikes a suitable balance between the fact that much of the
information would be known to the public and the
overarching importance of
supporting transparency.
Reveal health risks or measures
relating to public health and safety
reasonable expectation that disclosure could reveal health risks or measures
relating to public health and safety favours disclosure
under the FOI
my draft consideration, I noted that the information at issue is information
the period in scope. I
found it reasonable to expect that disclosure could promote this public interest
factor. I commented that
the pandemic is an ongoing public health situation and
the information is current in its general applicability to the COVID-19 virus
and the way the government implements measures to protect public health and
response to my draft consideration, the AHD submitted that the importance of
this public interest factor was ‘superseded’
and ‘essentially
mitigated’ by information the government has made public.
my view this submission is flawed. I do not see any basis, nor has the AHD
referred me to one, for the proposition that the FOI
‘superseded’ or ‘essentially mitigated’ and it would
seem to me that interpreting it in this way
is inconsistent with its objects.
The parties seeking to prevent disclosure themselves submit that the information
at issue includes
information about the risks to public health posed by COVID-19
and the stakes are therefore high. The public have a right of access
information that is not limited to information disclosed in material released
and managed carefully by government. In my view,
disclosure of the information
at issue, which includes information about hotel quarantine, the infectiousness
of COVID-19, potential
measures for the prevention of its transmission and
public compliance with restrictions could reasonably be expected to promote this
public interest factor to a considerable degree.
favouring non-disclosure
factors favouring nondisclosure are relevant to this review. These are:
Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(x): prejudice intergovernmental relations
Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(xii): prejudice an agency’s ability to obtain confidential
information
Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(xvi): prejudice a deliberative process of
government.
Preliminary issue: ‘identifying
information’
of the annotations made by the CDoH and the VDoH, which were included in the
annotated copy of documents, were accompanied by
comments indicating an
objection to disclosure of ‘identifying information’.
Identifying
information is not exempt under the ACT FOI Act. In my view, the information
identified by the CDoH and the VDoH as ‘identifying
information’ is
not sufficiently identifying that it would raise any Schedule 2 factors.
Accordingly, the redactions proposed
on pages 6, 16, 284 and 291 of the
annotated copy of documents cannot be permitted.
Intergovernmental relations
reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice intergovernmental
relations favours non-disclosure under the FOI
my draft consideration I commented that I was not satisfied disclosure could
reasonably be expected to prejudice intergovernmental
relations. I said this
because much of the information at issue seemed, on its face, to be publicly
referred to the Federal Court of Australia’s observation that this factor
necessitates more than ‘a State to indicate
disagreement with the policy
of the Act and claim, therefore, that a disclosure of particular documents could
reasonably be expected
relations.’
The test is
rather whether the decision-maker reaches a conclusion based on the evidence in
all the circumstances of the
is consistent with the view taken by Bowen CJ and Beaumont J in
Attorney-General’s Department v Cockroft
) when considering the phrase
‘reasonably be expected’ to be an objective test
... require[s] a judgment to be made by the
decision-maker as to whether it is reasonable, as distinct from something that
is irrational,
ridiculous...
also had regard to the Australian Information Commissioner’s decision in
Dan Conifer and National Disability Insurance Agency
. In that decision,
the Commissioner said:
There must be real and substantial grounds
for expecting the damage to occur which can be supported by evidence or
reasoning. There
cannot merely be an assumption or allegation that damage may
occur if the document were
draft consideration referred to my comments in
Jon Stanhope and Chief
Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
. In that matter, I
found that:
... for the intergovernmental relations factor to apply,
I consider it must involve confidential communications the disclosure of
could reasonably be expected to prejudice relations by, for instance, leading to
a loss of trust and cooperation between agency
that, in my draft consideration, I was not satisfied that the information was
confidential, I was unable to find that the AHD
had discharged the onus imposed
by s 72 of the FOI Act.
response to my draft consideration, I received written submissions, including
one sworn statement of evidence, from several senior
public officials which
attested to the prejudice to intergovernmental relations that could reasonably
be expected to flow from disclosure.
AHD provided me with submissions from Ms Cross, its Director-General and Ms
Croke, the Deputy Director-General of Policy and Cabinet
at the Chief Minister,
Treasury and Economic Development Directorate.
Cross’ submission was that:
If the information in papers
provided in confidence is released unilaterally by a jurisdiction... rather than
through agreement with
the providing jurisdictions, then jurisdictions will be
more guarded in contributing information in writing to these committees.
The use or release of another jurisdiction’s information without
agreement has in the past had a very real impact on interjurisdictional
relations and the sharing of information. It is difficult to imagine that the
same consequences would not flow from the release of
this information. The issue
whether the same or similar
information has been previously published, it is
whether information provided in confidence will potentially be released without
the agreement of the providing jurisdiction.
Croke’s submission was that:
... [The] model necessitates the
sharing of often sensitive and confidential information where consensus may not
have been met as
well as expert advice. Release of such materials would be
contrary to the public interest having been provided in confidence... and
release could jeopardise the ability of the ACT to work with the Commonwealth,
states or territories in future.
CDoH supplied me with the sworn evidence of Ms Street, First Assistant
Secretary, Office of Health Protection and Response in
the CDoH. Ms
Street’s opinion is that the ‘understanding of
confidentiality’ shared by AHPPC participants would
significantly by disclosure of the information at issue. Ms Street’s
evidence refers to a specific observation of
a jurisdiction becoming reluctant
towards sharing information after information was ‘potentially
inadvertently disclosed’.
I found this observation to be particularly
compelling.
VDoH submissions contended that:
It is highly likely that Chief
Health and Medical Officers, and other invited AHPPC members, would
significantly curtail their contributions
at AHPPC discussions if it was
subjected to FOI regimes.
contrast, the applicant submits that:
... it is implausible to
suggest that senior public health officers such as those who are members of
AHPPC would in the future downplay
or withhold critical public health
information such as this in their discussions with the Committee... for fear
that it may subsequently
be disclosed. Members of AHPPC are highly qualified
servants of science... They work in a world where the free flow of public health
information is both ubiquitous and vital... It beggars belief that such officers
would not be forthcoming simply because they believed
their material may become
my view, the applicant’s submissions do not sufficiently take into account
sensitivities that could arise in the context
of intergovernmental information
sharing. The submissions of Ms Cross and Ms Croke and sworn evidence of Ms
Street is that disclosure
could reasonably be expected to affect the willingness
of states and territories to share information.
applicant been heard on this issue?
responding to my draft consideration, the applicant also requested an
opportunity to respond to other submissions or evidence
adduced by the parties
seeking to prevent disclosure.
Office wrote to the applicant on 18 June 2021 and confirmed that such an
opportunity would be given, but only if new issues were
raised which were likely
to prove persuasive or indeed decisive.
than the ADH’s reference to Schedule 1, s 1.6, which I refused to accept,
the parties seeking to prevent disclosure raised
no new issues. Instead, the
arguments made by the parties seeking to prevent disclosure were based on the
applicability of the intergovernmental
relations factor. This was the central
issue in my draft consideration as well.
The applicant was afforded two opportunities to contend with the argument that
disclosure could reasonably be expected to prejudice
intergovernmental
relations. The first was in the submissions they included with their application
for review. The second was in
their response to my draft consideration.
therefore turned my attention to whether the applicant had been given an
opportunity to be heard on this issue and decided that
they had. I considered
the observations of Middleton and Wigney JJ in the Federal Court that
‘there would be no practical injustice’
in proceeding to a decision
without further consultation in circumstances where no new issue had been
am satisfied that there is no new, persuasive material which the applicant could
be expected to provide regarding the intergovernmental
relations factor. In this
case, as in FOI reviews generally, the applicant had to make submissions without
viewing the information
at issue. Their submissions correctly anticipated the
position which the parties seeking to prevent disclosure took and put a
case to me. In the circumstances, I proceeded to make my decision
satisfied that I had understood and considered the competing arguments
parties objecting to disclosure submitted that I should confirm the AHD’s
decision and find that all the information at
issue is contrary to the public
interest information. In the alternative, if I did not confirm the AHD’s
decision, they submitted
that information which is not public, or the
communication of which is not public, should not be disclosed. I received an
copy of documents from the CDoH and the VDoH with proposed redactions.
I am willing to accept the majority of these proposed redactions.
The annotated
documents altered the original page numbers because documents 7, 57, 58, 59, 60,
61 and 67 were removed because the
parties submit that no suitable redactions
could be made and that access should be refused to all of the information in
these documents.
Original document numbers remain the same as in the original
intergovernmental relations objection includes documents 7, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61
and 67 in their entirety, on the basis that these
are National Cabinet
documents. The intergovernmental relations objection also includes the
redactions proposed by the CDoH and the
VDoH in the remaining documents. I
accept that disclosing the information in documents 7, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61 and
the redacted parts
of the remaining documents would prejudice intergovernmental
relations by undermining the trust on which the exchange of this information
a small number of the redactions proposed by the VDoH in the remaining documents
were based on irrelevant factors. These
include redactions proposed by the VDoH
on the following pages of the annotated documents:
Page 41, except
for the top line.
the basis for the proposed redaction is an irrelevant factor, I am not satisfied
that I could reasonably expect disclosure to
prejudice intergovernmental
relations, other than in the way that I am unable to consider under s 17(2), and
accordingly I do not
consider that this information has been shown to be
contrary to the public interest to disclose.
ability to obtain confidential information
reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice an agency’s ability
to obtain confidential information favours non-disclosure
under the FOI
effect on the public interest, which it is submitted will flow from disclosure,
is identical to that which is said will harm intergovernmental
relations. I
therefore considered the public interest in preventing prejudice to
intergovernmental relations as the factor which
I should consider weighing in
respect of this reasonable expectation.
Deliberative process of
reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice a deliberative process of
government favours non-disclosure under the FOI
my draft consideration, my view was that I was not satisfied that this factor is
applicable.
response to my draft consideration, the AHD submitted that ‘the
government’ referred to in the FOI Act is the ACT Government.
that because the ACT Government is not mentioned in the information at issue,
the information could not reasonably be expected
to enhance the
government’s accountability. I accept that ‘the government’ is
indeed a reference to the ACT Government.
Similarly, I consider that the
relevant government is the ACT Government and its deliberative process.
AHD submitted that disclosure could prejudice the free flow of information,
which could in turn prejudice the deliberative process
of the ACT Government. I
therefore considered the factors of intergovernmental relations and
agency’s ability to obtain confidential
information and weighed them. I
therefore do not consider that any additional weight should be given to this
factor because the factual
expectation relied upon is the same as I have already
accepted in considering previous factors.
Balancing the
required under s 17, I identified the relevant public interest factors weighing
in favour of, and against, disclosure. Below, I
set out my balancing of these
this review, I found that the information at issue could reasonably be expected
to promote five public interest factors. I found
that disclosure could promote
open discussion of public affairs and enhance the government’s
accountability to a moderate degree.
I found that disclosure could contribute to
positive and informed debate on a matter of public interest to a moderate
degree. I found
that disclosure could allow or assist inquiry into possible
deficiencies in the conduct or administration of an agency or public
official to
a moderate degree. I found that disclosure could reveal the reason for a
government decision and any background or contextual
information that informed
the decision to a considerable degree. I found that disclosure could reveal
health risks or measures relating
to public health and safety to a considerable
the other hand, I considered that I should afford considerable weight to the
public interest factor which seeks to prevent prejudice
to intergovernmental
regard to the submissions of the parties, including the submissions of Ms Cross
and Ms Croke and the sworn evidence of Ms Street,
as well as the annotated copy
of the information at issue prepared by the CDoH and the VDoH, I considered that
intergovernmental
relations should be the decisive factor with respect to most
of the information at issue. I decided to afford this factor overriding
in relation to the redactions proposed by the CDoH and the VDoH, with some
exceptions. The exceptions are redactions proposed
by the VDoH at p 41, 60,
71-279, which rely on irrelevant factors relating to misinterpretation,
misunderstanding, confusion or provoke
unnecessary
decision is to
the decision of the AHD under s 82(2)(b) of the FOI
Information
in document 38 is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
Schedule 1, s 1.2 of the FOI Act.
should be refused to the entirety of documents 7, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61 and 67
because disclosing them could reasonably be expected
to prejudice
intergovernmental relations to a considerable degree.
should also be refused to the information which the CDoH and the VDoH proposed
redacting in the annotated copy of the information
at issue given to me, except
for the following sections, which should be disclosed to the applicant:
proposed by the VDoH in the annotated documents at p 41 (except for the top
line), 60 and 71-279.
proposed in the annotated documents on pages 6, 16, 284 and 291 that refer to
‘identifying information’, as
there is no public interest factor to
support the proposed redactions.
Michael Manthorpe
ACT Ombudsman
Section 7(1) of the FOI
Section 35(1)(c) of the
Section 16(a) of the
Section 72 of the FOI
Section 9 of the FOI
Section 17 of the FOI
[1987] FCA 148.
[1986] FCA 35
(1986) 64 ALR
[2020] AICmr
[2020] ACTOFOI 24.
Schedule 1, s 1.2 of the
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(i) of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(ii) of the FOI
Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(v)
of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2,
s 2.1(a)(viii) of the FOI
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(xi) of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(x) of the FOI Act.
Re Jane Suzanne Arnold
on behalf of Australians of Animals v Queensland; the Australian National Parks
and Wildlife Service
[1987] FCA 148
Re Jane Suzanne
Arnold on behalf of Australians of Animals v Queensland; the Australian National
Parks and Wildlife Service
[1987] FCA 148
Attorney-General’s Department v Cockroft
[1986] FCA 35
(1986) 64 ALR 97
Dan Conifer and National
Disability Insurance Agency
[2020] AICmr 33
Jon Stanhope and Chief
Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
[2020] ACTOFOI 24
Snedden v Minister
for Justice
[2014] FCAFC 156
Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(xii)
of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2,
s 2.2(a)(xvi) of the FOI Act.
RTF format (816 KB)
Signed PDF/A format