Police v Nathan Sheals (A pseudonym) [2025] ACTCC 4 (7 October 2025)
CHILDRENS COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Police v Nathan Sheals (A pseudonym)
[2025] ACTCC 4
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Magistrate Stewart
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – Commonwealth offence - young
offender – possess or control violent extremist material – terrorism
offence – limited sentencing options –
tension between youth justice
principles and Commonwealth sentencing regime for terrorism offences
Legislation Cited:
Children and Young People Act
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
Cases Cited:
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37
[2020 NSWCCA 131
R v Balcombe
(unreported, Children’s Court of Queensland, 21
R v De Simoni
(1981) 147 CLR 383
[1981] HCA 31
R v Fletcher
(unreported) District Court of Western Australia) 28
R v Hoolash
(unreported, District Court of Western Australia) 20
R v Khazaal (unreported
) 25 September 2009 NSWSC
R v Verdins; R v Buckley; R v Vo
[2007] VSCA 102
Director of Public Prosecutions (Prosecution)
Nathan Sheals (a pseudonym) (Young Person)
Representation:
K. Lee (Prosecution)
J. White SC (Young Person
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Prosecution)
Legal Aid ACT
(Young Person)
File Number:
CH 1508 of 2024
MAGISTRATE STEWART
A. Introduction
are the reasons for a sentencing decision imposed by the Court on 4 August
with all young people dealt with by this Court, the young person is referred to
by a pseudonym to protect his anonymity.
decision includes descriptions of extreme violence and murder and should be read
with caution.
fundamental issues in this decision are:
significant amount of time that Nathan has spent on remand;
limited sentencing options available when sentencing a young person for a
Commonwealth (
) terrorism offence;
ultimate choice between a further sentence of imprisonment with a short parole
period or a lengthier release upon recognisance;
tension between the youth justice principles and the Cth sentencing legislation
for this type of offence.
B. Dispute over the facts
entered a plea of guilty to one charge: Possess or control violent extremist
material obtained or accessed using a carriage
statement of facts contains 17 pages of dense material. There was a dispute
the defence submitted the
principle in
impugned. The prosecution provided written submissions that clarified the basis
for admission of those materials – it was
not to allege more serious
offending, it was to show the state of mind of Nathan at the time of his
thought that all of the disputed material was relevant and admissible because it
showed what state of mind was reflected in his
conduct and how his conduct
showed how far he was along the continuum of radicalisation at the time. I
relied on the case of
[2020] NSWCCA
for that proposition at [153] and also for the proposition that evidence of
uncharged (and more serious acts) can be relevant to
making findings about
protection of the community by assessing future dangerousness at [116].
reference to other, more serious, offending was ignored for anything other than
these purposes. Put another way, Nathan has not
been sentenced for anything in
the facts that suggest he committed a more serious offence than the one he is to
be sentenced for.
executed a search warrant on Nathan’s home on 6 December 2024. Nathan was
aged 16 years and seven months at the time.
were some of the most important things that police found in the
notebook in Nathan’s bedroom with the words “Islamic State”
written on it;
piece of paper containing the written words “The Islamic State is
remaining”;
Samsung mobile phone that contained 44 files that met the definition of violent
extremist material. These files depicted the stabbing
of a priest in Australia,
explosions amongst humans, deceased and injured people, written and verbal calls
to kill, confessions of
handcuffed prisoners, footage of live humans being
killed by decapitation and dead humans being decapitated, military attacks,
State insignia on flags and militaria, close range shootings of dead
soldiers, men being burned to death, soldiers being fatally
shot, training
videos containing footage of stabbing and dismembering live humans, training on
the creation of improvised explosive
devices with common chemicals, a human
being exploded by a backpack bomb, footage of apparently executed soldiers and
live humans having hands and feet amputated by a meat clever;
of multiple searches and downloads of material showing Nathan’s interest
in a caliphate, jihad, ISIS flags, ISIS soldiers
and ISIS propaganda videos
depicting murder and decapitation;
HP laptop containing 26 videos that met the definition of violent extremist
materials including a police station being blown up,
a video clip of a song
called a ‘nasheed’ and showing murder by shooting, explosives,
decapitation and the ISIS flag,
the decapitation of an American soldier, a mass
decapitation of 30 humans, nasheeds calling for warfare, depictions of explosive
devices and western military bases and vehicles being blown up;
on the laptop including a request for a recipe for HMTD (a high explosive) and a
recipe for HMTD;
telegram account that was not completely reviewed, but that contained 294 videos
that met the definition of violent extremist material
including explosives
detonating, dead bodies, men being shot in the back of the head, horrifically
injured dead children, combat
scenes, mutilation of humans, a Syrian soldier
being decapitated, execution, a decapitated head with nerves in the
facial muscles still twitching and multiple dead bodies.
chats that included material showing that Nathan had forwarded multiple films to
another person that depicted some of the
already mentioned material above
including propaganda, an execution by shooting, a statement that Nathan wanted
to “do this
operation as quickly as possible” and a request for a
martyrdom belt tutorial. These last messages occurred between 4 and 6
ideological
statements including support for Hamas, execution of gay people, the cursing of
Shia Muslims, a picture of himself in
Islamic clothing showing only his eyes;
23 November 2023 a video of himself was forwarded to his mother via Snapchat.
That video depicted Nathan’s head with only
his eyes uncovered and a
nasheed playing. There were subtitles that spoke of waging war on an enemy and
eternal paradise.
seriousness
is not a prevalent offence. The factors for assessing the objective seriousness
of Nathan’s possession of violent extremist
material (other than sheer
volume) was the existence of material that depicted:
death of non-combatants;
death of combatants in a manner inconsistent with the laws of armed conflict
(such as execution of prisoners);
non-combatants or combatants who have been killed in a manner inconsistent with
the laws of armed conflict;
attached to humans as forms of suicide bombing or murder bombing;
detonation of explosives attached to humans;
of terrorist organisations;
or cinematically produced content suggesting that the footage was a legitimate
documentary or short film;
accompanied by music or religious music;
of soldiers belonging to terrorist organisations;
for torture, killing, dismemberment and decapitation;
of humans that may identify them and may demean them or distress their family
promotion of unlawful violence and/or religion to promote unlawful
of religious people.
prevalence of this material in the content in Nathan’s possession
indicated that his offending was well above the median
level of objective
seriousness. I concluded that any messages he sent to others were more likely
to be driven by teenage bravado
than by any genuine desire to carry out any
physical act. I was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Nathan had
progressed quite
some way along the path to radicalisation but found that his
journey fell somewhere short of physically acting on his
E. Compulsory statutory sentencing
considerations
this is a Cth offence and the fact that Nathan is a young person under the age
of 18, the Court must consider the general
sentencing principles in
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), the purposes of sentencing, relevant
considerations and principles set out at s 7, 33 and 133C,D and G of the
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
(ACT) and the youth justice principles at
Children and Young People Act
(ACT). The Court considered
all of those principles, purposes and considerations.
much of the material was not disputed, the most important features that were
taken into account can be summarised as follows:
maximum penalty for the offence is 5 years imprisonment;
was aged 16 years and 7 months when he committed the offence. He is a proud
Aboriginal man who is learning more about his
damage arising from the conduct is the promotion and
fomentation
of terrorism
entered a guilty plea in the face of a strong prosecution case;
the report dated 13 August 2025 and evidence in court of Ms Kocak, forensic
psychologist (see detailed summary below), I
find that Nathan has shown remorse
and contrition for his offending and an acceptance of the wrongfulness of his
thoughts at the
willingly co-operated with the police who executed the warrant on his home. This
included providing the passwords to his devices
as per the s 3LA
(Cth) warrant shown to him.
Whilst he is not entitled to a discount for his compliance, I thought that his
behaviour when faced
with an order of the Court was directly relevant to
Nathan’s prospects of rehabilitation;
has no criminal history at all, let alone any relevant history. At the time of
the offending he was attending high school and
had worked casually at a takeaway
has endured complex trauma in his short life. His father passed away whilst in
custody in 2017. His grandmother who had been
his carer for many years passed
away in 2024. He has been the subject of care and protection interventions
including removal from
his mother’s care. He has been subjected to family
violence and experienced the effects of close family members being exposed
family violence and many police attendances. He has lived in multiple homes and
endured the trauma of one of his homes being destroyed
the time of the offending Nathan had self-placed with his mother;
is autistic and holds a low average level of intellectual
converted from Catholicism to Islam in 2022 and had taught himself to speak and
read Arabic; and
had been remanded in custody from 13 December 2024 to the day of sentence
– 264 days.
was no dispute that because this charge is a terrorism offence the usual ACT
sentencing options for young people do not apply
– only imprisonment or a
recognisance release order and no combination of them is available.
because of the operation of
(Cth), if a
sentence of imprisonment was imposed, a non-parole period of three quarters of
the head sentence must also be imposed
(unless exceptional circumstances are
E. Evidence of Ms Kocak
Kocak is a specialist who, amongst other qualifications, holds masters degrees
in forensic psychology and terrorism and security
studies. Her evidence
comprised of her written report and the evidence that she gave to the court via
audio visual link. I determined
that she was a knowledgeable and impressive
expert and could not ascertain any reason to stray from making findings based on
accepted her view that Nathan had been frank when speaking to her. Her report
spoke to significant disclosures made by him during
their interviews.
prominent features of her evidence were:
became interested in terrorist activities without being influenced by others to
do so. His radicalisation “
developed during adolescence through
self-directed online
exploration
had been recent changes in his ideological framework such that Nathan rejected
ISIS and had embraced jihad as being limited
to defence of land or
was then aware that he was no longer able to cross a line into the prohibited
possession or sharing of violent extremist
he knew that possessing the material was illegal, it is likely that
Nathan’s neurodevelopmental profile constrained his
interest in the material was shaped less by a desire to harm and more by rigid
moral beliefs reinforced by his ASD
combined influence of ASD and Low cognitive functioning is likely to have
causally contributed to the commission of the offence
to a significant
Restriction
of his worship was not
recommended.
Supervision
of Nathan’s study of chemistry was
recommended.
study of war history should be limited to legitimate and mainstream teachings
and sources and should exclude gory or
International
travel could be a possibility after a period of
therapy should focus on behavioural change rather than changing his
resources in place for Nathan were very positive and designed to assist him to
move forward into adulthood in the community as
a Muslim man navigating a
pluralistic
F. Consideration
found that the Bugmy
principles were
enlivened and that there was a reduced moral culpability for Nathan’s
offending as a result. These findings
also tempered the requirement to
concentrate on deterrence and punishment set out in the Cth legislation that
were reflected in the
sentencing approaches taken in other terrorism cases
provided to the Court by the
prosecution
(and instinctively) in the ACT a sentence of imprisonment that was partially
suspended or combined with a good behaviour
order would have been the
appropriate sentence. The Cth legislation did not allow for such an approach
because this is a terrorism
Cth regime left two sentencing options for Nathan - a sentence of imprisonment
with a parole period that would be supervised by
the Cth Parole Office (there is
no parole for young people in the ACT) or a Cth good behaviour order in the form
of a recognisance
release order. There could be no combination of both.
prosecution accepted that a sentence culminating in imprisonment for 12 months
with a fixed non-parole period would not be an
prosecution fairly conceded that they could not advise the Court of how long it
might take for an application for parole by Nathan
to be received and heard.
What this meant in a practical sense was that if the court imposed a sentence of
imprisonment and fixed
a non-parole period commencing on the day of sentence,
Nathan would not be released until he was granted parole by the Cth Parole
should not be forgotten that Nathan is a young person and had been remanded in
custody, bail refused since December 2024. If a
12-month sentence was fixed,
Nathan had already served 264 days of that 365 day sentence – a little
over 72 per cent (being
only 9 days shy of 75 per cent of a 12 month head
prosecution would not be heard against a non-parole period of less than three
quarters being fixed.
imprisonment was to be the outcome, then Nathan had likely served his mandatory
non-parole period.
youth justice principles speak to imprisonment being a last resort and for the
minimum time necessary.
a mandatory consideration that the Court must not ignore. The tension between
the principle and the Cth legislation was apparent.
imprisonment was chosen as the outcome then the Court had no control over when
Nathan’s application for parole would be received
is a young person with significant neurological disadvantage. There was no
guarantee that if the Court fixed a non-appellable
head sentence of 12 months
that Nathan would be granted the opportunity for parole before the head sentence
if parole was granted within days of sentence, it would have been for about
three months and likely to have been of little rehabilitative
purpose. Most
importantly, such a sentence would have only allowed for supervision for the
short length of the parole period.
of the above factors were taken into account and a recognisance release order
was imposed that allowed for lengthy supervision.
This was the greatest
opportunity for rehabilitation and consequent reduced risk to the community.
Such an outcome would have been
out of the question if Nathan had not served so
much time in custody whilst bail refused.
conviction was recorded, the time in custody was taken into account and a 24
month recognisance release order was imposed with conditions
supervision, reporting to CYF immediately, attendance at any assessments,
programs or counselling as directed, medical
treatment and supervision as
directed, any education or training as directed, reside as directed,
surrendering of passport, no study
of chemistry without permission, a
restriction on possession of certain chemicals without permission, not to travel
interstate or
overseas without permission and not to view or possess violent
extremist material.
Court file reflects that Nathan elected to sign that recognisance release order
on 2 September
I certify that the preceding thirty-three [33] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Sentence of His Honour Magistrate
Associate: Zeinab Elsheekhly
Date: 7 October 2025
R v De Simoni
147 CLR 383
[1981] HCA 31
complete extent of the materials is detailed in the statement of facts tendered.
It is unnecessary to repeat int in full to give
the content it’s full
R v Khazaal
(unreported
) 25 September 2009 NSWSC per Latham J at
See undated report of Dr
Eryn Davies at pages 9 and 10.
Report of Ms Kocak dated 13 August 2025 at
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37
Verdins; R v Buckley, R v Vo
[2007] VSCA
R v Balcombe
(unreported, Children’s Court of Queensland, 21 March 2025,
(unreported, District Court of Western Australia) 20 March 2025 and
R v Fletcher
(unreported) District Court of Western Australia) 28 March
Children and Young People Act
RTF format (238 KB)
Signed PDF/A format