Jon Stanhope and Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate [2021] ACTOFOI 2 (9 April 2021)
Jon Stanhope and Environment,
Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
ACTOFOI 2 (9 April 2021)
Decision and reasons for decision of ACT Ombudsman, Michael Manthorpe PSM
Application Number
AFOI-RR/20/10042
Decision Reference
[2021] ACTOFOI 2
Jon Stanhope
Environment, Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate
Decision Date
Freedom of Information Act 2016
(ACT) – deciding access
– whether disclosure of information is contrary to the public interest
– Cabinet information
– promote open discussion of public affairs
and enhance government’s accountability – contribute to positive and
informed debate on important issues and matters of public interest –
reveal the reason for a government decision and any background
or contextual
information that informed the decision – an individual’s right to
– trade secrets, business
affairs or research – competitive commercial activities of an agency
– economy of the
Freedom of Information Act 2016
the decision of the Environment, Planning and
Sustainable Development Directorate (
27 July 2020.
Background of Ombudsman review
13 May 2020, Mr Stanhope applied to EPSDD for access to:
documents... in the possession of the ACT Government, related to or concerning
in any way the negotiation of and finalisation
of the agreed land swap between
the ACT and Commonwealth Governments, involving the Curtin Horse Paddocks and
land at West Basin.
Included in the request is any and all documents concerning the valuation of
the land included in the land swap and any and all documents
emanating from or
considered by the Procurement Board which are relevant to the land swap.
27 July 2020, EPSDD decided the access application. EPSDD identified 34
documents in scope and decided to give Mr Stanhope access
to four documents in
full, nine documents in part and refused access to 21 documents.
relied on ss 17, 38, 43, 45, 50, 57, 58 and Schedule 1 and 2 of the FOI Act in
making its decision.
receiving EPSDD’s decision, on 27 July 2020, Mr Stanhope applied for
review by the Ombudsman under s 73 of the FOI Act.
provided the parties with my preliminary views in a draft consideration on 23
December 2020. My preliminary view was that some of
the information at issue was
in the public interest to disclose, including information that EPSDD decided was
contrary to the public
interest under Schedule 1, s 1.6 as Cabinet information
and could reasonably be expected to prejudice intergovernmental relations.
Stanhope advised my Office on 20 January 2020 that he did not have any
submissions to make in response to my draft consideration.
20 January 2020, EPSDD made additional submissions in respect of the
information, in documents 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10 and 11, stating:
commercial information includes estimated revenue per residential dwelling and
commercial m
based upon market advice, and discusses benchmarking
with Kingston Foreshore, and would, if released, impact upon the CRA’s
competitiveness to achieve revenue from future land sales at the site.
Disclosure of this information would have a substantial and
adverse impact on
land release and sales, therefore disadvantaging the economy of the Territory.
The agency’s bargaining power
or ability to negotiate competitive
commercial terms for the land sales would be diminished, and the loss of land
revenue would,
in turn, affect the CRA’s future funding.
did not make any additional submissions in response to my preliminary views on
any other information at issue.
Information at issue
information at issue in this review is information EPSDD decided is contrary to
the public interest information.
issue to be decided by me is whether the information at issue is indeed contrary
to the public interest information.
deciding this matter, I had regard to:
Stanhope’s original access application
Stanhope’s application for Ombudsman review
processing file relating to Mr Stanhope’s application, including
EPSDD’s submissions and information provided
through EPSDD by the Chief
Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate about the origins of
some of the documents containing
information at issue
the FOI Act, in
particular Schedule 1, s 1.6 and Schedule 2
the Explanatory
Statement of the
of Information Bill 2016
Human Rights Act 2004
Government’s
an unedited copy
of the information at issue
relevant case
law, including:
Newspapers and Department of Justice and Attorney-General; Carmody (Third
Coe and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
Coe and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
Stanhope and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate
Wastecorp Pty Ltd and Caboolture Shire Council; JJ Richards Pty Ltd (Third
FOI Act gives every person an enforceable right of access to government
information, subject to any provisions of the Act providing
a basis on which
access can be refused.
to the public interest information is defined in s 16 of the FOI Act
information—
(a) that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
schedule 1; or
the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest
under the test set out in section 17
public interest test provided for in s 17 sets out a process for balancing
public interest factors favouring disclosure and nondisclosure
respectively.
This balancing test must be used to determine whether disclosure would be
contrary to the public interest.
FOI Act permits refusal of access to information where the information sought is
contrary to the public interest
information.
a record contains some information that is contrary to the public interest, but
information that it is in the public interest
to disclose too, the contrary to
the public interest information should be deleted, where
practicable.
onus of establishing information should not be disclosed rests with the party
seeking to prevent
disclosure.
1 of the FOI Act sets out categories of information taken to be contrary to the
public interest to disclose.
2 of the FOI Act sets out public interest factors to be balanced when conducting
the s 17 test to determine the public interest.
The contentions
of the parties
its decision notice, EPSDD said:
The release of [some of] this
information may serve to further open discussion, government accountability,
informed debate and reveal
the reason for a government decision and any
contextual or background information. However, on balance, release of this
information
would be detrimental intergovernmental relations (sic) between the
ACT and the Commonwealth. On balance, and the information available
to me, I am
satisfied that the disclosure of this information is not in the public
Stanhope’s application for Ombudsman review did not particularise the
submissions are discussed in more detail below.
Considerations
examined the information at issue.
Information taken to be
contrary to the public interest to disclose under Schedule 1
1 lists categories of information which are taken to be contrary to the public
interest to disclose. In this matter, EPSDD
found that some of the information
Mr Stanhope sought is taken to be contrary to the public interest.
I reviewed the information at issue, I checked that none of the exceptions
outlined in Schedule 1 are applicable. That is to
say, the information at issue
does not identify corruption, an offence, or misuse of power in a law
enforcement investigation. Accordingly,
apply to the
information at issue.
initial question in this matter is whether some of the information in documents
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16,
18, 19, 20, 23, 24 and 25 is
subject to Schedule 1, s 1.6 of the FOI Act which categorises Cabinet
information as information that
is taken to be contrary to the public interest
to disclose.
Cabinet information
1, s 1.6 states:
Information-
(a) that has been submitted, or that a minister proposes to submit, to
Cabinet for its consideration and that was brought into existence
purpose; or
(b) that is an official record of Cabinet; or
(c) that is a copy of, or part of, or contains an extract from, information
mentioned in paragraph (a) or (b); or
(d) the disclosure of which would reveal any deliberation of Cabinet (other
than through the official publication of a Cabinet decision)
is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose.
refused access to documents 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 18,
19, 20, 23, 24 and 25 on the basis that they
constituted contrary to the public
interest information under Schedule 1, s 1.6. EPSDD did not identify which
sub-section it relied
on in making this finding.
ACT Government’s Cabinet handbook says:
Cabinet documents are
strictly confidential and are the property of the ACT. Confidentiality is
protected in the following ways...
documents (including drafts) should contain the Dissemination Limiting Marker
(Sensitive: Cabinet) ...
4, 14 and 19 include a Dissemination Limiting Marker (DLM). I consider a DLM to
be indicative and not determinative. The
presence of the DLM cannot be relied
upon on its own but does support the view the document was created for Cabinet,
while the absence
of the DLM does not disqualify Schedule 1, s 1.6 from
applying. Document 18 possesses the DLM but EPSDD did not decide or submit
any of the information it contains is contrary to the public interest under
Schedule 1, s 1.6.
to rebut the presence or absence of a DLM I require satisfactory evidence. In
this case, my preliminary view was that documents
2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 23 and 25 lacked the DLM altogether or contained the DLM but did not
appear to be Cabinet information.
The documents appear to comprise emails
between ACT Government officials and third parties engaged by the government
regarding the
land swap. My preliminary view was that these documents are not
contrary to the public interest under Schedule 1, s 1.6. EPSDD did
not make any
submissions on this point when responding to my draft consideration.
Accordingly, I do not consider that these documents
are taken to be contrary to
the public interest under Schedule 1, s 1.6.
my preliminary view, I observed that despite document 4 containing the DLM I was
not satisfied that it is a document to which Schedule
1, s 1.6 applies. I
invited EPSDD to provide additional information to support their original
decision with respect to document 4.
In EPSDD’s response to my draft
consideration, it was submitted that the information in document 4 could be
contrary to the
public interest to disclose on the basis of Schedule 2 factors.
Accordingly, I considered the information in document 4 when balancing
under Schedule 2, but it is not taken to be contrary to the public interest
under Schedule 1, s 1.6.
14, 16, 18, 19 and 20 are emails between ACT Government officials which were
intended to collect information and facilitate
discussion about and preparation
of Cabinet submissions. For this reason, I am satisfied the Cabinet information
that EPSDD refused
access to in these documents is taken to be contrary to the
public interest under Schedule 1, s 1.6.
Public interest
determine whether disclosure is contrary to the public interest, the FOI Act
prescribes the following five
identify any
factor favouring disclosure that applies in relation to the information (a
relevant factor favouring disclosure), including
any factor mentioned in
schedule 2, section 2.1
identify any
factor favouring nondisclosure that applies in relation to the information (a
relevant factor favouring nondisclosure),
including any factor mentioned in
schedule 2, section 2.1
balance any
relevant factor or factors favouring disclosure against any relevant factor or
factors favouring nondisclosure
decide whether,
on balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public
balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public interest,
allow access to the information
do not consider any irrelevant factors I am prohibited from considering arise in
this review.
Factors favouring disclosure
2, s 2.1 of the FOI Act contains a list of public interest factors favouring
disclosure.
parties agree that three factors are relevant, Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(i),
2.1(a)(ii) and 2.1(a)(viii).
Promote open discussion of public
affairs and enhance the government’s accountability
reasonable expectation that information could promote open discussion of public
affairs and enhance government accountability favours
disclosure under the FOI
found that disclosure of the information at issue could reasonably be expected
to promote this public interest factor. I agree
with this finding, noting that
the land swap is a matter that is the subject of discussion in the ACT, for
example in the media and
raises government accountability as a relevant
consideration.
I expect the
information at issue could promote this public interest factor to a considerable
Contribute to positive and informed debate on important
issues and matters of public interest
reasonable expectation that information could contribute to positive and
informed debate on important issues and matters of public
interest favours
disclosure under the FOI
found that disclosure of the information at issue could reasonably be expected
to promote this public interest factor. I agree
with this finding, as I find
that the matter is one of public interest, given coverage in the media and that
the information at issue
could help inform people who wish to take a position on
the issue. I expect the information at issue could promote this public interest
factor to a considerable degree.
Reveal the reason for a
government decision and any background or contextual information that informed
the decision
reasonable expectation that information could reveal the reason for a government
decision and any background or contextual information
that informed the decision
favours disclosure under the FOI
information at issue relates to the ACT Government’s decision to swap land
with the Commonwealth and could reasonably be
expected to help inform the public
the information
at issue could promote this public interest factor to a
considerable degree.
Pro-disclosure bias
found that three factors favouring disclosure are applicable in respect of Mr
Stanhope’s access application. Additionally,
the FOI Act has an express
pro-disclosure bias which reflects the importance of access to government
information for the proper working
of representative
This is promoted in
the objects of the FOI Act.
these reasons, my preliminary view is the information at issue could reasonably
be expected to promote the objects of the FOI
Act and two public interest
Factors favouring nondisclosure
2, s 2.2 of the FOI Act lists public interest factors which favour nondisclosure
of information. EPSDD’s submissions
are that five factors are relevant in
this review, Schedule 2, ss 2.2(a)ii), 2.2(a)(viii), 2.2(a)(x), 2.2(a)(xi),
2.2(a)(xiii).
An individual’s right to privacy
reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice an individual’s
right to privacy under the
Human Rights Act
favours nondisclosure under the FOI
original decision found that some personal information in documents 2, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 16, 18, 19, 25, 31, 32, 33
and 34 is information that could
reasonably be expected to prejudice an individual’s right to privacy to an
extent that it
outweighed any factor favouring disclosure.
individual’s right to privacy under the
Human Rights Act
Everyone has the right—
(a) Not to have his or her privacy, family, home or correspondence interfered
with unlawfully or
arbitrarily...
National Capital Authority (NCA), a Commonwealth government entity, was
consulted about some of these documents. In response,
the NCA requested that
EPSDD redact the names, emails and phone numbers of NCA employees. EPSDD’s
decision was in accordance
with the NCA’s request.
I do not think it is reasonable to expect that disclosing the names of public
servants, or their official email addresses
and phone numbers, or job titles
could prejudice an individual’s right to privacy under the
Human Rights
in the present circumstances. In this review, I did not receive any evidence
to a person’s
right to privacy. I do not perceive a sound basis for finding that Schedule 2,
is applicable.
is one exception to this, which is mobile telephone numbers of individuals. I
expect that disclosing a person’s mobile
number risks prejudicing their
right to privacy and home (because a mobile number may enable a person to have
their privacy interfered
with while they are at home). The likelihood of
interference may be low, but it is not ‘absurd, irrational or
ridiculous’
and therefore meets the relevant threshold for me to
reasonably form an expectation of prejudice.
Intergovernmental
reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice intergovernmental
relations favours nondisclosure under the FOI
found this factor applied to information in documents 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 23, 24, 25,
26, 29 and 30. EPSDD described
the information as that which had been ‘provided in confidence and subject
to ongoing negotiations
and deliberations between the ACT and the
Commonwealth.’
considered this public interest factor in
Jon Stanhope and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate
concerned ongoing negotiations between the ACT and the Commonwealth
regarding a different land deal. In that case, I accepted the
argument that
disclosing confidential communications between the ACT Chief Minister and the
Commonwealth’s Minister for Finance
and between senior officials in the
ministers’ respective departments, could reasonably be expected to
prejudice the intergovernmental
relationship.
cited the Queensland Information Commissioner’s comments in
Newspapers and Department of Justice and Attorney-General; Carmody (Third
in which it was observed that the purpose of the intergovernmental
relations factor is to:
[G]ive weight to the public interest in
protecting confidential communications between... government[s] where disclosure
could reasonably
be expected to prejudice the relations between those
governments.
, I said that I require something stronger than hesitancy on the
part of an agency to find that disclosure could reasonably be expected
cause prejudice. In that case, I disagreed with the high level of weighting
given to this factor in the original decision,
which resulted in access being
refused to information. A better example of prejudice may be disclosure
producing a loss of intergovernmental
trust or cooperation between agency
consulted with a third party, the National Capital Authority (NCA), which is a
Commonwealth entity. The NCA did not raise any
objections to disclosure based on
prejudice to intergovernmental relations. EPSDD’s decision notice stated
that disclosure
could reasonably be expected to be ‘detrimental to
intergovernmental relations between the ACT and Commonwealth’. EPSDD
neither specified what evidence this was based on nor how the relationship might
suffer prejudice.
examined the information at issue and contextual information about the documents
produced by the Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic
Development Directorate
(CMTEDD). The information at issue is of an
intragovernmental
that is, it is correspondence between ACT Government officials. While some of
the correspondence is marked with a dissemination
limiting marker saying
, I consider much of it is not.
of the information at issue relates to a particular arrangement that is a
sensitive part of the ACT government’s negotiations
with the Commonwealth.
This information is contained in documents 4, 5, 6, 10, 13, 24, 25 and 29. It is
also in document 14, but
my preliminary view is that this is contrary to the
public interest under Schedule 1, s 1.6. For clarity, the particular information
I refer to is the indented paragraph in document 5, then all other places in the
aforementioned documents where that same information
Jon Stanhope and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate
, I considered
this particular information to be contrary to the public interest information.
My decision in that matter was that
the information could reasonably be expected
to prejudice intergovernmental relations to a significant degree. This was based
part on an objection raised by a third party who was consulted about the
matter in that review. While that third party was not consulted
in this case, I
decided to apply consistent reasoning about the applicability of the
intergovernmental relations factor to the particular
information in this matter.
will explain the precise weight to be given to the relevant factors in the
section of this notice, ‘Balancing the factors’.
recognise the correspondence relates to negotiations between the ACT and
Commonwealth about the land swap. However, I do not consider
sufficiently sensitive to both parties to support EPSDD’s assertion that
expecting significant prejudice would be
reasonable.
than the exception I have noted above, I do not accept, having regard to the
lack of evidence in this case, that disclosure
of the information at issue could
reasonably be expected to prejudice the relationship between the ACT and
Commonwealth.
Competitive commercial activities of an agency
reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice the competitive
commercial activities of an agency favours nondisclosure
under the FOI
Information
has a commercial value if:
it is valuable
for the purposes of carrying on the commercial activity in which that agency or
other person is engaged (i.e. because
it is important or essential to the
profitability or viability of a continuing business operation, or a pending
commercial transaction); or
arms-length buyer is prepared to pay to obtain that information from that agency
or person, such that the market value of
the information would be destroyed or
diminished if it could be obtained from a government agency which has possession
responded to my draft consideration by submitting that information in documents
2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10 and 11 could reasonably
be expected to adversely affect
future land sales conducted by the Suburban Land Agency.
also contends that the fact that the valuation information is from 2019 does not
mean that it does not retain its commercial
value because it provides benchmarks
for future valuations.
accept that the information of dollar-value amounts, is information which is
essential to the profitability of the Suburban Land
Agency’s sales.
my view, it is reasonable to expect that the profitability of sales could be
prejudiced by disclosure of the information at issue
and decided to afford this
factor considerable weight.
Economy of the Territory
reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice the economy of the
Australian Capital Territory favours nondisclosure under
responding to my preliminary view, EPSDD raised this factor as an applicable
factor in relation to documents it initially refused
access to on the basis that
it was Cabinet information and information prejudicial to intergovernmental
submissions did not distinguish between this factor and the factor relating to
the competitive commercial activities
of an agency. On this factor, EPSDD
contends that disclosure of the size of the West Basin area could be expected to
prejudice the
ACT’s economy more generally and not just the competitive
commercial interests of EPSDD. EPSDD did not refer me to any authority
point and I am not satisfied that EPSDD discharged the onus under s 72 in
respect of this factor.
Balancing the factors
s 17 requires, I identified the relevant public interest factors favouring
disclosure and nondisclosure. The next step s 17 requires
is the balancing of
these factors according to the test it sets out.
this review, I found that the information at issue could reasonably be expected
to promote three public interest factors to a significant
the other hand, five factors favour nondisclosure, including intergovernmental
relations, individual privacy, business affairs,
the Territory economy and the
competitive commercial activities of EPSDD.
public interest factors is not simply a matter of quantifying the number of
relevant factors weighing on disclosure and
nondisclosure, with the higher
quantity prevailing. Section 17 requires me to weigh the relative importance of
each factor. The weight
I give to a factor depends on the effect that disclosing
the information could reasonably be expected to have on the public interest.
FOI Act has a bias favouring disclosure. This means that I do not approach the
balancing of factors as though there are empty
scales in equilibrium, waiting
for arguments to be placed on each side. Rather, the scales are ‘laden in
disclosure’.
made on the basis of prejudice to intergovernmental relations
decision is that the information at issue could not reasonably be expected to
prejudice intergovernmental relations, except in
one respect. The information in
the indented paragraph of document 5 and all other places where that information
appears (documents
4, 13, 14, 24, 24 and 29) is contrary to the public interest
to disclose because it is sensitive information relating to ongoing
negotiation
of a commercial arrangement between the ACT and Commonwealth. Otherwise all of
the information that was redacted on the
basis of expected prejudice to
intergovernmental relations should be disclosed.
Redactions made
on the basis of an individual’s right to privacy
find all staff names should be disclosed. It is not reasonable to expect that
disclosing them could prejudice an individual’s
right to privacy under the
Human Rights Act
in the absence of any specific evidence. There is therefore
nothing to weigh against disclosure of this information, nor the contact
of public officials. Indeed, public access to names of persons participating in
public decision-making promotes the factors
favouring disclosure to a
considerable degree.
the other hand, I expect that disclosing a person’s mobile telephone
number could enable interference with that person’s
think that disclosing a private mobile telephone number promotes any public
interest factor favouring disclosure.
Accordingly, I decided that
individuals’ private mobile telephone numbers are contrary to the public
interest information.
Document 12 – business
information in document 12 could reasonably be expected to promote all three
public interest factors favouring disclosure to a
considerable degree.
Accordingly, I afford considerable weight to each of these factors.
I expect that disclosure of document 12 could prejudice the business affairs of
Knight Frank. I afford this factor considerable
weight except in relation to
section 5.4 of the document, which is a summary of the advice contained in the
document. I distinguish
section 5.4 as in the public interest to disclose
because it reflects the conclusions drawn by Knight Frank and put to the
to inform policy rather than the business intelligence or methodology
of Knight Frank. All sections other than 5.4 are, on balance,
contrary to the
public interest to disclose because there is a reason to expect a real risk of
severe prejudice to Knight Frank’s
business affairs.
is consistent with the view I set out in my draft consideration. In responding
to my draft consideration, EPSDD did not submit
that disclosure of dollar-value
information in section 5.4 of document 12 could reasonably be expected to
prejudice the competitive
commercial activities of EPSDD or the economy of the
Territory. Thus, while I have agreed that dollar-value amounts may be contrary
to the public interest in some other documents in this review, I do not consider
EPSDD has discharged the onus imposed by s 72 with
respect to dollar-value
amounts that appear in section 5.4 of the report.
Competitive
commercial activities of EPSDD
response to my draft consideration submitted that information in documents 2, 3,
4, 6, 8, 9, 10 and 11 is contrary to
the public interest information because it
could reasonably be expected to considerably prejudice the agency’s
competitive
commercial activities of EPSDD considerably.
is a compelling public interest in transparency about the management of public
monies. The ability of the public to discuss
and debate and hold the government
accountable for its management of public monies is of fundamental importance for
the proper working
of representative democracy. All three pro-disclosure factors
apply to this information to a degree that warrants considerable weighting.
accept that disclosure of information which is dollar-value amounts in documents
2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10 and 11 could reasonably be expected
to prejudice the
competitive commercial activities of EPSDD. I decided to afford this factor
considerable weight. In this instance,
my decision is that the prevailing weight
favours nondisclosure and that this information, in documents 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10
which is the dollar-value amounts, should be redacted from those
documents. The applicant should be given access to the remainder
documents so that only the dollar-value amounts are redacted.
document 4 does not contain any dollar-value amounts so I do not accept that
EPSDD discharged the onus under s 72 of showing
that it contains contrary to the
public interest information that could reasonably be expected to prejudice the
competitive commercial
activities of EPSDD.
decision under
of the FOI Act is to
decision to refuse access to the information at issue under s
the FOI Act.
consider that EPSDD decided correctly not to disclose:
information in
documents 14, 16, 19 and 20 which comprise information that is taken to be
contrary to the public interest under Schedule
1, s 1.6(1)(a)
the information
I have identified (the indented paragraph in document 5), where it appears in
documents 4, 5, 6, 10, 13, 24, 25 and
29 on the basis of prejudice to
intergovernmental relations,
dollar-value
amounts in documents 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10 and 11.
document 12
(Knight Frank’s valuation report), except for section 5.4
telephone number of any person
redactions made
where information is out of scope, including information the NCA indicated was
out of scope when consulted about Mr
application.
Accordingly,
subject to the exceptions I decided on above, my decision is that Mr Stanhope
should be given access to all other information
Michael Manthorpe PSM
ACT Ombudsman
Human Rights Act 2004
ACT Government
[2016] QICmr 23.
[2019] ACTOFOI 3.
[2018] ACTOFOI 3.
[2020] ACTOFOI 24.
(2002, L0004, 30 June 2003).
Section 7 of the FOI
Section 35(1)(c) of the
Section 50 of the
Section 72 of the
Section 17(1) of
the FOI Act.
Section 17(2)
of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2,
s 2.1(a)(i) of the FOI Act.
See, for example, reporting in the
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(ii) of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(viii) of the FOI Act.
Section 17 of the FOI
Section 6(b) of the FOI
Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(ii) of the FOI Act.
Human Rights Act
Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(x) of
the FOI Act.
[2019] ACTOFOI
[2018] ACTOFOI 3
Jon Stanhope
and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
ACTOFOI 24 at [73].
Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(xiii) of the FOI Act.
Wanless Wastecorp Pty
Ltd and Caboolture Shire Council; JJ Richards Pty Ltd (Third Party)
L0004, 30 June 2003) at [45]-[46].
Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(viii)
of the FOI Act.
Explanatory
of Information Bill 2016
RTF format (923 KB)
Signed PDF/A format