COMMISSIONER FOR ACT REVENUE v 6 DOUBLEBAR PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR THE 6 DOUBLEBAR TRUST; COMMISSIONER FOR ACT REVENUE v 4 BLOODFINCH PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR THE 4 BLOODFINCH TRUST (Administrative Review) [2025] ACAT 53 (12 August 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
COMMISSIONER FOR AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
TERRITORY REVENUE v 6 DOUBLEBAR PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR THE 6 DOUBLEBAR TRUST;
COMMISSIONER FOR
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY REVENUE v 4 BLOODFINCH PTY LTD AS
TRUSTEE FOR THE 4 BLOODFINCH TRUST (Administrative Review)
[2025] ACAT
AA 1/2025 and AA 2/2025
Catchwords: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW –
merit review proceedings –
Taxation Administration Act 1999
burden of proof – does burden of proof in
Administration Act
apply in merit review proceedings in the Tribunal –
application of burden of proof
Duties Act 1999
– aggregation
of transactions – statutory requirements – “associated
person” – substantially
one transaction
Legislation cited:
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
Duties Act 1999
Duties Act 1997
Taxation Administration Act 1999
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Cases cited:
Abebe v The Commonwealth
(1999) 197 CLR
Canberra Cleaners Pty Ltd V Commissioner for ACT Revenue
[2018] ACTSC
Comcare v Power
[2015] FCA 1502
Cypjayne Pty Ltd v Rodskog
[2009] NSWSC 301
Gartside v IRC
[1967] UKHL 6
[1968] AC 553
Lemongrove Services Pty Ltd v Rilroll Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWCA 174
McDonald v Director-General of Social Security
(1984) 1 FCR 354
Planet Red Pty Ltd v Commissioner of ACT Revenue
Rawson Finances Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[2013] FCAFC 26
Sweeney v He
[2023] NSWCA 68
Whisprun Pty Ltd v Dixon
[2003] HCA 48
Presidential Member G Curtin SC
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) AA
COMMISSIONER FOR AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY REVENUE
6 DOUBLEBAR PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR THE 6 DOUBLEBAR
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE
TRIBUNAL ) AA 2/2025
COMMISSIONER FOR AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY REVENUE
4 BLOODFINCH PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR THE 4 BLOODFINCH
Presidential Member G Curtin SC
The Tribunal orders that:
appeals are
...............................................
Presidential Member G Curtin SC
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
mid-2018 two adjoining lots of land in Fyshwick, in the Australian Capital
Territory, were sold, one to each of the respondents
Transfers were lodged for registration in August 2018.
appellant (the Commissioner) determined that the two transactions should be
aggregated pursuant to 24 of the
Duties Act 1999
because the taxpayers
were “associated people” (as defined) and the transactions together
formed, evidenced, gave effect
to or arose from what was, substantially, one
arrangement relating to all of the interests in, the dutiable property.
Original Tribunal disagreed with the Commissioner. The Commissioner
two properties concerned were Nos. 4 and 6 Lyell St, Fyshwick.
4 Lyell St was originally owned by 4 Lyell St Pty Ltd. That company was the
trustee of a discretionary trust called the 4 Lyell
6 Lyell St was originally owned by 6 Lyell St Pty Ltd. That company was the
trustee of a discretionary trust called the 6 Lyell
shall collectively refer to 4 Lyell St Pty Ltd and 6 Lyell St Pty Ltd as the
Lyell St companies
unless it is necessary to refer to them
individually.
shall collectively refer to the 4 Lyell St Trust and the 6 Lyell St Trust as the
unless it is necessary to refer to them individually.
late 2016, the Lyell St companies were grouped by the Commissioner with certain
other companies for payroll tax purposes, with
a total claimed payroll tax owed
(by the group) of a little over $4.6m.
ensued between the Lyell St companies and the Commissioner commencing in
the course of that litigation, and by about November 2017, three non-bank
lenders – Marginata Securities Pty Ltd (
), Reliance
Financial Services Pty Ltd (
) and Accolade Advisory Pty Ltd
) (collectively, the
) – had advanced funds
to the Lyell St companies and entered into mortgages with the Lyell St companies
over Nos. 4 and 6 Lyell
St (as well as taking other securities).
is relevant to what comes later to note that at the time of these events, and
until 1 July 2019, the sole director and sole shareholder
of Marginata was
Stefan Adam Morvillo (
Mr Morvillo
relation to the claimed payroll tax debt the Commissioner issued garnishee
notices in August 2017, and compliance notices in October
2017, pursuant to
sections 54
Taxation Administration Act 1999
AsJ stayed enforcement of six of the garnishee notices on 14 November2017,
and stayed enforcement of the compliance notices
on 14 December 2017,
pending the outcome of proceedings before her Honour.
3 August 2018 McWilliam AsJ delivered judgment in those proceedings:
Cleaners Pty Ltd V Commissioner for ACT Revenue
[2018] ACTSC 208.
plaintiffs in those proceedings were partly successful. Some but not all of the
garnishee notices were set aside. None of the
compliance notices were set
on 3 August 2018, the first registered mortgagee of Nos. 4 and 6 Lyell Sts
discharged its mortgages, having been paid out by
funds advanced by one or more
of Marginata, Reliance and Accolade.
net result was that Marginata, Reliance and Accolade became registered
mortgagees over the two Lyell St properties.
Accordingly,
Marginata, Reliance and Accolade were concerned that they would lose the benefit
of their secured interests in Nos. 4
and 6 Lyell St.
at least 6 August 2018, the Lyell St companies were in default under their loan
agreements with the lenders.
avoid that occurring, and on 6 August 2018, the following steps were
(a) 6 Doublebar Pty Ltd (
) and 4 Bloodfinch Pty Ltd
) (being the taxpayers) were incorporated;
(b) the sole director and shareholder of Doublebar and Bloodfinch was
Mr Morvillo;
(c) Doublebar was appointed as trustee of the the 6 Doublebar Trust (the
Doublebar Trust
(d) Bloodfinch was appointed as trustee of the 4 Bloodfinch Trust (the
Bloodfinch Trust
(e) No. 4 Lyell St was transferred to Doublebar (as trustee of the 6 Doublebar
Trust) by way of a contract for sale, registered transfer
and a Deed of
Agreement for the sum of (as expressed in the transfer)
(f) No. 6 Lyell St was transferred to Bloodfinch (as trustee of the 4 Bloodfinch
Trust) by way of a contract for sale, registered
transfer and a Deed of
Agreement for the sum of (as expressed in the transfer)
$1,050,000;
(g) the Lyell St companies were placed into liquidation and a liquidator
Trusts were wholly discretionary trusts.
relevance to the submissions made by the Commissioner to the Original Tribunal
was the identification of Maria Cassaniti as a beneficiary
in the Bloodfinch
Trust. She was the grandmother of Mr Morvillo.
the Bloodfinch Trust, “General Beneficiaries” were defined to be the
persons that fell within the category defined
in Item 2 of the Trust Schedule.
Item 2 said:
General Beneficiaries
(a) Maria Cassaniti and the persons related to Maria Cassaniti as follows,
(i) spouse, including defacto spouse;
) children, including adopted and step;
(iii) children and more remote descendants of such children;
(iv) brothers, sisters and parents;
(v) children and more remote descendants of brothers and sisters; and
(vi) spouses of any of the foregoing;
(b) any corporation of which any one or more of the foregoing beneficiaries
is a member;
(c) the Trustee of any trust (in his capacity as such) which trust is bound
to be determined not later than the Vesting Day and under
which any one or more
of the foregoing beneficiaries has any interest whether vested contingent or
merely expectant or prospective;
(d) such individual's corporation's trusts or other entities having separate
legal identity as may from time to time are nominated
to be beneficiaries in
accordance with the powers contained in this Trust Deed.
the Doublebar Trust, “General Beneficiaries” were also defined to be
the persons that fell within the category defined
in Item 2 of the Doublebar
Trust Schedule. Item 2 in that Trust Schedule was identical to Item 2 in the
Bloodfinch Trust Schedule
other than for the first two lines where the words
“Thanh Cong Hoang and the persons related to Thanh Cong Hoang ...”
appeared in lieu of “Maria Cassaniti and the persons related to Maria
Cassaniti ...”.
sums expressed in the transfers as consideration was not paid in cash. Rather,
according to the lenders, the taxpayers “took
over” the liabilities
of the vendor companies to the lenders.
consideration for each lot expressed in the transfers of the Lyell St properties
was below the minimum consideration which would
trigger an obligation to pay
duty on each sale.
Commissioner issued notices of investigation to the taxpayers pursuant to
section 82 of the
Taxation Administration Act 1999
in relation to each transaction, and the taxpayers were required to provide a
declaration by a competent valuer as to the value
of each property.
taxpayers provided valuations of the properties (as at 6 August 2018) by Herron
Todd White. In those valuations No. 6 Lyell St
was valued at $520,000 and No. 4
Lyell St at $1,280,000.
29 October 2018, the Commissioner informed the taxpayers that the ACT Valuation
Office (the
) had been requested to provide valuations of the
properties.
AVO subsequently valued the properties at $600,000 and $1,900,000 respectively
(excl GST).
values exceeded the minimum sum which would trigger a liability for duty, and
the Commissioner determined that the two sales
should be aggregated under
Accordingly,
on 18 July 2019 the Commissioner issued a Conveyance Duty Notice of Assessment
to Doublebar for the sum of just under
$140,000, and a similar Notice to
Bloodfinch for the sum of just over $44,000. Both sums included duty, penalty
tax and interest.
the respective Notices, the dutiable value of No. 4 Lyell St was said to be
$2,090,000 (with GST added), and the dutiable value
of No. 6 Lyell St was said
to be $660,000 (with GST added).
or about 19 August 2019, Doublebar and Bloodfinch lodged objections to those
Notices pursuant to
section 100
Commissioner’s delegate considered those objections and dismissed the
taxpayers’ objections other than to hold that
GST should have been
excluded from the calculation of duty. Thus, the delegate said, the values to be
considered should have been
$600,000 (rather than $660,000) for No. 6 Lyell St,
and $1.9m (rather than $2.09m) for No. 4 Lyell St.
of those decisions was a reviewable decision.
being dissatisfied with those decisions, and on 6 September 2021, the taxpayers
commenced merit review proceedings in the Tribunal
against the
Commissioner’s reviewable decisions pursuant to section 108A of the
Original Tribunal hearing was conducted over five days between 22 November
2022 and 31 August 2023, and a decision given on
December 2024.
Original Tribunal upheld the taxpayers’ objections, set aside the
reviewable decisions, re-assessed the unencumbered value
of the Lyell St
properties and remitted the assessments of duty to the Commissioner for
re-assessment in accordance with the Original
Tribunal’s decision.
net result of the Original Tribunal’s decision was that Doublebar and
Bloodfinch would not be liable for all or most of
the duty, tax and interest
referred to in the Commissioner’s original assessments.
were two critical findings in the Original Tribunal’s decision which are
at the heart of this appeal.
first was that the transfers of the Lyell St properties should
aggregated under
, and, second, that the
unencumbered value of the two lots as found by the Original Tribunal was
Commissioner appeals from the Original Tribunal’s decision in each of the
proceedings.
The issues before the Original Tribunal
Original Tribunal said that the parties agreed that the issues for the Original
Tribunal to decide were as follows:
Issue 1: Should the transactions be aggregated under section 24 of the Act?
This involves three sub-issues:
(a) Issue 1(a): Are the transferees “associated” or
“related” under section 24(1)(b) of the Act?
(b) Issue 1(b): Are the dutiable transactions “one arrangement”
under section 24(1)(c) of the Act?
(c) Issue 1(c): Is it just and reasonable to aggregate the transactions?
Issue 2: What is the dutiable value of the properties? This involves three
sub-issues:
(a) Issue 2(a): Is the duty nil, following issue of a document titled
“Conveyance Duty Notice of Assessment” dated 10
(b) Issue 2(b): Is the dutiable value of the properties under section
20(1)(a) of the Act the “consideration” of the
transactions?
(c) Issue 2(c): What are the unencumbered values of the Lyell St
properties?
Issue 3: What penalty and interest are payable?
Original Tribunal also addressed the question of who bore the burden of proof.
The Original Tribunal said that the burden of showing
that the applicants’
objections are made out rested with the taxpayers pursuant to section 101(3) of
. This issue is dealt with in relation to the first ground
of appeal considered below.
understand many of the issues set out below it is convenient to here set out the
central provisions of the
(in the form it was at the relevant
time, namely 6 August 2018) so far as concern this appeal and why the
Commissioner said that
the transactions should be
aggregated.
Aggregation of dutiable transactions
(1) Dutiable transactions relating to separate items of dutiable property,
or separate parts of, or interests in, dutiable property
are to be aggregated
and treated as a single dutiable transaction if—
(a) they occur within 12 months; and
(b) the transferee is the same or the transferees are associated people;
(c) the dutiable transactions together form, evidence, give effect to or
arise from what is, substantially, 1 arrangement relating
to all of the items or
parts of, or interests in, the dutiable property.
(2) Dutiable transactions are not to be aggregated under this section if the
commissioner is satisfied—
(d) that it would not be just and reasonable for the transactions to be so
aggregated.
(3) The dutiable value of aggregated dutiable property is the sum of the
dutiable values of the items or parts of, or the interests
in, the dutiable
property as at the time when each dutiable transaction occurs.
(5) Duty may be apportioned to the instruments effecting or evidencing the
dutiable transactions, or may be payable in accordance
determined by the commissioner.
expressions “associated person” used in
was defined in
the Dictionary to the
definition of “associated person” was:
associated person-
(a) for this Act generally—means a person who is associated with
another person in accordance with any of the following provisions:
(i) people are associated people if they are related people;
(ii) individuals are associated people if they are partners in a partnership
to which the
Partnership Act 1963
(iii) private companies are associated people if common shareholders have a
significant interest in each private company;
(iv) trustees are associated people if any person is a beneficiary common to
the trusts (not including a public unit trust scheme)
of which they are
(v) a private company and a trustee are associated people if a related body
corporate of the company is a beneficiary of the trust
(not including a public
unit trust scheme) of which the trustee is a trustee; and
(Acquisition of interests in certain landholders)—see
section 83A.
expression “related person” (found in (a)(i) of the definition of
“associated person” above) was defined
as follows:
related person
means a person who is related to another person
in accordance with any of the following provisions:
(a) individuals are related people if—
(i) they are partners, or they have been partners and the partnership has
ended (whether the partnership ended in Australia or elsewhere);
(ii) the relationship between them is that of parent and child, brothers,
sisters, or brother and sister;
(b) private companies are related people if they are related bodies
(c) an individual and a private company are related people if the individual
is a majority shareholder or director of the company
or of another private
company that is a related body corporate of the company;
(d) an individual and a trustee are related people if the individual is a
beneficiary of the trust (other than a public unit trust
scheme) of which the
trustee is a trustee;
(e) a private company and a trustee are related people if the company, or a
majority shareholder or director of the company, is a
beneficiary of the trust
(other than a public unit trust scheme) of which the trustee is a trustee.
appears from the Original Tribunal’s reasons that the Commissioner’s
case was that the three subsections of
satisfied. Namely, that the dutiable transactions occurred within 12 months of
each other, the taxpayers were “associated
people” and that the
transactions together formed, evidenced, gave effect to or arose from what was
substantially one arrangement
relating to all of the interests in the dutiable
was no contest between the parties that the two dutiable transactions occurred
within 12 months of each other. There was no
dispute that the transfers were
dutiable transactions within the meaning of that term as defined in
shall briefly summarise the Original Tribunal’s reasons in order to aid
understanding of the grounds of appeal and the submissions
made in support of
those grounds.
The Original Tribunal’s decision
Original Tribunal said that the burden of showing that the taxpayers’
objections were made out rested with the taxpayers
section 101(3)
Original Tribunal held that the taxpayers were not “associated
persons” or “related persons” within the
definitions of those
terms in the
. It held that none of the “relevant
elements” of the respective definitions were met.
appears the Commissioner put a case that four of the five sub-paragraphs of the
definition of “associated person” applied,
namely (a)(i), (iii),
(iv) and (v). I shall summarise the Original Tribunal’s reasons in
relation to each of those sub-paragraphs.
to (a)(i), the Original Tribunal rejected the Commissioner’s submission
that Mr Morvillo was a beneficiary of the Bloodfinch
Trust (because he was a
blood relative of Maria Cassaniti) applying the reasoning in
Cypjayne Pty Ltd
[2009] NSWSC 301
that case Brereton J examined a relevantly similar definition of
“associated person” in the NSW duties legislation.
In short, his
Honour held that an object of a discretionary trust is not a beneficiary in the
traditional sense. His Honour said
Thus a discretionary trust does not have beneficiaries in the traditional
sense, whose interests together aggregate the beneficial
ownership of the trust
property. Instead, there is a class of persons, usually described in wide terms,
who are the objects of a
trust power to appoint either income or corpus or both
to selected members of the class. The members of the class are objects of
trust power, rather than beneficiaries in the strict sense. They do not have a
proprietary legal or equitable interest in the trust
fund, though they have a
right to due administration of the trust [Re Smith
[1928] Ch 915
; Gartside v IRC
[1967] UKHL 6
[1968] AC 553
; Jacob’s Law of Trusts in Australia, 5th ed, 649 [2315]].
They have no beneficial interest in the trust property; they are
not persons for
whose benefit the trust property is held by the trustee; at the highest they are
members of a class of persons for
the benefit of some one or more of whom the
trustee may in due course hold property if it so determines. At best, they are
beneficiaries, not beneficiaries.
response, the Commissioner relied on
section 82(2)
is headed “Constructive ownership of landholdings and other
property – discretionary trusts”. The Commissioner
submitted that
had the effect of deeming the object of a discretionary trust as a
beneficiary.
-(3) was in the following terms:
Constructive
ownership of landholdings and other property—discretionary
(1) For this section, a person is a beneficiary of a discretionary trust if
the person is a person, or a member of a class of people,
in whose favour, by
the terms of the trust, capital the subject of the trust may be applied in the
(a) of the exercise of a power or discretion in favour of the person or
(b) that a discretion conferred under the trust is not exercised.
Note Discretionary trust—see the dictionary.
(2) A beneficiary of a discretionary trust is taken to own or to be
otherwise entitled to the property the subject of the trust.
(3) For this part, any property that is the subject of a discretionary trust
(the primary trust) is taken to be the subject of any
other discretionary
(a) that is a beneficiary of the primary trust; or
(b) any trustee of which (in the capacity of trustee) is a beneficiary of
the primary trust.
Original Tribunal rejected that submission for two reasons. First, because it
(which appears in
did not apply to
(which appears in
but was confined to the matters set out in
(which is headed “Acquisition of interests in certain landholders).
Second, because Brereton J had rejected a similar argument
relation to the NSW equivalent of
, namely section 163U of the
Duties Act 1997
(NSW) and the same reasoning should apply to
to (a)(iii), the Commissioner submitted that if the discretionary beneficiaries
were not beneficiaries for the purposes of the
associated person test in the
, then the beneficial interest must rest with the taxpayers
and, by reason of the common shareholding, in the taxpayers by Mr Morvillo,
meant that they were associated persons.
Original Tribunal rejected this submission and said that:
In any case, common shareholding is not the test here, the test is whether Mr
Morvillo had a “significant interest” in
each of the applicants.
a reference to
which addresses the question
whether a person has an “interest” in a landholder, and whether they
have a “significant
Section 83(1)
and (2) said:
and significant interest in landholders—
(1) For this part, a person has an
in a landholder if the
person has an entitlement (otherwise than as a creditor or other person to whom
the landholder is liable)
to a distribution of property from the landholder on a
winding up of the landholder or otherwise.
(2) A person who, under subsection (1), has an interest in a landholder has
significant interest
in the landholder if the person, in the event of a
distribution of all the property of the landholder immediately after the
was acquired, would be entitled to at least 50% of the property
distributed.
Original Tribunal said that the Commissioner contended that Mr Morvillo had a
“significant interest” in the taxpayer
companies because he was the
only shareholder of those companies, the taxpayers were landholding companies,
and Mr Morvillo would
be entitled to 100% of any distribution under
Original Tribunal rejected this submission. It said that:
... a corporate trustee such as each of the applicants is not a landholder,
therefore a significant interest does not arise here,
and an association on the
basis of subsection (a)(iii) is not established.
to (a)(iv), the Original Tribunal said that the Commissioner submitted that the
two Trusts had common beneficiaries (for reasons
that need not be explored) and
rejected that submission. No ground of appeal was raised in relation to this
to (a)(v), the Original Tribunal said that it rejected the Commissioner’s
submission that the taxpayers were associated persons
because the private
company was a beneficiary of the trust of which the taxpayer company was
trustee. The Original Tribunal held
that neither of the two Trusts in this case
had any private companies as beneficiaries, and therefore (a)(v) did not
The grounds of appeal
Commissioner identified four grounds of appeal. They were that the Original
Tribunal erred in:
(a) failing to properly apply
section 101(3)
(b) failing to consider the Commissioner’s submissions on
“associated persons”;
(c) erroneously applying
section 24(1)(c)
(d) making an erroneous finding as to the unencumbered value of the Lyell St
properties by erroneously accepting the evidence of
the taxpayers’ valuer
and erroneously rejecting the evidence of the Commissioner’s valuer.
Ground 1: a failure to apply
of the TAA (ACT)
appellant contended that
section 101(3)
applied to a
merits review proceeding in the Tribunal, and that the Original Tribunal failed
to properly apply it.
taxpayers contended that the scheme under the
contained no
express provision creating a legal burden of proof in the Tribunal’s
review of a reviewable decision. Put more
simply, the taxpayers submitted that
section 101(3)
did not apply to a merits review
proceeding in the Tribunal. Alternatively, if
section 101(3)
applied, the
taxpayers submitted that the Original Tribunal applied it correctly.
Commissioner’s submission was:
The inclusion of
creates a default position that the assessment
issued by the Appellant stands and the taxpayer carries the burden of displacing
presumption. In practical terms,
does not require the Appellant to
prove that its assessment is correct; rather it requires the taxpayer to provide
evidence demonstrating
that an assessment is (in this case) excessive before the
Tribunal (as the decision maker) can consider what the correct or preferable
decision is. It represents a gateway which must be cleared before the Tribunal
can re-make the decision under review.
the reasons that follow I do not accept this ground of appeal.
Section 101(3)
of the TAA (ACT) applies to merits reviews in
the Tribunal
at first thought that
section 101(3)
did not apply to
merits review proceedings in the Tribunal because of the text of the
and notwithstanding decisions in the Tribunal to the contrary.
However, on reflection and after further consideration of the parties’
submissions, I have come to the view that the section does apply although for
different reasons than those expressed in earlier Tribunal
it is to be applied, and precisely what it means in a Tribunal context, are
different questions to which I will come.
distinguishes between “objections” to the
Commissioner (the subject of Division 10.1) and “reviews” to the
Tribunal (the subject of Division 10.2).
Divisions are contained within
which is headed
“Objections and reviews”. That is some indication that the
provisions of both Divisions are linked and
are to be interpretated to operate,
as far as possible, in a harmonious fashion.
10.1 is headed “Objections” and Division 10.2 is headed
“Notification and review of decisions”.
is within Division 10.1 and is concerned with
objections lodged with the Commissioner.
Section 100(1)
says that objections may
be lodged with the Commissioner if a taxpayer is dissatisfied with one or more
of the assessments and decisions
referred to. Sub-section (2) says that an
objection must be accompanied by a fee. Subsection (3) says that any fee must be
in the circumstances mentioned.
word “objection” is defined in the Dictionary to the
as being an “objection made under
section 100
“written objection” mentioned in
section 100
must refer to a
document which presumably identifies the assessment or decision with which the
taxpayer is dissatisfied and notifies
the Commissioner that the taxpayer
disagrees with it.
is headed “Grounds for objection”. It sets out three
requirements for objections. First, the grounds must be in writing,
fully and in detail. Second, the grounds were to be limited to the extent of the
reassessment. The third requirement, found
section 101(3)
The burden of showing that an objection should be sustained lies with the
taxpayer making the objection
section 101(3)
is to place a burden on the taxpayer to establish
his/her/its case because the taxpayer would have the better knowledge of
his/her/its
another consideration is the fact that consideration by the Commissioner of an
objection does not involve adversarial proceedings.
In such circumstances the
Commissioner would not have the benefit of a contravenor and so it seems logical
to place some requirement
on the objector to bring forth sufficient evidence of
relevant facts to sustain an objection based on the applicable law.
the Commissioner, in such circumstances, is not a contradictor. The Commissioner
is an inquisitor obliged to be
The Commissioner is not an
adversarial cross-examiner, has no client and has no case to put against a
much seems to have been contemplated in the Explanatory Statement to the
Taxation Administration Bill 1998. In relation to clause
101 of that Bill the
Explanatory Statement said:
Clause 101 - Grounds for objection
- sets the requirements for
objections generally and limits the grounds for objection against a reassessment
to the reassessment
itself, not the original assessment Also provides that on
the burden of establishing the taxpayer's
case by evidence rests with the taxpayer. This is because the taxpayer has the
best knowledge
of his or her own affairs
[Emphasis added.]
10.2 of the
concerns reviews to the Tribunal.
108B is headed “Grounds of review” and is a rough analogue of
section 101. Section 108B contains two requirements
for reviews. First, the
applicant’s and respondent’s cases on a review are not limited to
the grounds of the objection.
Second, if the objection was to a reassessment,
the grounds of the review are limited to the extent of the reassessment.
is being reviewed is, of course, the Commissioner’s decision on an
objection lodged by a taxpayer. The grounds for an objection
may be enlarged on
a review, and it would seem incongruous not to apply the same burden of proof to
those enlarged grounds that applied
to the grounds advanced before the
Commissioner. Just as there is no contravenor when the Commissioner is
determining an objection,
so there is no contravenor (in the traditional sense)
on a review notwithstanding the fact that the Commissioner is a party to the
proceedings.
shall return to that matter shortly.
the same burden of proof in reviews would be consistent with the Explanatory
Statement referred to above which said that
the burden of proof applied on
appeals (which were later called reviews when the
Ordinarily,
and absent a statutory provision to the contrary, there is no burden of proof in
merit review tribunals:
Comcare v Power
[2015] FCA 1502
central authority in this area is
McDonald v Director-General of Social
(1984) 1 FCR 354 (
appeal from a decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to the Federal
Court. The Tribunal had affirmed a decision of
a delegate of the
Director-General of Social Security to cancel an invalid pension which had
previously been awarded to the applicant.
The appeal lay to the Federal
Court pursuant to section 44 of the
and was limited to
questions of law. One question determined was whether either party bore any onus
of proof in the Tribunal. The
relevant legislation did not contain any similar
provision to section 101(3) of the
and the Full Court
considered the question of burden of proof before merit review tribunals.
357 Woodward J considered the position where legislation
burden of proof section. His Honour said:
It is possible to imagine a case where the act which the administrator is
applying places a requirement or onus on one or other of
the parties to an issue
to establish a particular state of facts on which the administrator's decision
would be based.
If that were so, the same requirement or onus would apply
before the AAT
[Emphasis added.]
matters might have been made more clear by the inclusion of a sub-section in
section 108B to the same effect as that found
in section 101(3), I think it is
tolerably clear that the purpose of the relevant provisions was to have a
consistent system where
a taxpayer bore a burden of proof both before the
Commissioner determining an objection or a Tribunal undertaking a merits review
of that determination, especially when one considers that neither are
adversarial proceedings: see
decisions in the Tribunal have come to the same conclusion but by a different
route, namely by drawing an analogy between section
101(3) of the
section 14ZZK
Taxation Administration Act 1953
I do not agree that the sections are analogous.
example, in
Planet Red Pty Ltd v Commissioner of ACT Revenue
[2017] ACAT
the Tribunal appeared to hold at [13] – [26] that the onus of proof set
out in section 101(3) of the
applied to a review in the
Tribunal. I cannot see in the reasons any textual or contextual analysis of the
section, nor can I find
any reference to any extrinsic materials.
the Tribunal in that case referred to
section 14ZZK
Administration Act 1953
), it being described as
“the material equivalent of section 101(3) of the”
and a small number of cases on that Commonwealth section.
great respect, I do not regard
materially equivalent to section 101 of the
. There is a very
great difference in the wording of the two sections, not least being the fact
expressly said that it applied to reviews in the relevant tribunal,
something section 101(3) of the
the time of the cases referred to in
section 14ZZK
14ZZK Grounds of objection and burden of proof
On an application for review of a reviewable objection decision:
(a) the applicant is, unless the Tribunal orders otherwise, limited to
the grounds stated in the taxation objection to which the
decision relates;
(b) the applicant has the burden of proving that:
(i) if the taxation decision concerned is an assessment (other than a
franking assessment)—the assessment is excessive; or
(ii) if the taxation decision concerned is a franking
assessment—the assessment is incorrect; or
(iii) in any other case—the taxation decision concerned should
not have been made or should have been made differently.
section 14ZZK
was expressly rereferring to a review in the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal, now the Administrative Review Tribunal (the
section 14ZZK
is not, in substance, materially different to the older
Nevertheless,
for the reasons I have given earlier, I am of the view that section 101(3) of
does apply to merit review proceedings in the
No error in the application of s 101(3) of the TAA
Original Tribunal said that the burden of showing that the taxpayers’
objections should be sustained rested with the taxpayers,
citing section 101(3)
Original Tribunal said that when conducting a review, the ACAT stood in the
shoes of the Commissioner and the ACAT’s role
was to make its own decision
based on the material before it. The Original Tribunal said that it was well
recognised that “[t]here
is no presumption that the administrator’s
decision is correct”, citing
Comcare v Power
[2015] FCA 1502
Original Tribunal then referred to section 68(3) of the
ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
which provides that, after a merits review,
the ACAT must confirm, vary or set aside the reviewable decision, and, if the
decision was set aside, to make a substitute decision or remit the
matter to the decision maker in accordance with any direction
or recommendation
of the ACAT.
Commissioner submitted that section 101(3) operated as a “gateway”.
That is, a tribunal would first determine whether
a taxpayer had satisfied the
burden of showing that its objection should be sustained. Then, and only if so
satisfied, a tribunal
would then turn to the question of what the correct or
preferable decision should be.
another way, the Commissioner submitted:
... if the authorising law requires a particular set of circumstances to
exist before a decision may be made, the Tribunal must be
satisfied that those
circumstances exist before it can make that decision. Subsection 101(3) is
precisely such a burden in an authorising
summary, the Commissioner submitted that the gateway issue had to be addressed
and decided first and separately from any other
issue, and that the Original
Tribunal erred in that it did not address this “gateway” first
before proceeding to determine
what the correct and preferable decision should
Commissioner submitted that this erroneous approach infected the totality of the
Original Tribunal’s decision. He submitted
Had the primary Tribunal properly applied this threshold, it would have held
that the Respondents had not provided sufficient evidence
to demonstrate that
the transactions should not be aggregated, nor had they supplied sufficient
evidence to demonstrate that the
valuations adopted by the Appellant were
excessive. It is an error which affects the entirety of the decision.
support of this submission made to the Original Tribunal, and repeated on
appeal, the Commissioner cited
at [18]. However, that passage
does not support the submission. All that the Tribunal said at [18] in
Section 101(3) of the TAA modifies that position in relation to an objection
to a reviewable tax decision by requiring the applicant
to sustain its
objection, meaning in this case to establish that the valuations are too
Commissioner also cited [24]-[26] of
wherein the Tribunal
the extent that the Tribunal considers (and has considered in this case) what
the valuations ought to be, it is done to establish
as a reference point whether
the applicant has discharged its onus. If and only if the onus is discharged may
the Tribunal proceed
– but need not do so – to decide the extent to
which the valuations are too high and substitute different valuations.
In Rawson Finances Jagot J put it this way:
The two tasks (on the one hand, being satisfied on the facts as found that
the applicant has proved that the assessment is excessive
and, on the other
hand, being satisfied on the facts as found as to the amount of the liability in
the impugned decision) are conceptually
different. The statute consigns the
first task only to the Tribunal. It may be accepted that, in performing the
first task, the Tribunal
may consider and/or resolve the second task. No doubt
in a case where the Tribunal can satisfy itself, in accordance with the second
task, that the facts as found by the Tribunal give rise to the amount of the
liability in the impugned decision the Tribunal can
also discharge the first
task with a high degree of confidence and conclude that the applicant has not
proved that the assessment
was excessive. Provided the Tribunal’s
consideration of the second task does not distract it from the task which the
requires to be performed there will be no question of law capable of
vitiating the Tribunal’s decision. But the second task
substituted for the first task.
the applicant to sustain its objection (in this case that the valuations are too
high) does not imply that it must prove on the
balance of probabilities that its
view about the UV of each subject block is ‘correct’ or require the
Tribunal to accept
the applicant’s viewpoint. The Tribunal therefore
rejects Dr Jarvis’ submission in this respect. Discharge of the onus
not a ‘black or white’ exercise. The
Valuation of Land Act 1916
section 40(2)
, similarly places an onus on an appellant to prove its case
on appeal to the Land and Environment Court, but proving its case permits
Court to conclude on the evidence what it considers to be the appropriate value
of improvements and thus the consequential UV
of the land.
best exposition of the point the Commissioner was putting was in
at [25], namely the first sentence in the quote from
Rawson Finances
Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[2013] FCAFC 26.
as that quote reveals, Jagot J made the point that the two tasks may be
undertaken concurrently. That passage is no support for
the Commissioner’s
gateway argument, and I see no error in the Original Tribunal’s reasoning
process. It seems to me
that the Original Tribunal satisfied itself in
accordance with the second task (to adopt Jagot J’s language) that the
as found also discharged the first task with a high degree of confidence
and concluded that the taxpayers had proved that their objections
Ground 2: failing to consider the appellant’s submissions
on “associated persons”
Commissioner submitted that it had put forward two alternative arguments why the
taxpayers were associate persons within the meaning
first argument was that the beneficiaries of the two trusts were the beneficial
owners of the two Lyell St properties, relying
. In response, the taxpayers relied on
and submitted,
correctly, that the beneficiaries of the Doublebar and Bloodfinch Trusts were
not beneficiaries caught by
section 82.
second argument, put as an alternative to the first, was that if the
beneficiaries of the two Trusts were not the owners of the
land, then the
taxpayers were the legal and equitable owners of the two properties at the time
of the transfers. If that were correct,
the Commissioner submitted, the
taxpayers were associated people because Mr Morvillo was the sole director and
shareholder of both
Commissioner contended that the Original Tribunal had failed to consider the
second argument.
the second argument fell within the terms of
not clearly explained and I had difficulty understanding what the
Commissioner’s precise case was. No part of
consideration whether trustee companies are “associated persons”
because the companies are the beneficial
owners of land (assuming that latter
statement was accurate).
put to the Original Tribunal in written submissions, the Commissioner submitted
that, assuming the taxpayers were the beneficial
owners of the land, the
taxpayers were “associated persons” because, per (a)(iii) of the
definition. The submission was:
By reason of the common shareholding and directorship of those companies at
the time of the transfer, being Mr Morvillo in all instances,
those companies
were properly “associated persons” for the purposes of
of course was the ultimate submission, but how the Commissioner said that those
particular facts fell within
was difficult for me to understand.
that as it may, the question whether the taxpayers held a beneficial interest in
the two properties was a red herring.
best I understood the Commissioner’s submissions, the question, per
(a)(iii) of the definition of “associated person”,
whether Mr Morvillo (who was the common shareholder in each taxpayer) had a
“significant interest” in each
word “interest” is defined in the
(a) for this Act generally—includes an estate, an interest under a
lease or a sublease, a proprietary right and a beneficial
interest; and
(b) in a landholder, for part 3.2 (Acquisition of interests in certain
landholders)—see section 83.
words “significant interest” are defined in the
significant interest
, in a landholder—see
section 83.
I asked the Commissioner during oral submissions what was the
Commissioner’s case as put below in terms of how it was put
Morvillo had a “significant interest” in the taxpayers, the
Commissioner said he had relied upon both (a) and
(b) of the definition of
“interest”.
I cannot find any submissions regarding (a) of the definition in either the
written or oral submissions of the Commissioner
put to the Original
In his written submissions on the appeal (at [28]) the Commissioner said that
the “legal and factual analysis to support”
his two alternative
arguments were “spelled out in detail in the (Commissioner’s)
closing submissions at [15]-[38]”.
those submissions are silent on how it was said that Mr Morvillo had a
significant interest in both shareholders per (a)
of the definition other than
simply asserting this was because he was the sole shareholder of both
oral submissions to the Original Tribunal the Commissioner’s only case on
this point concerned (b) of the definition.
example, at T 114 (AB 355) the Commissioner referred to (a)(iii) of the
definition of “associated person”, then referred
to the definition
of “significant interest” (which concerns a landholder), then
referred to a distribution on winding
up (the subject of
) followed by references to the deeming provisions of
have set out
earlier in these reasons. In short, it means that for
Mr Morvillo to have had a significant interest in the taxpayers, he would
to have been entitled to at least 50% of any distribution of property on
the winding up of the taxpayers.
Commissioner submitted that on a winding up of a trustee of a discretionary
trust, the sole director and shareholder of the trustee
company could distribute
the trust assets to himself. Self-evidently, that proposition is incorrect and
would be a breach of trust
and a breach of the trustee’s fiduciary duties.
It would be a breach of clause 4 of the Trust Deeds if this occurred on the
vesting day. I could not find any power in the Trust Deeds to wind up the trusts
before the Vesting Day and was not taken to any
such clause by the
Commissioner.
I read the Commissioner’s written and oral submissions put to the original
Tribunal, and the Original Tribunal’s reasons,
the Tribunal did consider
the argument the Commissioner says was not considered. It was dealt with at [65]
of the Original Tribunal’s
reasons where the Original Tribunal said:
(Commissioner)
contended that if the Tribunal accepted that
discretionary beneficiaries are not beneficiaries for the purposes of the
person test in the Act,
then the beneficial interest must rest
with the applicant companies and, by reason of the common shareholding, this
means they are
. The Tribunal does not agree with the simplistic
binary logic of the respondent’s latter contention given it is
inconsistent
with significant bodies of case law, as the applicant submitted.
In any case, common shareholding is not the test here, the test
is whether Mr
Morvillo had a “significant interest” in each of the applicants. On
this issue, during the proceedings
the respondent contended that Mr Morvillo had
a “significant interest” in the applicant companies because he was
only shareholder of a landholding company and he would be entitled to 100%
of any distribution under section 83 of the Act. The
respondent contended that
the latter was true even if the applicants were trustee companies, relying again
on section 82(2) of the
Act which the Tribunal finds does not apply.
that paragraph the Original Tribunal expressly referred to the case put by the
Commissioner and, like myself, came to the view
that beneficial ownership of the
land was irrelevant. What (a)(iii) of the definition of “associate
person” directed
attention to was whether Mr Morvillo had a significant
interest (as defined) in the taxpayers.
Original Tribunal then addressed that question on the submissions put to it, and
rightly rejected it.
case was put to the Original Tribunal that (a) of the definition of
“interest” applied, and I would not allow it to
be raised for the
first time on appeal.
should also note that the Original Tribunal found that the taxpayers were not
“landholders” for the purposes of the
and consequently
cannot apply. There was no appeal from that finding
and thus this ground was bound to fail.
Ground 3: failing to find the transactions formed one
arrangement
the appeal fails because the Commissioner has failed to establish any error in
the Original Tribunal’s finding that the taxpayers
“associated persons” as required by
section 24(1)(b)
, this ground need not be determined.
as the matter was argued, I shall set out some brief reasons why this ground
would also fail.
Commissioner submitted that the Original Tribunal erred in failing to properly
That is, the Original Tribunal failed
to find that the dutiable transactions together formed, evidenced, gave effect
to or arose
from what was, substantially, one arrangement relating to all of the
interests in the dutiable property: see
section 24(1)(c)
is important to note that the Commissioner did not challenge any of the Original
Tribunal’s findings of fact.
the Commissioner, on the appeal, directed attention to the facts set out at [39]
of his written submissions put to the Original
Tribunal (commencing at AB 1347)
and then submitted:
Once those matters are considered, the Appellant submits that it is clear
that the primary Tribunal erred in failing to hold that
the transfers of the
properties to the Respondents arose out of one arrangement.
respect, it is not sufficient on appeal to simply direct attention to a number
of facts and then submit that it is therefore
clear that the Original Tribunal
erred. On an appeal error must be identified.
think that the Commissioner’s real appeal point was that the Tribunal had
not referred to all of the evidence in its reasons
i.e. an inadequacy of reasons
a Tribunal need not refer to all of the evidence in reasons. As was said by the
majority in
Whisprun Pty Ltd v Dixon
[2003] HCA 48:
[62] A judge’s reasons are not required to mention every fact or
argument relied on by the losing party as relevant to an issue.
Judgments of
trial judges would soon become longer than they already are if a judge’s
failure to mention such facts and arguments
would be evidence that he or she had
not properly considered the losing party’s case.
[63] ... To suggest that a trial judge has not properly considered a
party’s case is a serious charge. Such a suggestion should
be accepted
only when the record of the trial or other evidence persuasively suggests that
the judge failed to discharge that paramount
judicial duty.
Sweeney v He
[2023] NSWCA 68
Ward P, with whom Brereton and Mitchelmore
JJA agreed, said this:
[142] The litany of complaints by the appellant as to an inability to see
that the primary judge had received and understood his submissions
hallmarks of a formulaic complaint that there was appellable error in relation
to each submission not separately recorded
and addressed by the primary judge.
His Honour made clear the basis on which he rejected the appellant’s claim
and it was not necessary in my opinion for his Honour to give a line by line
account of the submissions made by the appellant
in order to do so (though
to pre-empt a similar such complaint I have set those out in some detail in
these reasons).
[143] I note that, in Baira v RHG Mortgage Corporation Ltd
[2012] NSWCA 387
(2012) 297 ALR 416
, at [173]-[175] this Court noted that
it is insufficient
to demonstrate (on appellate review of factual findings) that a primary judge
has failed to deal with some evidence.
The evidence in question must have the
“quality which seriously calls into question the integrity of a finding of
(see also Lemongrove Services Pty Ltd v Rilroll Pty Ltd
per Payne JA).
[Emphasis added]
Commissioner identified some matters not expressly recorded in the reasons of
the Original Tribunal, but made no attempt to explain
how those matters had the
quality which seriously called into question the integrity of the Original
Tribunal’s finding that
there was not one arrangement.
seems to me that the Original Tribunal addressed its mind to the correct factual
question and, in some detail, considered various
facts. In evaluating all of
those facts the Original Tribunal came to a view that there was not one
arrangement, and it was not erroneous
to fail to refer to every fact mentioned
by the Commissioner.
should also note that the Original Tribunal also found in favour of the
taxpayers that the Commissioner should have been satisfied
that it would not be just and reasonable for
the transactions to be aggregated.
was no appeal from that conclusion and so the appeal from the finding that the
transactions should not be aggregated would necessarily
Ground 4: error in accepting the taxpayer’s
valuer’s valuations
Commissioner submitted that the Original Tribunal erred in accepting the
taxpayers’ valuer’s expert opinion as to
the market value of the two
properties at the time of the transfers.
Commissioner submitted that the “basis for this ground” was set out
in his written submissions to the Original Tribunal.
With respect, that
submission was not helpful. Disturbing factual findings on an appeal is a
different exercise to advocating for
the preference of one witness over another
at a hearing.
that as it may, no error was identified in the Commissioner’s submissions.
The submissions simply restated what was put below
and that is not sufficient on
an appeal. Error must be demonstrated, and none was.
the Commissioner did not grapple with the entirety of the Tribunal’s
reasoning process. That is, the Original Tribunal
set out in detail the reasons
why it preferred Mr Wright’s evidence over that of Mr Pilat, but the
Commissioner did not address
all of the matters relied on by the Tribunal.
the Commissioner, in substance, simply restated his submissions made to the
Original Tribunal.
see no error in the Original Tribunal’s findings on the
valuations.
The Tribunal orders that:
appeals are
......................................
Acting Presidential Member G Curtin SC
Date(s) of hearing:
22 and 23 May 2025
Counsel for the Appellants:
Mr B Buckland
Solicitors for the Appellants:
ACT Government Solicitor
Counsel for the Respondents:
Solicitor for the
Respondents:
Mr A Russoniello
McEvoy Legal
Done by the lenders purportedly
exercising their powers under the terms of their loan agreements and/or
By describing the
Commissioner’s case I should not be seen as implying that the Commissioner
bore any burden or onus of proof.
It is simply recognition that it was the
Commissioner who had determined that the transaction should be aggregated, and
necessary to understand the reasoning for that determination in order
to also understand the taxpayers’ submissions to the
Abebe v The
Commonwealth
(1999) 197 CLR 510
at 576 [187] per Gummow and Hayne JJ;
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2001] HCA 23
(2001) 206 CLR 128
per Kirby J;
Re Ruddock; ex
parte Applicant S154/2002
[2003] HCA 60 at [57] per Gummow and Heydon
Section 14ZZK, at the time of
the cases referred to, appeared in Division 4 of the
headed “AAT review of objection decisions and extension of time refusal
decisions”.
RTF format (351 KB)
Signed PDF/A format