DPP v Ziebell [2025] ACTSC 471 (21 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
DPP v Ziebell
[2025] ACTSC 471
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – forcible confinement –
recklessly inflict grievous bodily harm – reckless threat to inflict
grievous bodily harm – intentionally and unlawfully
choke, suffocate or
strangle – assault occasioning actual bodily harm – minor theft
– joint criminal enterprise
– high degree of responsibility –
guarded prospects of rehabilitation – extensive criminal history –
episode of criminal conduct as part of a joint criminal enterprise –
offender convicted and sentenced to six years and six
months of imprisonment
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT), s 45A
Cases Cited:
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37; 249 CLR 571
[2019] ACTCA 3
Director of Public Prosecutions v Padreny
[2024] ACTCA 4
[2023] ACTSC 259
[2021] ACTCA 19
KR v The Queen
[2012] NSWCCA 32
Le Clair v The Queen; Achanfuo-Yeboah v The Queen
[2017] ACTCA
[2021] ACTSC 353
R v Cowling
[2019] ACTSC 138
[2020] ACTSC 285
[1999] NSWCCA 111
; 46 NSWLR 346
[2010] NSWCCA 49
[2019] ACTCA 7
[2020] ACTSC 284
R v Williams
[2016] ACTSC 389
Singh v The Queen
[2015] ACTCA 65
Stott v The Queen
[2021] ACTCA 18
Stott v The Queen
[2012] ACTCA 33
The Queen v Avery
[2018] ACTCA 57
Will v the Queen
[2021] ACTCA 14
Director of Public Prosecutions
Raymond Kevin Ziebell (Offender)
Representation:
G Meikle (DPP)
J Sabharwal (Offender)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Tu'ulakitau McGuire Lawyers (Offender)
File Number:
SCC 142 of 2024
SCC 405 of 2024
Introduction
offender, Raymond Kevin Ziebell, is to be sentenced for the following offences:
(a) Count 1
: Recklessly inflict grievous bodily harm (joint commission)
(CC2024/1156) contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) by virtue of
s 45A of the
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT), which attracts a maximum penalty
of 13 years of imprisonment.
(b) Count 3
: Forcible confinement (joint commission) (CC2024/4523)
contrary to
by virtue of s 45A of the
, which attracts a maximum penalty of 10 years of imprisonment.
(c) Count 4
: Reckless threat to inflict grievous bodily harm (joint
commission) (CC2024/4526) contrary to
by virtue of
s 45A of the
Criminal Code
, which attracts a maximum penalty of 5 years
of imprisonment.
(d) Count 5
: Intentionally and unlawfully choke, suffocate or strangle
another person (joint commission) (CC2024/4525) contrary to
by virtue of s 45A of the
Criminal Code
, which attracts
a maximum penalty of 5 years of imprisonment.
(e) Count 6
: Assault occasioning actual bodily harm (joint commission)
(CC2024/4527) contrary to
by virtue of s 45A of
Criminal Code
, which attracts a maximum penalty of 5 years of
imprisonment.
(f) Minor theft (CC2024/4524) contrary to
virtue of s 45A of the
Criminal Code
, which attracts a maximum penalty of
50 penalty units, 6 months of imprisonment or both.
Agreed facts
agreed facts were set out as follows.
the evening of 10 December 2023, the victim, [redacted], left her residence in
[redacted] with the offender and co-offender Casey-Lee
Pricsina on the
understanding that they were going to drive to a nearby McDonald’s
restaurant. They got into the offender’s
vehicle, where co-accused Kristie
Lee Watson was seated in the back seat. The offender drove around for
approximately two hours during
which time the three co-accused demanded the
victim give them money for drugs, struck her with a metal bat causing a tooth
and laceration to her face, choked her, punched her, and threatened to
cut her up with an electric saw that was inside the vehicle.
ultimately escaped and sought refuge at the Lower Molonglo Water Quality Control
Centre in Holt ACT where staff alerted
police of the incident.
Relationship between the
victim and three co-accused
to 9 December 2023, the victim had not met the offender or Casey-Lee Pricsina.
She knew them through a mutual friend named [redacted],
who had put the victim
in contact with the offender and Ms Pricsina as he thought that they might be
able to assist her in repairing
her fence. The victim knew them as Cassie and
victim knows Kristie Lee Watson personally and recognised her on the evening of
10 December 2023 but hadn’t seen her for
Ziebell and Casey-Lee Pricsina were de facto partners as at 10-11 December
The incident on 10-11
December 2023
9 December 2023, the offender and Casey-Lee Pricsina attended the victim’s
address to conduct repairs on her fence. They
finished at about 8 o’clock
in the evening, had some beers with the victim, and fell asleep on the
victim’s lounge. When
the victim woke on the morning of 10 December 2023,
the offender and Ms Pricsina had left.
knocked on the front door. The victim’s daughter,
[redacted], did not
answer. Ms Pricsina then proceeded to knock on the back door. She was upset and
calling out for the victim. [The
victim’s daughter] answered the door and
asked Ms Pricsina if she was okay. Ms Pricsina said that she needed to use the
phone to call her boyfriend with whom she had had a fight. [The
victim’s daughter] attempted to wake the victim, but the victim
deep sleep. [The victim’s daughter] then offered for Ms Pricsina to use
her own phone to contact her boyfriend. Ms
Pricsina then messaged the offender
and attempted to call him several times via the Messenger application using [the
daughter’s] Facebook profile.
victim’s daughter] again attempted to wake the victim, this time
successfully. [The victim’s daughter] told the victim
” was in the backyard. The victim got up and went to the front
door where she saw Ms Pricsina and let her inside. Ms Pricsina
told the victim
that she’d had a fight with her boyfriend. Meanwhile, [the victim’s
daughter] retreated to her bedroom.
victim and Ms Pricsina proceeded to sit in the lounge room of the victim’s
house where they talked. The victim had a drink,
which she thought tasted weird,
like medicine. The victim had grabbed the drink from her fridge, but had left it
unattended on a
couple of occasions.
offender arrived about 10 minutes after Ms Pricsina’s arrival. The victim
let the offender inside. From her bedroom, [the
victim’s daughter]
observed a black Audi pull up outside the house and heard a male enter the
5-10 minutes after the offender’s arrival, Ms Pricsina suggested that the
three of them drive to McDonald’s. The
victim said that she did not want
to go, but Ms Pricsina talked her into it. The victim, the offender and Ms
Pricsina then left and
got into the offender’s vehicle, which was parked
in the victim’s driveway. The vehicle was a dark colour with leather
and a sunroof, and was the vehicle that the victim had seen the offender and Ms
Pricsina arrive at her house in the previous
Lee Watson was already seated in the backseat of the offender’s vehicle
behind the driver’s seat, but the victim
did not realise that she was
inside the car when she first got in. The offender got into the driver’s
seat, Ms Pricsina got
into the front passenger seat, and the victim got into the
rear passenger seat.
offender began driving and the three co-accused began accusing the victim of
taking drugs or money and threatening her, including
threats that they would cut
the victim up and get to the victim’s daughter. The victim insisted that
she did not know what
they were talking about and told them that she would give
them money. The victim pleaded with the co-accused to let her go home (count
forcible confinement).
some point during the car journey, Ms Watson told the victim that she had her
house keys and car keys. The victim had not brought
her keys with her and
assumed that Ms Watson must have taken them from her residence at some point
without her knowledge (summary
transfer offence: minor theft).
another point during the car journey, the victim gave Ms Watson her phone and
the details to access her bank account. Ms Watson
stated that she wanted $10,000
from the victim, but the victim only had $4,000 in her bank account. Ms Watson
did not withdraw any
money from the victim’s account.
another point during the car journey, Kristie Lee Watson punched the victim in
the face about two times (count 6: assault occasioning
actual bodily harm) and
struck her in the face with a long metal bat about three times, causing the
victim’s right lateral
incisor tooth to dislodge (count 1: recklessly
inflict grievous bodily harm). The offender was driving at the time and was not
responsible for the tooth avulsion.
offender drove the vehicle through the Woden and Weston Creek area, before
eventually bringing the vehicle to a stop. Once he
brought the vehicle to a
stop, the offender went around to where the victim was seated. He opened the car
door next to the victim,
and threatened to cut her up with an electric saw that
was inside the vehicle and bury her where the car had stopped (count 4: make
reckless threat to inflict grievous bodily harm).
then strangled the victim to the point where she could not breathe, put his knee
in her chest, and punched the victim in the face
choke/suffocate/strangle; count 6: assault occasioning actual bodily harm). The
victim managed to get out of the car and
started to run away. The offender and
Ms Watson chased the victim, and one of them tripped the victim over. The victim
pleaded with
the offender and Ms Watson, then got up and continued running. The
victim ran towards gate 1 of the Lower Molonglo Water Quality
Control Centre in
Holt, which she climbed over. This is captured on CCTV footage as occurring at
12:43am on 11 December.
[the victim’s daughter] awoke and discovered that the victim had left the
residence. She became concerned and attempted
to call her mother at least four
[Redacted],
an employee of Icon Water, was on a 12-hour shift at the Lower Molonglo Water
Quality Control Centre. In the early hours
of 11 December 2023, [redacted] was
returning to the control room when he heard a car revving its engine
“weirdly”. A
minute or two later, he heard a woman screaming for
[Redacted] checked the other entrances before he saw the victim through the
glass. He observed that she was bleeding from her face.
The victim was pleading
for assistance, but [redacted], did not open the door at first out of concern
for his safety. [Redacted],
asked the victim what she was doing there, and the
victim responded by screaming for help. [Redacted] told the victim that he was
going to call the police, to which the victim replied “please call the
police”. [Redacted] contacted the guard hut for
assistance at 12:48am, and
then called police at 12:49am from a landline, during which call he tried to
ascertain further information
from the victim. The victim was mostly concerned
that the people who had attacked her had threatened her daughter, who was at
[Redacted] then requested police return his call on his mobile phone.
[redacted] was on the phone to police, [redacted], a security guard who was
stationed at the guard hut, and [redacted], another
Icon Water employee,
attended to assist with the situation. [The security guard] observed that the
victim had been “pretty
badly beaten” and had a big cut on the side
of her eye. The victim was saying that three people had picked her up, said that
they were going to take her to McDonald’s, and had beaten her. The victim
also said that she had managed to escape from the
car and that she was worried
that they were going to get her daughter. [The security guard] recalls that the
victim mentioned the
name “Cassie”.
eventually let the victim into the building where they offered her a space
blanket, a chair, and a drink of water.
attended shortly after 1:00am on 11 December and met with the victim. They
observed that she was extremely distressed, had
a large gash to her right
eyebrow that was swollen and bleeding, had dried blood on her dress, had leaves
in her hair, and was hyperventilating.
The victim told police that she had been
kidnapped by Kristie Watson, a man named Ray, and an unknown female. She said
that Ms Watson
had hit her multiple times with a bat and knocked her tooth out.
The victim said that Ray had choked her and threatened her with
an electric
Ambulance Service personnel attended the Lower Molonglo Water Quality Control
Centre and assessed the victim at about 1:12am on
11 December. They subsequently
conveyed the victim to the Emergency Department of The Canberra Hospital.
victim underwent a clinical forensic medical examination conducted by Dr
[redacted] at 12:17pm on 11 December 2023 at Canberra
Hospital. Dr [redacted]
made the following findings:
(a) [The victim] reported non-fatal strangulation. She reported that she felt
light-headed during the attack and was found to have
redness of her neck and
tenderness of her cervical spine, findings which can be seen in cases of
strangulation.
(b) [The victim] sustained injuries to her head, including a laceration,
traumatic tooth avulsion, abrasions, redness, and tenderness.
(c) [The victim] sustained over 44 individually identifiable injuries of varying
and across a number of
anatomical body planes including the head, neck, upper limbs, and lower limbs,
indicating multiple applications
victim was admitted to The Canberra Hospital and discharged on 13 December
Investigation and arrests
from a plate recognition camera at the Lower Molonglo Water Quality Control
Centre shows a vehicle leaving gate 1 of the facility
at 12:31am on 11 December
bearing the registration plates [redacted].
conducted checks on the registration [redacted] and found that it was registered
to The Auto House in Mount Druitt, NSW. The
Auto House produced a tax invoice
showing that the vehicle was sold to Raymond Ziebell on 27 November 2023.
12 December 2023, police obtained search warrants and section 3LA orders for the
(a) Kristie Watson;
(b) [Redacted], the address of Ms Watson;
(c) Raymond Ziebell;
(d) Casey-Lee Pricsina;
(e) [Redacted], the address of the offender and Ms Pricsina;
(f) Black Audi bearing NSW registration [redacted].
police at 1:40pm on 12 December 2023. The black
Audi bearing registration
[redacted] was observed to be parked in the driveway of the premises upon police
number of items were seized in the course of the execution of the search warrant
at [the address of the offender and Ms Pricsina].
Items of note include several
electric saws and reciprocating saws, a metal pole with a black handle, $6,580
AUD cash inside a North
Face bag, a ripped men’s shirt stained with blood,
and three resealable bags containing a crystalline substance.
black Audi was forensically examined and searched. The following findings of
note were made:
(a) There is extremely strong support for the proposition that the victim is the
source of a female DNA profile obtained from blood
on the side of the centre
(b) Raymond Ziebell’s fingerprints were found in numerous locations;
(c) Kristie Watson’s fingerprint was found on the rear driver side door;
(d) A black tomahawk was seized from inside the vehicle and a mixed DNA profile
from a minimum of three individuals was obtained
from a swab of the handle.
There is extremely strong support for the proposition that the offender and
Casey-Lee Pricsina are contributors
to this profile;
(e) There is extremely strong support for the proposition that Casey-Lee
Pricsina is a contributor to a mixed DNA profile from a
minimum of two
individuals obtained from fake nails and nail clippings found inside the
offender, Ms Pricsina, and three other persons were inside the residence at the
time the search warrant was executed at [the address
of the offender and Ms
Pricsina]. At about 2:54pm, the section 3LA order was executed on the offender.
The offender provided a passcode
for his mobile phone, but not for the CCTV
system installed at the residence.
offender participated in a record of interview on the afternoon of 12 December
his Record of Interview, the offender stated:
(a) He and “Casey” were doing a fencing job for the victim, who they
had met about a week ago through an old friend named
[redacted];
(b) He had a disagreement with Casey, who went around to the victim’s
(c) Casey then messaged him using the victim’s daughter’s Messenger
account telling him to come over to the victim’s
(d) He got a lift to the victim’s house from a friend and they all had a
(e) They all decided to go to McDonald’s for a drink, so he went out to
the car and waited for Casey and the victim;
(f) Casey and the victim got into the vehicle;
(g) Casey was driving, he was in the front passenger seat, and the victim was in
the backseat;
(h) They got as far as around the corner when the victim jumped out, saying that
she wanted to get her phone;
(i) He and Casey went home;
(j) While he and Casey were in the shower, his friend [redacted] turned up in a
crying, drunken state;
(k) Kristie Watson was not with them that night, but he knows Kristie Watson as
she is the sister of his old friend [redacted].
ACT Regional Watch House.
Number Place Recognition (ANPR) records for [redacted] were subsequently
obtained by police, showing that the vehicle was
captured travelling along
Erindale Drive at 10:19pm and 11:55pm on 10 December 2023.
following items of interest were seized from the victim’s residence: a
toolbox, jerry can, work boots, and four cans of
vodka mix drinks. A sample of
the vodka mix drinks was analysed by the ACT Government Analytical Laboratory.
“1,4-Butanediol”
was detected in the liquid.
“1,4-Butanediol” is a source of gamma-hydroxybutyrate (GHB).
examination conducted of the offender’s mobile phone revealed messages
sent via the Facebook Messenger application
between the offender’s
Facebook profile and “[redacted]”, the Facebook profile of [the
victim’s daughter].
A number of messages had been
victim’s phone and keys have not been located.
Nature and circumstances of the
maximum penalty for each offence is a ‘yardstick’ by which to
measure the objective seriousness of the offence. In
coming to assess the nature
and circumstances of the offending I must consider the objective seriousness of
the conduct establishing
the offence and where the offending falls on the
spectrum from the least serious example of the offence to the most serious
of the offence.
consequence of participation in a joint criminal enterprise is liability or
responsibility for all the acts committed by the participants
while carrying out
the enterprise:
KR v The Queen
[2012] NSWCCA 32
per Latham J
(Whealey JA and Harrison J agreeing) at [19]-[20]. An assessment of liability or
responsibility and moral culpability
are relevant at different stages of the
criminal process:
at [20]. The moral culpability of an
individual participant is assessed by reference to the specific conduct they
engaged in as well
as their subjective circumstances “in order to
determine the appropriate degree of punishment”:
[22]. It follows that an assessment of the objective seriousness of a joint
criminal enterprise offence will have limits to the
amount of differentiation
amongst co-offenders:
Stott v The Queen
[2012] ACTCA 33
[2010] NSWCCA 49
with approval.
those principles in mind, I turn to consider the features of each offence which
inform the assessment I am required to perform.
is an overarching circumstance which applies to all the offences. I am satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that the offending
was planned. The circumstances of the
victim being persuaded to get into the vehicle included subterfuge and one of
the co-accused
‘lay in wait’ in the vehicle. The inescapable
inference from the agreed facts is that the victim’s drink was spiked
the co-offender Pricsina and/or the offender to facilitate the offending. Once
in the vehicle the co-offenders acted in accordance
with, or in the course of
carrying out, the agreement they had reached to commit the offences.
Count 1: Recklessly
inflict grievous bodily harm
[2023] ACTSC 259
Loukas-Karlsson J observed:
...[T]he objective seriousness for the offence of recklessly inflicting grievous
bodily harm is to be assessed by reference to the
conduct of the offender and
associated degree of recklessness, together with the nature of the grievous
bodily harm to the victim:
DPP v Crutchett
[2023] ACTSC 193
[2018] ACTSC 261
[2016] ACTSC 180
[2017] ACTSC 194
R v Butters
[2019] ACTSC 143.
circumstances of the offending are also relevant:
McCullough v The Queen
[2009] NSWCCA 94
194 A Crim R 439
offender did not personally perform the conduct which constituted this offence.
The prosecution conceded that the court would
be unable to find beyond a
reasonable doubt that the offender knew that co-accused Watson had possession of
a baseball bat, nor that
she intended to use it to commit the offence.
Nonetheless,
the offender is still liable for the offence on the basis that he entered into
an agreement with the co-offenders the
scope of which included the forcible
confinement and physical assault of the victim, and the offence was committed in
of carrying out the agreement: s 45A(1)(b)(i) of the
mechanism of the injury being repeated blows to the face with a weapon was
brutal. The prosecution accepted that the loss of a
tooth is a less serious
example of harm that might be captured by this offence.
Count 3: Forcible
confinement
offender had a key role in this offence as the driver of the vehicle within
which the victim was confined and accordingly bears
a high degree of
responsibility for the commission of this offence. The offender was entirely in
control of the vehicle and consequently,
the victim’s position within it.
victim was confined for a protracted period. The offence was committed in
furtherance of other offences and included threats of
violence and the
infliction of actual violence. The victim would have experienced significant
fear given the offending was in company,
weapons were present, and the victim
was significantly outnumbered which undoubtedly contributed to her fear and
sense of helplessness:
R v Cowling
[2019] ACTSC 138
R v Williams
[2016] ACTSC 389
per Refshauge ACJ.
was very serious example of the offence.
Count 4: Reckless threat
to inflict grievous bodily harm
AJ observed in
[2021] ACTSC 353
, an assessment of this offence
calls for a range of factors such as the manner in which the threat was made,
for example if it was
made in the victim’s presence in circumstances where
it could be easily realised. The presence of a weapon and premeditation
planning is an aggravating feature.
features of the conduct making up this offence make it a serious example. The
offender himself made the threat directly to the
victim whilst she was
effectively trapped in the vehicle. The threat could have been easily carried
out, noting that the offender
threatened to “cut her up” with an
electric saw that was present inside the vehicle and bury her. The threat was
in circumstances where the victim was acutely vulnerable being entirely at
the mercy of the offender and his co-offenders.
Count 5: Intentionally and
unlawfully choke, suffocate or strangle another person
Court of Appeal in
Director of Public Prosecutions v Padreny
[2024] ACTCA
per McWilliam and Abraham JJ noted:
For this offence, without being exhaustive, the following have been referred to:
(1) the length of time during which the “choking”
persisted; (2) the
amount of force used; (3) whether the victim’s breathing was restricted;
(4) whether verbal threats were
made at the time of the choking; (5) whether the
victim sustained any injuries; (6) whether any aides like rope or cable were
(7) the vulnerabilities of the victim; (8) whether the conduct was
deliberate and sustained, designed to threaten and inflict harm;
and (9) whether
the conduct occurred in a family violence context: see for example,
[2021] ACTSC 362
) at [68]-[69];
[2023] ACTSC 255
[2023] ACTSC 166
). These features
are not to be treated as a checklist.
prosecution conceded that the duration of the act was unknown however I observe
it was long enough and with sufficient force to
see the victim unable to
breathe. The act occurred in the context of an episode of violence and abuse
conduct. The victim was found
to have redness on her neck and tenderness of her
cervical spine. The conduct was deliberate and occurred in an effort to frighten
and subdue the victim.
offender deliberately and directly perpetrated the conduct. In my view, this is
a serious example of this offence.
Count 6: Assault
occasioning actual bodily harm
conduct making up this offence came immediately after count 2. This offence
involved a high degree of violence perpetrated directly
by two separate
participants including the offender. Co-accused Watson punched the victim in the
face twice and the offender placed
his knee into the victim’s chest and
also punched her in the face.
victim suffered pain and sustained many injuries revealed in the photographs and
described in a medical report including cuts,
abrasions, a black eye and other
bruising and swelling.
offender was the direct perpetrator of actual violence in this serious example
of the offence.
Summary transfer offence
of minor theft
transferred charge particularised the property which was stolen as
“keys”. The offence was committed as part of the
joint criminal
enterprise and the prosecution accepted that they could not identify the precise
role of the offender in the taking
of the victim’s keys. The prosecution
accurately observed that the taking of the victim’s keys in the context of
offending represented a significant breach of the security of her home and
undoubtedly resulted in inconvenience and anxiety.
Subjective circumstances
me was a pre-sentence report (PSR) prepared in October 2024 and another prepared
in October 2025. Taken together with the submissions
made on his behalf by Mr
Sabharwal at the sentencing hearing as well as evidence adduced in the
proceeding, the offenders’
subjective factors can be summarised as
offender is now 47 years of age. He was born and raised in Canberra and is one
of four children. His parents separated when he
was 3 years old and he resided
predominantly with his mother.
offender moved to NSW with his mother and three sisters [redacted]. Following
this move the offender had no contact with his father
for many years and has
minimal contact with him now.
offender has a supportive relationship with his sister with whom he resides, and
a positive relationship with his mother who lives
nearby. He reported having a
close relationship his other two sisters who live interstate however
acknowledged contact with them
is infrequent.
offender has four children. The eldest two of whom are now adults he remains in
[Redacted]. [Redacted].
The offender is single and acknowledged his previous relationship had been
strained due to illicit substance
use by both he and his partners.
offender has been living with one of his sisters and her young daughter since he
was released from custody in January 2025. The
PSR author noted ACT Housing
advised has no record of the offender residing in an ACT Housing property which
may affect the tenancy.
offender ceased formal education prior to completing Year 9 and reported he did
not enjoy school. He reported having completed
a qualification in spray painting
and worked in this industry for approximately nine years. The offender ceased
working in 2014 as
he was assessed as eligible for the disability support
pension and has not worked since. The offender has indicated a desire to gain
employment in the future. The offender is in receipt of a disability support
pension and did not report experiencing any financial
hardship or debt. He
admitted he gambles but denied this is problematic. The offender is not charged
rent or utilities by his sister
however she will not be able to support him long
term due to her own financial position.
offender reported having pro-social friends, most of whom lived interstate. He
acknowledged several of his associates engaged
in illicit substance use however
he claimed to have distanced himself from them. The offender reported no
involvement with organised
pro-social activities in the community however
advised he spends his spare time with his son.
offender reported problematic consumption of both alcohol and drugs from a young
age. He reported having begun consuming alcohol
at 13 years of age and noted he
would consume up to one bottle per day with the aim of ‘getting drunk as
often as possible’.
[Redacted]. He reported at the height of this alcohol
use he would consume a bottle of moonshine and two bottles of spirits in one
day. The offender acknowledged he did not recall periods of his life due to his
level of intoxication however was aware he returned
a high blood alcohol level
when arrested for his last driving charge. The offender claimed he has not
consumed alcohol since his
release from custody.
offender also disclosed a long history of polysubstance use. He reported he
commenced using cannabis at age 14 and would smoke
a joint sporadically up until
age 17 when his cannabis used ceased. At age 18 the offender began using
amphetamines and reported
using a ‘point’ every few days for a month
when he ceased use due to his reliance on alcohol. The offender reported he
MDMA for a brief period at age 26 before commencing methamphetamine use at age
28. He noted a brief period of cocaine use at
age 30 but advised the substance
had been too expensive to continue using.
offender acknowledged he had consistently used methamphetamine since age 28 and
that his consumption had escalated to problematic
levels. He reported that at
the height of his addiction he would use approximately three grams ‘every
second to third day’.
The offender reported he had recently completed the
Karralika Matrix program, however reported that he had failed in his attempt
cease methamphetamine use. He claimed to have been able to reduce his current
use to ‘half a point’ every fortnight.
offender completed the Solaris program in custody on 6 September 2024.
offender reported a diagnosis of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), anxiety
and depression. He reported he was currently medicated
for these conditions and
experienced variations in the stability of his mental health. The offender
acknowledged his engagement with
mental health treatment had been inconsistent.
offender claimed he had recently begun experiencing heart pain and had spent
time in the Intensive Care Unit after heart arrythmia’s
and his heart
having stopped. The PSR author noted this information was unverified and
information from Canberra Health Service did
not confirm a diagnosis.
offender was granted bail in January 2025 to participate in a residential
rehabilitation program. The offender did not complete
the program and was exited
due to his failure to achieve completion requirements.
offender gave evidence at the proceedings and confirmed he remains living with
this sister in an ACT Housing property. He is not
on the lease for her property,
but his sister intends to add him to it. He said the living arrangement is
stable and can continue.
Consistent with a certificate tendered in the
proceedings the offender accessed counselling at Relationships Australia. A
confirmed he had attended six sessions of counselling between February
2025 and October 2025 [redacted].
offender gave evidence that he is “100 per cent” committed to
addressing his issues with drug and alcohol use which
he said was connected to
his “trauma”. He confirmed he has been reporting daily to police on
bail and has submitted to
breath analysis on occasion. He has not been subject
to drug testing.
offender described more recent health issues to do with his heart. He did not
recall exactly when but described an incident which
occurred “probably a
month or two ago” when he was taken to hospital by ambulance. He said his
mother collected him from
the hospital.
offender explained that he has regular contact with his now six-year-old son. In
cross-examination he clarified that his contact
with him recommenced after a
period of no contact just prior to the most recent school holidays. He said that
he now has contact
with his son three or four days a week, his son stays with
him every weekend and he had care of him through the school holidays.
offender characterised himself as “genuine” in his desire to pursue
rehabilitation saying, “he will not deviate”.
The offender explained
that he had read the victim impact statement and heard it read aloud. He said
he was “sad” that
“something like this has happened” and
“he feels sad for the lady”
offender said he had a staph infection that meant he could not continue with the
Karalika program in May 2025. The infection began
“about a month”
after he began the program and resolved “around” June 2025.
letter from Karralika confirmed that the offender contacted Karalika on 2
September 2025 to enquire about resuming their program,
but they did not have
any places available. The offender then engaged with the Canberra Recovery Hub
(CRH) on 15 September 2025 and
a letter from CRH explained that a
“clinical decision” was made to refer the offender for one-on-one
supports through
Everyman and Catholic Care. The referral was made on 17 October
offender’s mother gave evidence. She is a support worker and currently
trying to “sort” something out with respect
to the offender living
with her. She said she became aware that the offender had been rushed to
hospital about “six weeks ago”.
She said she went straight to
hospital, and he was released the next day. She said there was no discharge
paperwork provided. On
another occasion two to three weeks ago he was again
taken to hospital and released the next day. Discharge paperwork was provided
that occasion. The offender’s mother explained that it was her
understanding that the offender has “arrhythmia”
which she said she
has herself and medial professionals could not identify the cause of it for the
offender’s mother described “constant” contact with the
offender whilst he has been on bail and that she tries
to provide him with
consistent support. She said the offender has had a “hard life” and
a “traumatised life”
and that they constantly talk about
rehabilitation. She described the offender as having a “close bond”
with his son
[redacted]. She said the offender’s contact with his son was
longer that he had indicated in his evidence.
Responsibility, remorse and
rehabilitation
offender bears a high degree of responsibility for his role in the criminal
enterprise. The offender was at all times actively
involved in the enterprise
and directly perpetrated several offences which included acts of significant
violence. The violence used
by the offender facilitated the offending,
maintained and escalated an environment of fear and resulted in significant harm
victim. His drug use at the time of the offending perhaps goes some way
to explaining his conduct but it does not excuse it or mitigate
the seriousness
remarks attributed to the offender by the PSR author disputed aspects of his
involvement and attempted to apportion blame to the
victim. The conclusion of
the report author that the offender “[did] not fully understand the peril
his actions placed the
victim in, which required her to attempt to defend
herself” can be readily accepted. That conclusion mirrored my own
of the offender’s attempt to express remorse in the witness
said in evidence that he was “sad” that “something like this
happened”. His language seemed to distance
himself from the events. Of
course, this event was not something that just “happened” to the
victim; it was an event
brought about directly by the deliberate acts of the
offender and his co-offenders. The offender did say that he would be prepared
participate in a restorative justice process which I accept as some indication,
consistent with his plea of guilty, of acceptance
of responsibility.
balance, I am satisfied that the offender has demonstrated some genuine remorse.
offender has been subject to multiple supervised community-based orders in the
past and was recorded to have displayed poor compliance
with community-based
orders, with breach action initiated on multiple occasions predominantly due to
reoffending. The offender did
successfully complete an order in 2022, however he
was recorded to have made little effort to attend alcohol and drug treatment
This is a consistent theme for the offender.
offender did not complete the Karralika rehabilitation program which was the
purpose of a grant of bail in January 2025. The offender
was granted bail after
a substantial period on remand and after completing the Solaris program. In
evidence, the offender presented
his inability to complete the program as
arising from a “staph” infection, but counsel confirmed his failure
to complete
arose directly from his failure to achieve the requirements of the
program. The offender told the PSR author that he had been unable
abstinence from methamphetamine use.
offender initially sought referral to the Drug and Alcohol Sentencing Court for
the making of a Drug and Alcohol Treatment Order.
Perhaps unsurprisingly in
light of the history I have outlined, the offender was found unsuitable for such
offender continues to express a desire to address his substance misuse. I
acknowledge that the pathway to rehabilitation is not
always linear. The
offender is no longer a young man. His history must have demonstrated to him the
challenges which continue to
see him interact with the criminal justice system.
The offender has some insight identifying that he uses alcohol as a coping
and alcohol is a gateway for him to illicit substance use. Despite
this insight, and the opportunity provided to him to demonstrate
whilst on bail
and with the sentence for these offences outstanding, his commitment to
rehabilitation after a lengthy period on remand
the offender was unable to
finalise his participation in rehabilitation. He continued to use
methamphetamine though claimed he had
not used alcohol since he was granted
offender’s evidence about the effort he has made with respect to
rehabilitation since his exit from the Karralika program
in May 2025 was not
persuasive. He initially said he had engaged in counselling since that time and
when it was pointed out to him
that the Relationships Australia letter recorded
a session on 22 May 2025 and the next session on 17 October 2025, he did not
any other counselling service with whom he had engaged.
my view the evidence demonstrates that the offender did not actively seek out
other rehabilitation supports after he was removed
from the Karralika program in
May 2025 until at best, August 2025. He contacted Karralika on 2 September 2025
and engaged with CRH
on 15 September 2025. This timing reflects his
understanding that these proceedings were fast approaching.
I am satisfied that the offender considers himself “genuine” when he
expresses his desire to meaningfully pursue
rehabilitation, his efforts on bail
say otherwise.
accept that the offender has not reoffended since the commission of these
offences, but it must be recalled that he was on remand
for a significant
period. I acknowledge that he has been on bail without incident since January
2025 and he appears to have loving
and supportive family members who want better
for him. He is attempting to rebuild a relationship with his small son who would
no doubt from a positive father figure.
light of the offender’s more recent failure to take full advantage of the
opportunity provided to him on bail and the role
that drug use has played in his
history of interaction with the criminal justice system, including in the
commission of these offences,
at best I am guarded about the offender’s
prospect of rehabilitation.
Co-offender
Pricsina has yet to be sentenced, and co-accused Watson died in August
Victim impact statement
victim read aloud a victim impact statement. In it she
described the
physical, psychological and emotional effect upon her of the episode of
“unimaginable violence”. The victim
did not return to work after the
incident during which she believed she would not be “returned home”.
The victim expressed
her disbelief that she managed to escape describing it as
“a feat she still can’t believe [she] accomplished”.
victim explained that the “ordeal has changed us in ways I am still
discovering” and set out the following matters:
I was taken to Canberra hospital in critical condition. I sustained a fractured
rib and facial trauma. I underwent emergency surgery,
including the insertion of
a chest drain to prevent my lung from collapsing. My phone has been stolen,
leaving me cut off from the
world. My employer found me four days later.
Since then, my life has narrowed to a corridor of fear and isolation. I rarely
leave the house and find shopping malls unbearable.
At night, I have to lock my
daughter and myself in our room to find some sense of safety to fall asleep. The
injuries remain. My
right eye only sees 66%. My jaw clicks, I have missing teeth
and a scar down my face. My daughter had to leave her dream job that
our resources to the breaking point. Her life has been irrevocably altered.
statement directly informs an understanding of the extent of the harm occasioned
to the victim by the actions of the offender
and the co-offenders. On any view
that harm was extensive and all consuming. The victim impact statement
eloquently expressed the
life altering consequences she has experienced and
revealed the devastation that violent offending such as this can bring about.
Plea of guilty and assistance to law
enforcement authorities
offender entered pleas of guilty on 21 August 2024 upon arraignment in this
court. At the same time, he placed on record his preparedness
to give evidence
in the proceedings involving his co-accused who at that stage had both entered
pleas of not guilty. The prosecution
accepted that the utilitarian value of the
plea was significant and that a reduction in recognition of that to the value of
cent is appropriate.
prosecution accepted that the offender’s preparedness to give evidence
enlivened the discretion available pursuant to
(Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT) which should be assessed against the background
of a strong prosecution case.
is a “codification of the well-established sentencing consideration of
“assistance to the authorities”, which is
designed to incentivise
behaviour rather than reward outcomes”:
Will v the Queen
[2021] ACTCA 14
circumstances where the offender indicated his preparedness to give evidence in
the co-accused’s proceedings in a prosecution
case which relied on the
establishment of an agreement between the participants of a joint criminal
enterprise, I am satisfied that
an additional discount of 5% is warranted.
Criminal history
offender has an extensive criminal history [redacted]. The offender has
convictions for assault occasioning actual bodily harm,
domestic violence
related offending, intentional threat to kill, aggravated burglary, drug
possession and driving related offences.
offender’s criminal history limits the leniency that can be afforded to
Time in custody
at the date of the sentencing hearing the offender had spent 414 days in custody
in relation to the offences. The sentence imposed
will be backdated accordingly.
Current sentencing practise
following sentencing outcomes were identified. I acknowledge the limitations of
comparable sentencing outcomes; they do not define
the upper nor lower limits of
the sentencing range for an offence. In coming to consider current sentencing
practise I bear in mind
in the need to ensure the consistent application of
legal principle.
consideration of the comparable outcomes, in my view the incident for which the
offender is to be sentenced is made more serious
than some of them by the nature
and the extent of the violence that the victim was subject to which included the
offender choking
[2020] ACTSC 284
offender in this matter was the co-offender in
and found guilty
after trial. The offender was accepted to have attempted to stop the co-offender
from assaulting the victim with
the baseball bat. The offender had a significant
criminal history and a history of drug abuse. The offender had connections
an outlaw motorcycle gang.
not recorded in the table provided by the prosecutor, the offender appealed
against the sentence originally imposed by the
sentencing judge. The Court of
Appeal concluded that a finding made by the sentencing judge that the offending
was pre-planned was
an error and the offender was re-sentenced as follows
Stott v The Queen
[2021] ACTCA 18):
(a) On the count of unlawful confinement, two years of imprisonment.
(b) On the count of making a demand accompanied by threat, two years of
imprisonment.
total sentence imposed was two years and six months of imprisonment.
[2020] ACTSC 285
involved the co-offender of
The offender was found guilty at
trial of one count of forcible confinement, one count of intentionally
inflicting actual bodily harm
and one count of making a demand accompanied by a
Together with
, the offender unlawfully confined the
victim for one hour. During confinement the co-offender, made demands of the
victim to pay
the sum of $20,000. The offender was armed with a baseball act and
made multiple threats of serious physical injury.
offender attacked the victim with a baseball bat, and the victim armed himself
with a knife. The victim sustained a 5cm left-sided
parieto-occipital laceration
with a surrounding 3cm haematoma which required suturing, as well as multiple
bruises and swellings
to his upper limbs and upper chest. The offender was
intoxicated at the time of the offending and had a lengthy criminal history
offences of violence and dishonesty.
not recorded in the table provided by the prosecutor, as in
sentence imposed by the sentencing judge was the subject of an appeal by the
offender. The Court of Appeal concluded that error
made in the offender’s case and the offender was re-sentenced as follows
[2021] ACTCA 19):
(a) On the count of unlawful confinement, 30 months of imprisonment.
(b) On the count of making demand accompanied by threat, 30 months of
imprisonment.
(c) On the count of intentionally inflicting actual bodily harm, 24 months of
imprisonment.
total sentence imposed was three years and six months of imprisonment.
The Queen v Avery
offender was charged with one count of forcible confinement, one count of demand
accompanied by threats, one count of trafficking
in controlled drug other than
cannabis, one count of unlawful possession of stolen property, and one count of
possess cannabis. The
offender was found to be the instigator of the offence of
forcible confinement alongside 5 co-offenders, and the offence of forcible
confinement was found to be an extremely serious example of the offence.
prosecution appeal did not challenge the 35 per cent discount allocated by the
sentencing judge and succeeded on a ground which
alleged that the sentence of 16
months of imprisonment with a non-parole period of 12 months was manifestly
inadequate. The offender
had a minimal criminal history, previous association
with an outlaw motorcycle gang, a history of drug use and undiagnosed and
mental health issues. Citing
Singh v The Queen
[2015] ACTCA 65
the Court of Appeal observed at [31]:
, this Court surveyed comparable cases about unlawful confinement
where violence was present, noting that they usually attract a sentence
between two and five years’ imprisonment, with the high sentences being
reserved for matters involving a high level of violence
causing physical injury
or threatening to cause injury or death, and where the offender had a
significant criminal history:
offender had served the sentenced by the time the appeal judgment was delivered.
The Court observed that sentences imposed on
the co-offenders which were not the
subject of a prosecution appeal were “undoubtedly lenient” and that
“the sentences
imposed upon the co-offenders provide a basis for the early
suspension of the sentences imposed upon the respondent”: at [41].
Court of Appeal determined that the offending warranted an overall sentence of 4
years of imprisonment: at [39]. After the application
of the reduction to which
the offender was entitled, he was re-sentenced on appeal as follows to a total
term of two years and seven
months of imprisonment:
(a) For the count of unlawful confinement, the offender was sentenced to two
years and seven months of imprisonment suspended upon
on entering into a good
behaviour order for a period of almost 2 years.
(b) For the count of trafficking in controlled drug other than cannabis the
offender was sentenced to nine months of imprisonment
upon entering into a good
behaviour order.
(c) For the count of demand accompanied by threats the offender was sentenced to
12 months of imprisonment.
(d) For the count of unlawful possession of stolen property, the offender was
convicted and sentenced to three months of imprisonment.
(e) For the count of possessing cannabis the offender was convicted and
sentenced to three months of imprisonment.
[2019] ACTCA 7
appellant in this matter was the co-offender in
. The appellant had
been charged with one count of forcible confinement and one count of making a
demand accompanies by a threat.
The Court accepted the Crown’s submission
that the offender had played a key role in the offending although his
co-offender
Mr Avery was the instigator of the offending. The offender entered a
guilty plea approximately one month prior to the trial and was
afforded a 12 per
cent discount on sentence for his plea. The offender, although not a child, was
a young offender with a minimal
criminal history. The Court of Appeal sentenced
the appellant as follows:
(a) On the count of forcible confinement, the offender was re-sentenced to two
years and 11 months imprisonment.
(b) On the count of making demands accompanied by threats, which was 14 months
imprisonment, the sentence was made cumulative as
to one month.
total sentence was three years of imprisonment.
[2024] ACTSC 49
offender was dealt with for one count of forcible confinement and one count of
aggravated robbery. The victim was confined for
a period of over one hour in a
residential home in the middle of the night. There was a degree of planning, and
the purpose of the
offending was to extract money from the victim. The offender
was not the instigator however did swing a wrench at the victim’s
hit him on the top of his head, and punch him in the face resulting in a black
eye. The victim was forced to drink unknown
liquid which caused him to feel
dizzy and have difficulty speaking. Hopkins AJ noted that the extent of fear
instilled in the victim
must have been significant. Property was stolen from the
victim although the value was not significant. The victim ultimately escaped
convincing the group to let him to go the bathroom where he kicked out a window.
principles in
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37; 249 CLR 571 and
[1999] NSWCCA 111
; 46 NSWLR 346
were applied. The
offender entered pleas of guilty 5 days prior to the commencement of trial and a
10 per cent reduction was applied:
(a) On the count of forcible confinement, the offender was convicted and
sentenced to 27 months of imprisonment.
(b) On the count of aggravated robbery, the offender was convicted and sentenced
to 22 months and 14 days of imprisonment.
total aggregate sentence was 30 months of imprisonment, and a drug and alcohol
treatment order was made.
Le Clair v The Queen;
Achanfuo-Yeboah v The Queen
[2017] ACTCA 19
first appellant, Mr Le Clair, and second appellant, Mr Achanfuo-Yeboah, both
committed one count of forcible confinement and one
count of trafficking in a
trafficable quantity of cannabis. The offending occurred in the context of a
failed drug deal whereby the
appellants became angry with the victim. The first
appellant produced a knife and held the victim at knifepoint in a vehicle. The
second appellant drove the vehicle from whilst the first appellant repeatedly
threatened the victim, stating he would break the victim’s
bones, cut off
his fingers, and tattoo the word “dog” on his face. One of the
appellants called for additional support.
The victim escaped the car at this
point however was recaptured after which he was struck on the head with a
baseball bat. The victim
was driven to a remote location in NSW where he was
further assaulted and abandoned.
first appellant had a troubled childhood, problematic substance abuse which
commenced in his teenage years, and mental health
issues. The first appellant
also had a criminal history including offences which were traffic-related,
aggravated burglary, minor
theft, and assault occasioning actual bodily harm.
The first appellant was sentenced to a partially concurrent sentence as follows:
(a) On the count of forcible confinement, the offender was convicted and
sentenced to three years and six months of imprisonment.
(b) On the count of trafficking in a trafficable quantity of cannabis the
offender was convicted and sentenced to twelve months of
imprisonment.
second appellant had come to Australia at age 12 and displayed little victim
empathy. He had been previously assaulted in custody,
his partner was pregnant
and had reduced his significant use of cannabis. The second appellant was
sentenced to a partially concurrent
sentence as follows:
(a) On the count of forcible confinement, the offender was convicted and
sentenced to two years and 11 months of imprisonment.
(b) On the count of trafficking in a trafficable quantity of cannabis the
offender was convicted and sentenced to 12 months of imprisonment.
Determination
purposes of sentencing are set out in
Crimes (Sentencing)
. In this matter general deterrence and punishment feature as
considerations which carry significant weight. The offending involved
gratuitous, cruel and painful violence. It was senseless conduct, motivated
seemingly only by greed, and it left the victim
to rebuild her life around the
physical and psychological consequences. There is a compelling need for the
sentence imposed to properly
recognise the substantial harm done to the victim.
Offending such as this must be strongly and unequivocally denounced.
offender was assessed as a high risk of re-offending by the PSR author, noting
his poor compliance with community-based orders
and recidivism. The author
considered that the offender would likely benefit from intensive interventions
to address his illicit
substance use, as well as engagement in specific anger
management programs. The offender’s capacity to translate his wish for
reform into substantive action, in light of his history, must be doubted. The
sentence imposed must deter the offender and protect
the community.
was no dispute that the offending in this instance warranted the imposition of a
sentence of imprisonment. No other sentencing
outcome would adequately reflect
the grave nature of the offences. The proper application of sentencing
principles in my view requires
a severe sentence to reflect the gravity of the
offending and to adequately punish the offender, to deter others who may be
to similarly offend, to make clear that the conduct is unacceptable and
to recognise the substantial harm done to the victim.
sentencing the offender for multiple offences, I bear in mind that the offending
occurred as one episode of criminal conduct as
part of a joint criminal
enterprise. I have heeded the caution issued by the Court of Appeal in
Just as in the case of the abduction offence, it is necessary to draw a
distinction between the criminality involved in the confinement
criminality involved in the offences committed in the course of the confinement.
Otherwise, the offender will be punished
twice for the same conduct.
offending involved separate offences such that the sentence imposed on one
cannot entirely comprehend the other and the victim
occasioned separate harm
arising from the commission of individual offences. The sentence must be just
and appropriate and not be
disproportionate to the criminality involved.
structure will see a degree of concurrency as between the offences. Even with
substantial overlap the sentence will be a heavy
one. As the Court of Appeal in
Director of Public Prosecutions v Padreny
[2024] ACTCA 4
observed at
[169(c)] “there comes a point when general and specific deterrence
objectives are met and imposing further lengthy
terms of imprisonment for every
sentence does little to achieve the objectives of denunciation and recognition
of harm to the victim”.
starting point for the charge of minor theft (joint commission) (CC2024/4524) is
4 months of imprisonment reduced to 2 months
and 24 days of imprisonment in
recognition of his plea of guilty.
starting point for the count of forcible confinement (joint commission)
(CC2024/4523) is 4 years of imprisonment reduced to 2
years, 9 months and 18
days of imprisonment in recognition of his plea of guilty.
starting point for the count of intentionally and unlawfully choke, suffocate or
strangle another person (joint commission) (CC2024/4525)
is 3 years of
imprisonment reduced to 2 years, 1 month and 5 days of imprisonment in
recognition of his plea of guilty.
starting point for the count of recklessly inflict grievous bodily harm (joint
commission) (CC2024/1156) is 3 years of imprisonment
reduced to 2 years, 1 month
and 5 days of imprisonment in recognition of his plea of guilty.
starting point for the count of assault occasioning actual bodily harm (joint
commission) (CC2024/4527) is 2 years of imprisonment
reduced to 1 year, 4 months
and 22 days of imprisonment in recognition of his plea of guilty.
starting point for the count of reckless threat to inflict grievous bodily harm
(joint commission) (CC2024/4526) is 2 years of
imprisonment reduced to 1 year, 4
months and 22 days of imprisonment in recognition of his plea of guilty.
have taken into account the effect of the sentence on the offender’s young
son. The offender’s son is not presently
in his fulltime care, though I
accept that a period of imprisonment served full-time will necessarily disrupt
the reestablishment
of their relationship. I also accept that a return to
fulltime custody after a period on bail will be challenging for the offender.
Neither consideration in isolation or combination in this instance should
undermine the purposes of sentencing or justify the extension
of undue leniency
to the offender. The offender’s progress whilst on bail was a matter
firmly within his control. His exit
from the Karralika program in May 2025 and
his decision to delay attempts to re-engage in any rehabilitative program are
indications
of the extent to which he is committed to his own reform.
for the offender submitted that I should consider suspending any further period
of imprisonment to give effect to the offender’s
prospect of
rehabilitation. As he accepted such an outcome would be based on a mere hope, in
view of the offender’s lacklustre
effort whilst on bail and his history,
that he might decide to meaningfully engage in his own rehabilitation.
my view the suspension of any further period of imprisonment would be unduly
lenient. The seriousness of the offending demands
a sentence of fulltime
imprisonment. The offender does not present with a compelling case for
rehabilitation. Even partially suspending
the sentence would be to give effect
to an uncertain prospect of rehabilitation and allow it to overwhelm the
sentencing task. Should
the offender maintain a desire to address his use of
drugs and alcohol the parole authorities will be well placed to assess his
period of imprisonment is warranted for each offence, the time already served in
pre-sentence custody does not sufficiently reflect
the gravity of the offending
and for the reasons I have outlined, any further period should be served as
full-time imprisonment.
coming to set a non-parole period I bear in mind the principles expressed in
[2019] ACTCA 3
and the authorities cited therein.
A non-parole period is the minimum period that justice requires the offender
actually serve. It
is determined by reference to the purposes of sentencing, the
objective seriousness of the offending and the offender’s subjective
circumstances. I am satisfied it is the interest of the community and the
interest of the offender that he be subject to a regime
of supervision for a
substantial period to assist him to transition back to the community upon his
release and properly address the
factors which underpin his offending conduct.
This approach is consistent with the views expressed in the PSR.
those reasons, I make the following orders:
(1) On the charge of minor theft (joint commission)
(CC2024/4524) the offender is convicted and sentenced of 2 months and 24 days
imprisonment commencing 2 September 2024 and expiring 25 November 2024.
(2) On the count of forcible confinement (joint commission) (CC2024/4523) the
offender is convicted and sentenced to 2 years 9 months
and 18 days imprisonment
commencing 2 September 2024 and expiring on 19 June 2027.
(3) On the count of intentionally and unlawfully choke, suffocate or strangle
another person (joint commission) (CC2024/4525) the
offender is convicted and
sentenced to 2 years 1 month and 5 days imprisonment commencing 13 November 2026
and expiring on 17 December
(4) On the count of recklessly inflict grievous bodily harm (joint commission)
(CC2024/1156) the offender is convicted and sentenced
to 2 years 1 month and 5
days imprisonment commencing on 12 February 2028 and expiring on 16 March 2030.
(5) On the count of assault occasioning actual bodily harm (joint commission)
(CC2024/4527) the offender is convicted and sentenced
to 1 year 4 months and 22
days imprisonment commencing on 24 April 2029 and expiring on 14 September 2030.
(6) On the count of reckless threat to inflict grievous bodily harm (joint
commission) (CC2024/4526) the offender is convicted and
sentenced to 1 year 4
months and 22 days imprisonment commencing 8 October 2029 and expiring on 1
March 2031.
(7) The total period of imprisonment is 6 years and 6 months imprisonment
commencing 2 September 2024 and expiring 1 March 2031.
(8) I set a non-parole period of 3 years 10 months and 25 days, commencing on 2
September 2024 and expiring on 26 July 2028.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and forty-seven [147] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Sentence of
her Honour Justice
Associate: P Beohm
Date: 23.10.2025
RTF format (383 KB)
Signed PDF/A format