BC and Canberra Health Services [2020] ACTOFOI 28 (17 December 2020)
and Canberra Health Services
December 2020)
and reasons for
decision of Senior Assistant Ombudsman, Louise Macleod
Application
AFOI-RR/20/10048
[2020] ACTOFOI 28
Canberra Health Services
Information Act 2016
(ACT) – deciding access –
information is not held by the respondent
am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman for the purposes of
Freedom of Information Act 2016
s 82(2)(a) of the FOI Act, I
the decision of Canberra
Health Services (
August 2020.
of Ombudsman review
27 July 2020, BC applied to CHS for access to:
ACT Health Injury Management Unit written policy for leave applications and
leave processing or by whatever name is used, for
fulltime or part time staff
specialist doctors on worker’s compensation, and also the ACT Health
People and Culture policy
on the same content.
information contains confidential personal information and medical information
and as such should not be listed on the disclosure
log, which is
17 August 2020, CHS advised the applicant that it does not hold any documents
relevant to the scope of the access application.
In its decision letter, CHS
the circumstances of individuals accessing Worker’s Compensation due to
injury, can differ significantly. Therefore, consideration
is provided on a case
by case basis.
making its decision CHS relied on s 35(1)(b) of the FOI Act.
11 September 2020, the applicant applied for a review of CHS’ decision by
the ACT Ombudsman, under s 74 of the FOI Act.
23 November 2020, I provided my preliminary views about CHS’ decision to
the parties in my draft consideration.
accepted my preliminary view on 30 November 2020.
applicant did not provide any more submissions relating to this review.
issue before me in this Ombudsman review is whether CHS’ decision was
making my draft consideration, I have had regard
access and review applications
FOI Act gives every person an enforceable right of access to government
information, subject to any provisions of the Act providing
a basis on which
access can be
35(1)(b) of the FOI Act provides that the respondent to an access application
may decide that it does not hold any information
falling within the scope of the
access application.
contentions of the parties
applicant’s review application
is clearly impossible to assess different and indeed adverse treatment without
the comparison clauses applying to other employees
in the same situation.
being notified of this Ombudsman review, CHS
Health Services conducted searches of areas identified as to hold information
pertinent to the scope of this request. This
was extended to seeking further
advice and documentation from CMTEDD. Canberra Health Services advised the
applicant in the decision
letter that the circumstances of individuals accessing
Workers’ Compensation due to injury, can differ significantly. Therefore,
consideration regarding leave is provided on a case by case basis.
Considerations
35(1)(b) of the FOI Act authorises the respondent to an access application to
decide it does not hold any information that
is within the scope of the access
application.
29 September 2020, CHS provided the applicant with written confirmation that it
does not hold any in-scope information. CHS provided
internal emails in the
course of this review as evidence of its searches for information that may have
been in-scope. These searches
included seeking information from another
Directorate.
on evidence provided by CHS, I accept CHS does not hold any information that is
within the scope of the access application.
I note that Part 9 of the FOI Act
imposes penalties for failing to identify information or making a decision
contrary to the Act.
There is no evidence before me which suggests that any such
offence has been committed in this matter.
this reason, under s 82(2)(a) of the FOI Act I
CHS’ decision that
it does not hold information that is in-scope with respect of the access
application under s 35(1)(b) of
the FOI Act.
Senior Assistant
17 December
Section 7 of the FOI Act.
RTF format (808 KB)
Signed PDF/A format