McBride v The King [2025] ACTCA 16 (28 May 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
McBride v The King
[2025] ACTCA 16
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Baker, Taylor and Abraham JJ
The appellant’s appeals against his
conviction and his sentence are dismissed.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– appeal against conviction
– unlawfully communicate naval, military or air force information other
than in the course
of the appellant’s “official duty” contrary
Defence Act 1903
(Cth) – publish confidential
information other than in the course of the appellant’s “duty”
contrary to s
70(1) of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) – theft –
where the appellant was a member of the Australian Defence Force at the time of
the offending –
where the appellant pleaded guilty – whether a
miscarriage of justice arose because the appellant’s guilty pleas were
entered in consequence of a wrong decision of law – whether by way of the
appellant’s oath of enlistment the appellant’s
“official duty” extended to acting in the “public
interest”, even where in contravention
of a lawful general order –
whether the scope of the appellant’s duty may be defined by a lawful
general order –
no wrong decision of law – no miscarriage of justice
– conviction appeal dismissed
CRIMINAL LAW
– Crime and Punishment
– Sentence – appeal against sentence – whether primary judge
erred in failing to take
into account the appellant’s motivation to remedy
a perceived injustice when assessing the objective seriousness of the offending
– where concern was with perceived over-investigation of alleged war
crimes – whether appellant honestly believed offending
conduct to be
lawful – contribution of mental health condition to offending –
principles considered – harm to the community –
sufficient consideration of intensive correction order assessment report
–sentence appeal dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Crimes (Sentencing)
Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Code
(Cth), s 131.1
Defence (Personnel) Amendment
Regulations 2002
(Cth), sch 2
Defence Act 1903
Defence Force Discipline Act
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013
Public Service Act
Cases Cited:
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
Allred v The Queen
[2015] ACTCA 21
Attorney-General (NSW) v Perpetual Trustee Co (Ltd)
[1952] HCA 2
Bowen v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 67
Brown v The Queen
[2020] VSCA 212
; 62 VR 491
Carr v The Queen
[2020] NSWCCA 214
[2001] HCA 67
Commonwealth v Carter
(1965) 7 FLR 223
Commonwealth v Quince
[1944] HCA 1
Crane v The King
[2024] NSWCCA 87
De Dohsé v Reg
(unreported, Court of Appeal, 2 June
DPP (Cth) v De La Rosa
[2010] NSWCCA 194
; 79 NSWLR 1
DPP (Vic) v Zierk
[2008] VSC 184
184 A Crim R 582
DPP v Clarke (No 3)
[2024] ACTSC 395
DPP v Coory
[2011] VSCA 316
214 A Crim R 301
DPP v Herrmann
[2021] VSCA 160
290 A Crim R 110
DPP v Vincent (No 2)
[2023] ACTSC 379
Dunn v The Queen
[1895] UKLawRpKQB 205
(1896) 1 QB 116
Elmir v The Queen
[2021] NSWCCA 19
357 FLR 274
Enever v The King
[1906] HCA 3
Fares v DPP (No 2)
[2025] ACTCA 2
Groves v Commonwealth
[1982] HCA 21
150 CLR 113
Harrison v Melhem
[2008] NSWCA 67
72 NSWLR 380
Haskins v Commonwealth
[2011] HCA 28
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
Hu v The King
[2025] VSCA 60
Kentwell v The Queen
[2014] HCA 37
252 CLR 601
Marks v Commonwealth
[1964] HCA 45
111 CLR 549
Marks v The Queen
[2019] VSCA 253
280 A Crim R 23
McBride v The King
[2023] ACTCA 42
Moiler v The Queen
[2021] NSWCCA 73
Monfries v The Queen
[2014] ACTCA 46
19 ACTLR 99
Munda v Western Australia
[2013] HCA 38
249 CLR 600
Pense v Hemy
[1973] WAR 40
Private R v Cowen
[2020] HCA 31
271 CLR 316
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
194 CLR 355
R v Anderson
[1981] VicRp 17
[1981] VR 155
R v District Court of the Northern District of Queensland; Ex parte
[1968] HCA 48
118 CLR 488
(1995) 84 A Crim R 67
[2020] HCA 8
267 CLR 141
R v Hanson (No 3
[2025] ACTSC 6
[2007] VSCA 119
; 16 VR 349
R v McBride (No 2)
[2023] ACTSC 330
R v McBride (No 4)
[2024] ACTSC 147
R v McBride
[2023] ACTSC 328
(Full Court of Supreme Court of Victoria, unreported, 21
[2023] ACTCA 18
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
; 16 VR 269
R v Waters; Ex parte DPP (Cth)
[2023] QCA 131
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
262 CLR 362
Tasmania v Johnston
[2009] TASSC 60
18 Tas R 195
Watson v The Queen (No 2)
[2020] ACTCA 30
White v Director of Military Prosecutions
[2007] HCA 29
X v Commonwealth
[1999] HCA 63
200 CLR 177
Texts Cited:
Australian Capital Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative
Assembly, 19 November 2015, 4216 (Simon Corbell, Attorney-General)
The Administration of Justice under Military and Martial
(2nd ed, Murray, 1874)
The Military Forces of the Crown: Their Administration and
(J Murray, 1869)
Introduction to the Study of the Law of the
Constitution
(8th ed, Macmillan, 1915)
Halsbury’s Laws of England
(1st ed, Butterworth, 1913) vol
David McBride (Appellant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) (Respondent)
Commonwealth of Australia (amicus curiae)
Representation:
B Neild SC & K Ginges (Appellant)
P McDonald SC & CJ Tran (Respondent)
A Berger KC & LM Johnston (Commonwealth)
Lloyd Law (Appellant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Cth) (Respondent)
Australian Government Solicitor (Commonwealth)
File Number:
AC 29 of 2024
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: ACTSC
Before: Mossop J
Date of Decision: 14 May 2024
Case Title: R v McBride (No 4)
[2024] ACTSC 147
McBride (the appellant) was a lawyer and a member of the Australian Defence
Force (ADF) with a rank of Major in the Australian
Army. In this role, the
appellant held a level of security clearance which allowed him to access
information at all classification
levels, including TOP SECRET, as well as
certain types of caveated information.
the course of his service with the ADF, the appellant became dissatisfied with
what he perceived to be “illegal”
and “vexatious”
investigations into alleged war crimes by Australian soldiers, particularly
where Afghan citizens had
been killed as a result of the actions of Australian
soldiers in Afghanistan. The appellant was of the view that these investigations
were “driven by appearances rather than suspicion of a crime”, and
“erode[d] morale and waste[d] resources”.
part of his employment, the appellant had access to a record information system
which ran on a secure ADF network. Commencing in
May 2014, the appellant printed
hundreds of documents (235 in total) from the ADF network, took them to his
private home, and stored
them in plastic tubs in his lounge room.
late 2014 and early 2015, the appellant contacted two journalists, Mr Chris
Masters and Mr Andrew Clark, the latter whom he knew
through a family
friend. In separate meetings in 2015, the appellant provided the journalists
with two folders of documents containing
confidential ADF material, together
with a submission that he had prepared, which included confidential information
drawn from these
documents. Neither journalist published the information which
had been provided to them by the appellant.
April 2016, the appellant created a website called ‘The Ops Room’
(the Ops Room Website), on which he published various
blogs detailing his
concerns about ADF management. He also attached various documents to the blogs.
The appellant was not authorised
to publish or communicate much of the
information contained in the blog posts or the documents available on the Ops
Room Website.
May 2016, an Australian journalist, Daniel Oakes, contacted the appellant after
reading material on the Ops Room Website. Later
that month, the appellant met Mr
Oakes in person first at the appellant’s home and later at a hotel in
Canberra, and provided
him with a number of confidential ADF documents. Mr Oakes
subsequently published information that was contained in these documents
series of articles entitled ‘The Afghan Files’.
appellant was subsequently charged with five offences: one count of theft
contrary to s 131.1 of the
Criminal Code
(Cth); three counts of
unlawfully communicating naval, military or air force information other than in
the course of the appellant’s
“official duty” contrary to
Defence Act 1903
(Cth); and one count of publishing
confidential information other than in the course of his duty contrary to s
70(1) of the
Crimes Act 1914
appellant initially entered a plea of not guilty to all charges. However, prior
to the empanelment of the jury, the appellant
sought an indication as to what
instructions the jury would be given with respect to the scope of the
“duty” referred
Defence Act
and s 70(1)
. The parties agreed that there was jurisdiction for the
Court to hear the argument and to give a ruling on this issue.
order to establish the offences against
Defence Act
, it was necessary for the prosecution to establish
beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant had not made the impugned
communication
in the course of his “duty” (or “official
duty”, in the case of s 73A). The appellant contended that the
jury should
be instructed that the “duty” referred to in these provisions
“extended to acting in the ‘public
interest’ or
‘Australian public interest’, as determined by the jury, even where
that was in contravention of a
lawful order that had been given to the
primary judge rejected the appellant’s contention and on 16 November 2023,
made orders to this effect:
R v McBride
[2023] ACTSC 328
R v McBride (No 2)
[2023] ACTSC 330
McBride (No
). An application for leave to appeal was heard and dismissed by McCallum
decision later that day:
McBride v The King
[2023] ACTCA 42.
Immediately
following these rulings, on 17 November 2023, the appellant pleaded guilty to
the following three offences in full satisfaction
of the indictment:
(a) Count 1, theft, contrary to s 131.1(1) of the
Criminal Code
appropriated property belonging to a Commonwealth
entity with the intention of
permanently depriving the entity of the property.
(b) Count 2, unlawfully communicating naval, military or air force information,
contrary to
Defence Act
: between about 1 August 2014 and
communicated documents relating
to naval, military or air force information to
other persons, namely Chris Masters and Andrew Clark, and that
communication was not
in the course of his official duty.
(c) Count 3, unlawfully communicating naval, military or air force information,
contrary to
Defence Act
: between about 2 May 2016 and
documents relating to naval,
military or air force information to another
person, namely Daniel Oakes, and that communication was not in the course of his
1 related to the appellant’s conduct in taking the confidential documents
from the ADF and storing them at his private
appellant’s conduct in disclosing confidential documents to Mr Masters and
Mr Clark, and
Mr Oakes, respectively.
primary judge was also asked to take into account, pursuant to
, a charge of
contravening s 70(1) of the
in relation to
Section 16BA
permits an offender who admits guilt
for an offence, to have the offence taken into account by the court in passing
sentence on them
for the offence or offences for which they have been convicted.
This charge related to the publication of confidential material on
the Ops Room
14 May 2024, the primary judge convicted the appellant of the three offences and
imposed an overall sentence of imprisonment for
5 years and 8 months, comprised
of individual sentences of 34 months (count 2); 34 months (count 3) and 27
months (count 1):
R v McBride (No 4)
[2024] ACTSC 147
McBride (No 4)
). The overall term commenced on 14 May 2024 and will end
on 13 January 2030. A non-parole period of 27 months was fixed, commencing
May 2024 and ending on 13 August 2026.
appellant appeals against his conviction and sentence.
the reasons below, the appeals against conviction and sentence are dismissed.
primarily relevant to the appellant’s sentence appeal, there are some
contextual matters which should be noted before
addressing the individual
grounds of appeal.
as alluded to at [2] above, in taking and disclosing the confidential material,
the appellant was not attempting to bring allegations
of war crimes committed by
Australian soldiers to the public’s attention. On the contrary, the
Statement of Facts agreed to
by the appellant and the prosecution (the Agreed
Facts), records that the appellant’s concern was that:
... [t]here were soldiers doing their operational duties on behalf of the
Commonwealth who were being held to account for actions
on operations that were
appropriate in the operational context but that were being misconstrued,
misinterpreted or recast as contrary
to the [Rules of Engagement] by those
elsewhere in the chain of command outside Afghanistan.
other words, the appellant’s concern was not that alleged war crimes by
Australian soldiers were being under-investigated
by the ADF. Rather, his
concern was the converse: that such allegations were being over-investigated by
the chain of command.
the appellant positively resisted any suggestion that the story he was (in his
own words) “pushing” may have
been misconceived. After the appellant
gave the confidential material to Mr Oakes, Mr Oakes called the appellant and
I’m going to run a story, it’s going to be very damning, it’s
going to say the SAS kill people unnecessarily ...
A total opposite to what
you’ve just said. I’m just warning you.
appellant told police that he responded, “And I was like, ‘Never
call me again’”.
second matter
of contextual importance concerns the character of the
confidential information and the manner in which the appellant determined
make the confidential information public.
confidential information was marked “SECRET”. The Agreed Facts
record that:
[T]he SECRET classification indicates that a compromise of the confidentiality
of the information could be expected to cause ‘serious
the national interest, organisations or individuals. That damage may include
loss of life.
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013
recognises, there is a strong public interest in exposing wrongdoing by public
officials. However, as the SECRET classification
makes clear, compromises of
confidentiality in documents of this nature can have serious impacts upon
national security interests,
and ultimately can result in the loss of Australian
lives. These risks are particularly acute where the breach of confidentiality
occurs in a military context.
the proceedings below, the appellant accepted that the disclosures that were the
subject of counts 2 and 3 were not made pursuant
initial stages of the proceedings, the appellant foreshadowed an argument that
his acts were immune under the
, but he later discontinued this
application:
McBride (No 4)
to making the disclosures which were the subject of counts 2 and 3, the
appellant had sought to agitate his concerns internally.
However, it is
important to note that the appellant engaged in the offending conduct before the
internal inquiry, which he had set
in motion, had concluded.
Specifically,
the appellant had approached the Australian Federal Police (AFP) in May 2014
using disciplinary investigations
to vexatiously and improperly prosecute Australian soldiers. The AFP advised the
appellant that
the information the appellant had provided did not disclose
evidence of a criminal offence. The AFP officers told the appellant that
Inspector General of the Australian Defence Force (the IGADF) would be best
placed to investigate his concerns.
15 August 2014, the appellant prepared a submission to the IGADF. In that
submission, the appellant stated that the disclosure
was being made under the
However, on 25 August 2014, the Deputy Inspector General
explained to the appellant that disclosures about alleged ADF misconduct
not be made under the
to the IGADF at that time. The appellant
was provided with information about the process that needed to be followed to
submission to be treated as a disclosure under the
appellant declined that opportunity, saying that his preference was for the
IGADF to investigate his concerns.
IGADF determined to hold an inquiry (the IGADF Inquiry). Two assistant IGADFs
were appointed to the task. One was a former judge
of the County Court of
Victoria and a Commodore in the Royal Australian Navy Reserve. The other was a
captain in the Royal Australian
August 2015, the IGADF provided a report (the IGADF report), which upheld the
appellant’s complaints about the validity of
some warrants issued by the
Australian Defence Force Investigative Service, but found that the other
complaints made by the appellant,
particularly concerning the alleged
over-investigation of Australian soldiers, could not be substantiated. The
appellant read the
IGADF Report in the IGADF office in late 2015. He did not
raise any concerns about the report with anyone at the IGADF at that time.
did he seek to raise any further concerns by utilising
after the IGADF report was published.
chronology of these events as against the offences committed by the appellant is
significant. The Agreed Facts records that count
1 (theft) commenced in
May 2014. Count 2 (unlawfully communicating naval, military or air force
information), which was constituted
by the provision of documents to Mr Masters
and Mr Clark, likewise occurred in either late 2014 or early 2015. Count 3
(unlawfully
communicating naval, military or air force information), which was
constituted by the provision of documents to Mr Oakes, occurred
short, the appellant chose to take unilateral action to remove SECRET documents
from ADF headquarters, to store them insecurely
in his private home, and to
disclose SECRET information to journalists. The appellant undertook this action,
including disclosing
the documents to two journalists (Mr Masters and Mr Clark),
before the IGADF had produced its report and before the appellant knew
outcome of the IGADF Inquiry. The appellant did not make any complaint to, or
its report. Nor did he take any
other action after the IGADF Inquiry dismissed his complaints about the
over-investigation of war
crimes by the ADF. The appellant’s
communications with Mr Oakes occurred after Mr Oakes first made contact
with the appellant.
third contextual matter
concerns the effects of the appellant’s
conduct, which will be addressed further below. The Agreed Facts records that
Inquiry subsequently conducted by Major General Brereton was initiated
by the ADF more than 12 months before the ADF became aware
appellant’s disclosures. Apart from lawfully using the appellant’s
IGADF submission to identify lines of inquiry,
Major General Brereton did not
use any information from the appellant’s unlawful disclosures the subject
of the charges:
McBride (No 4)
at [192]. The appellant did not respond to
Major General Brereton’s emails inviting him to give evidence before the
(the appellant had no recollection of receiving the emails).
as the primary judge observed, whilst there is “no doubt that the subject
matter of The Afghan Files was a matter of
significant public interest... the
articles published by Mr Oakes were the exact opposite of what [the appellant]
had intended when
making the disclosures”:
McBride (No 4)
In those circumstances, the primary judge concluded that it was “not
appropriate to treat any raising of awareness
[of alleged war crimes] by reason
of Mr Oakes’ journalistic activities as being a matter reducing the
seriousness of [the appellant’s]
of the above contextual matters were the subject of concessions in the Agreed
Facts, and findings by the primary judge at first
instance. None of these
findings were the subject of challenge in this appeal.
Conviction appeal
explained in the proceedings below, the appellant contended that the
“official duty” in
Defence Act
“duty” in s 70 of the
of a member of the ADF
was, consistent with their oath of enlistment, to advance the Australian public
interest, and that this could
involve a disregard of lawful orders applying to
that member. The s 131.1(1)
Criminal Code
offence of theft, to which
the appellant pleaded guilty, is not directly impacted by the conviction appeal.
It is not referred to
in the primary judge’s reasons (and it is assumed
was not the subject of argument before the primary judge): see
McBride (No
part of that submission, the appellant contended that the scope of the
appellant’s duty, for the purposes of s 73A(1) and
s 70(1), was not
defined by duties imposed by the
Defence Force Discipline Act
Discipline Act
) including a “general order” pursuant
to s 29, Internal Defence Instructions (part of the definition of general
or any disciplinary code. On this basis, the appellant contended that
general orders only had effect for the purposes of discipline
Discipline Act.
We note the general orders relied on by the prosecution
to establish that the appellant’s conduct was not in the course of
official duty, and the duties said to arise therefrom, were summarised by the
primary judge in his reasons. It is unnecessary
for present purposes to repeat
that summary.
rejecting the appellant’s contention, the primary judge made the following
orders on 16 November 2023, to reflect his
conclusions:
1. Subject to any further order of the Court made during the trial:
(a) The directions to the jury will not include a direction that, by reason of
the oath taken by the accused under the
Defence (Personnel) Regulations
Defence Act 1903
(Cth), the duty of the
accused for the purposes of
Defence Act 1903
and s 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) extended to acting in the “public
interest” or “Australian public interest”, as determined by
even where that was in contravention of a lawful order that had been
given to the accused.
(b) The directions to the jury will be framed in a manner that recognises that a
lawful order contained in a “general order”
within the meaning of
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) may define the scope of the
duty of the accused under
Defence Act 1903
and s 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
Thereafter,
the appellant pleaded guilty to the three counts described above.
sole ground in the conviction appeal alleges that a “miscarriage of
justice arose because the appellant’s pleas of
guilty were entered in
consequence of the wrong decision of questions of law in orders 1(a) and/or 1(b)
R v McBride (No 2)
[2023] ACTSC 330
”. This ground relates to the
offence provision the subject of counts 2 and 3, namely
Defence Act
. However, we note that in reply, the appellant maintained the
same statutory construction for the meaning of “duty” in
respondent did not make any objection to the taking of an appeal against
conviction following the entry of the guilty pleas. The
appeal was conducted by
both parties on the basis that if legal error was established in the primary
judge’s decision concerning
the directions to be given to the jury, it
would follow that a miscarriage of justice would have been occasioned, requiring
the convictions
and sentences to be set aside: see similarly
Watson v The
Queen (No 2)
[2020] ACTCA 30
is helpful at the outset to recite the terms of the two offence provisions the
subject of the argument before the primary judge,
as at the relevant dates.
Defence Act
is as follows:
73A Unlawfully
giving or obtaining information as to defences
(1) A person who is a member of the Defence Force or a person appointed or
engaged under the
Public Service Act 1999
is guilty of an offence if:
(a) the person communicates to any other person any plan, document, or
information relating to any fort, battery, field work, fortification,
work, or to any defences of the Commonwealth, or to any factory, or air force
aerodrome or establishment or any other
naval, military or air force
information; and
(b) the communication is not in the course of the first-mentioned person’s
official duty.
70(1) of the
is as follows:
70 Disclosure of
information by Commonwealth officers
A person who, being a Commonwealth officer, publishes or communicates, except
to some person to whom he or she is authorized to publish
or communicate it, any
fact or document which comes to his or her knowledge, or into his or her
possession, by virtue of being a
Commonwealth officer, and which it is his or
her duty not to disclose, shall be guilty of an offence.
Consideration
appellant identified that before the primary judge he relevantly argued: (1)
that “official duty” is not defined in
Defence Act
for the purposes of
, “official duty” refers to the duty
arising from the oath taken on enlistment (and is not synonymous with duties
Discipline Act,
including compliance with lawful general
orders, or defence regulations); (3) that the promise in the oath to “well
serve Our Sovereign” should be understood as a duty to advance
the Australian public interest; and (4) whether or not a particular
action is in
the “public interest” and thereby in the course of a person’s
official duty, is a matter for a jury
to determine.
appellant has not alleged any error in the primary judge’s reasoning in
rejecting those propositions, rather he challenges
the primary judge’s
conclusion. By doing so, the appellant failed to properly grapple with the
reasons of the primary judge
or advance submissions directed as to why his
Honour was incorrect.
appellant’s submission is one of statutory construction, being the meaning
of the term “official duty” in
Defence Act
(and “duty” in s 70(1) of the
is timely to recall that the starting point for ascertaining the meaning of a
statutory provision is its text, having regard to
its context and purpose:
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
[1998] HCA 28
194 CLR 355
Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
said, although the appellant made submissions directed to the statutory
construction of s 73A, in practical terms, unless the
appellant establishes the
primary judge erred in concluding that the oath of enlistment does not require a
member of the ADF to act
in the “public interest” or
“Australian public interest”, even when in contravention of a lawful
order given
to that member, he cannot succeed on his appeal. It is therefore
appropriate to first consider that submission. That is because the
appellant’s contention that he has a duty to act in the public interest is
solely dependent on that duty arising from the terms
of his oath. That is the
only basis for a jury direction in the terms he sought. Although order 1(a) also
Defence Act
, that was not relied on in the appeal.
That is unsurprising given
is simply a provision which created the
obligation for “continuous full time military service” at the
relevant time,
as distinct from service in the Army Reserve, where the use of
the word “service” could not provide a foundation for
the duty the
appellant contends for:
Accordingly,
the appellant confined his submission, as to the source and content of the duty,
to the terms of the oath of enlistment.
That is, his submission is premised on
the proposition that by taking the oath of enlistment, as required by law to
become a member
of the ADF, that member has a duty to act to advance the
Australian public interest, as that member determines it to be, and to act
accordingly. That duty imposed on the member “to act in the Australian
public interest” is to be carried out even if
it involves disobeying
lawful orders, or legal obligations imposed on that member by the ADF. This,
according to the appellant, defines
his official duty as a member of the ADF. As
such, the appellant contended that a lawful general order within the meaning of
Discipline Act
does not define the scope of the duty in s 73A (or s
appellant therefore submitted, in relation to the s 73A(1) offence:
the jury would need to be directed [that] the Crown would need to establish
beyond reasonable doubt that the particular communication
was not reasonably
necessary in order to advance the Australian public interest and that the
Australian public interest would not
necessarily be determined by reference to
whether or not there was a lawful general order in place prohibiting the
communication.
the primary judge, the proposed direction was put as follows,
The jury must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that a communication could
not be regarded, given the existing circumstances,
as a carrying out of [the
accused’s] official duty to serve the public interest. That is, the Crown
must eliminate any reasonable
possibility that the communication could be
regarded, given the existing circumstances, as a carrying out of the
official duty to serve the public interest.
primary judge correctly rejected that proposition:
Honour recited the appellant’s submission detailing the history of the
oath, which is unnecessary to repeat here:
at [92] – [104].
The oath taken by the appellant was provided for in Schedule 2 to the
(Personnel) Amendment Regulations 2002
Defence Regulations
and was as follows:
I, (insert full name of person) swear that I will well and truly serve Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second, Her Heirs and Successors
according to law,
as a member of the (insert
Australian Navy, Australian Army,
Australian Air Force
) (insert for the period of (number of years), and any
extensions of that period or until retiring age,) and that I will resist her
enemies and faithfully discharge my duty according to law.
abovementioned oath is relevantly in the same terms as what the appellant
identified he took as a commissioned officer:
appellant’s submission was quoted by the primary judge at [98] to then
follow that:
The duty to “well and truly serve” the Sovereign [as arising from
the oath] should be understood, under the Australian
constitutional framework,
as a duty to advance the (Australian) public interest.
appellant’s submission finds no support in the terms of the oath. There is
no reference to a duty to act in or advance the
Australian public interest, and
if there was such a duty, it would be expected the terms of the oath would
expressly state so. As
discussed further below, this is particularly so given
the concept of military service and what that has historically entailed.
there is nothing in the terms of the oath that directs a
member’s attention to this being their duty, and that they have an
individual obligation to assess the acts they are taking (i.e. whether such acts
are in the public interest), instead of simply obeying
the lawful orders the
member is given. Again, if that is what is intended by the oath it would be
expected that it would clearly
and explicitly state so. Rather, the terms of the
oath are to the contrary. The oath, as recited above, requires a member of the
ADF to well and truly serve the Sovereign and that the member “will resist
her enemies and faithfully discharge [their] duty
according to law”. The
appellant’s submission has not adequately explained the meaning or
application of “according
to law”. Indeed, the appellant’s
written submissions (in chief and reply) do not refer to that aspect of the
meaning of that phrase is self-evident. The oath is underpinned by the
concept of service in line with the inherent nature of military
service, within
which, as identified below, compliance with orders is a central feature. That is
the plain meaning of its terms.
is important to recognise that the interpretation of the oath contended for by
the appellant, if correct, would hold for all purposes.
That is, the duty
imposed on members of the ADF which he says arises from the oath would not be
confined to the disclosure of confidential
information (being the offence the
subject of these proceedings) but would also extend to conduct of members in all
spheres of a
member’s military service, including on the battlefield.
appellant did not identify that the
Defence Regulations
or any other
defence legislation expressly gave the oath the effect for which he contended:
so far as the appellant seeks to rely on the ordinary meaning of
“service” as part of the oath to “well and truly
it does not assist him. The word must be considered in the context in which it
appears, a military context.
the primary judge observed at [114] – [115]:
Discipline Act
makes it clear that there is a duty to obey a
lawful command of a superior officer (s 27) or of a lawful “general
such as a Defence Instruction (s 28).
Defence Act
Discipline Act
exist against a
background which assumes the importance of a disciplined force that follows
lawful orders.
are many authorities which describe the nature of military service. Although the
Courts there were not considering the argument
advanced by the appellant in this
case, the general concept nonetheless informs the nature of military service and
reflects the content
of the oath for membership in the ADF.
example, in
Haskins v Commonwealth
[2011] HCA 28
French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ observed at
To permit the plaintiff to maintain an action against those who executed that
punishment (whether service police or the officer in
charge of the Corrective
Establishment) would be destructive of discipline. Obedience to lawful command
is at the heart of a disciplined
and effective defence force. To allow an action
for false imprisonment to be brought by one member of the services against
where that other was acting in obedience to orders of superior officers
implementing disciplinary decisions that, on their face,
were lawful orders
would be deeply disruptive of what is a necessary and defining characteristic of
the defence force. It would be
destructive of discipline because to hold that an
action lies would necessarily entail that a subordinate to whom an apparently
order was directed must either question and disobey the order, or take
the risk of incurring a personal liability in tort.
White v Director of Military Prosecutions
[2007] HCA 29
231 CLR 570
Gleeson CJ said at [19]:
An illustration of the problem of separating essentially disciplinary offences
from civil offences may be seen in the archetypal
disciplinary offence: mutiny.
The essence of mutiny lies in the combination to defy authority. The offence
strikes at the heart of
a disciplined, hierarchical service.
description was echoed by Gummow, Hayne and Crennan JJ, who later said at both
[52] and [61], that “the defining characteristic
of armed forces [is] as
disciplined forces organised hierarchically”.
the respondent correctly observed, the notion of service in this context does
not encompass simply doing what the soldier considers
to be in the public
interest, where
[t]hat would invert the relationship between the soldier and the sovereign.
Soldier A does not serve the sovereign by promising the
sovereign to do whatever
Soldier A thinks is in the public interest even if contrary to the lawful
general orders of the chain of
command over which the sovereign ultimately
presides. This is the very antithesis of service.
the appellant’s perspective, the high point of his submission in respect
to “service” was his reliance on a
passage from McTiernan J in
Commonwealth v Quince
[1944] HCA 1
at 250, in respect of a
member of the Royal Australian Air Force:
His enlistment was an engagement for public service: for the defence and
security of the community. As public service it was “for
benefit” or the “good of the public” and could not at common
law be the subject of a contract consisting
of mutual promises (
(Citation omitted)
appellant then referred to the passage in
Dunn v The Queen
[1895] UKLawRpKQB 205
(1896) 1 QB
at 118, where Lord Esher MR noted what he had said in
(unreported, Court of Appeal, 2 June 1885):
All service under the Crown itself is public service, and to my mind it is most
likely that the doctrine which is said to be confined
to military service
applies to all public service under the Crown, because all public service for
the Crown is for the public benefit.
those passages, the appellant submitted that the content of the
derives from the office, as was set out by McTiernan J in
by virtue of the office to act to serve the public. So we would say that that
overarching official duty is a duty to act for
the public benefit or, as it has
been framed on behalf of the appellant, in the Australian public interest, and
that is the answer
to the legal question which we say Mossop J was in error in
deciding to the contrary.
properly read, the comments by McTiernan J do not have the meaning or
consequence the appellant contended for. His Honour
does not suggest that it is
the member’s duty to act in the public interest, that the member is to
thereby act in that manner
as the member determines it, or that this duty
derives from the member’s oath of enlistment. Indeed, McTiernan J at 248
249, refers to the injured airman having enlisted in the Royal
Australian Air Force and having taken the oath of enlistment with
consequence that
[h]e thereby promised to serve the King in the Air Force for the duration of the
war and twelve months thereafter, to resist the
King's enemies and to cause his
peace to be maintained and in all matters appertaining to his service,
faithfully to discharge his
duty according to law. The airman was bound under
the regulations to serve according to the tenor of the oath.
Significantly,
the comments of McTiernan J at 250 are in the context of what he was examining
in that case, being the question of
whether a claim can be brought by the
Commonwealth against Quince who, through his negligence, caused injury to the
airman. His Honour
was explaining why there was no contract of service between
the Crown and a soldier.
the primary judge observed at [120]:
Neither that passage nor the case from which the references to “for the
public benefit” or “good of the public”
are drawn, support the
proposition that there was some independent entitlement arising from the
accused’s oath to disobey a
lawful order.
other member of the Court in
refers to the concept of service in
the manner relied on by the appellant, although most refer to the oath of
enlistment. To illustrate,
Latham CJ in dissent said at 234 that
“[t]he oath of enlistment imposes an obligation to render service”.
also said at 238:
The authorities in my opinion show that the action lies when one person has a
right to the services of another and can command that
person in the doing of
such services. The Commonwealth is entitled to the services of members of the
forces. They swear that they
will serve the King. Military service is service of
the highest order of obligation. The obligation is enforced by discipline under
the authority of military law. It is higher in degree than any contractual
obligation or any obligation founded upon family relationship.
It is, I think,
true that a member of the forces is not a servant of the Crown in such a sense
that the ordinary law of master and
servant determines the relations of the
parties. He may not be an officer or servant of the Crown within the meaning of
which imposes liability upon the Crown for the acts of its officers
and servants – as was held in
McArthur v. The King
. But the very
essence of his position is that he is bound to render service, to obey orders,
and, in my opinion, the history of this
form of action shows that in such cases
the action lies, even though the obligation is not based on contract.
(Citation omitted)
Williams J,
also in dissent, said the following at 255 and 257:
The oath is an oath to serve the King in person according to its tenor. Service
in the Air Force, as in the naval or military forces,
involves in its most
absolute form the right of a member superior in rank to give lawful orders to a
member inferior in rank, and
the obligation of the member inferior in rank to
obey those orders.
In essence the obligation is the same as the obligation of any servant to obey
the orders of his master. The difference is that a
breach of the obligation does
not give rise to an action for damages but to disciplinary punishment.
But, within this broad charter, an airman is bound, as I have said, to obey the
lawful orders which he receives from time to time
from a superior in rank.
primary judge surveyed other cases relied on, being:
Marks v Commonwealth
[1964] HCA 45
111 CLR 549
R v District Court of the Northern District of
Queensland; Ex parte Thompson
[1968] HCA 48
118 CLR 488
Commonwealth
[1982] HCA 21
150 CLR 113
X v Commonwealth
200 CLR 177
Private R v Cowen
[2020] HCA 31
271 CLR 316
Commonwealth v Carter
(1965) 7 FLR 223.
As his Honour commented, those
cases are of limited assistance where none of them involve a consideration of
the issue that arises
in this case. That said, as the primary judge concluded at
none of [the cases] recognise a duty of a military officer arising pursuant to
the oath taken, or otherwise, to act in the public
interest when that is in
direct contravention of a lawful order. On the contrary, the authorities
recognise that discipline within
the military is dependent upon the obligation
of members to comply with a lawful order. The absence of any reference to any
independent
aspect of a member-of-the-Defence-Force’s duty being to
disobey a lawful order in the “public interest” or “Australian
public interest” is because there is no textual, common law or historical
foundation for the existence of such a duty.
the respondent submitted, the history of military service is against the
appellant’s contention that a soldier’s official
duty is simply to
advance the public interest even when their conduct is inconsistent with lawful
general orders: see, e.g. Clode
The Military Forces of the Crown: Their
Administration and Government
(J Murray, 1869) at [110], [112] cited by
Callinan J in
at 233; Clode C M,
The Administration of Justice under
Military and Martial Law
(2nd ed, Murray, 1874) at 72 – 77, cited and
part quoted with approval by Williams J in
at 254 and cited
by Edelman J in
Private R v Cowen
at [193]; Dicey A V,
Introduction to the Study of the Law of the
Constitution
Macmillan, 1915) at 189, 191 – 192, 196 – 197;
Laws of England
(1st ed, Butterworth, 1913) vol 25 at [79], quoted by
Gummow, Hayne and Crennan JJ in
primary judge at [125] referred, inter alia, to Edelman J’s recitation of
a passage of Clode’s work in
Private R v Cowen
at [193], describing
it as particularly apt:
Obedience must be implicitly exacted by each responsible officer, “for
nothing (even in Civil affairs) can be more dangerous
than to allow the
obligations to obey a law to depend on the opinion entertained by individuals of
its propriety,” [
Fergusson v Earl of Kinnoul
9 Cl and Fin p 324]
and in military affairs it would be intolerable.
illustrated above, the concept of military service and what that has
historically entailed supports the plain reading of the oath
as reflected in the
reasons of the primary judge (and is inconsistent with the interpretation
contended for by the appellant).
appellant has not established any error in the primary judge’s conclusion
that the oath does not give rise to the duty contended
for. As a result, the
appellant has not established there is any error in the primary judge’s
rejection of the jury direction
in the terms he sought.
Nonetheless,
it is appropriate to make the following observations which arise from the
appellant’s submissions.
there is no reference to public interest in s 73A (or
provisions were intended to depend only upon the concept of acting in the public
interest, then Parliament would simply
have said so. The expression
“public interest” is extremely familiar to parliamentary
draftspersons.
the appellant’s submission is dependent on the phrase “official
duty” in s 73A. That is, it is said the phrase
signifies that the duty
comes from the person’s office, which in this case, is said to be derived
from the oath of enlistment.
Despite that, the appellant does not properly
grapple with how this reasoning applies to
, which does not contain the same
terminology (i.e. the absence of the word “official”). Rather, the
submission is that
the construction contended for in
would be consistent
with that in respect to s 73A, given the similarity of the provisions,
albeit using different wording, referring
Harrison v Melhem
72 NSWLR 380
. However, the paragraph relied on from
Harrison v Melhem
simply refers to the principle of statutory
interpretation supporting the presumption that a legislature intends to attach
meaning to the same words when used in a subsequent statute in a
similar connection: at [131]. That is not the situation in this
appellant’s submission involves reading a word into
submission based on the meaning of “official duty” could not apply
we note the appellant submitted that s 73A and
refer to there being a
singular duty of office to be identified; that is one duty only, not duties
plural. The reasons of the primary
which describe the
submissions advanced by the appellant (and which are not criticised in this
regard) make no reference to such
an argument: see at [41] – [47]. In any
event, the use of singular language encompasses the plural:
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth). There is no indication in s 73A or s
70 to the contrary (and none were submitted by the appellant).
although the appellant accepted that there is a duty to obey lawful general
orders, he submitted that disobedience to this duty
results in a service offence
justiciable only within the military justice system. As the respondent
The result, on this argument, is that a duty to obey lawful general orders does
not form part of the official duty of a member of
the Defence Force, albeit it
is a critical component of what is required of them within the system of
military discipline.
is no logical basis for confining a breach of general orders to the military
justice system. The existence of
Defence Act
recognises the
possibility that breaches of such orders could be outside the realm of military
justice, and that disciplinary action
may be insufficient. The criminal offence
requires different elements and carries with it a greater sentence. There is no
in principle why a duty which can result in disciplinary action for
breach cannot also inform the extent of a person’s official
duty for the
purposes of a criminal offence provision. As the respondent submitted, the fact
that a particular duty is central to
military discipline might be thought to
provide a substantial reason as to why it would form part of the person’s
the appellant’s reliance on s 190(1) of the
Discipline Act
provides that “a civil court does not have jurisdiction to try a charge of
a service offence,” is misplaced. That
was said by the appellant to
reflect a clear legislative intention to capture and retain within the system of
military discipline
matters which (while capable of being civil criminal law
offences if committed by members of the armed forces on service territory)
to be dealt with only as disciplinary matters. He submitted that a breach of
lawful general orders under the
Discipline Act
cannot be sufficient for
criminal offences because it would mean the failure to follow a lawful general
order would then “simultaneously
and automatically” result in a
criminal consequence. In this case that was submitted to mean that a breach of a
service offence
(i.e. a duty to follow general orders) would automatically give
rise to a contravention of
Defence Act
. That submission
is misconceived. The offence of failing to comply with a lawful general order in
s 29 of the
Discipline Act
is strict liability, whereas the criminal
offence in s 73A(1), as explained below, contains fault elements. In any event,
not a service offence. Just because civil courts cannot charge a
service offence, does not mean that any breaches of general orders
result in a service offence) cannot assist in defining the scope of a
member’s duty for the purposes of s 73A (and
this context, the appellant also relied on a series of cases involving police
officers, submitting his construction of “official
consistent with previous decisions relating to the duty of members of the police
force, citing:
Enever v The King
[1906] HCA 3
Attorney-General (NSW) v Perpetual Trustee Co (Ltd)
[1952] HCA 2
Pense v Hemy
[1973] WAR 40
DPP (Vic) v Zierk
[2008] VSC 184
184 A Crim R 582
Tasmania v Johnston
[2009] TASSC 60
18 Tas R 195.
submitted that these decisions confirm the distinction between a “duty of
office” and legal or disciplinary duties
imposed upon office holders, and
thereby supports the proposition that the courts should be slow to hold that any
such disciplinary
duties give rise to a duty, a breach of which would amount to
a criminal offence.
primary judge surveyed the relevant cases at [61] – [88]. Again, the
appellant did not identify any error in his Honour’s
reasons in this
regard. Rather, he merely asserts that the primary judge distinguished those
authorities on the basis that “[t]hey
related to a disciplined force but
not to a military force in which discipline is of central importance”:
at [91]. Although that is an aspect of the primary judge’s
reasoning, it is not complete. To put that statement in context,
his Honour said
when considering the effect of the
Discipline Act
at [89] – [91]:
[89] The rules of conduct in the
Discipline Act
are, self-evidently,
contained in an Act of Parliament. They are not obligations arising from
subordinate instruments. In the case
of s 29, the statute gives statutory
effect to subordinate instruments.
[90] The fact that the rules in the
Discipline Act
are not directly
enforceable in the civilian courts is significant. However, it does not mean
that the rules may be ignored when
assessing the content of a member’s
duty for the purposes of either the
Defence Act
They remain statutory rules of conduct which define the duty of a member. There
is no adequate reason why those rules of conduct
may not be picked up by other
statutes as elements of a member’s duty. To treat them as establishing a
completely separate
regime which could not be used to define the scope of a
member’s duty would result in the anomalous situation where factual
issues, such as where a member was posted and the task that the member was given
to perform, would be able to be considered when
determining the scope of the
member’s duty, but all of the statutorily mandated constraints upon the
exercise of those functions
would be ignored.
[91] I do not consider that the police cases require a different conclusion.
Each turned on the specific statutory provisions in
question. They related to a
disciplined force but not to a military force in which discipline is of central
importance. The existence
of an established body of common law defining the
functions of police officers provided a more secure foundation for an argument
that the scope of the officer’s duty could be found other than in the
specific disciplinary rules in question. In contrast,
on the accused’s
argument, the content of the duty would be contained principally in
Defence Act
and the oath that was required by the relevant regulation at
the time of the accused’s enlistment. The terms of
are set out later
in these reasons (see [98]). Even if they had the effect contended for by the
accused, they would not provide any
adequate definition of the duty of the
accused. As will be described shortly, the terms of
do not provide a
general duty to act “in the Australian public interest”, even if
that involves disobedience to orders
or instructions. The consequence is that
unless the rules provided by the
Discipline Act
are available to provide
content to the duty of the accused, the law will provide very little content.
Anomalously, the duty of the
accused would be defined by factual matters such as
postings or instructions deprived of the legal content which, in reality,
the nature of his service at the relevant times.
appellant’s submission fails to grapple with the fact there is a statutory
command to comply with lawful general orders
in s 29 of the
, whereas there was no statutory command to comply considered in any of
the decisions of
instead concern codes of conduct or standing orders). Similarly, although both
the military and police are disciplinary
forces, as explained in the cases
referred to above regarding the nature of military service, there is a
centrality of obedience
to orders in the defence force.
authorities are properly distinguishable.
the appellant also submitted that because the offence in
is not confined to members of the ADF, but also applies to persons
appointed or engaged under the
Public Service Act 1999
are not subject to the
Discipline Act
), the content of their
“official duty” must derive from a different source as they do not
all have a duty to obey lawful
general orders. So much can be accepted. However,
as the respondent submitted, “there is no reason why the official duties
of members of the Defence Force must be the same as the official duties of those
appointed under the
Public Service Act
”. The former may be obliged
to follow orders as part of their office in, or membership of, the ADF which may
be different to
the official duty of those employed under the
Public Service
. That does not reflect any inconsistency or lead to a conclusion that
compliance with general orders cannot be part of the official
duty of members of
the appellant’s written submission did not address the practical
application of the direction he sought, including on the conduct
of any trial.
To address that, it is helpful to identify the elements of the offence.
relation to an offence contrary to
Defence Act
prosecution must prove that a person (a member of the ADF or a person appointed
or engaged under the
Public Service Act
(a) communicates to any other person any plan, document, or information relating
to any fort, battery, field work, fortification,
or defence work, or to any
defences of the Commonwealth, or to any factory, or air force aerodrome or
establishment or any other
naval, military or air force information (physical
element – conduct; fault element – intention);
(b) the communication is not in the course of that person’s official duty
(physical element – circumstance; fault element
– recklessness).
establish its case, the prosecution must prove for the element of circumstance,
that “the communication is not in the course
of the person’s
official duty”, which the appellant contended means proving that the
particular communication was not
reasonably necessary in order to advance the
Australian public interest. The jury direction sought for this element (recited
at [51]), contains concepts (e.g. “Australian public interest”
and “reasonably necessary”) not in the offence
the hearing, the appellant accepted that this direction would effectively
require the prosecution in a case (where it is based
on documents being
communicated) to tender every document and leave the jury to assess each
document to determine whether they are
satisfied the communication was not
reasonably necessary to advance the Australian public interest. To do so would
likely require
the prosecution having to lead classified evidence on matters of
military and national security issues (including, but not limited
documents themselves). On the appellant’s submission, this direction is
required in each case where this offence is
charged, regardless of the motive of
the accused, as the prosecution must establish its case. It must be able to do
so even when
an accused has not made any statement to the authorities (or
revealed their motive). To suggest, as the appellant does, that an
interpretation
which has these consequences is consistent with
Parliament’s intention in relation to s 73A(1) (or s 70(1)), is without
proper foundation. It is inherently unlikely.
note also that the appellant had difficulty in articulating the application of
his contended jury direction. In explaining the
direction, he submitted that
where a person is possessed of a belief that there is, for example, wrongdoing
being committed by the Australian Defence Force, it
would be a matter for the
jury to determine whether or not [the communication is advancing the public
as explained above, that direction would be required in each case irrespective
of whether a motive is apparent. As the submission
reflects, although the
appellant disavowed that a person’s subjective motive was relevant to
assessing reasonableness (affecting
the scope of the evidence to be led by the
prosecution), during the hearing, his submission repeatedly changed. He often
to referring to the subjective intention when explaining the direction.
This reflects the artificial nature of the appellant’s
submission, with
which he never properly grappled. Further, it is to be recalled that the
appellant submitted the same direction
applies to both offence provisions, yet
the terms of the provisions and therefore the elements of the offences, are
different. The
element of circumstance in s 70 is that a person has a duty
to disclose (to be contrasted with the appellant’s case for
“official duty” in s 73A which refers to a positive
duty to advance
the Australian public interest).
appellant has not established error in the primary judge’s conclusion in
order 1(a) of
McBride (No 2)
that the oath of enlistment taken by the
appellant does not define the duty of the appellant for the purposes of
Defence Act
and s 70 of the
as extending to acting
in the Australian public interest, even where in contravention of a lawful
order. Nor has he established error
in the primary judge’s conclusion in
order 1(b) of
McBride (No 2)
that a lawful order contained in a
“general order”, within the meaning of the
Discipline Act
may define the scope of the duty of the accused under
Defence Act
and s 70 of the
. To put it another way
relevant to this case, a communication of the type referred to in s 73A or s 70
may not be in the course of
a person’s “official duty” if that
person was under a duty (which arises from, inter alia, general orders) not
make that communication.
Accordingly,
the appeal against conviction is dismissed.
The sentence appeal
The grounds of appeal against sentence
limited. As this Court observed in
Allred v The Queen
[2015] ACTCA 21
, the High Court’s decision in
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
identifies only two bases upon which an appellate court may set aside
a sentence imposed at first instance:
One is where there is specific error, such as taking into account irrelevant
considerations, failing to take into account relevant
considerations, mistaking
the facts or acting on a wrong principle. The other is where the court cannot
identify such a specific
error but the sentence is what is now called manifestly
excessive or inadequate and the court may infer that there has been an error
such that the discretion has not been properly exercised.
the present appeal, the appellant did not contend that the sentence imposed upon
him was manifestly excessive. Accordingly, the
appellant must demonstrate that
there was specific error in the sentence imposed.
appellant relies on the following six grounds in support of his appeal against
the severity of his sentence:
(a) The primary judge erred in failing to take into account that the appellant
was motivated to remedy what he perceived to be an
injustice occurring in the
Australian Defence Force (Ground 2);
(b) The primary judge erred in failing to find that the appellant honestly
believed, at the time of engaging in the offending conduct,
that he was not
committing offences against the criminal law (Ground 3);
(c) The primary judge erred in holding that the appellant’s “mental
health condition” contributed only in a minor
way to his offending conduct
and did not have any “significant consequence for the suitability of his
sentence as a vehicle
for general deterrence” (Ground 4);
(d) The primary judge erred in finding that “the offender’s
culpability for the offending having regard to the circumstances
(Ground 5);
(e) The primary judge erred in finding that the “level of harm done to the
community is significant” (Ground 6); and
(f) The primary judge erred in failing to consider the intensive correction
assessment when deciding whether to make an intensive
correction order for the
appellant, as required by
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT) (Ground 7).
of these grounds are addressed below.
Second ground
of appeal: Whether the sentencing judge erred in failing to take into account
that the appellant was motivated to remedy
what he perceived to be an injustice
occurring in the Australian Defence Force
second ground of appeal relates to the following finding by the primary judge
(at [167] – [168]):
[The appellant’s] motivation was therefore to remedy what he perceived to
be an injustice occurring within the ADF, even if
it involved him committing
very serious criminal offences. It is clear that he did not commit the offences
in order to achieve any
financial gain for himself or in order to assist
Australia’s adversaries. Rather, the offending was motivated by his
that there was an injustice occurring to individuals and to the
institution of the Army because of political pressures upon its senior
management. Characterising the conduct as “honourable” is apt to
mislead, unless that word is simply used to indicate
that there were not base
motivations of financial gain or other personal advantage or a desire to assist
Australia’s adversaries.
It is therefore more appropriate to simply identify that the offending was not
motivated by financial gain, personal advantage or
a desire to assist
Australia’s adversaries. It may be accepted that the conduct reflected
strongly held beliefs on his part.
As I have indicated, no attempt was made to
establish the correctness of those beliefs in these proceedings or to undermine
the validity
of the conclusions reached by the IGADF as a result of the inquiry
arising from the IGADF Submission. Insofar as counsel submitted
appellant] was of the view that “the IGADF was biased and controlled by
the Chief of the Defence Force”, there
was no attempt to establish that
this was true or was a reasonable belief. To the extent that [the appellant]
held that belief, it
is only of relevance insofar as it precludes more
reprehensible motivations such as a desire to assist foreign powers. (emphasis
counsel for the appellant contended that the primary judge erred in taking into
account the appellant’s motivations “only
insofar as they meant that
he did not act out of ‘base motivations’”. In this respect,
the appellant’s senior
counsel noted the well-established line of
authority that motivation may be relevant to the objective seriousness of an
R v Tepania
[2018] NSWCCA 247
275 A Crim R 233
Elmir v The Queen
[2021] NSWCCA 19
357 FLR 274
[2001] HCA 67
Marks v The Queen
[2019] VSCA
280 A Crim R 23
as the respondent pointed out, the difficulty with the appellant’s
submission is that it is predicated on the primary
judge having failed to
consider the appellant’s motivation when assessing the objective
seriousness of the offending at all.
This is not the correct construction of the
primary judge’s reasons. It is clear from the passage extracted above that
primary judge properly accepted that the appellant’s motivation
relevant to an objective assessment of the offending; his Honour
simply determined that the appellant’s motivation was not
one, in all of
the circumstances, that should operate to mitigate the sentence.
essence, the appellant’s complaint is that the primary judge did not place
more weight on the fact that the appellant honestly
believed that he was
remedying a perceived injustice. This submission must be rejected. It is a firm
principle that matters of weight
are “very much matters for
the sentencing judge”:
[2023] ACTCA 18
Carr v The Queen
[2020] NSWCCA 214
is also important to bear in mind the observations made at the outset of this
judgment when assessing the appellant’s contentions
under this ground of
appeal. As outlined above, the injustice which the appellant was motivated to
remedy was not that Australian
soldiers were failing to be held to account for
war crimes. Rather, the appellant’s concern was that Australian soldiers
being over-investigated for such crimes. It is difficult to see why an
honest belief that Australian soldiers were being over-investigated
by the chain
of command mitigated the appellant’s conduct, particularly where the
appellant decided to breach his duties of
confidentiality
IGADF Inquiry which he had initiated had made any findings. In these
circumstances, the primary judge was correct to find that
the appellant’s
motivation was only relevant insofar as it did not operate as an aggravating
factor on sentence.
ground of appeal should be dismissed.
Third ground
of appeal: Whether the sentencing judge erred in failing to find that the
appellant honestly believed, at the time of
engaging in the offending conduct,
that he was not committing offences against the criminal
the primary judge accepted that the appellant honestly believed that he was
acting to remedy the injustice described above,
the primary judge did not accept
that the appellant honestly believed that he was not committing offences against
the criminal law
at the time that he engaged in the offences.
his judgment, the primary judge set out various statements in the
appellant’s interview in which the appellant claimed that
he honestly
believed that he was not committing criminal offences:
McBride (No 4)
[170] – [176]. However, the primary judge did not accept that these
passages demonstrated that the appellant genuinely believed
that he was not
committing a crime:
McBride (No 4)
at [179]. At [183], the primary judge
Even taking into account the decline of [the appellant’s] mental state
following his return from Afghanistan, I do not accept
that he held a belief
that what he was doing was not a criminal offence. He was not such a bad lawyer
as to have genuinely reached
a legal conclusion along the lines expressed in his
interview. Rather, he had a hope at the time that his actions would ultimately
be vindicated in some way other than by being found to be legally correct.
appellant’s third ground of appeal relates to this finding.
appellant’s senior counsel pointed out that the appellant maintained pleas
of not guilty up until the time that the primary
judge rejected the defence he
intended to rely on in
McBride (No 2)
. He contended that in these
circumstances, the primary judge should have found that the appellant had an
honest belief that he was
not committing criminal offences when he took the
confidential materials to his home, or when he disclosed confidential
information
to the journalists.
conclusion that a legal argument lacks merit does not necessarily carry with it
an imputation that the belief was not honestly held.
With respect, we would not
adopt the primary judge’s statement that the appellant “was not such
a bad lawyer as to have
genuinely reached a legal conclusion along the lines
expressed in his interview”. However, error is not established whenever
the appellate court disagrees with an aspect of a sentencing judge’s
reasons. As senior counsel for the appellant properly
acknowledged, it is
necessary for the appellant to demonstrate that any error was material to the
sentence imposed:
Kentwell v The Queen
[2014] HCA 37
252 CLR 601
onus was on the appellant to demonstrate that he held an honest belief in the
lawfulness of his actions on the balance of probabilities.
A mere hope that
one’s action is lawful falls short of a positive belief in the lawfulness
of that action and does not establish
the matter to the necessary standard: see
DPP v Coory
[2011] VSCA 316
214 A Crim R 301.
evidence in the present case fell far short of demonstrating that the appellant
honestly believed in the lawfulness of his actions.
In the Agreed Facts, the
appellant accepted that he was aware that “ADF instructions
force of law
prohibited the provision of the documents to [Masters, Clarke
and Oakes]” (emphasis added). Further, when the appellant gave
documents to Mr Clark, he said “look, I don’t really want to go to
jail, obviously, but I’m prepared to be
named if you need to”.
Importantly, on 22 September 2017, following the execution of the search
warrant, the appellant moved
to Spain with no immediate intention to return to
Australia. In his interview with police, the appellant explained that he was
from the Christopher Skase case that extradition from Spain would prove
difficult and he “didn’t really want to go to
proper inference to be drawn from all of the appellant’s conduct is that
the appellant hoped that his conduct
was lawful, but that he did not positively
believe that to be so.
Accordingly,
whilst we do not adopt the reasoning of the primary judge in respect of the
relevance of the appellant’s legal
prowess, there is no material error in
the primary judge’s conclusion that the appellant’s belief in the
lawfulness of
his actions was not of a nature that justified any mitigation of
the sentence to be imposed.
contention under third ground of appeal: Whether a greater discount for plea of
guilty should have been afforded
the third ground of appeal, the appellant also contended that the primary judge
should have afforded the appellant a larger
discount in recognition of his pleas
provides that where an offender pleads guilty
to an offence, the sentencing court must consider the fact of the plea of
guilty, the
timing of the plea and the degree to which that fact and the timing
of the plea resulted in any benefit to the community; or any
victim of, or
witness to the offence. These are utilitarian considerations which are concerned
with the practical benefit that is
actually occasioned as a result of an
offender’s guilty plea:
Bae v The Queen
[2020] NSWCCA 35
appellant pleaded guilty on the fifth day of pre-trial argument of a trial that
was listed for a jury trial with an estimated
length of three weeks. The
appellant did not put the Court, or the prosecution, on notice that he was
intending to plead guilty if
his legal contentions addressed in the pre-trial
ruling were unsuccessful. The lateness of the plea would therefore also have
significant inconvenience and cost to the prosecution and its
witnesses, who were required to prepare for a trial that did not eventuate.
primary judge afforded the appellant a 10 percent discount for his guilty pleas.
This utilitarian discount was generous in the
circumstances.
ground of appeal should be dismissed.
Fourth ground
of appeal: The sentencing judge erred in holding that the appellant’s
‘mental health condition’ contributed
only in a minor way to his
offending conduct and did not have any ‘significant consequence for the
suitability of his sentence
as a vehicle for general deterrence’
Relevant principles
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
; 16 VR 269, the Victorian Court of Appeal
held that an offender’s impaired mental functioning may affect the
determination
of the sentence to be imposed in the following ways:
(i) First, the condition “may reduce the moral culpability of the
offending conduct, as distinct from the offender’s
responsibility”. The Court explained that where an offender’s moral
culpability is reduced, “the condition
affects the punishment that is just
in all the circumstances; and denunciation is less likely to be a relevant
sentencing objective”:
at [32(1)].
(ii) Second, the condition may be relevant to an assessment of the weight to be
given to general deterrence. The Victorian Court
of Appeal emphasised that
“[w]hether general deterrence should be moderated or eliminated as a
sentencing consideration depends
upon the nature and severity of the symptoms
exhibited by the offender, and the effect of the condition on the mental
capacity of
the offender, whether at the time of the offending or at the date of
sentence or both”:
at [32(3)].
(iii) Third, the condition may be relevant to an assessment of the weight to be
given to specific deterrence. Again, the Court emphasised
that “[w]hether
specific deterrence should be moderated or eliminated as a sentencing
consideration likewise depends upon the
nature and severity of the symptoms of
the condition as exhibited by the offender, and the effect of the condition on
capacity of the offender, whether at the time of the offending or at
the date of the sentence or both”:
at [32(4)].
(iv) Fourth, “the existence of the condition at the date of sentencing (or
its foreseeable recurrence) may mean that a given
sentence will weigh more
heavily on the offender than it would on a person in normal health”. In
such circumstances, the weight
to be given to punishment, denunciation, general
and/or specific deterrence may be moderated:
at [32(5)].
a result of the above, the Victorian Court of Appeal held that an
offender’s mental condition “may have a bearing on
the kind of
sentence that is imposed and the conditions in which it should be served”:
at [32(2)]. Further, the Court observed that where there is a
“serious risk of imprisonment having a significant adverse effect
offender’s mental health, this will be a factor tending to mitigate
punishment”:
at [32(6)].
principles were applied by the High Court in
[2020] HCA 8
and [46], and have been followed in many Australian
Monfries v The Queen
[2014] ACTCA
19 ACTLR 99
respect of point (i) above, there are some suggestions in the authorities that
there will be no reduction in an offender’s
moral culpability unless there
is a “direct causative link” between the offender’s mental
impairment and the offending:
see, for example,
Bowen v The Queen
[2011] VSCA 67
. However, more recent authorities are not so rigid,
and have held that an offender’s mental impairment may reduce a
moral culpability where the offender’s mental impairment
has made a “material contribution” to the offending, or
other “realistic connection” to the offending:
Moiler v The Queen
[2021] NSWCCA 73
Crane v The King
[2024] NSWCCA 87
Hu v The King
[2025] VSCA 60
agree with these more recent authorities. The causes of human behaviour are
complex and multilayered: see similarly
DPP v Herrmann
[2021] VSCA 160
290 A Crim R 110
. The sentencing task should not be approached in
“an unduly technical or restrictive way”, which disregards the
of human behaviour:
at [70]. For this reason,
“[w]here the mental illness or impairment explains or sheds light on the
offending conduct in some
material way, an offender’s moral culpability
may be reduced, and the weight afforded to denunciation and deterrence may be
it must also be borne in mind that a finding of reduced moral culpability does
not necessarily require the weight to be given
to general or specific deterrence
to be reduced or eliminated:
at [65]. It is “erroneous in
principle to approach the law of sentencing as though automatic consequences
follow from the presence
or absence of particular factual circumstances”:
(1995) 84 A Crim R 67
at [68], quoted in
Munda v Western
[2013] HCA 38
249 CLR 600
. Each case will depend upon its
own facts. As Nettle JA (as his Honour then was) observed in
[2007] VSCA 119
; 16 VR 349 at
, “[t]he theory and reality upon
which the intuitive synthesis approach to sentencing is built is that each case
is unique”.
explained by the Victorian Court of Appeal in
, whether the weight
to be given to general and/or specific deterrence should be moderated depends
upon the nature and severity of
the symptoms exhibited by the offender, and the
effect of the condition on the mental capacity of the offender: see also
at [65]. Of particular relevance to this assessment will be whether the
mental condition affected the offender’s capacity to
understand the
wrongfulness of their conduct:
at [65]. Where an offender’s
mental illness is such that the offender is not an appropriate medium for making
an example to
others, the weight to be given to general deterrence may be
reduced, potentially significantly so: see similarly
at [62], citing
(Full Court of Supreme Court of Victoria, unreported, 21 June
R v Anderson
[1981] VicRp 17
[1981] VR 155.
Application
evidence before the primary judge included two psychological reports of Mr Sam
Borenstein, psychologist, dated 31 January 2024
and 23 February 2014,
respectively.
the first report, Mr Borenstein concluded:
During the offending period, Mr McBride was suffering with symptoms of Major
Depressive Disorder and combined Alcohol and Substance
Use Disorders and Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder.
Mr McBride has consulted psychiatrists and psychologists who have confirmed the
Mr McBride was medically discharged from the Australian Defence Force, diagnosed
to be suffering Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD),
Major Depressive Disorder
and Alcohol and Substance Use Disorders, currently in sustained remission.
Medical records confirmed Mr McBride struggled with a deterioration in his
mental health, which was the case during the offending
Mr McBride places significant emphasis on honesty and adherence to morals and
ethics which dates to his boarding school days, (primary
and high school), and
his training as a solicitor and barrister. Mr McBride’s sensitivity to
diversions from moral or ethical
values was strengthen [sic] when his father was
subjected to considerable humiliation and disgrace in the medical profession for
committing scientific fraud. Mr McBride’s relationship with his father
improved when his father accepted Mr McBride’s
advice to admit to
“lies and dishonesty” so he could be reinstated medical practitioner
prior to his death.
In summary, Mr McBride’s sensitivity to diversions from moral and ethical
standards made him vulnerable to developing symptoms
of Major Depressive
Disorder and PTSD against which he relied on alcohol and prescriptive medication
(dexamphetamine), as a form
of self medication, which was the case prior to and
during the offending period.
Mr McBride’s current presentation is improved because he pursues daily
exercise, and he attends daily AA meetings, and he is
engaged in combined
psychiatric and psychological treatments.
Mr McBride’s symptoms could worsen, particularly as he faces the real
prospect of a custodial sentence.
Borenstein confirmed these opinions in his second report, in which he stated:
You are in receipt of my report on the above named dated 31 January 2024, in
which I opined Mr McBride was suffering with symptoms
of Major Depressive
Disorder, Alcohol and Substance Use Disorders, and Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder during the offending period.
Mr McBride has also been diagnosed with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD), which together with Major Depressive Disorder
(MDD), Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder (PTSD), and maladaptive coping mechanisms, ie Alcohol and
Substance Use Disorders, represents
a mental health impairment, and responsible
for temporary or ongoing disturbance of thought, mood, volition, perception and
regarded as significant for clinical diagnostic purposes and the level
of disturbance would, in my opinion, impair Mr McBride’s
wellbeing, judgment and behavioural choices.
I further expressed the opinion Mr McBride places “significant emphasis on
honesty and adherence to morals and ethics”.
As mentioned in report [sic] dated 31 January 2024 (Page 3/Paragraph 5), Mr
McBride witnessed the atrocities of war and “people
I was close to were
killed. I was feeling helpless and hopeless, and the local population were being
killed unnecessarily. I witnessed
vehicle and helicopter crashes, and as a legal
officer, I had to investigate them. These were people who died and had the same
the same age as my children at the time”. I commented making
personal connections increases the impact and compounded Mr McBride’s
moral and ethical obligations, which dates to his boarding school days, and
training as a solicitor and barrister. Mr McBride’s
moral and ethical
values were further strengthened when his father was subjected to considerable
humiliation and disgrace in the
medical profession for committing scientific
Mr McBride’s emphasis on honesty and adherence to morals and ethics is, in
my opinion, far greater than the standards of ordinary
Finally, Mr McBride’s symptoms would worsen if subject to a custodial
sentence, and likely worsen, possibly requiring intensive
psychiatric and
psychological treatment, and inpatient care.
as the primary judge observed (at [186]), the appellant did not himself
attribute his offending to his mental illnesses.
In his interview with the
Intensive Correction Order Assessment Report (ICOAR) author, the appellant
“denied that alcohol or
his mental health played a role in his decision to
offend” and stated that he “still believed he made the correct
The appellant also told the ICOAR author that in his view, his
“PTSD was, in part, caused
the offences” (emphasis added),
rather than the offending having resulted from the appellant’s PTSD.
primary judge accepted Mr Borenstein’s opinion that the appellant
suffered from symptoms of Major Depressive Disorder, combined
with Alcohol and
Substance Use Disorders and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder during the offending
McBride (No 4)
at [187]. However, his Honour was unable to
determine whether it was the appellant’s “underlying personality or
his declining
mental health” which caused the appellant to become
“obsessed with the conduct of senior management of the ADF”:
McBride (No 4)
at [187]. His Honour concluded that the appellant was to
be sentenced on the basis that the appellant’s “mental health
condition made a material, if only minor, contribution to his offending
conduct”, and that the appellant’s mental health
did not “have
any significant consequence for the suitability of his sentence as a vehicle for
general deterrence or the need
for specific deterrence”:
McBride (No 4)
appellant submitted that his Honour erred in so finding. In particular, the
appellant’s senior counsel contended that the
appellant’s
“‘underlying personality’ may be understood as a ‘mental
health condition’ which
affected his assessment of his ‘duty’
in respect of what he perceived as injustice within the ADF”. The
appellant’s
senior counsel further submitted that “whether the cause
of the appellant’s ‘obsession’ was his underlying
personality,
his mental disorders, or a combination of the two, his [moral] culpability was
diminished”, such that the need
for general deterrence should have been
the present case, there is no suggestion that the offender suffered from a
recognised Personality Disorder. We are not aware of
any authority which holds
that an offender’s moral culpability may be reduced where the
offender’s ‘underlying
personality’ (which does not amount to
a Personality Disorder) contributed to the offending: cf
Brown v The
[2020] VSCA 212
; 62 VR 491 at
R v Waters; Ex parte DPP
[2023] QCA 131
. An offender’s personality (for example,
an offender’s level of impulsivity, risk taking, social attitudes, lack of
self-control)
will often contribute to their offending. An offender is not less
morally blameworthy simply because their personality traits were
a factor in a
decision to engage in criminal conduct.
nothing turns on this distinction in the present case. The appellant has been
diagnosed as suffering from, amongst other
illnesses, PTSD and Major Depressive
Disorder. These diagnoses, which were unchallenged by the prosecution, arose at
least in part
out of the appellant’s defence service and were operative
during the offending period. As outlined above, it is well-established
mental impairments may be relevant to an assessment of the offender’s
moral culpability, and to the weight to be
given to the sentencing purposes of
denunciation, punishment, general and specific deterrence.
the present case, there was a clear connection between these disorders and the
offending conduct. As Mr Borenstein stated, the
appellant’s disorders
were responsible for ongoing disturbances in,
appellant’s thoughts and perception. Further, as Mr Borenstein also
stated, these disturbances “would have impaired
[the appellant’s]
emotional wellbeing, judgment and behavioural choices”. In this respect,
it may also be observed that
in correspondence directing the appellant to take
down the Ops Room Website upon first becoming aware of its existence, ADF Legal
Services identified the “need to support [the appellant in his] current
state of health”.
matters not that the appellant did not himself attribute his offending conduct
to his mental illnesses. The fact that an offender
does not have insight into
the effects of his or her mental condition does not preclude a finding that the
offending was contributed
to by an offender’s mental condition. It should
be borne in mind that the nature of conditions such as PTSD and Major Depression
may present a significant barrier to such insight.
noted above, the primary judge accepted Mr Borenstein’s opinions. The
primary judge also accepted that the appellant’s
mental health condition
had made a material contribution to the offending conduct. Nonetheless, his
Honour concluded that this contribution
was not such as to result in a
significant reduction in the weight to be given to general or specific
deterrence.
was open to the primary judge to conclude that the need for general and specific
deterrence remained high, despite the reduction
in the offender’s moral
culpability arising from his mental illnesses. As outlined at [128] –
[129] above, it is not
the case that a finding of reduced moral culpability must
necessarily result in a reduction to the weight to be given to general
specific deterrence.
the reasons outlined at [110] – [117] above, we have concluded that the
appellant was aware that he was acting illegally
(although he hoped that he may
have had a lawful defence). The appellant’s mental illnesses were not such
as to require a finding
that the appellant was not an appropriate medium for
making an example to others. As the primary judge observed (at [231]):
Notwithstanding the availability of other legitimate means by which [the
appellant] could raise his concerns, he decided that he
knew best and that he
should disregard his legal obligations in order to pursue his own view of how
the ADF should be managed. It
is very important to deter others from such
conduct. Self-confident people with strong opinions who are subject to legal
to disclosure information must be deterred from making disclosures in
order to advance their own opinions. They must know that breaching
their legal
obligations to maintain the confidentiality which they have undertaken to
protect will be met by significant punishment.
That is particularly so when that
information is secret and its disclosure has the potential to harm
Australia’s national security.
was similarly open to the primary judge to conclude that there remained a real
need for specific deterrence. The appellant had
shown no remorse for his
offending. Although the appellant did not seek to establish (either before the
primary judge or before this
Court) that there were no other legitimate and
lawful means for him to raise his concerns (
McBride (No 4)
– [232]), the appellant nonetheless maintained that he acted properly in
breaching his duties of confidentiality. It
was open to the primary judge to
conclude that, in these circumstances, the appellant “needs to be deterred
from any further
disclosures of military information which he learned during his
service as a soldier”:
McBride (No 4)
is well established that the assessment of the extent of a mental condition, its
connection (if any) with the offending, and any
resulting reduction of an
offender’s moral culpability and the sentence to be imposed “are all
very much a matter for
a sentencing judge”:
at [58], citing
DPP (Cth) v De La Rosa
[2010] NSWCCA 194
; 79 NSWLR 1 at
findings of the primary judge concerning the weight to be given to general and
specific deterrence were open, it follows
that this ground of appeal must be
Fifth ground
of appeal: The sentencing judge erred in finding that “the
offender’s culpability for the offending having
regard to the
circumstances is high”
sentencing judge found that the offender’s moral culpability for the
offending was high:
McBride (No 4)
at [248]. The appellant submitted that
“this finding was not open in light of the matters raised (individually
and/ or cumulatively)
by grounds two, three and four”. The appellant did
not advance any additional submissions in support of this ground.
the reasons outlined above, we
have concluded that grounds 2, 3 and 4
lack merit. It follows that this ground of appeal must also be
Sixth ground of appeal: The sentencing judge erred in
finding that the “level of harm done to the community is
significant
the proceedings before the primary judge, senior counsel for the appellant
contended that the level of harm occasioned to the community
appellant’s conduct was low. The sentencing judge rejected this
submission. At [191], his Honour said:
In my view, it is not appropriate to go beyond the detailed and nuanced
description of the level of harm and risk of harm which is
articulated in the
Agreed Statement of Facts. There are multiple types of harm and risks of harm
which are there described and it
would not be consistent with those agreed facts
to subject them to a uniform gloss by characterising the harm or risk as being
Rather, the harm and risk of harm is accurately described in
the Agreed Statement of Facts.
in the judgment, when considering whether it was appropriate to order that the
sentence be imposed by way of an Intensive Corrections
Order (ICO), the primary
judge described the level of harm to the community as “significant”:
McBride (No 4)
appellant contended that the primary judge erred in finding that the level of
harm that was occasioned to the community was “significant”.
particular, the appellant submitted that the primary judge:
... has effectively fallen into the same error which his Honour identified in
the submission put to him below on behalf of the appellant’s
is, to seek to place a “uniform gloss” upon the agreed facts, in
which the “harm and risk of harm”
cause by the offending conduct is
“accurately described”.
other words, in this ground of appeal, the appellant contended that in
describing the level of harm to the community as “significant”,
primary judge had, contrary to his earlier indication, characterised the level
of harm occasioned to the community, and had found
the level of harm occasioned
by the appellant’s conduct to be “significant” in the sense of
occasioning a “high”
risk of harm.
Honour did not so conclude. In circumstances where the primary judge had
previously declined to characterise the risk of harm
by reference to a single
label, it is clear that, read in context, the primary judge was not making a
finding that the level of harm
occasioned was high. Rather, read in context, his
Honour was simply recording his rejection of the appellant’s contention in
the sentencing proceedings that the risk of harm was low.
was open to the primary judge to reject the appellant’s contention that
the risk of harm occasioned by his conduct was low.
The Agreed Facts contained
the following information concerning the risk of harm that was occasioned by the
appellant’s conduct:
As a result of the potential that a person had read, or copied the materials
found at [the appellant’s] apartment, Australia’s
foreign partners
had to be, and were, notified of that potential. The public disclosure of
information obtained confidentially from
allies and partners may damage
Australia’s relationships with those allies/partners. Unauthorised
disclosure of allied and
partner confidential information may reduce their
willingness to share information with Australia in the future and Australia may
not be informed of this change in attitude. If that has occurred, it would
disadvantage ADF operations and, more broadly, would be
of detriment to
Australia’s international relations and national security interests.
Had a person read, copied or photographed the documents found at [the
appellant’s] apartment, information contained in those
documents may have
given rise to risks such as:
(1) The public disclosure of information relating to Australian intelligence
operations including capabilities, sources, processes,
analysis and advice,
would likely prejudice the future collection (including, threatening Australian
intelligence methods and sources)
and analysis of intelligence, risk damage to
critical international relationships, and risk prejudicing the security of
operations.
(2) The public disclosure of information relating to [rules of engagement] risks
informing Australia’s adversaries of the limits
on the ADF’s use of
force. Such disclosure would give those adversaries tactical advantages,
including the opportunity to employ
methods that take advantage of the
limitations imposed by the [rules of engagement] to the disadvantage of ADF
operations, including
through increased risk of harm to ADF personnel, giving
rise to a risk of compromising the effectiveness of Australia’s current
and future military operations and place soldiers at a greater risk of injury or
(3) Some documents reveal sensitive information such as certain policies,
capabilities and response times, the public disclosure
of which would prejudice
their ongoing effectiveness, and could be employed to the detriment to Australia
or its partners by domestic
or overseas adversaries wishing to cause Australia
or its partners harm.
the Agreed Facts, the appellant accepted that public disclosure of the
information in documents which he disclosed “would,
or would have been
likely to have prejudiced the defence, national security or international
relations of Australia at the time”,
and that whilst the potential risks
“have decreased and will continue to decrease over time”, “the
information
in a number of documents is still capable of causing such prejudice
as at the date of this statement of agreed facts”.
these circumstances, the primary judge did not err in describing the level of
harm occasioned to the community as “significant”.
Accordingly,
this ground of appeal should be dismissed.
Seventh ground of
appeal: The sentencing judge erred in failing to consider the intensive
correction assessment when deciding whether
to make an intensive correction
order for the appellant, as required by
(Sentencing) Act 2005
for the appellant at first instance submitted that the Court should order that
the appellant serve his sentence by way of
an ICO. His Honour rejected that
submission, finding as follows:
If the availability of an intensive correction order is to be assessed by
reference to the aggregate sentence imposed then, clearly,
one is not available
because the aggregate sentence exceeds four years. However, I have previously
held that the availability of
an intensive correction order is to be assessed in
relation to each individual sentence that is imposed, rather than the aggregate
DPP v Vincent (No 2)
[2023] ACTSC 379
. Each of the
sentences which I have imposed is below the four-year threshold. It is therefore
necessary to consider the matters in
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
(ACT) and determine whether the imposition of an intensive correction
order is appropriate in the circumstances of the case. In my
view, the level of
harm done to the community caused by the offending is significant. Further, the
offender’s culpability for
the offending having regard to all the
circumstances is high. Given the nature of the offending and the aggregate
sentence, I do
not consider that it is appropriate that it be served by
intensive correction. I consider that an intensive correction order would
adequately reflect the need for general deterrence, specific deterrence and
punishment of the offender.
alluded to in the above extract, an ICO is not available where the
“sentence of imprisonment” to which it relates is
more than four
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
. There is contradictory
authority in this jurisdiction as to whether an ICO can be ordered where the
combined total of individual
sentences exceeds four years.
noted in the above extract of the primary judge’s reasons, in an earlier,
unrelated judgment, the primary judge had held
that where multiple sentences are
ordered to be served by way of ICO, a separate ICO should be imposed for each
DPP v Vincent (No 2)
[2023] ACTSC 379
– [75]. As a
consequence, his Honour concluded that
is not contravened where
the combined sum of the ICOs totals more than four years, so long as each
individual ICO is for a term of
less than four years.
DPP v Clarke (No 3)
[2024] ACTSC 395
, Taylor J accepted the
prosecution’s submission that an ICO relating to more than one sentence,
where each sentence was partially
concurrent, was a singular, global order. Her
Honour concluded that
precludes the imposition of an ICO where that
global order would exceed four years’ imprisonment.
R v Hanson (No 3
[2025] ACTSC 6
the primary judge noted the
different approaches that had been taken in
, but did not find it necessary to resolve that controversy in those
proceedings. (
concerned an alleged breach of an ICO which related
to a number of individual sentences. As the primary judge determined that it was
inappropriate to take action on the breach, it was not necessary for his Honour
to determine whether the ICO was properly characterised
as a single, global
order, or as a number of individual, concurrent orders.)
difficult questions of construction were not the subject of submissions on this
appeal. It is not necessary to determine this
issue in the present case, other
than to observe that, even if the construction of the primary judge is to be
preferred and separate
ICOs should be ordered for each offence, an ICO or ICOs
should not be ordered where the aggregate of the individual sentences exceeded
four years’ imprisonment.
absolute prohibition in
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
against imposing an ICO of more than four years represents a legislative
determination that an ICO will not be appropriate where
the offending is
sufficiently serious to require a sentence of imprisonment of more than four
years. So much is clear from the following
explanation in the Second Reading
Speech to the
Crimes (Sentencing and Restorative Justice) Amendment Bill 2015
(ACT), which introduced
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
This limitation is intended to ensure that offences at the more serious level,
or a combination of offences
which would justify a longer sentence of
imprisonment, would not ordinarily be eligible for an intensive correction
order. Those offences
would, and indeed should, usually attract an immediate
term of imprisonment in full-time detention.
Australian Capital Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative
Assembly, 19 November 2015, 4216 (Simon Corbell, Attorney-General).
these reasons, where a sentencing judge determines that the criminality involved
in a course of offending is such as to require
a total term of imprisonment
which exceeds four years, the leniency inherent in an ICO will be inappropriate.
This was so in the
present case, in which the overall term of imprisonment
ordered by the primary judge was imprisonment for 5 years and 8 months, with
non-parole period of imprisonment for 2 years and 3 months.
noted above, the appellant did not contend that the sentence imposed was
manifestly excessive. Nor did he contend that it was not
open to the primary
judge to reject his submission that the sentences should be served by way of an
ICO or ICOs. Rather, his submission
was limited to the process by which the
primary judge considered the question of whether to order an ICO. In particular,
the appellant
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
provides that when deciding whether to make an ICO for an offender, “the
court must consider... the intensive correction order
assessment”. The
appellant contended that the primary judge had not given “proper,
realistic and genuine consideration”
to the ICOAR because his Honour only
took the report into account “in a manner adverse to the
appellant”.
the appellant acknowledged, the primary judge expressly referred to the ICOAR at
three points in his judgment: first when considering
whether the appellant had
demonstrated remorse for the offending, second when considering the
offender’s mental health and
third in assessing the need for specific
deterrence:
McBride (No 4)
at [147], [186] and [234].
accepting that the appellant was
for an ICO, his Honour
considered that the offending was too serious for the purposes of sentencing to
be met by an ICO. Having so
concluded, it was not necessary for his Honour to
further address the ICOAR. As this Court held in
Fares v DPP (No 2)
[2025] ACTCA 2
The sentencing judge, having determined that a sentence of imprisonment served
by intensive correction order would fail to reflect
the gravity of the
offending, was not required to go on to “genuinely engage” further
with the appellant’s suitability
and the assessment directed toward
it. The offender’s suitability could not trump the determination the
sentencing judge made
as to the appropriateness of the alternative to full-time
imprisonment. The offender’s suitability did not ‘cure’
which the imposition of an intensive correction order would fail to
appellant has not established any error in the process by which the primary
judge considered whether an ICO should be imposed,
nor was the primary
judge’s decision refusing to order an ICO or ICOs in error. This ground of
appeal should also be dismissed.
the above reasons, the appellant’s appeals against his conviction and his
sentence are dismissed.
I certify that the preceding one-hundred and sixty-eight [168] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
RTF format (586 KB)
Signed PDF/A format