Police v Valent [2025] ACTMC 12 (26 May 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Police v Valent
[2025] ACTMC 12
Hearing Dates:
17, 18, 19 December 2024, 11 March 2025
Decision Date:
Magistrate Temby
See paragraphs [261] and [262]
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– Theft – Obtain Property by Deception
– Money – Multiple Charges
Legislation Cited:
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT), ss 304, 308, 326
Cases Cited:
(1987) 11 NSWLR 12
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
De Silva v The Queen
[2019] HCA 48
(2019) 268 CLR 57
Edwards v The Queen
(1993) 179 CLR 193
Bethany Scott (Informant)
Theodore Valent (Defendant)
Representation:
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
ACT Legal Aid (Defendant)
File Numbers:
CC 23/8211 – 8227
CC 24/1146 – 1147
MAGISTRATE TEMBY:
Defendant and the complainant used to be married, however they separated a long
time ago. Ordinarily, the complainant is distrustful
of the Defendant, however,
in May 2023, she turned to the Defendant for assistance. Her mental health was
deteriorating as a result
of a decision she had made to wean herself off her
anti-psychotic medication. The complainant has schizophrenia.
complainant began weaning herself off her anti-psychotic medication from around
September 2022 and was no longer taking the medication
by early May 2023.The
Defendant moved in with the complainant in late May 2023. He assisted her by,
for example, making food for
her, providing transport and supporting her desire
to pursue alternative remedies for her mental health condition. On 29 June 2023,
after the Defendant had been living with the complainant for around a month, the
complainant gave him authority to operate one of
her bank accounts.
complainant’s mental health condition further deteriorated, particularly
in the days leading up to 12 July 2023, when she
was admitted to hospital. The
Defendant continued to stay at her house while she was in hospital. It was not
until their daughter
(Marita Valent) obtained a Family Violence Order on the
complainant’s behalf, with the Defendant being the respondent to the
order, that the Defendant moved out.
Defendant was interviewed by police on 6 August 2023. It is alleged that, from
shortly before the Defendant obtained access to
the complainant’s bank
account until he spoke to police about five weeks later, the Defendant took
$11,050 belonging to the
complainant by withdrawing cash from her account and
transferring funds from her account to his.
Defendant is charged with 19 counts of theft, relating to each of the impugned
transactions, pursuant to s 308 of the
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT). In the
alternative, the Prosecution relies on the offence of obtaining property by
deception, pursuant to s 326 of the
Criminal Code 2002
is no doubt that money was transferred from the complainant’s account to
the Defendant’s accounts. There is also
no doubt that, after the
complainant was taken to hospital, it was the Defendant who effected the
transfers. Little else is agreed
between the Prosecution and the
are a number of decision-making principles that are relevant to the
determination of criminal proceedings and directions that
I must give to myself.
Onus and standard of proof
Prosecution bears the onus of proving the guilt of the Defendant. The Defendant
does not have to prove that he did not commit
the offences with which he is
charged. The standard of proof the Prosecution must meet is proof beyond
reasonable doubt and the Defendant
cannot be found guilty unless the evidence
which I accept satisfies me beyond reasonable doubt of his guilt. If I am
satisfied that
there may be an explanation consistent with the innocence of the
Defendant, or I am unsure of where the truth lies, then I must find
charge has not been proved to the standard of proof required by law.
of a matter beyond reasonable doubt requires the Prosecution to exclude all
reasonable hypotheses or any reasonable possibility
inconsistent with the
Prosecution case or with the Defendant’s innocence. That is because a
reasonable doubt will necessarily
arise where any hypothesis or possibility
consistent with innocence is reasonably open on the evidence.
is not necessary to find that the event suggested by the hypothesis or the
possibility in fact occurred in order to find for the
Defendant. It is
sufficient if there is a reasonable possibility that such an event took
burden of proof on the Prosecution does not mean that the Prosecution must prove
every fact in dispute beyond reasonable doubt,
only that it must prove the
elements of the charge beyond reasonable doubt.
Assessment of
evidence and making of findings
must determine whether each of the witnesses is a reliable witness. That is,
whether I can rely on the evidence that the witness
gives and so find the facts
witness’s evidence
and reject part of that evidence or accept or reject it
all. The law does not require me to give all evidence the same weight.
must determine the facts in accordance with the evidence, considering it
logically and rationally, without acting capriciously or
irrationally. I must
not let emotion enter into the decision-making process. I must bring an open and
unbiased mind to the evidence
but I may use my common sense and experience in
assessing it. Both the Prosecution and the Defendant are entitled to my verdict
of partiality, prejudice, favour or ill-will.
may draw reasonable inferences from the facts that I find are established. I
must consider any possible inference to ensure that
it is a justifiable
inference, and I must not draw an inference from the direct evidence unless it
is a rational inference in all
the circumstances. It is permissible for the
court to rely on an inference, of which the court is satisfied should be drawn
reasonable doubt, as proof of an element of an
Defendant’s right to silence
defendant did not give evidence during his hearing. No inference, adverse to
him, can be drawn from his decision to exercise his
right to silence. Nor can
the absence of evidence from the defendant be used to fill in any gaps or used
as a makeweight for any
deficiency in the prosecution case.
Complainant’s evidence
recorded statement of police interview was admitted as constituting part of the
complainant’s evidence in chief, pursuant
section 81B
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
(ACT). It was admitted
pursuant to that section as if the complainant gave the evidence at the hearing
in person. I note, for the
purposes of
section 81I
, that admission of a recorded
statement is a usual practice in family violence proceedings and that I cannot
draw any inferences
against the Defendant, or give the complainant’s
evidence more or less weight, because the evidence was given in that way.
when giving evidence at the hearing, the complainant did so by audio-visual link
from an external place, pursuant to
Evidence (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act
. I do not draw any inference against the Defendant, or give
the complainant’s evidence more or less weight, as a result of
evidence being given in that way.
give myself what is known as the
direction (from
(1987) 11 NSWLR 12).
Where, as here, an element of the commission of an
offence depends on the evidence of a single witness – here, the
complainant
– the evidence of that witness must be scrutinised with great
care to satisfy myself that I can safely act upon her evidence
to the standard
required in a criminal trial. Ultimately, I must be satisfied of the evidence of
that witness beyond reasonable doubt
as to the relevant
Defendant’s version of events
the Defendant chose not to give evidence, his interview and other discussions
with police record him answering questions in
relation to the financial
arrangements that he had with the complainant while he was living with her. The
Defendant also makes observations,
complainant’s account to his, in an email he sent to Ms Valent.
Defendant’s versions of events are that he and the complainant:
(a) shared whatever money was left over once bills were paid and, to that end,
they shared part of an account, from which the Defendant
withdrew money for them
to do things together, withdrawing a little bit at a time (version to police);
(b) agreed to save for a car together and, to that end, the complainant
transferred $1,000 to the Defendant each payday, which the
goal of the Defendant
saving $10,000 towards the car (version to Ms Valent).
statements made by the Defendant are now evidence and must be considered. As
with all the evidence, it is for me to decide the
weight to be given to
particular statements.
give myself what is known as the
direction (from
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
, as applied in
De Silva v The Queen
[2019] HCA 48
(2019) 268 CLR 57)
, given the conflict between the complainant’s
evidence and the versions of events offered by the Defendant. In this context,
remind myself that a preference for the prosecution’s evidence is not
enough. I must not find the Defendant guilty unless
I am satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt of the truth of that evidence. Similarly, even if the evidence
relied upon by the Defendant
is not positively believed, I must not find him
guilty if that evidence gives rise to a reasonable doubt about his guilt.
(a) if I believe the Defendant’s version of events, or if I think it might
be true, and if on that version an element of the
offence would not be
satisfied, I must find the Defendant not guilty;
(b) if I do not believe the account relied on by the Defendant, I should put it
to one side. The question remaining is, has the Prosecution,
on the basis of the
evidence that I do accept, proved the Defendant’s guilt beyond reasonable
the avoidance of doubt, I note that this direction does not require me to first
consider the Defendant’s version of events
in isolation and then, only if
I reject that evidence, to consider the Prosecution’s evidence. I am
required to consider the
whole of the evidence before making my
Multiple charges – Markulevski direction
of the charges against the Defendant must be considered separately. If I am not
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt in relation
to one of the charges, I must
consider what effect, if any, the doubts that I have about the
complainant’s evidence on that
charge have in relation to the other
Good character
Defendant’s criminal record is limited to two non-conviction orders in
1993 in relation to driving offences. I take that
fact into account in assessing
the probability of the Defendant committing the offence charged and in assessing
the credibility of
the Defendant’s statements to police and Ms Valent,
particularly in circumstances where that record has extended over a considerable
period (the Defendant is 72 years of age).
said that, I note that the only evidence of the Defendant’s good character
is his lack of antecedents and that no evidence
was led as to his character more
Circumstantial evidence
this was a case relying, at least in part, on circumstantial evidence, I remind
myself that such a case may be just as convincing
and reliable as a case based
on direct evidence, but it will depend on whether all of the evidence leads to
an unavoidable conclusion
that the prosecution has established the guilt of the
must approach a circumstantial case by considering and weighing, as a whole, all
the facts I find established by the evidence. I
must not consider any particular
fact in isolation and whether that fact proves the defendant’s guilt, or
whether there is
any explanation for that particular fact or circumstance which
is inconsistent with the defendant’s guilt.
correct approach is, first, to determine what facts I find established by the
evidence. Any particular fact to be taken into account
by me does not need to be
proved beyond reasonable doubt. I must then consider all of those facts together
as a whole and ask myself
whether I can conclude from those facts that the
defendant is guilty of the offence charged. I cannot be so satisfied on
circumstantial
evidence unless no other explanation than guilt is reasonably, or
rationally, compatible with the circumstances.
this respect I note that, for an explanation or inference to be reasonable, it
must rest on something more than mere conjecture.
The bare possibility of
innocence should not prevent me from finding the Defendant guilty if the
inference of guilt is the only inference
open to a reasonable person following
consideration of all the facts in evidence.
Overview of
parties’ cases
parties filed detailed written submissions and, at my request, supplementary
written submissions, following the hearing.
Prosecution submits that the Defendant may be found guilty of the theft offences
with which he has been charged in one of three
(a) The Prosecution’s primary submission is that the complainant simply
did not consent to the Defendant withdrawing funds
from her bank account as
alleged. In this respect, the Prosecution submits that I should accept the
complainant’s evidence
that she gave the Defendant permission to withdraw
cash from her account as a thank you for supporting her but that the premise of
that authorisation was that the Defendant would inform her on each occasion that
he withdrew money and she was only prepared to give
him $100 or $200 every now
and then (Prosecution’s Primary Submission);
(b) The Prosecution’s alternative submission is that, if there was an
agreement between the complainant and the Defendant which
permitted the
Defendant to transfer funds of $100 or $200 out of the complainant’s
account, the Defendant’s transfer
of money was not in accordance with that
agreement and, once the complainant was hospitalised, the agreement was void in
(Prosecution’s Alternative Submission);
(c) The Prosecution’s further alternative submission is that, even if the
complainant consented to the withdrawal of all the
funds that were transferred
to the Defendant’s account, the Defendant must have known that her consent
was given in a period
of acute mental psychosis and was therefore not freely
given, making the Defendant’s reliance on that consent dishonest
(Prosecution’s
Further Alternative Submission).
the reasons which are set out in my consideration of the credibility of the
complainant’s evidence later in these reasons,
I do not accept that the
complainant was suffering from acute mental psychosis until around 8 July 2023.
It is unclear, prior to
that time, how mentally unwell the complainant was, or
what the impact of her mental health condition on her decision-making capacity
was. Accordingly, the Prosecution cannot succeed in relation to the
Prosecution’s Further Alternative Submission.
Prosecution’s position in relation to the statutory alternative charges of
obtaining property by deception (the Statutory
Alternative Submission) is that,
even if the complainant consented to the withdrawal of the funds that were
transferred to the Defendant’s
account, the Defendant obtained the money
by deception – namely:
(a) by representing to the complainant that the access he obtained to operate
her account was to help her with her finances when
he was, in fact, looking out
for his own interests, at a time when the Defendant held a position of trust
with respect to the complainant.
The Prosecution submits that there is a
sufficient nexus between the premise upon which the Defendant gained access to
the complainant’s
account and the obtaining of property on each charged
(b) alternatively, even if there was an agreement between the Defendant and the
complainant to save for a car together, and the Defendant
did not obtain access
to the complainant’s account by deception, the premise upon which the
Defendant obtained the money (to
save for a car) still involved a deception by
the Defendant because the Defendant retained the money in his account.
to the last of these positions, the Prosecution nevertheless submits that it is
implausible that the transfers were for the purposes
of saving for a car given
the structure and frequency of the transfers, which involved ‘a certain
randomness’. The Prosecution
submits that, if I did find that the
Defendant was saving for a car:
(a) the evidence is insufficient to support the proposition that the end goal
was that the car would be jointly shared by him and
the complainant; and
(b) even if that was the end goal, the conduct would still be both dishonest and
deceptive because the complainant had not consented
to the transfer of her money
to be used for the Defendant’s contribution to the joint purchase.
Defendant’s position is that the nature of the evidence does not allow
findings of fact on relevant issues to be made with
any confidence. The
Defendant submits that “it is simply too difficult to ascertain to a
criminal standard, during the material
period, what the complainant said and
thought, and how the defendant, in kind, responded”.
Defendant points to the following issues, in particular, as raising a doubt as
to these matters:
(a) the fact that the Defendant, a 74 year old man with very little resources of
his own, did not spend any of the money that was
transferred into his account
– the Defendant says that this supports his account, that he and the
complainant were saving to
buy a car together;
(b) the fact that the complainant was mentally unwell during the relevant
period, which impacted her “world view”, affects
complainant’s reliability, particularly in circumstance where she had a
lack of specific recollection as to whether she
made the impugned transactions
prior to her hospitalisation. This, the Defendant submits, reflects a degree of
confusion and conjecture
infecting the entirety of the complainant’s
evidence. The Defendant points to the many times in her evidence that the
complainant
answered questions in either the hypothetical or subjective
(“I would have”, “I wouldn’t have”, “I
have”). The Defendant also points to the antipathy that the complainant
displayed towards the Defendant as further impacting
the credibility of her
(c) the Defendant also submits that his record of interview with police is
consistent with the complainant’s evidence (and
with his innocence).
I will explain, I agree that the evidence establishes the possibility that the
Defendant was saving to buy a car with the complainant.
However, I do not accept
that they saved together, or that the complainant gave money to the Defendant
(or authorised the Defendant
to take money from, or hold money for, her) for
that purpose.
agree that the fact that the complainant was mentally unwell during the relevant
period is something that needs to be kept in mind
in assessing the credibility
of the complainant’s evidence but, again for reasons which I will explain,
I consider that the
complainant was generally a credible witness and that I can
rely on the evidence that she gave. On the other hand, I find that the
Defendant’s statements to police and to Ms Valent lack credibility.
terms of the various positions advanced by the Prosecution, the Defendant
submits that:
(a) it is not possible to exclude the possibility that the complainant made the
transfers prior to her hospitalisation (to, for example,
reward the Defendant
for his emotional and physical support, assisting him to save towards a joint
car, and putting her money beyond
the reaches of her family – all being
things that might have seemed rational to the complainant at the time) –
particularly
where the apparent randomness of the transfers and the retention of
the money by the Defendant seem inconsistent with him having
(b) the evidence does not establish that the Defendant knew or suspected that
the complainant did not genuinely want him to hold
the funds; and
(c) there is little evidence to establish that the complainant’s consent
for any transfers she made was vitiated by her illness
and that the Defendant
knew this to be true. The Defendant notes that there were no legal restrictions
on the complainant dealing
with her money as she pleased, nor any evidence that
anyone raised concerns with him about the complainant’s ability to operate
autonomously prior to her hospitalisation. The Defendant submits that it is
plausible that he, perhaps subconsciously accepting of
a reality that he desired
(sharing his life with the complainant) and which he thought was real, even if
others may have taken a
different view, believed that the complainant was at her
“most real” when not taking her medication.
I have already indicated, I agree with the Defendant that there is little
evidence to establish that the complainant’s consent
for any transfers was
vitiated by her illness. However, for reasons which are set out later in these
reasons, I find that it was
the Defendant who made each of the impugned
transfers. In my view, it is possible to exclude the possibility that the
complainant
made the transfers prior to her hospitalisation because no
explanation, other than that it was the Defendant who made all of the
and that he knew he did not have authority to make the transfers, is rationally
compatible with the circumstances.
Defendant submits that, if I accept that the complainant made the transfers
prior to her hospitalisation, or if the Defendant
made the transfers honestly,
the Court would find it difficult to impute constructive dishonesty to the
Defendant in making the post-admission
transfers. The Defendant submits that,
while other people in the Defendant’s position may have queried whether it
was appropriate
to continue to give effect to the complainant’s wishes,
that is not the relevant test. The Defendant submits that, in circumstances
where the complainant distrusted Ms Valent and Mr Falzarano (the
complainant’s brother), he may have believed that the complainant
him to put the funds out of their reach, and therefore may have felt compelled
to make the post-admission transfers.
I have noted, I am satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that it was the Defendant
who made each of the transfers. As I will explain,
while I am also satisfied
that he largely did so for his own purposes, not in the interests of the
complainant (or in what he might
have thought were the interests of the
complainant), I have doubt in relation to some of the transfers. I also have
doubt in relation
to the two cash withdrawals that were
Parties’ submissions in relation to queries raised by
considered the parties’ written submissions, I sought further submissions
from the parties in relation to a number of
queries. In doing so, I set out
possible findings I might make, namely that:
(a) the Defendant opened a Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) account, ending
in numbers 7104, for the purpose of saving for a
car for himself;
(b) the Defendant believed, at some point, that the complainant would buy a car
with him if he saved as much money as she had saved
in her car savings
(c) the Defendant made all of the relevant transfers the subject of the present
(d) the Defendant did so without authority (that is, not predicated on any
arrangement or agreement with the complainant);
(e) the Defendant did not believe he made the transfers with authority;
(f) the Defendant’s intention was to transfer the money to the CBA account
ending in 7104 to save for a car, which was to be
bought for himself, or jointly
for himself and the complainant; and
(g) the Defendant intended to misrepresent that the money transferred and
subsumed into account 7104 was his own (including to represent
complainant, if and when the time came to purchase the car, that the money was
Defendant submits that the first of these findings is uncontentious and
consistent with the Defendant’s innocence, being
that he was saving
jointly with the complainant for a car.
Defendant argues against the other findings, relying on his other submissions.
In particular, he submits that the Court would
need to be satisfied, beyond
reasonable doubt, that the Defendant transferred the funds from the
complainant’s account for
the purpose of appropriating them into his car
savings account and to misrepresent the funds as his own, in order to find the
guilty. He submits that, having regard to the view expressed through
the possible findings, they are indispensable to a finding that
the Defendant
was dishonest. He accepts that, if those findings could be made, his conduct
would be dishonest, however he says that
there is no reasonable evidentiary
basis for those findings.
Defendant submits that:
(a) there is no direct evidence as to what was in the Defendant’s mind, in
terms of what he intended to do with the money at
the time of transfer, nor as
to what the Defendant would do with the money in the future – he submits
that it is entirely speculative
to making a finding as to how the Defendant
would represent the money transfers to the complainant if confronted about them
and that, in any case, it is not the Prosecution case that the Defendant
transferred money from the complainant’s account with
the intention of
saving for a car;
(b) it is unlikely that the Defendant would have had such a plan, in
circumstances where he knew that the complainant and Ms Valent
could see that
the transfers had been made from the complainant’s account – that he
could not possibly have represented
the funds as his once the transfers were
inevitably discovered; and
(c) given that the Defendant also spent money from his account on items that
could have been of joint benefit to him and the complainant
during the relevant
period, it may be difficult for the Court to exclude beyond reasonable doubt
that the Defendant did not have
a dishonest mindset in relation to any of the
transfers that led to that expenditure. In this respect, the Defendant submits
if the Court is unable to identify which transfers are infected with doubt
as to the Defendant’s intention (and dishonesty)
– because they may
have been for a purpose that was not dishonest (at least not entirely) –
the Court would need to acquit
on all transfers that could possibly have an
honest purpose.
to the Defendant’s submissions that it was never the Prosecution’s
case that the Defendant transferred money from the
complainant’s account
to his with the intention of saving for a car (for himself, and not as part of
an arrangement made with
the complainant), that is true. However, it was the
Prosecution’s case (the Prosecution’s Primary Submission) that the
Defendant had no authority to transfer money from the complainant’s
account to his and that the Defendant transferred the money
to his accounts
intending to retain that money for his own benefit, in the knowledge that his
conduct was dishonest.
Prosecution did not seek to identify the ultimate purpose for the money that was
transferred to the Defendant’s account.
Nor is that required. What the
Prosecution needs to establish is that the Defendant appropriated the money,
dishonestly, with the
intention of permanently depriving the complainant of the
my view, there is no unfairness to the Defendant in me considering, in assessing
the Prosecution case, whether, to the extent that
I find that it was the
Defendant who effected the transfers, it was the Defendant’s intention to
purchase a car with the money,
including by representing that the money was his.
Such an intention would, consistently with the Prosecution case (and as conceded
by the Defendant), evidence both dishonesty on the part of the Defendant and an
intention to permanently deprive the complainant
of the money.
and perhaps more importantly with respect to the question of fairness, it is the
Defendant’s case that one possibility
consistent with his innocence is
that the money was transferred for the purpose of assisting the Defendant to
save for a car, or
to further the objective of the complainant and the Defendant
jointly saving for a car. Having raised that possibility, I cannot
unfairness in making findings as to whether there was, as the Defendant says,
participation, agreement or authorisation given
by the complainant for the
transfers to be made for that purpose and, if not, to make consequential
findings as to what that reveals
as to the Defendant’s intention and
whether he was dishonest. The Defendant did not articulate any specific
unfairness that
would befall him, from the way that the hearing was run, if I
made findings of the kind I articulated.
also asked the parties about the possible application of s 304(2) of the
Criminal Code 2002
Criminal Code
). That provision could have
application in this case if it was not possible to making a finding in relation
to the Defendant’s
intention at the time a transfer from the
complainant’s account was made to one of his accounts, but it was clear
that he then
transferred that money within his own accounts with the intention
of assuming ownership of the money.
parties disagreed as to whether it would be unfair for the Prosecution to rely
on that provision, in circumstances where the Prosecution
case was premised on
the impugned transactions having been made on particular dates. While I agree
with the Prosecution that the
date on which the Defendant is alleged to have
committed the offence is not an element of it, I agree with the Defendant that
Prosecution’s case was that the offence was committed on the dates
that the initial transfer of funds were made from the complainant’s
account to one of the Defendant’s accounts.
agree with the Defendant that it would be unfair to decide the case by reference
to the Defendant’s intention in dealing with
the complainant’s funds
after the time he initially transferred money from the complainant’s
account to one of his. What
he did after the initial transfer can inform my
assessment of his intention at the time, but the Prosecution did not rely on
later conduct as itself establishing an element of any the offences with
which the Defendant is charged.
note that there were multiple sources of funds into the Defendant’s CBA
account that most of the transfers from the complainant’s
account went
into during the relevant period and that the Defendant both made transfers from
that account to his account ending in
7104 and made purchases of items that
could have benefited the complainant. This, of course, gives rise to some
complexity in assessing
the Defendant’s purpose in appropriating money
from the complainant’s account and, to the extent that that purpose was
unclear, complexity in assessing the use to which he subsequently put the money
(and his purpose for doing so). If the Prosecution
wished to rely on s 304(2) of
Criminal Code
in the circumstances of this matter, it needed to
articulate at the hearing how it sought to do so.
The key issues
for resolution
regard to the foregoing, the key issues for resolution are:
(a) the credibility of the accounts given by the complainant and the
(b) the nature of the financial arrangements that existing between the
complainant and the Defendant during the relevant period,
(c) the identity of the person who made the transfers from the
complainant’s account to the Defendant’s accounts prior
complainant’s hospitalisation; and
(d) the purpose for which each of the transfers was made.
turning to those issues, I will briefly discuss the Defendant’s and the
complainant’s bank statements which were
tendered at the hearing. I will
however I have focused
my initial observations on a key aspect of the
Defendant’s statements, being the establishment of car savings accounts.
actions in this regard informed my assessment of the key issues I have
outlined above.
Bank statements
statements for accounts that were maintained by the Defendant and the
complainant during the period when the impugned transactions
were made (27 June
to 6 August 2023) (referred to elsewhere in these reasons as “the relevant
period”) were tendered
in evidence. They are an important source of
objective evidence against which the statements of the Defendant and the
complainant,
as to what occurred, can be assessed.
Annexure A is a table which identifies the impugned transfers and the transfers
the Defendant made between his accounts in and
around the relevant period. From
reviewing these transactions, it is apparent that the majority of the money that
was transferred
from the complainant’s account to the Defendant’s
accounts ended up in a CBA account that the Defendant set up to save
(which I have referred to in these reasons as the Defendant’s “CBA
car savings account”).
Defendant set up an account with Beyond Bank on 6 June 2023. He called it
“Car Savings”. Between 29 June 2023 and
4 July 2023, he transferred
the then balance of that account to a CBA account ending in the numbers 7104,
indirectly through a CBA
account ending in numbers 7926 (which I have referred
to in these reasons as the Defendant’s “general CBA account”).
he intended to use account “7104” as an account in which to save for
a car is confirmed by the facts that:
(a) he opened the Beyond Bank “Car Savings” account, while he was
living with the complainant, to start saving for a
car. He wanted to have a car
savings account like the complainant had one. The complainant’s evidence
to this effect is consistent
with the timing of the Defendant opening his Beyond
Bank account and the name that he gave to that account;
(b) the Defendant told the complainant that he also had a CBA car savings
(c) there were two transfers from the complainant’s account to account
“7926” with the description “Car”
(on 2 and 10 July
2023) and corresponding entries transferring the same amounts from 7926 to 7104;
(d) the amount transferred into 7104 during the relevant period is consistent
with a discussion that the complainant said that she
and the Defendant had, in
relation to the Defendant saving as much as the complainant had saved for a new
car. By the end of the
period, he had saved a similar amount to the amount that
the complainant had saved by the beginning of the relevant period (around
Defendant closed the Beyond Bank account prior to 19 July 2023. A transfer he
made to that account on that date was returned because
the account had been
closed. The same thing happened on 1 August 2023.
I have indicated, I will return to other aspects of my analysis of the bank
statements later in my reasons.
Reliability of witnesses’
evidence and the statements made by the Defendant
complainant, Ms Valent, the complainant’s and Defendant’s son
(Ashley Valent) and the complainant’s brother
(Tonino Falzarano) gave
evidence at the hearing. To the extent that I have relied on the evidence of Ms
Valent, Mr Valent and Mr
Falzarano, I consider that it is reliable. I have
relied on their evidence to a limited extent and the evidence that I have relied
on is consistent with other evidence that I have accepted as reliable.
noted already, the Defendant did not give evidence but he gave a statement to
police. He also sent an email to Ms Valent which
set out a version of
have considered the reliability of the complainant’s evidence and the
statements made by the Defendant in some detail below.
note that three police officers also gave evidence but no issues were raised as
to the reliability of their evidence, which was
uncontentious.
The complainant
complainant was an open and honest witness, however the Defendant submits that
her evidence is nevertheless unreliable, given
how unwell she became during the
relevant period. As noted at the beginning of these reasons, the complainant has
schizophrenia and
she asked the Defendant for assistance because she was weening
herself off her medication and she unwell.
the Defendant submits:
(a) the complainant asked the defendant to live with her in May 2023, at a time
when her mental health was already starting to decline,
and he moved in, in late
(b) the complainant’s mental health was declining, at least in part, due
to her eschewal of her ordinary medication (this was
done in joint consultation
with, and under the auspices of, her doctor, and continued with the
Defendant’s assistance when
he moved in with her);
(c) the complainant described the effect that being unwell has had on her in the
past, including:
(a) losing touch with reality and having delusions;
(b) spending money carelessly, including making reckless donations; and
(c) changing her name when she sought out a married man; and
(d) on this occasion, the complainant said that, at some point, she could not
reason properly and she confided in, and trusted the
Defendant, which she would
not normally do, whilst adopting the opposite attitude to her daughter (Ms
Valent) and brother (Mr Falzarano),
whom she normally trusted.
Defendant described a ‘profound disparity between the complainant’s
world view when she suffers from symptoms of schizophrenia,
and when she is in
remission, that warrants the Court’s scepticism about the reliability of
her evidence’. The Defendant
also submitted that the complainant acted in
a way that was utterly inconsistent with her normal behaviour and values when
she suffered
from the onset of her protracted schizophrenic episodes.
there is little evidence as to the impact of the complainant’s condition
on her during the relevant period, until close
to her hospitalisation on 12 July
2023. By that time, the complainant was floridly psychotic but that was not the
state she was in
when the Defendant moved in with her at the end of May
also does not appear that the complainant’s mental health condition was
substantially impacting her by the time she attended
the CBA on 29 June 2023 to
execute the authority which allowed the Defendant to access her account. I have
no doubt that the complainant’s
mental health had declined, and the
complainant herself said that she was confused. However, as the Defendant noted,
no issues of
competence were raised by the bank, which indicates that there were
not any obvious issues (although it should be noted that there
are no records of
any checks being made) and the complainant did not identify what the nature of
her confusion was.
the decline in the complainant’s mental health was clearly having an
impact by 8 July 2023. During a phone call with
the complainant and the
Defendant on that date, Mr Valent identified that the complainant was agitated
and confused and saying things
that did not make sense, including being paranoid
that she was being followed and that the paparazzi were trying to take photos of
her. He discussed with the Defendant that the complainant was clearly unwell.
This is consistent with the Defendant’s advice
to the hospital on the
complainant’s admission, as recorded in the hospital notes, that she had
been delusionary for the previous
few days, including speaking about paparazzi
chasing her, and everybody being after her.
example of the complainant’s delusion is that, on one occasion, she told
the Defendant that their son and daughter-in-law
(from Seattle) were in the
backyard, when they were not, but it is not clear when this incident occurred.
Given the Defendant’s
advice to the hospital as to the timing of the
complainant’s delusions, I suspect that this incident also occurred in the
leading up to the complainant’s admission.
notes record that, by 18 August 2023, the complainant’s mental state had
improved and she appeared to be approaching
her baseline mental state. At that
time, she was transferred from the Adult Mental Health Unit to the Adult Mental
Health Rehabilitation
Unit for ongoing monitoring and care until her mental
state had fully stabilised.
accept the Defendant’s submission that the complainant’s mental
health was declining whilst he was living with her,
but the evidence points to
there being an obvious deterioration in her mental health in the days leading up
to her admission on 12
July 2023, rather than there being a consistent decline
over the period that the Defendant lived with her. This reflects the
Defendant’s
advice to the hospital, following the complainant’s
admission, that the complainant had been ‘reasonably well’
previous two months, until ‘a few days ago’ and with the advice that
Ms Valent provided to the hospital that
the complainant’s symptoms were
quite stable for several months while the complainant was off her
medication.
regard to all of the foregoing, I am not satisfied that the complainant had lost
touch with reality prior to 8 July 2023. I
do not accept the Defendant’s
submission that the complainant’s evidence is unreliable or that I should,
in a general
sense, approach the complainant’s evidence sceptically.
complainant said, in relation to the relevant period, that she was able to
recall some things but not others. Being able to recall
some matters, and not
others, is, as the Prosecution submits, not unique to someone with a mental
health condition.
the evidence of the complainant and Mr Falzarano is that, even for periods when
the complainant is unwell, she has good recall
of events once she becomes well
again. The complainant said that this includes having good insight into how she
was thinking at the
complainant’s evidence reflects both that she was able to recall events
relevant to this matter and that she had good recall
of those events. I note
that, in the complainant’s Family Violence Evidence-in-Chief (FVEIC)
interview with police, which was
undertaken while the complainant was still in
hospital, she gave evidence that:
(a) she had asked the Defendant to help her in late May 2023, when she was
mentally unwell and he came to help her;
(b) the Defendant took the complainant to the bank to sign a form allowing him
to operate her account for her;
(c) it was a Commonwealth Bank account that the Defendant was authorised to
access; and
(d) she was admitted to hospital on 12 July 2023.
answering questions at the hearing, the complainant gave evidence
(a) she had a car savings account containing approximately $15,000;
(b) while the Defendant was living with the complainant, he opened an account
with Beyond Bank to save for a car;
(c) she also thought that the Defendant had a car savings account with the
(d) she attended the CBA to sign a form giving the Defendant access to one of
her accounts and she was advised by a bank officer
that the authority gave the
Defendant the ability to operate her account.
of this evidence is accurate. Except for the timing of the Defendant’s
re-entry into the complainant’s life, in relation
to which there is no
dispute, each of the other pieces of evidence is supported by objective evidence
(in the form of bank and hospital
complainant also remembered smaller details, telling police that, while she paid
for most things, the Defendant paid for swimming
expenses. That the Defendant
paid for swimming expenses appears to be reflected in the Defendant’s bank
statement, which records
an expense on the day he moved in with the complainant
that appears to have been for swimming ($82 at the ASC swim school) and which
records that the Defendant also twice spent $20 at Club Lime ANU while he was
living with the complainant (from 28 May to 12 July
payments can be contrasted with payments of $10 the Defendant made to Club Lime
ANU either side of the period that the Defendant
was living with the
complainant. The payments to ANU Club Lime were at irregular intervals, which is
consistent with the complainant’s
evidence that the Defendant paid to go
swimming rather than those being payments consistent with ongoing gym membership
fees. Given
that the cost doubled when the Defendant was living with the
complainant, this is consistent with the Defendant paying for both of
swimming when the Defendant was living with the complainant (as the complainant
said occurred occasionally), but only
paying for himself either side of that
the extent that the complainant also suggested that she paid for everything
else, that may not be accurate, as there are expenses
recorded on the
Defendant’s bank account statement for, for example, food outlet stores,
grocery stores and homewares and home
improvement stores during the time that
the Defendant was living with the complainant. However, it is not clear that the
complainant
was trying to tell police that she paid for everything.
told police that the Defendant did not pay her anything. That appears to be
true, as there is no evidence which indicates that
he did pay the complainant
also told police that the Defendant did not contribute to house costs. To the
extent that the complainant had in mind direct house
costs like energy and
water, that is also true, as those expenses were automatically deducted from her
the amounts that the Defendant spent while he was living with the complainant
were not significant ($186.27 at grocery stores,
$73.03 at a chemist and vitamin
stores, $89.85 at homewares and home improvement stores and $101.30 at food
outlets). Accordingly,
the complainant’s recollection that she was paying
for food and coffees may well be true, even if the Defendant also incurred
expenses of that kind.
Accordingly,
while I need to assess the complainant’s evidence carefully, it is clear
that her evidence is not
inherently unreliable. Indeed, on matters that
can be tested against objective evidence, I find that the complainant’s
was reliable.
the other hand, the Defendant was evasive in his interview with police, and the
statements he made to police and to Ms Valent (by
email), contained
inconsistencies and errors. Some of the statements were misleading and others
were clearly untrue and known by
the Defendant to be untrue. I do not accept
anything that the Defendant said as being truthful unless corroborated by other
noted earlier in these reasons, the two versions of events that the Defendant
put forward to police and Ms Valent, in relation
to financial matters concerning
him and the complainant during the relevant period, were that he and the
complainant:
(a) shared whatever money was left over once bills were paid and, to that end,
they shared part of an account, from which the Defendant
withdrew money for them
to do things together, withdrawing a little bit at a time (version to police);
(b) agreed to save for a car together and, to that end, the complainant
transferred $1,000 to the Defendant each payday, with the
goal of the Defendant
saving $10,000 towards the car (version to Ms Valent).
former was never put to the complainant in cross-examination and does not appear
to be relied on by the Defendant as having been
an arrangement that he and the
complainant had adopted. It is not consistent with the objective evidence in any
case, as I will discuss.
latter version of events is inconsistent with the evidence. It is possible that
the complainant agreed to buy a car with the Defendant,
as the complainant
indicated was the case. However, insofar as the Defendant explained this version
of events in his email to Ms
Valent, it is inconsistent with:
(a) the complainant’s evidence that she did not make any transfers to the
Defendant’s account;
(b) the Defendant’s concession that he made all of the transfers once the
complainant was hospitalised; and
(c) the objective evidence. The transfers on the bank statement do not reflect
the sum he told Ms Valent that the complainant had
transferred to him, nor were
the transfers made in regular intervals like payday payments are.
these reasons, which are elaborated on below, I do not believe the versions of
events given by the Defendant. I do not even think
that they, or either of them,
might be true.
The Defendant’s interview with police
Defendant gave a statement to police by way of recorded interview conducted on 6
August 2023.
Answer 114 the following exchange occurred:
Q113: Right. Now, can
you tell me about the current financial arrangements that you and your ex-wife
A114: Well, we don’t have any financial arrangements ... Although, we
– we – you could call it a financial arrangement.
Since we’ve
been living together ... she trusted me and she said, ‘Look, you can
manage the finances.’ And I said
to her, ‘Okay. Well, if I manage
your finances, I’m sure we’ll be both better off.’ Her bills
are all being
make two observations about what the Defendant said in this exchange.
first is that the proposition that the complainant had agreed to the Defendant
looking after her finances is consistent with her
evidence, including her
evidence in relation to the reason why she authorised him to access her account
(I will return to that issue
later). The second is that, despite the apparent
truth of that proposition, the Defendant’s statement is also misleading.
consider that the Defendant’s answer contains a deliberate indication that
he was paying the bills and, in that way, looking
after her financial interests.
However, the following exchange then occurred:
Q117: Yeah. When was
the last bill paid?
A117-118: Well, the bills come out automatically ... she set up that on her
phone that all the bills are paid.
answer makes clear that the Defendant was not actually looking after her
financial interests by paying bills. She had arranged
for automatic deductions
from her account. That she had done so is consistent with automatic deductions
for ActewAGL and Icon Water
that were taken by direct debit from her Beyond Bank
savings account during the relevant period.
Defendant then said, at A119:
whatever money was left over, we shared.
was not true. As I will discuss later in these reasons, where I undertake a more
detailed analysis of the relevant bank statements,
the Defendant shared little,
if any, of the money that he received during the relevant period from his
pension, and instead transferred
that money (which, without access to the
complainant’s money, he ordinarily withdrew for himself in cash) to the
CBA car savings
account he created when he was living with the complainant. Of
the complainant’s money, the bulk of that money went to the
Defendant’s car savings account, either directly or indirectly.
Defendant made similar statements at Answers 121 to 130, as
Q120: What money is she receiving at the moment?
A121: Well, she has a special kind of pension which comes from her
superannuation
Q122: Okay. And what about yourself?
A122: I’m just on a normal Government pension.
Q128: Can you tell me more about the setup with how the finances work while
you’ve been living together?
A128: Right. Well, whatever money we have leftover, right, like I said to
you, we shared it
Q130: Is that in a shared bank account? How does it work? What does it look
A130: Ah, we had a shared part of that account. So most of it stays with her
and some of it was shared. So I just withdrew money,
I would say, and we went
out and did things together, so.
information is clearly not accurate. As I have discussed already, while there
was an agreement that the Defendant could access
the complainant’s
account, the evidence is inconsistent with his assertion that most of the money
stayed with the complainant
and with his assertion that he just withdrew money
so that they could do things together. In relation to the latter assertion, as
will discuss shortly, he withdrew money on the day he obtained access to the
account, and not at any other time.
Answer 131, the Defendant made the following statement:
where has that money come out of – which account – when you do
things together?
A131: Um, I don’t even know, to tell you the truth, because I think I
paid for most of it and it’s from my account
note that this is contradictory to the statement that he had just made to
police, that they shared a part of the complainant’s
Defendant also spoke of withdrawing money from the complainant’s account.
A136 – 137: ... She has one account and I have one
account, but she also asked the bank ... that I can operate.
A138: So, like, I could go and withdraw money from that account
Q139: When was the last time you withdrew money from her account?
A139: Probably when I was with her.
Q140: when was that?
A140: Six weeks ago
note that this information is correct, but it is contradictory to the
explanation he initially provided to police, which is that
he was managing their
finances by withdrawing money from a part of the complainant’s account so
that they could do things together,
seemingly throughout the relevant
the Defendant said at Answers 144 to 149:
A144-145: Well, she gave
me permission to withdraw money if I – if I needed it ... but I never
withdrew it for my own needs
Q147: Do you know how much money it was at the time roughly?
A 148-149: We took – took about – withdrawing a little bit at a
time ... As much as we needed for a morning tea
answer is inconsistent with the complainant’s bank records. There were
only two withdrawals during the relevant period,
both on the day he obtained
authority to access the complainant’s account (29 June 2023), of $400
Defendant was asked to confirm how he withdrew money. He said:
so when you say ‘withdraw money’, are you doing it electronically
and then into an account, or are you physically
going to an ATM, using the card
and withdrawing case?
A151: Um, we going to the ATM
is, the Defendant confirmed that the answers he had given to that point
concerned the physical withdrawal of funds from an ATM.
In the following
exchange he distinguished the withdrawal of funds from an ATM from a transaction
involving a transfer to his account.
A203 - 205 [in
relation to the Defendant transferring $400 in August 2023, after the FVO had
been made]: I did actually ask her. Yeah.
I ask her, ‘Look, I don’t
have any money’ ... ‘Is it alright with you if I withdraw
$400?’ And she
said, ‘Yes. That’s quite alright’
Q206: Okay. And what happened in relation to the $400?
A206: I withdrew it
Q207: Once again, so how did that withdrawal take place? So you access her
account. Withdrew the money from that account. Where did
the money go? ..
A207: That goes into my personal account ...
Q209: Okay. So I just want to clarify because, prior to this, you said the
last time you withdrew money was about six weeks ago when
you were with her
A209: Yes. That’s actually withdrawing money that we had in hand. This
was a transaction
Defendant was then asked whether any transactions had occurred (as opposed to
withdrawals), or any other time that the complainant’s
bank account had
been accessed. He said:
A210: I think I did ask her a couple of
times before
answer is clearly misleading and contradictory. His statements to that point
were that he had only ever withdrawn money as cash,
until 5 August 2023. In this
answer, the Defendant said that, in addition to the transaction on 5 August
2023, he asked to transfer
funds a couple of times. However, at the hearing he
conceded that he accessed her account several times whilst she was in hospital
and, as I have found, he also made numerous other transfers to his account
between 27 June and 12 July 2023.
the Defendant confirmed his position that the amounts he and the complainant had
spent were small. He said:
Q228: So ... over the last six weeks,
have there been any larger purchases that you have jointly made? Like, anything
more than, say,
Q229: No? So it’s all usually what we call small change. It’s
dealing in the hundreds of dollars
this is a misleading statement in the context of the questions that had been
asked. It is true that no large joint purchases
had been made, but the clear
impression he gave was that he had only accessed the complainant’s money
to withdraw cash to pay
for small items like morning teas when, in fact, he had
made large transfers of funds to his account.
Defendant submits that the statements he made in his interview with police are
consistent with the complainant’s evidence
and with his innocence. For the
reasons I have already articulated, I disagree.
truth, as I have noted later in these reasons when analysing the
Defendant’s and the complainant’s bank statements,
(a) the two withdrawals he made on 29 June 2023, when he obtained access to the
complainant’s account, totalled $800, which
is not a small sum;
(b) otherwise, on several occasions most (and on some occasions all) of the sums
that were deposited in the complainant’s account
were transferred to one
of the Defendant’s two CBA accounts on, or a short time after, the day the
amounts were credited to
the complainant’s account;
(c) on several occasions, substantial sums were transferred to the Defendant,
including $3,000 on 10 July 2023 (while the Defendant
was still living with the
Defendant but after which her mental health had obviously deteriorated) and
$3,980 on 13 July 2023 (the
day after the complainant was admitted to
(d) some transfers were made directly to the Beyond Bank car savings account and
the CBA car savings account and the majority of
sums that were transferred to
the Defendant’s other CBA account were subsequently transferred to his CBA
car savings account;
(e) in large part the Defendant transferred his pension payments to his car
savings account (that is, he did not share his money);
(f) the Defendant made nine transfers (on six separate days) from the
complainant’s account to his after the complainant was
admitted into
hospital, totalling $5,750 (quite clearly not withdrawing a little bit at a time
for him and the complainant to have
morning tea and without any indication that
the Defendant needed the money for anything in particular).
The Defendant’s email to Ms Valent
Defendant wrote an email to Ms Valent on 16 November 2024 in which he made
certain statements which sought to explain why sums
of money had been
transferred from the complainant’s account to his. He said,
relevantly:
First of all I want to apologise to you for now I see
that you are right and I was wrong in understanding the situation and trusting
your mother and not taking your advice. I hope that you can forgive me ... Now
going back to your mother I would like to explain
that trusting her I was wrong
too. She is the one that came up with all the ideas that she talked me into, one
of them was that we
will save for our future car. This she said we will do in an
account that was apart from her name, because she said that she did
you as you had access to her account. I suggested to open a new account in her
name as well as mine with special conditions
attached. This of course never
eventuated as she was hospitalised and everything came to an end. Before this
she was transferring
money into my account, I do not know why, and she said we
will open our joint account later. Perhaps she trusted me ... Now she is
accusing me for stealing her money while she is disposing of my property. She
talked me into selling my car so I do not even have
that. Even my bike is there,
so I bought another. At her place I had my bed, desk, books, documents, camping
equipment, tools, the
list goes on ... At my place I had almost nothing, so
when the Police told me that I had to leave her place I came back to nothing.
Now going back to the money part she wanted me to have access to her account in
a limited way. I found that 1,000 was transferred
to my phone every payday. She
said that she wanted me to put this money towards our car till 10,000- was going
to be reached. I did
as she had asked me to. Then the transfers were stopped,
but I was going to stop it anyway .. I have to I will give the money back
her, but I do not really want to as I need to buy another car and all the
property that I lost because of her ... I hope that
you will now see that all I
wanted to do was to help her. But perhaps this was a mistake too ...
I will discuss, the complainant and the Defendant did discuss buying a car
together. The Defendant did also move his possessions
complainant’s house when he was staying with her. Accordingly, there is a
kernel of truth to the contents of the email.
given the inconstancies, untruths and misleading statements to police, his email
to Ms Valent must be approached with caution,
particularly as he had been
charged with the present offences by the time he wrote the email (and, indeed, a
hearing date had been
set). Similarly, parts of the Defendant’s email are
untrue and contradictory.
particular, the Defendant states that, before her hospitalisation, the
complainant transferred money into his account, but he did
not know why. This is
at odds with his earlier statement that they had agreed that they would save for
a joint car and that they
would do so in an account apart from the
complainant’s name because she did not trust Ms Valent.
in the email, the Defendant states that he discovered that the complainant had
transferred $1,000 to him every payday and that
he did as the complainant asked
him to do. However, this is inconsistent with the bank records, which show only
one payment of $1,000
being transferred to the Defendant. His reference to
having done what the complainant asked him to do is unexplained.
the end of the email, the Defendant stated that the transfers were stopped, but
that he was going to stop them anyway. This
was not true.
strong impression given by this statement was that payments were made by the
complainant, later discovered by the Defendant, which
then stopped, but which
the Defendant was going to put an end to anyway, presumably because (as he
claimed) he had just discovered
them. There are several issues with the
(a) Firstly, why would he put an end to the payments, when he said that they had
agreed to save for a car together and, on that version,
the complainant was
giving effect to that agreement?
(b) Secondly, putting to one side the fact that $1,000 was not being routinely
transferred to his account as he said had occurred
each payday, it is clear that
the transfers that were made were not being made without the Defendant’s
knowledge – undermining
the impression that he had just discovered the
transfers into his account at some point. The first transfer was made to his
Bank car savings account, the second transfer to his general CBA account
and the seventh to his CBA car savings account. Assuming
that the transfers were
made by the complainant, and not by the Defendant himself, how would the
complainant know about each of these
accounts without the Defendant knowing that
she wanted to transfer funds into them and providing her with the account
details? Further,
on the same day that the third of the transfers was made to
his main CBA account (2 July 2023), the Defendant transferred the same
his CBA car savings account. As I will discuss in greater detail later in these
reasons, the pattern of transferring money
out of the general CBA account, into
which he had received funds from the complainant’s account, into the
Defendant’s
CBA car savings account, continued throughout the relevant
(c) Thirdly, the transfers were not stopped. Nor, as he says elsewhere in the
email, did everything just come to an end when the
complainant was hospitalised.
Not only did he continue to live in the complainant’s house, but he made
several transfers from
her account to his, totalling over $5,000, in the two
weeks following her hospitalisation and a further $400 a week or so later,
day before he was interviewed by police for breaching an FVO that Ms Valent had
obtained against him.
(d) Fourthly, while in contrast to his interview with police 15 months earlier,
the Defendant discloses in this email that there
were several transfers of funds
from the complainant’s account to his, it is noteworthy that even in this
email, after he had
been charged with 19 counts of theft, and knowing (even on
his case) that he had made the transfers to his account that were the
nine of those transfers, the Defendant still did not admit to having made any of
the transfers.
the Defendant’s statements to police, the Defendant’s email to Ms
Valent thus contained inconsistencies, untruths
and misleading statements. Taken
together, the statements he made to police and in his email to Ms Valent reflect
poorly on his credibility
and I do not accept anything that the Defendant said
as being truthful unless corroborated by other evidence.
financial arrangement did the Defendant have with the complainant, if
What was the nature of the Defendant’s authority to operate the
complainant’s bank account?
is not in dispute that the complainant and the Defendant attended the CBA on 29
June 2023. On that occasion, she signed an authority
granting the Defendant
authority to access her account. A bank officer explained to her that that the
form she was signing authorised
the Defendant to operate her account.
the complainant said that she would not have signed the form if she was well,
and that she was confused to some extent at the
time, it is clear that she
considered her position before agreeing to do so. This is clear from her
evidence that she thought the
Defendant would consult with her about the
operation of the account and her expectation that he would not use the account
extent that he did. That is, she was comfortable with the Defendant
accessing the account, subject to conditions.
said that, the authority was given in unusual circumstances. It appears from the
complainant’s evidence that the complainant
was not involved in the
discussions that the Defendant had with the bank about the reason for the
authority to be given and was asked
to sign the form as a fait accompli.
complainant gave the following evidence:
And so you've talked about
remembering giving Theo access to your account. Do you remember when you signed
that document - or not
when, but do you remember what was happening when you
signed that document?‑‑‑I just - he seemed to be very friendly
to me and trying - making out that he was my ally and he was trying to help me,
and I just - I just wanted to trust him, to give
him the benefit of the doubt
that he wanted to help me, and I was hoping that he - in giving this authority,
that he would let me
know any time he wanted to draw money out for whatever
reason, but I didn't give it to him with the intention that he drew out large
sums of money of $1,000, or $2,000 or $3,000.
Yes?‑‑‑They were way more than what I had in mind. Even
though I gave him this authority, I didn't expect that
he would use it to the
extent that he did. I thought he would still - I thought he would still consult
So do you remember whether you talked with Theo before you signed this
document at all
Okay?‑‑‑No, what happened - what I remember was we went to
the bank together - the Commonwealth Bank in Tuggeranong
- and he asked me to
sit down - because they had seats to wait in the bank. He asked me to sit down
and he went and spoke to the
bank officer. This is how I remember it, and I'm
hoping I remember it correctly ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes?--- - - - but this is how I remember it. He asked me to sit down while
he talked to a bank officer, and after he was talking
to the bank officer for a
while, the bank officer approached me and asked me to sign this document, and
she explained to me that
it's a document giving him authority to operate my
account, and I thought, 'Okay, I'll sign it, because she asked me to sign it,'
but I think if I wasn't - if I was well, I wouldn't have signed this
And ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑Because I
wouldn't have trusted - I wouldn't have trusted him with this if I was
I was - I was being very trusting of him when I signed it.
Yes. And ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑So I
signed it because I thought it was an appropriate thing to do if I wanted
the complainant said that she hoped that she was recalling the incident
correctly, she did have a recollection of attending
the Tuggeranong branch of
the CBA and the layout of that branch. That is, she had a specific recollection
of an occasion that obviously
did occur. She recalled, as is indicated on the
authority form, that she was advised by the bank officer that the authority gave
the Defendant the ability to operate her account.
accept the complainant’s evidence that the Defendant took control at the
bank and arranged for the relevant paperwork to be
prepared without the
complainant’s involvement, but that a bank officer explained to her that
the authority would allow the
Defendant to operate her account. She would not
have signed the authority if she had been well (taking her medication) but, at
time, she trusted him and thought it was an appropriate thing to do if she
wanted his help. I accept her evidence that the Defendant
told her that he
wanted to help her look after her money.
complainant hoped that the Defendant would let her know any time he wanted to
withdraw money out, but it is not clear that she
communicated that expectation.
Nevertheless, the Defendant must have appreciated that he had an obligation to
act in her interests
or in accordance with any arrangement that they had come
to. On the version of events that the Defendant gave to police, he said
complainant gave him permission to withdraw money from the account if he needed
it. I accept that might be true.
is no evidence which suggests that the complainant gave the Defendant access to
her account for him to use her money for whatever
purpose and in whatever amount
he pleased. Indeed, there is no evidence that the complainant gave the Defendant
access to her account
for any purpose other than to assist her with her
finances. Subject to the possibility that the complainant gave the Defendant
to withdraw money from the account if he needed it, the authority
that the complainant gave to the Defendant was not directed at
benefitting the
Defendant in any way.
There was no
other financial arrangement between the Defendant and the complainant
I have found above, I accept that it might be true that the complainant told the
Defendant that he could withdraw money from her
account if he needed it. I do
not accept that the Defendant and the complainant had any other financial
arrangement.
No arrangement for the complainant to give the
Defendant money
complainant’s evidence does not support a finding that she had any
particular discussion with the Defendant about the management
of finances,
certainly not any discussion about specific dollar amounts (or even a range of
amounts), that she would or might give
him or was prepared for the Defendant to
take. The Defendant describes it as an ad hoc arrangement, predicated not on any
conversation,
but an assumption of mutual understanding.
is right in saying that there is no evidence of any conversation, but I do not
agree that there was an assumption of mutual understanding.
There was no
arrangement at all.
in her evidence the complainant agreed with the proposition that there was a
mutual understanding, she also said in answer to
that proposition, ‘I just
trusted him’. She did not recall any discussion in which she gave the
Defendant permission
to withdraw particular sums of money and there is no
evidence of the complainant doing or saying anything from which a mutual
understanding
of that kind could have arisen.
complainant notes in her evidence that the Defendant started taking her to the
bank quite frequently at one stage, and then really
frequently, seemingly in the
period prior to 29 June 2023 when the Defendant arranged for the complainant to
give him access to her
the complainant stated that the Defendant attended to a range of administrative
matters at the bank, I consider that it is
likely that, at least on some
occasions when they attended the bank, they withdrew money. The administrative
activities the complainant
described do not explain, on their own, why they
would have visited the bank with such frequency. It might also explain the
complainant’s
evidence that she thought that the Defendant was always
asking her before taking out cash and the statement in her evidence that,
because she gave the Defendant $100 one day, the Defendant should not have
assumed that she would give him $100 in the next
couple of days, or $200 the day
complainant’s evidence is that she wanted to help the Defendant
financially, to a small extent, because she believed it
was reasonable to help
him with some money. She said she was prepared to give the Defendant money for
of $100 or $200.
that was just what she considered reasonable and there is no evidence of her
discussing such payments with the Defendant.
The complainant was clear in her
evidence that she did not think that she would have been happy with the
Defendant taking large sums
of money – of $3,000, $2,000 and $1,000
– as was transferred to his account. There is no evidence that she agreed
such sums being transferred to the Defendant’s account.
she gave evidence that she would have agreed to possibly giving the Defendant
$2,000 overall, but there is no evidence
that she discussed any arrangement in
that respect with the Defendant. She agreed that it was just based on a general
idea at the
time she gave her evidence of what she would have approved at the
is, the complainant’s evidence is simply that, now, looking back, she
thought she would have been happy to give him particular
amounts to thank him
for his assistance, up to a particular cap. She makes reference on several
occasions to the fact that the dollar
figures she had mentioned in her evidence
were figures that, with hindsight, she thinks she would have thought reasonable
time. Her evidence is not that she in fact formed the intention to give
the Defendant those amounts, nor that she told the Defendant
that she would.
is to be kept in mind that the amounts withdrawn from the complainant’s
account and transferred from her account to the Defendant’s
accounts do
not reflect the sums she identified in her evidence, with only three out of the
19 impugned transactions being for the
sums she identified and the total of the
all the transactions well exceeding the cap she identified. That is, the
objective evidence
does not support there having been a mutual understanding
that the complainant would give the Defendant $100 or $200 every few days.
Consistently
with that view of the evidence, there is nothing in the statement that the
Defendant gave to police, or the email he
sent to Ms Valent, that suggested that
he and the complainant had discussed the complainant giving him any particular
sums of money.
accept that the complainant’s evidence is reliable. Some of the
complainant’s answers in relation to questions that
were asked of her were
attendant with some uncertainty, as she sought to recall what had happened and
to hypothesise about what she
would have thought about particular matters at the
time, but the overall tenor of her evidence, which I have described above, is
clear. Her evidence, that she and the Defendant never discussed the payment of
money to him, is not challenged.
do not accept that the complainant and the Defendant had an agreement or
understanding pursuant to which the complainant agreed
that she would give the
Defendant any money. As noted above, she may have given the Defendant permission
to withdraw money if he
needed it and she may have gifted the Defendant money
(in the form of cash) from time to time prior to 29 June 2023, however I do
find that there was any agreement for the complainant to give the Defendant $100
or $200, or any other amount, on an ongoing
the same reasons, I do not accept that the Defendant believed (or, even, that he
might have believed) that the complainant would
give him $100 or $200 (or any
other particular sum) on an ongoing basis, or that she had authorised him to
take such sums from her
Accordingly,
the Prosecution’s Alternative Submission falls away.
the extent that the Defendant’s case relied on there having been an
agreement that the complainant would give, or the Defendant
could take, money on
a regular basis, I also reject that submission.
No agreement that
the Defendant could use the complainant’s account to transfer money to his
there is no evidence that the complainant ever agreed to the Defendant
transferring money from her account to his. Further,
the complainant’s
evidence, which I accept, is that she did not realise that the Defendant was
transferring money to his own
Defendant’s statement to police, that the complainant had given him
permission to withdraw money from her account if he
needed it is, in
circumstances where he explained that, by withdraw, he meant withdraw cash from
an ATM, consistent with the complainant’s
evidence that she had given him
permission to withdraw funds from her account, not make transfers from it.
find that there was no agreement that the Defendant could use the
complainant’s account to transfer money to his
A plan to buy a new car but
no agreement for the complainant to give the Defendant money towards the
purchase of a new car
noted in my discussion of the credibility of the Defendant’s statements to
police and Ms Valent, in his email to Ms Valent
the Defendant asserted that the
complainant talked him into saving for a car together and suggested to the
Defendant that this be
done in an account that was not in her name because she
was worried that Ms Valent had access to her account.
Defendant asserted that he suggested that they open a joint account but that,
while that never eventuated, the complainant transferred
money to the
Defendant’s account prior to her hospitalisation. Confusingly, the
Defendant said that he did not know why that
money was transferred but later in
the email said that the complainant transferred $1,000 every payday and told the
Defendant that
she wanted him to put the money towards their car, until $10,000
was reached.
the reasons which I have articulated earlier in these reasons, the
Defendant’s email to the complainant contained numerous
untruths. Those
untruths undermine the credibility of the other claims made in the email and the
Defendant’s credibility more
generally. As I found in considering the
Defendant’s credibility, I do not accept anything that the Defendant said
truthful unless corroborated by other evidence.
do not accept that the claims made in the Defendant’s email are
note the complainant’s clear refutation of the proposition that was put to
her at the hearing that she had a plan to transfer
up to $10,000 to the
Defendant to buy a car together. She said that, while the Defendant might have
had that plan, she never had
it. She agreed that she had looked at cars with the
Defendant but said that she wanted him to save for his car for himself. Given
general acceptance of the credibility of the complainant’s evidence, the
clarity of her evidence and her recollection of
her position at the time, I
accept the complainant’s evidence.
answering questions about the use to which the cash that was taken out on 29
June 2023 was put, the complainant suggested that
the Defendant might have put
some of it into his bank account for the car. She noted that the Defendant had
opened an account with
Beyond Bank to start saving for a car which, as I noted
earlier in these reasons is reflected in the Defendant’s bank account
statements.
complainant said that the Defendant noticed that she had a car account and
wanted a car account like hers. Her recollection that
she had a car savings
account is reflected in her bank statements. Her evidence as to the
Defendant’s actions is consistent
with the chronology of events, namely
that the complainant had a car savings account when the Defendant moved in with
opened a car savings account in his own name about a week after he
moved in. I accept the complainant’s evidence that the Defendant
the complainant’s approach to saving for a car.
complainant also suggested that the Defendant might have put the money into a
car account that the complainant thought that he
held with the CBA. As also
noted earlier in these reasons, her understanding that the Defendant had a CBA
car savings account is
also consistent with the Defendant’s bank
is no suggestion in the evidence that the Defendant opened a car savings account
in order to fund the joint purchase of car,
nor that the complainant had any
role in setting up his accounts. I find that the Defendant was simply copying
the complainant as
the Defendant wanted to save for a new car as well.
accept that the complainant had a good recall of the discussions that she and
the Defendant had about him opening his car savings
accounts in order that the
Defendant might save for a car like the complainant was.
complainant also recalled going to car dealerships with the Defendant. She
recalled going to a BMW dealership and the Defendant
encouraging her to go along
with his plan to buy a BMW together. She said she went along with the plan at
the time because she was
high and elevated but, even at that time, she wondered
how the Defendant was going to achieve it, or how they could achieve it, because
the car the Defendant was looking at cost more than $120,000.
complainant said that she did not raise her concerns about the affordability of
the plan with the Defendant, but did recall having
a discussion about saving for
a car. She was clear that she did not agree to any plan to match the money that
the Defendant had in
his account. She explained that she had $15,000 in her car
savings account (which is reflected in her bank statements) and that the
Defendant was going to try to match what she had, as the Defendant acknowledged
that he had a lot less than what she did.
the complainant’s clear recollection of the conversations she had with the
Defendant, I accept the complainant’s
evidence that she did tell the
Defendant that she would go along with his plan to buy a BMW together but that
there was no plan as
to how they would achieve that goal, including no agreement
for the complainant to give the Defendant money towards the purchase
Rather, the only thing that was discussed was that the Defendant would try to
save as much as the complainant had saved
in her car savings account, being
around $15,000.
No agreement for the
Defendant to hold the complainant’s money on trust
also do not accept that the complainant and the Defendant had an agreement that
the Defendant would hold her money for her in his
account in order to put the
money out of Ms Valent’s reach. The Defendant’s email suggests that
the complainant wanted
to save for a car in this way but, as I have found, the
email from the Defendant to Ms Valent lacks credibility. It is also not a
version of events that the Defendant articulated to police when asked about the
financial arrangements that he and the complainant
as the Defendant relies on a more general desire on the complainant’s part
to avoid Ms Valent interfering in her financial
affairs, I note that this is an
issue that appears to have been more significant to the Defendant than it was to
the complainant.
cross-examination, the complainant accepted that she and Ms Valent had had a
falling out over the complainant’s decision
to ween herself off her
medication from around September 2022. She said that she and Ms Valent had not
had a lot of contact after
that because Ms Valent was upset with the
complainant.
was asked about the power of attorney that she had made in 2020, which gave Ms
Valent (and Mr Valent) the power to act on the
complainant’s behalf in
relation to a range of matters, including financial matters. It was put to the
complainant that she
told the Defendant that she wanted to revoke the power of
attorney, however the complainant said that she did not remember saying
She remembered the Defendant saying that she should get rid of the power of
attorney but she did not want to do that.
complainant was clear in her refutation of the proposition that the Defendant
told her that she should not revoke the power of
attorney because it was too
complicated. She repeated that it was the Defendant who wanted her to revoke the
power of attorney and
she did not want to because it took a lot of effort and
cost to set it up. She was clear that it was the Defendant encouraging her
given my general acceptance of the reliability of the complainant’s
evidence, and the clarity of her recollection in
relation to this issue, I
accept that the complainant’s evidence about the power of attorney is
complainant accepted in cross-examination that, because of the falling out she
had had with Ms Valent, she was a bit distrusting
of her with respect to the
power of attorney and was concerned that Ms Valent might access her bank
accounts. However, she also gave
evidence that Ms Valent did not have access to
her money at the time that the complainant was distrusting of her, because Ms
only had access when the complainant was not mentally well.
was the complainant’s understanding that Ms Valent could only exercise the
power of attorney if the complainant became unwell,
was hospitalised and was
considered by a doctor to be unable to look after herself. In a general sense,
that understanding is consistent
with the terms of the power of attorney, which
was only exercisable when the complainant was a person ‘with impaired
making capacity’. The complainant said that she did not see the
need to revoke the power of attorney because she thought that
she was well.
accept that that is how the complainant viewed the situation prior to her
hospitalisation. Accordingly, I do not accept that the
complainant was motivated
to transfer her money to the Defendant to put it beyond Ms Valent’s reach
or that she otherwise had
any agreement with the Defendant to hold the money on
trust for her to achieve that objective.
also find that the complainant did not ask the Defendant to hold the money for
her for any other purpose. She was asked in cross-examination
whether she
transferred the money to the Defendant so that he could look after it for her
while she was unwell, however she emphatically
denied that that was possible.
She said that she definitely did not do that. Given the clarity of her evidence,
I accept that it
is reliable.
The withdrawal of funds on 29 June
8212/24 and 8213/24 concern the withdrawal of two amounts of $400 from the
complainant’s account on 29 June 2023, the
day that complainant and the
Defendant went to the CBA to put the authority in place for the Defendant to be
able to access the complainant’s
complainant said that that the Defendant withdrew and kept the money. She
recalled that the Defendant withdrew the money through
the teller although she
could not remember if he asked her to sign the withdrawal form or not. I accept
her evidence.
happened to the money is unclear. The complainant said in evidence that she was
not sure what the Defendant did with the money.
She said that they might have
spent some of it on groceries or the Defendant might have put some of it into
his Beyond Bank or CBA
car savings accounts.
Accordingly,
while it appears that the Defendant did not give any of the money to the
complainant (which is consistent with the Defendant
having taken control of
their finances), the use to which the Defendant put the money is unclear.
Ultimately, the complainant said
that she did not know what the Defendant did
with the money and I note that there are no entries in the Defendant’s
bank statements
indicating that the money was deposited into any of the
Defendant’s accounts.
lack of clarity as to how the money was used, including whether it was used for
what might be described as joint household expenses
such as groceries, makes it
difficult to ascertain what the Defendant’s intention was with respect to
the use of the money
at the time that he withdrew it. Ultimately, there is
insufficient evidence to satisfy me that the Defendant dishonestly appropriated
the money with the intention of permanently depriving the complainant of the
money. Accordingly, these charges must fail.
The Defendant
effected the impugned transfers
am satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that the Defendant made all of the
impugned transfers. He admits making the transfers once
the complainant was
hospitalised and, in my view, the only rational explanation in the circumstances
is that the Defendant also made
the transfers prior to her hospitalisation as
the Defendant took a keen interest in the complainant’s finances soon
after moving in with her and convinced her to
give him access to her account. As
the complainant told police in her FVEIC, evidence which I accept given the
complainant’s
clear recollection of the events, that included:
(a) trying to find out about the complainant’s finances once he moved in
with her, including wanting to see how she effected
transfers electronically.
She explained that the Defendant was intrigued to learn how the complainant used
internet banking and asked
her to show him how she used it. She told police that
she showed the Defendant each step in the process of transferring money from
account to another so that the Defendant could learn for himself, but the
Defendant then started rearranging her whole finances;
(b) taking the complainant to the bank quite frequently, then really frequently,
including to attend to administrative tasks and,
as I have found, likely at
least on some occasions to withdraw cash; and
(c) taking the complainant to the bank and arranging with the bank for her to
sign an authority granting the Defendant access to
one of her accounts. In
circumstances where the complainant’s household bills were automatically
coming out of one of her Beyond
Bank accounts, it is not clear why it was
desirable for the Defendant to have access to the complainant’s account
and, indeed,
the complainant’s evidence is that she did not need the
Defendant’s assistance to manage her finances but just decided
him. It is clear that it was the Defendant who convinced the complainant to give
him access to her account and took the
lead at the bank to put the relevant
authority in place.
nowhere in the Defendant’s interview with police does he say that the
complainant transferred money to him. He refers
to taking cash out. While he
refers in his email to Ms Valent to the complainant having transferred money to
him, the transfers he
states occurred are inconsistent with the bank statements.
As I have found earlier in these reasons, the Defendant’s statements
Valent lack credibility.
the complainant did not recall making the transfers to the Defendant and did not
know the Defendant’s account numbers.
Defendant points to the fact that the complainant had no specific recollection
of whether or not she made the impugned transactions.
As the Defendant submits,
her evidence involved a degree of confusion and conjecture.
that is consistent with the complainant not having effected the transactions
– which, she said, in varying degrees
of certainty, was the case –
and her attempt, in those circumstances to reconstruct what had happened.
Defendant also submits that:
... the entirety of the
complainant’s evidence is infected with conjecture. There is simply no
actual basis in recollection
that founds any of her responses about the
transfers. One would expect someone with a strong recollection of events that
just weeks ago (as was the case at the time of the FVEIC) would
answer definitively ‘I didn’t do X, I didn’t do
it is hard to have a recollection of something that you never experienced and,
in fairness to the complainant, she explained
that her recovery was not complete
when she was interviewed by police. She did her best to try to work out whether
she had made any
of the transactions but, because she had no recollection of the
transactions (in my view, because she did not authorise or effect
them), she had
to do so using post-fact reasoning and reconstruction.
was not confident enough to say, in relation to many of the transactions, that
she definitely did not have a role in them, but
that is understandable given
that she was not well at the time. Nevertheless, she repeatedly indicated that
she had not effected
the transfers.
said several times that the Defendant had taken money out of her account and
that she did not realise that he was doing so. She
said that she thought she
would have remembered if she had made the transfers and, since she did not
remember making any of them,
she considered it highly unlikely that she did. In
other parts of her evidence she said that, if a transfer was to the
Defendant’s
account, she would not have been the one to effect the
transaction. She said she was almost 100 per cent sure that she did not effect
any transfers from her account to his.
later evidence emphasises this position. She confirmed that it was not a case
that, having recovered from her mental health issues,
she was embarrassed by
what she had done while she was unwell, nor was it a case that she had made the
transfers to keep her money
out of the reach of Ms Valent and Mr Falzarano. She
was clear that she did not effect the transfers.
complainant said that she was horrified that the Defendant had let her down by
making out that he was looking after the complainant
when he was in fact trying
to steal money from her. That evidence is consistent with what she told Ms
Valent and Mr Falzarano, being
that there were many transfers on her bank
statement that she was not aware of and that she was very surprised when she
so much money had been taken from her account. That reaction is
consistent with her recollection that she did not effect or authorise
answers did not reflect any antipathy towards the Defendant, contrary to
position the Defendant suggested may have been the case.
In this respect, I note
that she gave evidence (as discussed already) that she would have been content
to give the Defendant money
in acknowledgment of the assistance he was giving
it is unlikely, if the complainant had made the transfers, for her to have
transferred money to all three of the Defendant’s
accounts. It might make
sense to transfer to one of the Defendant’s CBA accounts, once he closed
his Beyond Bank account, if
that is the account number he had initially given to
the complainant, but it is hard to understand why she would have transferred
money to both CBA accounts. If, for example, the complainant had wanted to
transfer money to the Defendant as reimbursement for household
expenses (eg.,
food) and as a gift (eg., to contribute towards his car savings goal), the most
likely way she would have done so
would be to send two separate transfers to the
same account or just send one transfer to the Defendant’s account, and
it to the Defendant to sort out the allocations within his accounts. She
was not managing the Defendant’s money and it is unlikely
that she would
have been concerned as to how the Defendant did so. Nor is it likely that the
Defendant would have given her three
accounts into which to transfer money,
particularly in circumstances where he considered that her mental state was such
that he should
manage her finances.
while the complainant gave evidence that she did give certain gifts to the
Defendant, there is no suggestion in her evidence
that she did so by
transferring money to him. In her FVEIC, she indicated that she had given him
(or let him take out) money in the
form of cash (perhaps being the $100 or $200
figures she referred to), and said that she bought a metal drawer cabinet for
which cost about $600, a puffer jacket from Macpac and a t-shirt from
Country Road. She also noted that she paid for their food costs
and coffees when
they went out. On her evidence, she would not have transferred money as
reimbursement for any expenses incurred
by the Defendant because she considered
that she was paying for everything.
the transfers that were made are inconsistent with the complainant having gifted
money to the Defendant, both in terms of
the overall amount that was transferred
($11,500) and the size of many of the transfers (including $400 on 27 June; $700
$3,000 on 10 July; $3,980 on 13 July (the date after the complainant
was hospitalised); $1,000 on 27 July and $400 on 5 August).
inconsistent with the transfers being gifts because they well-exceeded the
figures that the complainant said that she would
have been comfortable with, and
because on several occasions the transfers resulted in most, if not all, of the
sums that had been
credited to the complainant’s account being transferred
to the Defendant’s account. This explains why the transfers were
what might seem like ‘random clumps’ (as the Defendant describes
them) – they reflected the timing and
amount of payments that were
credited to the complainant’s account during the relevant period.
also note that, for the period 2 July 2023 to 19 July 2023, there are 25 entries
in the complainant’s account, with over half
of those entries (14 debits)
being transfers to one of the Defendant’s accounts. There were otherwise
three credits, at least
one debit, and seven transactions of unknown character
(which could have been credits, debits or a combination).
such a large proportion of the complainant’s money is not consistent with
a ‘thank you payment’. While the
complainant accepted that she made
unwise financial decisions when unwell, there is no evidence that she was so
unwell for the whole
of the relevant period that she would take such an
all of the impugned transfers except the first one were made during the period
that the Defendant had authority to operate
the complainant’s account (29
June to 5 August 2023). If it had been the complainant who made the
pre-hospitalisation transfers,
I would have expected more transfers to have been
made prior to 29 June 2023, rather than those payments having only commenced at
were no transfers from the complainant’s account to the Defendant’s
Beyond Bank car savings account between 6 June
2023 (when it was opened) and 27
June 2023 (when the first of the impugned transfers was made to that account).
There were also no
transfers from the complainant’s account to the
Defendant’s general CBA account between 9 May 2023 (the beginning of
period covered by the bank statement for that account) and 2 July 2023 (when the
first of the impugned transactions to that account
was made). The
Defendant’s CBA car savings account was only opened on 29 June 2023.
the first transfer, to the Defendant’s Beyond Bank account, was made
before the Defendant obtained authority to access
the complainant’s
account, the complainant gave evidence (as noted above) that the Defendant
watched the complainant using
her banking app, which provides an explanation for
how he could have made that transfer as well. As the complainant explained in
her evidence in court, the Defendant often watched her transact on her phone,
sitting right next to her, and could have seen her
enter her PIN. I also note
that this transfer was only made two days prior to the complainant obtaining
access to the complainant’s
account. Having regard to all the other
circumstances, including my satisfaction that it was the Defendant who made all
of the transfers
to the Defendant’s CBA accounts, I am satisfied that this
transfer was also made by the Defendant and not by the complainant.
during the period the Defendant had access to the complainant’s account,
most of the sums that were credited to the
complainant’s account from time
to time were transferred to one of the Defendant’s two CBA accounts on, or
a short time
after, the day the amounts were credited to the complainant’s
account – I note, in particular, that:
(a) between 2 and 4 July 2023, $200 was received into the complainant’s
account (in a single transaction) and, on 4 July 2023,
$200 was then transferred
to the Defendant’s account (and a further $200 on 6 July 2023) (there were
no other transactions
between 2 and 6 July 2023);
(b) between 6 July and 10 July 2023, $3,000 was received into the
complainant’s account (in a single transaction) and, on 10
$3,000 was transferred to the Defendant’s accounts ($2,000 directly to the
Defendant’s car savings account)
(there were no other transactions between
6 and 10 July 2023);
(c) between 10 and 13 July 2023, at least $4,952.28 was received into the
complainant’s account and, on 13 July 2023, $3,980
was transferred to the
Defendant’s accounts ($3,000 directly to the Defendant’s car savings
account) (there was only
one other transaction between 10 and 13 July); and
(d) between 19 and 27 July 2023, $1,952 was received into the
complainant’s account (in a single transaction) and, on 27 July
$1,000 was transferred to the Defendant’s account (there were no other
transactions between 19 and 27 July 2023).
can be seen from the dates that I have identified, this pattern continued across
both the pre and post-hospitalisation periods.
As it was the Defendant who
adopted that practice post-hospitalisation, this pattern indicates that it was
also he who took that
approach prior to the complainant’s hospitalisation.
only possible explanation in the circumstances for why the complainant would
have taken that approach prior to her hospitalisation
is that she was trying to
put her money beyond Ms Valent’s reach, however, for the reasons I have
already articulated, I do
not accept that she was motivated to do that.
my view, that was a concern which motivated the Defendant’s conduct, a
concern which would have been particularly acute in
the few days leading up to
and after the complainant’s hospitalisation, when the prospect that Ms
Valent’s powers under
the power of attorney would soon be enlivened must
have been obvious to him given his knowledge of the power of attorney and of the
complainant’s declining mental state. That view is consistent with the
largest of the impugned transfers ($3,000 on 10 July
2023 and $3,980 on 13 July
2023, totalling $6,980) being made over those few days.
in a global sense, the majority of the money that was transferred from the
complainant’s account through the impugned
transactions, both before and
after the complainant’s hospitalisation, ended up in the Defendant’s
CBA car savings account.
As discussed below, this is consistent with the
Defendant’s objective of building his car savings account. It is not
with the complainant having effected or authorised any of the
transfers because she did not agree to assist the Defendant to save
Why did the Defendant make the impugned transfers?
find that, in a general sense, the Defendant wanted to use the
complainant’s account to assist him to build his car savings
in these reasons, I discussed why it is clear that the Defendant’s Beyond
Bank car savings account and his CBA car savings
accounts were accounts that he
established in order to save for a car, having copied the complainant’s
practice in that regard.
In the previous section of these reasons, I discussed
the pattern of transactions that the Defendant entered into during the period
that he was able to access the complainant’s account, being that most of
the sums that were credited to the complainant’s
account from time to time
were transferred to one of the Defendant’s two CBA accounts on, or a short
time after, the day the
amounts were credited to the complainant’s
addition, I note that, during the relevant period:
(a) the Defendant transferred $400 to his Beyond Bank car savings account two
days before he was authorised to operate the complainant’s
(b) after the Defendant obtained access to the complainant’s account, the
Defendant transferred $9,850 from the complainant’s
account to one of the
Defendant’s two CBA accounts;
(c) of the sum of $9,850:
(i) $3,550 was transferred directly to the Defendant’s car savings account
($500 prior to the complainant’s hospitalisation
and $3,050 after her
hospitalisation) – meaning that $3,950 was transferred directly to one of
the Defendant’s car savings
accounts (including the Beyond Bank
(ii) $6,300 was transferred to the Defendant’s general CBA account ($3,600
prior to the complainant’s hospitalisation
and $2,700 after the
complainant’s hospitalisation)
(d) in addition to the sum of $6,300 that was transferred from the
complainant’s account to the Defendant’s general CBA
account, he
also received $2,729.40 into that account from other sources (ignoring the sum
of $5,000 that passed through that account
on 29 June 2023 from the Beyond Bank
account on its way to the CBA car savings account), comprising:
(i) pension payments totalling $2,489.40; and
(ii) $240 in cash.
(e) of the total sum of $9,029.40 ($6,300 + $2,729.40) that the Defendant
received into his general CBA account, he transferred $7,345.60
to his CBA car
savings account, he transferred $200 to another CBA account, he withdrew $100
and he spent $954.71. He increased the
balance in his account by $367.58 (from
$13.09 at the end of 29 June 2023 to $380.67 at the end of 5 August 2023);
(f) on several occasions, amounts were transferred from the Defendant’s
general CBA account to his car savings account in the
same, or similar, amount
to sums that had been recently transferred from the complainant’s account
to the Defendant’s
general account – namely:
(i) $200 was transferred from the complainant’s account on 2 July 2023 to
the Defendant’s general CBA account, and $200
was transferred on the same
day to the Defendant’s car savings account;
(ii) $2,000 was transferred from the complainant’s account on 10 July 2023
to the Defendant’s general CBA account, and
$2,000 was transferred on the
same day to the Defendant’s car savings account;
(iii) $980 was transferred from the complainant’s account on 13 July 2023
to the Defendant’s general CBA account, and
$940 was transferred on the
same day to the Defendant’s car savings account (the Defendant also
transferred $30 to his car
savings account from a $30 cash deposit that had been
made to his general CBA account that day); and
(iv) $400 was transferred from the complainant’s account on 5 August 2023
to the Defendant’s general CBA account, and
$300 was transferred on the
same day to the Defendant’s car savings account;
(g) in addition to these transfers:
(i) as noted above, $3,950 was transferred directly to the Defendant’s car
savings accounts from the complainant’s account,
($500 on 27 June 2023,
$500 on 10 July 2023 and $3,000 on 13 July 2023); and
(ii) $1,000 was transferred from the complainant’s account on 27 July 2023
to the Defendant’s general CBA account, and
$1,000 was transferred on 1
August 2023 to the Defendant’s car savings account – however, I note
that the Defendant also
received a pension payment of $829.80 on 1 August 2023
and the amount transferred to the Defendant’s CBA car savings account
27 July 2023 was $275.60.
contextualise these figures I note, by way of a summary of my findings with
respect to the Defendant’s intention in effecting
the impugned transfers,
(a) there was no agreement that the Defendant would hold the complainant’s
money for her in his account, whether in order to
put the money out of Ms
Valent’s reach (which was not a concern that the complainant held) or
(b) the Defendant was given access to the complainant’s account only to
assist her look after her money (and, in that respect,
he was not authorised to
transfer money to his accounts and could only withdraw money for himself if he
needed it);
(c) the complainant did not agree to give the Defendant money to contribute to
his car savings account (and, in fact, there was no
agreement that the
complainant would give the Defendant money at all);
(d) the Defendant and the complainant had a discussion in which the Defendant
said that he would try to match the amount that she
had saved in her car savings
account (which contained around $15,000);
(e) consistently with that discussion, the Defendant grew his car savings
account during the period that he was able to access the
complainant’s
account, from $8,103 on 28 June 2023 to $19,056.87 by 5 August 2023 (an increase
of $10,953.87 over a period
of around five weeks);
(f) $3,550 of that increase was funded directly by payments from the
complainant’s account (noting that the transfer of $400
on 27 June 2023
contributed to the initial savings amount that was transferred from the
Defendant’s Beyond Bank car savings
account to his CBA car savings account
prior to the Defendant obtaining access to the complainant’s account);
(g) the balance of the increase ($7,403.87) was funded by a combination of
transfers from the complainant’s account ($6,300),
the Defendant’s
pension payments ($2,489.40) and cash deposits ($240).
is clear, from the above findings and my analysis of the bank statements,
(a) the Defendant was focused on building his CBA car savings account during the
period he was able to access the complainant’s
(b) he was heavily reliant on transfers from the complainant’s account to
achieve that purpose. At a minimum (that is, assuming
“other” sources of money were transferred to his car savings account
and the complainant’s money was used
for all the expenses that the
Defendant incurred), $8,224.47 of the $10,953.87 increase was funded by
transfers from the complainant’s
account ($10,953.87 - $2,729.40); and
(c) a large proportion of the money that the Defendant transferred from the
complainant’s account ended up in the Defendant’s
car savings
account (at a minimum, $8,224.47 of the $9,850 that was transferred during that
my view, the only rational inference that is compatible with the circumstances
(a) the Defendant effected the impugned transfers as part of a course of conduct
designed to bolster his car savings account;
(b) he knew he was not authorised to take money from the complainant’s
account for that purpose but did so anyway;
(c) as a consequence, it is clear that:
(i) his actions were dishonest according to the standards of ordinary people and
he must have known that he had acted dishonestly;
(ii) he intended to keep the money that ended up in his car savings account as
his own (that is, an intention to permanently deprive
the complainant of the
money). This must have included an intention to represent the funds as his own,
including if the plan to buy
a car with the complainant ever eventuated as,
otherwise, there was no reason (on the evidence which I accept) for him to have
transferred
the money to his car savings account.
noted earlier in these reasons, the Defendant accepts that, if I was to find
that he took the funds from the complainant’s
account for the purpose of
appropriating them into his car savings account and to misrepresent the funds as
his own, I would conclude
that his conduct was dishonest.
conclusion I have reached is, in my view, supported by the statements he made to
police and in his email to Ms Valent which deliberately
avoided disclosing that
he had transferred money from the complainant’s account to his. In my
view, this conduct reflects the
fact that the Defendant knew that he had acted
dishonestly and is consistent with him having had an intention not to return the
to the complainant.
intention to keep the funds is also consistent with his statement to Ms Valent,
even once the transfers were discovered, that he
did not want to return the
money. While his explanation for taking that position was that he had lost
property as a result of living
with the complainant, the money was not his and
he accepted in his email that he would have to return the money, yet he
acknowledged
that he did not want to. Had the transfers not been discovered, I
do not consider that there is any prospect that he would have returned
Defendant’s submissions as to implausibility
Defendant submits that it is implausible that a man of modest means, having
stolen around $10,000, would leave the money in his
account and not spend it. As
an initial observation, the Defendant likely did spend some of the money that he
transferred from the
complainant’s account. He spent $954.71 during the
period he was able to access the complainant’s account.
the fact that the Defendant transferred the money from the complainant’s
account for the purpose of bolstering his
car savings account does provide an
explanation for why, even though the Defendant was not in a particularly good
financial position,
he retained the majority of the money he had obtained from
the complainant.
was saving for a car and, given the discussion he and the complainant had had in
relation to buying a car, including visiting a
BMW dealership, must have thought
that the complainant would follow through with the plan to buy a car together.
As the Defendant
submitted, it is possible that he believed that he would be
able to share his life with the complainant.
noted already, I find that the Defendant and the complainant had discussed
buying a car together on the basis that the Defendant
would try to save as much
in his car savings account as the complainant had saved. The transfers of money
from the complainant’s
account assisted him (together with the
contributions from his pension payments that he was able to transfer to his car
savings account
during the relevant period) to achieve that goal.
during the period that he made the transfers he was also living at the
complainant’s house, with household bills being
paid automatically from
one of the complainant’s Beyond Bank accounts, and the Defendant therefore
also had minimal expenses
at that time, as reflected in the amounts he spent
from the CBA general account. Accordingly, he did not need to spend any of the
money he obtained and could focus on building his car savings account.
Defendant also submitted that it is not plausible that the Defendant would take
the complainant’s money without authorisation,
or take the money with the
intention of keeping it for himself (including representing that the money was
his), in circumstances
where the transfers would inevitably be discovered
because, as the Defendant knew, both the complainant and Ms Valent had oversight
of the complainant’s accounts. I agree that such a course of action does
not appear to be well thought through, however I do
not consider that I should
assume that the Defendant was at all sophisticated.
most obvious reason against making such an assumption is contained in the email
he sent to Ms Valent, which makes assertions that
are clearly untrue on even a
cursory glance of the complainant’s bank account records. These assertions
were made even though
the Defendant had knowledge of the charges that had been
brought against him and the basis for those charges.
untruths and misrepresentations contained in his statements to police and to Ms
Valent all seek to avoid the uncontested fact
that the Defendant made numerous
transfers to his account once the complainant was hospitalised and the fact, as
I have found, that
he made numerous transfers before then, including transfers
of substantial size in the few days prior to and after the complainant’s
hospitalisation. Adopting such a position would not be necessary if he held the
money with the complainant’s authority, or
even if he thought that he did.
He might not, as the Defendant submits, have thought that he would be believed
by Ms Valent, but
what reason did he have to mislead police if he had authority
to make the transfers?
he simply did not contemplate being caught. It is to be observed that the
initial transfers were for smaller amounts ($400
on 27 June, $500 and $200 on 2
July, $200 on 4 July and $200 on 6 July 2023) that might have gone unnoticed. It
was not until the
few days leading up to and after the complainant’s
hospitalisation that the larger (and more noticeable) transfers were made
$2000 and $500 on 10 July, $3,000 and $900 on 13 July 2023). It appears that the
obvious deterioration in the complainant’s
mental state around 8 July 2023
provided a catalyst for these larger transfers and it may also have meant that
the Defendant acted
without thinking.
he thought that he could say, if challenged, as he did in his email to Ms
Valent, that the complainant made or authorised
the transfers, including by
convincing the complainant of that position. He knew, of course, that the
complainant was not well.
Consistently
with that possibility, I note that there are several statements in the
Defendant’s email to Ms Valent that seek
to attribute responsibility to
the complainant for conduct that I am satisfied the Defendant engaged in,
(a) he asserts that he was wrong to trust the complainant, however I am
satisfied that any misplacement of trust was the complainant’s
in trusting
him that he would help her to look after her finances (particularly in the
context of giving him access to her bank account);
(b) he states that it was the complainant who came up with the idea to save for
a car together, whereas I am satisfied that the Defendant
complainant’s practice of having and building a car savings account and it
was he who later convinced her to buy
a car together;
(c) he states that the complainant distrusted Ms Valent because she had access
to the complainant’s account, however, while
the complainant was
distrustful of Ms Valent, she was not concerned that Ms Valent would access the
complainant’s account –
that was a concern that was held by the
Defendant, who encouraged the complainant to revoke the power of attorney she
had given Ms
(d) he states that the complainant transferred money to his account, whereas it
was the Defendant who was doing so (even on his own
case he admits making all of
the post-hospitalisation transfers); and
(e) he states that he lost property because of the complainant, however I accept
the complainant’s evidence that it was the
Defendant’s decision to
move his property to the complainant’s house while he was living there.
consider that the Defendant thus engaged in a deliberate strategy of victim
blaming to avoid taking responsibility for his own actions.
Ultimately,
I do not consider that it is implausible in the circumstances that the Defendant
would take the complainant’s money
authorisation.
Consciousness of guilt
Prosecution relies on the statements that the Defendant made to Ms Valent in his
email (that the complainant had transferred money
to him and he did not know
why, that $1,000 was being transferred every payday and that, while the
transfers stopped, he was going
to stop them anyway) as an ‘Edwards’
lie. That is, the Prosecution submits that the statements contained lies which
demonstrate
a consciousness of guilt on the Defendant’s part and, thus, an
implied admission of guilt.
give myself what is known as an
direction (from
Edwards v The
(1993) 179 CLR 193).
As the Defendant submitted, in order to use the
Defendant’s statements as a lie of implied admission, the Court must be
(a) the Defendant lied (that is, deliberately told an untruth);
(b) the lie relates to a material issue; and
(c) the lie was told out of a realisation of guilt – that is, because the
Defendant feared that telling the truth would implicate
him in the commission of
the relevant offences. In this respect, I note that people do not always act
rationally, and that a person
may lie for reasons unrelated to a realisation of
guilt. For example, a lie may be told out of panic, to escape an unjust
or to avoid a consequence extraneous to the offence.
I am satisfied of these matters, I may take the lies into account as evidence of
the Defendant’s guilt. In this respect I
note that the lies will not
provide sufficient evidence of guilt on their own, but may be considered as part
of all the facts relied
on by the Prosecution.
statements in the email clearly relate to a material issue, being the identity
of the person who made the transfers and the reason
why the transfers were made.
The Defendant accepts that the statements relate to a material issue.
Defendant submits that the statements did not contain lies and were not made out
of a realisation of guilt. The Defendant submits
that, while it is possible to
construe the email as attempting to minimise the Defendant’s conduct to
eschew guilt, there are
preferable interpretations. He says that the purpose of
the email is to reconcile with Ms Valent and that telling the truth (as the
Defendant puts it) – that the complainant had made regular transfers for
the purpose of rewarding him for his assistance and/or
in order to save for a
car – would have frustrated that purpose. The Defendant submits that he
was acutely aware that Ms Valent
considered that the Defendant exploited the
complainant and that he may have considered that she would have rejected what
the Defendant
submitted was the truth out of hand.
the reasons I have set out earlier in these reasons, in considering the
statements made in the email to Ms Valent, the statements
Defendant’s email that are relied on by the Prosecution were lies. The
statements were untrue and the Defendant knew
they were untrue. While the
Defendant did not concede that he deliberately told an untruth, his submissions
do not attempt to argue
the contrary position.
Defendant’s submissions focus on the reason why the Defendant made the
statements that he did. He submits that the statements
comprised a clumsy
attempt at presenting the story that gave the Defendant the best opportunity at
reconciling with his daughter,
knowing that she may have rejected the truth out
do not accept the Defendant’s explanation that Ms Valent would have
rejected the truth out of hand. The obvious issue with
the Defendant’s
submission is that the “truth” he relies on for this submission
– that the complainant made
regular transfers for the purpose of rewarding
him for his assistance and/or in order to save for a car – is, at least in
of the transfers made after the complainant’s hospitalisation,
inconsistent with his concession that he made those transfers,
complainant. It is also inconsistent with my finding that the Defendant made all
of the impugned transfers. If the Defendant
had told the truth (which was, even
on his case, that he made all of the post-hospitalisation transfers), Ms Valent
would not have
rejected that concession out of hand.
it is clear that the Defendant told the lies that he did because he knew that he
had done the wrong thing.
noted earlier in these reasons, he also avoided disclosing to police that he
made the transfers from the complainant’s account.
In circumstances where
he knew that he had made the transfers, I infer that he avoided disclosing that
fact to police because he
knew he had done the wrong thing. He did not want it
known that the transfers had been made because he knew he had made the transfers
without authority. He must have also appreciated that taking the
complainant’s money without her authority was dishonest. Had
authority, there would be no reason to avoid disclosing them to police.
statements made to Ms Valent came after the Defendant had been charged in
relation to each of the transfers and it was thus clear
to the Defendant that
the transfers had been discovered. His statements to Ms Valent accordingly went
beyond his attempts to avoid
discussing the transfers, as he had done with
police, to a positive attempt to distance himself from the transfers and place
responsibility
for them firmly at the complainant’s feet. As I have found,
the Defendant deliberately engaged in a strategy of victim blaming
taking responsibility for his own actions. The obvious explanation, in
circumstances where he knew that he had made the
transfers, is that he knew he
had done so without authority and had therefore acted dishonestly.
this context, it is to be kept in mind that Ms Valent was not only the
Defendant’s daughter but a witness in the hearing
of the charges against
him. The hearing was only a month away by the time he sent the email and it is
hard to believe that his email
was, at that time, focused on repairing his
relationship with Ms Valent, except to the extent that such an outcome might
his position in the proceedings.
my view, the lies in the Defendant’s email to Ms Valent were clearly
self-serving attempts to avoid responsibility for the
transfers by placing
responsibility for them on the complainant. It is clear that he feared the truth
– that it was the Defendant
who effected the transfers – and it is
clear from the concerted effort he made, through his statements to police and to
Valent, to avoid that truth that he did so because he knew he did not have
authority to make the transfers and had therefore acted
dishonestly.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that he told the lies in the email to Ms Valent because he feared
that the truth would implicate him in
the offences with which he had been
charged. The truth would reveal both that he made the transfers without the
complainant’s
authority to do so and that his conduct was dishonest. The
obvious explanation for the telling the lies is that he wished to escape
consequence by attempting to convince Ms Valent to accept his version of events.
am satisfied that the Defendant told lies to Ms Valent out of a consciousness of
guilt. This finding provides further support for
my findings that it was the
Defendant who made all of the transfers and did so without the
complainant’s authority.
Purpose of transfers is to be
considered individually
the observations I have made as to the general reliance that the Defendant
placed on the complainant’s account in his
efforts to build his car
savings account, it is important to keep in mind that this is not a general
deficiency case. The Defendant
is charged with appropriating (or, on the
statutory alternative charges, obtaining) money on 19 separate occasions. Each
transfer must be considered.
the Defendant submits, the Prosecution must prove, for each transfer, that the
Defendant made the transfer, did so dishonestly,
and, at the time of making the
transfer, had an intention to permanently deprive the complainant of the funds.
The Defendant accepts
that, if I find that he intended to permanently deprive
the complainant of the money (including by representing the funds in his
savings account as his own), his conduct will have been dishonest. In
circumstances where his access to her bank account was
premised on his
representation that he would help her to look after her money while she was
unwell and, as I have found, he must
have appreciated that he was under an
obligation to act in her interests in operating the account, the
Defendant’s concession
is rightly made.
Accordingly,
the critical question is: what was the Defendant’s intention at the time
he made each of the transfers.
Transfers made directly to one of
the Defendant’s car savings accounts
regard to the views I have expressed as to the Defendant’s intention with
respect to the money that ended up in his car
savings account (being that he
intended to keep that money and represent it as his own), the answer to the that
question is clear
with respect to the transfers that were made directly to the
Defendant’s car savings accounts. There is no alternative possibility
the conclusion that he intended, at the time he made the transfers, to
appropriate the money for his car savings account and he
therefore intended to
permanently deprive the complainant of that money. The relevant charges in this
respect are:
(a) 27 June 2023 - $400 transfer to Beyond Bank car savings account (charge
(b) 10 July 2023 - $500 transfer to CBA car savings account (charge 8219/24);
(c) 13 July 2023 - $3,000 transfer to CBA car savings account (charge 1147/24);
(d) 15 July 2023 - $50 transfer to CBA car saving account (charge 8223/24).
Transfers to the Defendant’s general CBA account
answer to the question is more difficult in relation to the other transfers,
however, because there were several sources of money
that came into the
Defendant’s general CBA account and he not only transferred money from his
general account to his car savings
account, but he also spent money on what
might be described as household expenditure that could have been of benefit for
the complainant
(at least until the complainant was hospitalised). This included
expenditure at, for example, Club Lime (seemingly for the Defendant
complainant to swim there), homewares and home improvement stores (for example,
Howards Storage World, Bed Bath N Table and
Bunnings), grocery stores, chemist
and vitamin stores, and cafés.
the complainant’s hospitalisation, I cannot see how any of the
Defendant’s expenditure from his general CBA account
benefited the
complainant. His expenditure was mainly on food, however there was a small
amount spent on clothing and he made two
small purchase at home-related stores
($4.89 at Bunnings and $3 at Kmart).
Accordingly,
for the transfers that the Defendant made after the complainant’s
hospitalisation, I find that he intended to permanently
deprive the complainant
of that money, regardless of whether he subsequently transferred that money to
his CBA car savings account.
His intention was to use the money solely for his
own benefit. To the extent that he used the complainant’s money for
expenditure rather than transferring to his CBA car savings account, I
note that, in addition to the direct benefit he received from
being able to use
the complainant’s money for his personal expenditure, it enabled him to
transfer more of his pension to his
car savings account.
am also satisfied that transferring money to himself, to use for personal
expenditure, was dishonest according to the standards
of ordinary people, given
that his access to the complainant’s account was for the purposes of
money. However, with some reservation, I am not
satisfied that he knew that his actions were dishonest, in circumstances where
is possible that the complainant had given the Defendant permission to
withdraw money if he needed it. It is conceivable that the
Defendant may have
thought that that permission was sufficient to enable him to take money for
living expenses while he was looking
after the complainant’s house when
she was in hospital.
Ultimately,
aside from the transfers the Defendant made directly to his car savings
accounts, it is only in relation to those transfers
of money to the
Defendant’s general CBA account which are matched by a corresponding
transfer on the same day, in the same
amount, to the Defendant’s CBA car
savings account, that I am satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that the
Defendant had the
intention, at the time of the initial transfer, to appropriate
the funds for his car savings account.
those cases, I am satisfied that the subsequent conduct of transferring the
money to his CBA car savings account establishes that
it was his intention at
the time of the initial transfer to his general CBA account that the money would
end up in his CBA car savings
account. The relevant charges in this respect
(a) 2 July 2023 - $200 transfer to CBA general account (charge 8215/24); and
(b) 10 July 2023 - $2,000 transfer to CBA general account (charge 1146/24).
are three transfers to the Defendant’s general CBA account (two on 13 July
2023 and one on 5 August 2023, being the transfers
the subject of charges
8220/24, 8221/24 and 8227/24) with respect to which there are corresponding
entries on the same day involving
transfers of similar amounts to the
Defendant’s car savings account. I consider that it is probable that the
Defendant intended,
at the time of the initial transfer, to appropriate the
funds for his car savings account, but the different amounts subsequently
transferred to the car savings account makes me question whether he knew what he
intended to do with the money when he first transferred
it to his general CBA
even if it was clear that he was going to transfer some of the money to his car
savings account, I cannot identify a proportion
of the funds initially
transferred that he intended, at the time of the initial transfer, to transfer
to his car savings account.
I do not consider that the fact that he later
transferred a particular sum to his CBA car savings account, which differed from
amount he initially transferred, demonstrates that it was his intention at
the time of initial transfer to ultimately transfer that
sum to his car savings
am not satisfied, for each of the remaining transfers, that it was the
Defendant’s intention, at the time he transferred money
complainant’s account to his general CBA account, that the money
ultimately end up in his CBA car savings account.
The money involved in these
transfers was not immediately transferred to the Defendant’s car savings
account and he spent money
at around the time of the transfers on expenses that
either might have been of benefit to the complainant (in the pre-hospitalisation
period) or which he might have thought he had permission to take to spent on
personal expenditure (in the post-hospitalisation period).
It is therefore
possible that, at the time he transferred the money to his general CBA account,
he intended to spend the money in
that way. The relevant charges in this respect
(a) 2 July 2024 - $500 transfer to general CBA account (charge 8214/24);
(b) 4 July 2024 - $200 transfer to general CBA account (charge 8216/24);
(c) 6 July 2024 - $200 transfer to general CBA account (charge 8217/24);
(d) 10 July 2024 - $500 transfer to general CBA account (charge 8218/24);
(e) 15 July 2024 - $50 transfer to general CBA account (charge 8222/24);
(f) 18 July 2024 - $150 transfer to general CBA account (charge 8224/24);
(g) 19 July 2024 - $120 transfer to general CBA account (charge 8225/24); and
(h) 27 July 2024 - $1,000 transfer to general CBA account (charge 8226/24).
regard to my findings, the Prosecution’s Statutory Alternative Submission
falls away. Relatedly, I find that Prosecution
cannot succeed on the statutory
alternative charges of obtaining property by deception for any of the theft
charges with respect
to which I am not satisfied that all of the elements have
been established. That is because the elements of the theft offences with
respect to which I am not satisfied are common to the statutory alternative
find the Defendant guilty in relation to charges:
(a) 8211/24;
(b) 8219/24;
(c) 1147/24;
(d) 8223/24;
(e) 8215/24; and
(f) 1146/24
find the Defendant not guilty in relation to charges:
(a) 8212/24;
(b) 8213/24
(c) 8220/24;
(d) 8221/24;
(e) 8227/24;
(f) 8214/24;
(g) 8216/24;
(h) 8217/24;
(i) 8218/24;
(j) 8222/24;
(k) 8224/24;
(l) 8225/24; and
(m) 8226/24.
I certify that the preceding two-hundred and sixty-two [262] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of his
Honour Magistrate
Associate: Noelle-Alexis Bowles
Date: 26 May 2025
Annexure A – table of relevant
transactions
Complainant’s CBA account
Defendant’s Beyond Bank (“Car Savings”)
Defendant’s main CBA account (7926)
Defendant’s car savings CBA account (7104)
Pension payment $829.80
Cash withdrawal $770
Pension payment $829.80
Cash withdrawal $750
Pension payment $829.80
Cash withdrawal $600
Pension payment $829.80
Toyota credit $500
Amounts received into account prior to 27 June unknown
$400 transferred to Beyond Bank
$400 received from complainant’s account
Cash withdrawal $1,500
9 May – 29 June 2023
Payment of expenses $181.41
$5,000 cash withdrawal
$5,000 cash deposit
$5,000 transferred to 7104
$5,000 received from 7926
30 Jun – 1 July
Payment of expenses $31.51
Amounts received into account between 27 June and 2 July unknown
$500 transferred to 7926
$500 received from complainant’s account
$200 transferred to 7926 (“Car”)
$200 received from complainant’s account
$200 transferred to 7104
$200 received from 7926
$2,000 transferred to 7104
$2,000 received from Beyond Bank
Payment of expenses $123.45
Transfer to another CBA account $200
Between 2 and 4 July
$200 received into account in one transaction (balance was the same on 2
July and after transfer to Defendant of $200 on 4 July)
$1,103.10 transferred to 7104
$1,103.10 received from Beyond Bank
$200 transferred to 7926
$200 received from complainant’s account
Pension payment $829.80
$900 transferred to 7104
$900 received from 7926
$50 received from 7926
$50 transferred to Breyond Bank
Payment of expenses $180.60
Transfer to another bank (“BB Car Savi”) $50
$200 transferred to 7926
$200 received from complainant’s account
Payment of expenses $69.85
Between 6 and 10 July
$3,000 received into account in one transaction (payments totalling that
sum transferred to Defendant on 10 July, with no transactions
in between, and
balance is the same on 6 July and end of 10 July transactions)
$500 transferred to 7926 (“Food”)
$500 received from complainant’s account
$2,000 transferred to 7926 (“Car”)
$2,000 received from complainant’s account
$2,000 transferred to 7104
$2,000 received from 7926
$500 transferred to 7104
$500 received from complainant’s account
$400 transferred to 7104
$400 received from 7926
$250 transferred to 7926
$250 received from 7926
10 – 13 July
Payment of expenses $192.65
Cash deposit $150
Between 10 and 13 July
At least $4,952.28 received into account between 10 July and 13 July in one
to two transactions with sums totalling $3,980 transferred
to Defendant on 13
July [$3,980 + 1008.89 (end balance) - $36.61 (beginning balance =
$50 cash withdrawal (to take balance to $0)
$50 cash deposit
$3,000 transferred to 7104
$3,000 received from complainant’s account
$900 transferred to 7926
$900 received from complainant’s account
$820 transferred to 7104
$820 received from 7926
$80 transferred to 7926
$80 received from complainant’s account
$120 transferred to 7104
$120 received from 7926
$30 cash deposit
$30 transferred to 7104
$30 received from 7926
14 – 15 July
Payment of expenses $59.84
Amounts received between 13 and 15 July unknown
$50 transferred to 7926
$50 received from complainant’s account
$50 transferred to 7104
$50 received from complainant’s account
16 – 17 July
Payment of expenses $11.61
Pension payment $829.80
$850 transferred to 7104
$850 received from 7926
$150 transferred to 7926
$150 received from complainant’s account
Payment of expenses $29.17
$120 transferred to 7926
$120 received from complainant’s account
Transfer to other bank (“BB Car Savi”) $50
19 – 22 July
Transfer from BB Car Savi $50 (“Return Account Closed”)
Payment of expenses $60.85
$200 transferred to 7104
$200 received from 7926
$10 cash deposit
25 – 27 July
Payment of expenses $48.45
Between 19 and 27 July
$1,952.28 received into account, with $1,000 transferred to Defendant on 27
July (no transactions in between) [$1,000+1056.67 (end
balance) -$104.39
(beginning balance) = $1,952.28]
$1,000 transferred to 7926
$1,000 received from complainant’s account
$275.60 transferred to 7104
$275.60 received from 7926
Payment of expenses $29.35
Pension Payment $829.80
$1,000 transferred to 7104
$1,000 received from 7926
1 – 5 August
Transfer to other bank (“BB Car Savi”) $50
Transfer from BB Car Savi $50 (“Return Account Closed”)
$100 withdrawal
Payment of expenses $148.89
Amounts received between 27 July and 5 August unknown
$400 transferred to 7296
$400 received from complainant’s account
$300 transferred to 7104
$300 received from 7926
Account balance improved from $13.09 at end of 29 June to $380.67 at end of
Pension payment $829.80
Cash withdrawal of $1,100
Pension payment of $829.80
Cash withdrawal of $800
$50 received from 7104
$50 transferred to 7926
RTF format (663 KB)
Signed PDF/A format