HOPKINS v ROAD TRANSPORT AUTHORITY (Administrative Review) [2025] ACAT 61 (17 September 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
HOPKINS v ROAD TRANSPORT
(Administrative Review)
[2025] ACAT 61
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Transport (General) Act
two decisions by Access Canberra, acting through the Road Transport Authority
("the Authority") - Decision to require a
driver to undergo a medical
examination, and to provide a report of the examination before granting a driver
licence - Decision to
suspend a driver licence for failure to comply with the
requirements to undergo a medical examination and provide a medical report
Medical history of drivers and the requirement for drivers to undergo a medical
assessment at least every two years – Authority’s
responsibility to
ensure drivers are fit to operate vehicles safely – Balancing public
safety with privacy protections and
potential data breaches –
Tribunal’s powers to decide an application on the papers.
Legislation cited:
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 s 7,
Road Transport (General) Regulation 2000
Road Transport (General) Act 1999
Road Transport (Driver Licensing) Regulation 2000
Road Transport (Driver Licensing) Act 1999
Cases cited:
Applicant 362024 v Director General
[2025] ACAT 28
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 2 ALD 60
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) HCA 28
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
Member K Reddy
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) AT 5/2025
ROSS HOPKINS
ROAD TRANSPORT AUTHORITY
Member K Reddy
The Tribunal orders that:
medical examination decision under review is confirmed.
suspension decision under review is confirmed.
application is dismissed.
................................
Member K Reddy
REASONS FOR DECISION
INTRODUCTION
is a review application under section 95 of the
Road Transport
(General) Act
RT General Act
the Applicant
) is seeking review of the following two decisions
made by Access Canberra, acting through the Road Transport Authority (
(a) The decision to require the Applicant to undergo a medical examination, and
to provide a report of the examination, in accordance
Road Transport (Driver Licensing) Regulation
) (the medical examination decision); and
(b) The decision to suspend the Applicant's driver licence under
of the Regulation (
the suspension decision
) because the Applicant failed
to comply with the requirements of the medical examination decision.
Applicant seeks to have both decisions set aside, including an order that no
further medical assessments be imposed unless the
Applicant consents voluntarily
to providing his personal health information.
Deciding the application on the papers
24 February 2025, the Tribunal gave notice to the parties that it proposed to
decide the application on the basis of documents,
without the parties, their
representatives or witnesses appearing at a hearing.
54 (1) of the
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
) provides that the Tribunal may, on application by a party or on its own
initiative, decide an application on the basis of documents,
without the
parties, their representatives or witnesses appearing at a hearing.
discretionary power in section 54 (1) is conditional on the Tribunal being
satisfied that:
(a) it is in the public interest not to hold a hearing; and
(b) the Tribunal has sufficient information to make an informed decision on the
application.
objects of the ACAT Act are set out in section 6, which relevantly
(a) to ensure that access to the tribunal is simple and inexpensive, for all
people who need to deal with the tribunal; and
(b) to ensure that applications to the tribunal are resolved as quickly as is
consistent with achieving justice; and
(c) to ensure that decisions of the tribunal are fair.
7 of the ACAT Act provides that in exercising its functions, the Tribunal must,
among other things, seek to ensure that Tribunal
procedures are as simple,
quick, inexpensive and informal as is consistent with achieving justice, as well
as implemented in a way
that facilitates resolution of the issues so that the
cost to the parties and Tribunal is proportionate to the importance and
of the subject matter of the proceeding. The Tribunal must also
observe natural justice and procedural fairness.
Respondent supported the Tribunals proposal to decide the application on the
documents, without the parties, their representatives
or witnesses appearing at
Applicant’s preference was for an oral hearing, but he did not actively
oppose the Tribunal’s proposal.
the foregoing and considering that:
(a) The scope of the issues in dispute in this application are narrow.
(b) The Applicant relies on documentary evidence to assert that the risk
associated with their condition is lower than that contemplated
by the medical
(c) There are no witnesses to be cross-examined, nor any questions of
credibility,
(d) The issue is straightforward and can be properly determined by reference to
the material and submissions of the parties.
(e) The Tribunal decided the matters on the papers.
8 July 2024, the Respondent wrote to the Applicant, requesting that he undergo a
medical assessment and submit a Driver Licence
Medical form completed by a
General Practitioner, in accordance with section 78 (2) of the Regulation.
basis of the request was the Applicant’s medical history, specifically his
diagnosis of insulin-treated diabetes, a condition
that under the publication
Assessing Fitness to Drive
(as updated in 2022 by Austroads),
necessitates
medical review at least every two
the Applicant failed to submit a Driver Licence Medical form, the Respondent
sent the Applicant a follow-up notice on 5 September
2024, advising him that
failure to comply by 5 October 2024 would result in licence suspension.
14 August 2024, the Applicant sought an internal review of the Respondents
decision of 8 July 2024 pursuant to section 91A of the
RT General Act.
decision to require a medical assessment for a driver licence is an internally
reviewable decision under Schedule 1, Part 1.4, item
Road Transport
(General) Regulation 2000
internal review was finalised on 12 December 2024, confirming the requirement
for the Applicant’s medical examination and
explaining the rationale which
was based on public safety, national medical standards, and privacy
protections.
Respondent followed through with a final notice to the Applicant stating that
failure by the Applicant to submit the medical assessment
by 13 January 2025
would result in licence suspension on 14 January 2025.
Applicant failed to submit the medical assessment by 13 January 2025 which
resulted in the Respondent suspending his driver licence.
APPLICANT’S SUBMISSIONS
Applicant objects to the requirement to disclose medical information which he
(a) To be an arbitrary demand by the Respondent for personal health information,
with a threat of driver’s license suspension,
for noncompliance.
(b) To be discriminatory and authoritarian and based on his disability (Type 1
diabetes) and the need to use Insulin and nothing
to do with his driving
(c) The rules and regulations do not comply with Privacy Laws.
(d) The medical data and potential data breaches may be used for further
discrimination either by Government or third parties; and
(e) That the suspension of his licence adversely
affects his independence and identification.
RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
Respondent submitted that the reviewable decisions are, in each case, the
correct and preferable decision and the Tribunal ought
to confirm them on the
basis of the following:
(a) The Applicant was the holder of a driver licence for the purposes of section
78(2) of the Regulation.
(b) The Applicant has insulin-treated diabetes.
(c) The medical standards provide for a person with insulin-treated diabetes to
be subject to minimum 2-yearly medical review.
(d) Section 78(2)(c) and (d) of the Regulation gives the Respondent
discretionary power to require the Applicant to undergo a medical
examination in
accordance with the medical standards and to provide a report of the
examination.
(e) The Applicant did not comply with the requirements of the medical
examination decision.
(f) Section 87(1)(k) of the Regulation gives the Respondent discretionary power
to suspend the Applicant's driver licence on its
own initiative if satisfied on
reasonable grounds that the Applicant has not complied with its requirements.
(g) The Regulation was applied equally and consistently, and the decision was
made without bias or arbitrariness. Medical conditions
such as insulin-treated
diabetes are known to carry risks, including sudden incapacitation, and require
regular assessments.
Respondent acknowledged a technical defect in the notice under section 88(1) for
failing to state the proposed suspension period.
However, the suspension was
clearly linked to non-compliance and was to be lifted upon submission of the
required form.
Issues for Determination
the reviewable decisions the correct or preferable decisions under section
68(3)(a) of the ACAT Act?
Legislation
Tribunal undertakes a merits review under the ACAT Act, to determine the correct
or preferable decision on the facts and law before
Senior Member Orlov expressed in
Applicant 362024 v Director General, ACT
Directorate
is settled law that in a merit review of an administrative decision
(which is what this application is)
– a tribunal is required to make
the correct or preferable decision on the material before the tribunal, not the
material before
the original decision maker.
Member Orlov at paragraph 46 of his decision also referred to
Shi v Migration
Agents Registration Authority
where Kiefel J explained:
“the Tribunal reaches its
decision as to what is the correct decision by conducting its own, independent
assessment and determination
of the matters necessary to be
addressed”.
respondent is a statutory authority.
Its powers include the issuing,
cancelling or suspending of driver licences, and imposing conditions on
Those powers are to be
exercised in accordance with the
Road Transport (Driver Licensing) Act
and Regulation 87 of the Regulation. The Regulation provides a
discretionary power to the Respondent to vary, suspend or cancel driver
licences. Relevant to the application for review, the Regulation provides:
authority may vary, suspend or cancel driver
(1) The road transport authority may vary, suspend or cancel a person’s
driver licence on its own initiative under section 88
(Procedures for variation,
suspension or cancellation of driver licences) if the authority is satisfied on
reasonable grounds that—
(d) the person does not comply with the required medical standards
required medical standards are those set out in the Guidelines which are
published and periodically amended by
The 2022 edition of the
Guidelines apply in the current proceedings.
Respondents powers to make medical examination decision
78 of the Regulation sets out the powers of the Respondent in relation to
testing and medical examination of drivers. Under
section 78(2)(c) and (d) the
Respondent may require a person to undergo, at the person's own cost, a medical
examination by a doctor
in accordance with the required medical standards, and
to provide a report of the examination.
Respondents power to make suspension decision
87 of the Regulation sets out the Respondent's powers to vary, suspend or cancel
driver licences. This includes the power
to suspend a person's driver licence on
its own initiative if satisfied on reasonable grounds that the person has not
complied with
a requirement made by the Respondent in relation to the
Considerations and Findings
On the medical examination decision:
safety is a critical important feature of the relevant legislative framework.
This includes to facilitate the regulation of drivers
in the interests of road
safety; and to provide a way of enforcing driving safety standards.
legislation also includes offences for driving if one's ability to drive safely
is impaired by a medical condition and failing
to tell the relevant authorities
governments have a right to ensure public safety the process and criteria must
be applied consistently and fairly, in this case,
balancing public safety with
the rights of the Applicant with medical conditions is important.
is undisputed that, the Applicant has insulin-treated diabetes.
that diabetes is recognised as a condition which has the potential to cause
significant impairment and/or sudden incapacity,
the medical standards provide a
minimum review period for diabetes.
78(2)(c) and (d) of the Regulation gives the Respondent discretionary power to
require the Applicant to undergo a medical
examination in accordance with the
medical standards and to provide a report of the examination.
standards specifically provide that individuals with insulin-treated diabetes
undergo a review at least every two years.
Applicant had his last assessment in August 2022, more than two years had
Applicant is seeking a decision to the effect that the discretionary power under
section 78(2)(c) of the Regulation is exercised
only every 5 years, or ways
inconsistent with the medical standards.
The Tribunal recognises that licensing requirements applying to people with
medical conditions may be onerous and may impose additional
inconvenience. However, it also recognises that the licensing requirements are
reasonable, justifiable and proportionate
on the basis that they are aimed at
ensuring public safety, including the safety of the Applicant.
decision made by the Respondent was not discriminatory or arbitrary. It was
applied to the Applicant on the basis of clear and
objective criteria.
On the suspension decision:
87(1)(k) of the Regulation gives the Respondent discretionary power to suspend
the Applicant's driver licence on its own initiative
if satisfied on reasonable
grounds that the Applicant has not complied with the Respondents
requirements.
authorities have a responsibility to ensure drivers are fit to operate vehicles
safely, but this must be done without unfairly
targeting individuals or
Suspensions
should be based on a reasonable assessment of the individual's fitness to drive,
considering the specific condition and
its potential impact on driving
Applicant was afforded fair opportunity to present evidence of their fitness to
drive, by submitting a medical report, but chose
not to comply.
Tribunal finds that the Respondent was authorised under section 87(1)(k) to
suspend the Applicant’s licence due to the Applicants
non-compliance.
there was a procedural omission under section 88(1)(c)
Road Transport
(General) Regulation 2000
, the notice otherwise satisfied the statutory
requirements, including stating the basis of the decision and effective
procedural defect did not cause substantive unfairness or prejudice. As stated
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
, not every failure to
comply with a procedural requirement invalidates a decision.
Tribunal acknowledges the Applicant’s privacy concerns as genuine and
recognises the burden such requirements may place
on individuals with medical
conditions. However, the regulatory scheme aims to balance personal privacy with
the paramount objective
of public safety.
Applicant's assertions concerning potential misuse of data, while important, are
speculative and unsubstantiated in the present
matter. The use and protection of
personal health information is regulated by applicable privacy legislation and
Access Canberra’s
stated privacy practices.
evidence before the Tribunal leads to the inexorable conclusion that, in all of
the circumstances, any benefit which the Applicant
might obtain from not
complying with the legislative requirements would be outweighed by the potential
risks both to himself and
to the general public.
Tribunal finds that that the reviewable decisions are, in each case, the correct
and preferable decision and each is confirmed.
to section 68(3)(a) of the
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Tribunal orders as follows:
medical examination decision is confirmed.
suspension decision is confirmed.
application for review is dismissed.
..............................
Member K Reddy
Date(s) of review on papers:
Drake v Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 2 ALD 60
Applicant 362024 v Director
[2025] ACAT 28
Shi v Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
Road Transport (General) Act 1999
Road Transport (Driver Licensing) Act 1999
Road Transport (Driver
Licensing) Regulation 2000
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) HCA 28
RTF format (226 KB)
Signed PDF/A format