BELL v BAILEY (Appeal) [2025] ACAT 56 (20 August 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
BELL v BAILEY & Anor (Appeal)
[2025] ACAT 56
AA 54/2024 (XD 95/2023)
Catchwords: APPEAL
– civil dispute – whether Original
Tribunal erred by determining proceedings in appellant’s absence –
appellant served with civil dispute application – whether Original
Tribunal erred in finding that the Facebook page which was
by Facebook Messenger application was operated by the appellant – Whether
Original Tribunal erred in drawing
an inference of consent to service of
concerns notice by Facebook Messenger, for the purposes of the
Transactions Act 2001
Whether Original Tribunal erred in finding that
a concerns notice may be served by Facebook Messenger within
Electronic Transactions Act 2001
Whether Original Tribunal erred in
finding that the respondent to the appeal had established serious harm within
section 122A of the
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
the Original Tribunal erred in finding that the appellant was the publisher of
defamatory material – Whether the Original
Tribunal erred in its award of
Legislation cited:
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
ss 7A, 15, 16, 17, 18, 22, 47A, 56, 82
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
Civil Law (Wrongs) Amendment Act 2024
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
Electoral Act 1992
Electronic Transactions Act 2001
, Dictionary
Electronic Transactions Bill 1999
Electronic Transactions Bill 2000
Magistrates Court Act 1930
Service and Execution of Process Act 1992
Subordinate
Legislation cited:
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedures Rules
2020 (repealed), rules 19, 20, 21, 24, 26, 28, 29, 35
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedures Rules 2024, rule 91
Service and Execution of Process Regulations 2018
Cases cited
Amer v Eriksson
[2019] ACAT 108
Bailey v McCrae & Ors
[2023] ACAT 51
Bailey v McCrae & Ors
[2024] ACAT 82
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
Cassell & Co Ltd v Broome
[1972] UKHL 3
[1972] AC 1027
City of Stirling v Dueschen
[2011] WASC 126
Dow Jones & Co Inc v Gutnick
[2002] HCA 56
Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd v Voller
[2021] HCA 27
Faithfull v Woodley
[1889] UKLawRpCh 192
(1890) 43 Ch D 287
Flo Rida v Mothership Music Pty Ltd
[2013] NSWCA 268
Google LLC v Defteros
[2022] HCA 27
Greenwich v Latham
[2024] FCA 1050
Humphries v TWT Ltd
[1993] FCA 577
(1993) 120 ALR 693
[1959] HCA 8
Kolodzeij v Ali & Anor
[2021] ACAT 114
Krutsky v Commissioner for Social Housing
[2023] ACAT 68
Lazarus v Azize
[2015] ACTSC 344
L&B Linings Pty Ltd v WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
Mansour v Dangar
[2017] ACAT 49
Newsnet Pty Ltd v Patching
[2011] NSWSC 690
Rader v Haines
[2022] NSWCA 198
Riley v St Vincent De Paul Society Canberra/Goulburn
[2025] ACAT 16
Supaphien v Chaiyabarn
[2023] ACTSC 240
Wilson v Bauer Media Pty Ltd
[2017] VSC 521
Wilson v Mendelsohn & Ors
[2024] EWHC 821
Texts/Papers cited:
Presidential Member J Lucy
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) AA 54/2024
KATRINA BAILEY
First Respondent
DEAN MCCRAE
Second Respondent
APPEAL TRIBUNAL:
Presidential Member J Lucy
The Tribunal orders that:
......................................
Presidential Member J
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Bell appealed against a decision of the Original Tribunal ordering him to pay
$5,000 in general damages and $5,000 in aggravated
damages to the first
respondent, Ms Bailey, in respect of a defamatory publication. Mr Bell took no
part in the proceedings before
the Original Tribunal.
Bell claimed, on appeal, that the Original Tribunal had erred in various
respects. These included that he had not been served with
the application; that
the concerns notice had not been properly or lawfully served; that the Tribunal
erred in finding that Ms Bailey
had established that the publication of
defamatory matter caused serious harm to her; that it had erred in finding that
he had published
the defamatory material; and that it had made various errors
affecting its award of damages.
Bell has not persuaded me that any of his grounds of appeal should be upheld.
Accordingly, I have decided to dismiss the appeal.
4 February 2022, the Resolute TV YouTube channel published a live video entitled
“D.O.T. Pedophiles (sic) Rule the World”
in which the appellant, Mr
Jesse Bell, interviewed Mr Luke McKee (the
). The Video includes
statements made by Mr McKee that impute that the first respondent, Ms Katrina
Bailey, was a member of an organisation
whose members sexually abuse children
and engage in child trafficking activity.
6 February 2022, a person operating the “Jesse Bell” Facebook
account posted in relation to the Video: “This
man who is an Australian
political refugee proves forensically the people involved in the pedo cult in
Australia...”. Mr Bell
provided a link to the Video on YouTube and on
Bailey exchanged messages via Facebook Messenger in 2022 with persons operating
the accounts of Mr Bell and Mr McCrae after she
became aware of the Video.
3 April 2022, a person operating the “Jesse Bell” Facebook account
sent Ms Bailey a Messenger message stating:
Hey mate. I got off
the phone with Dean Mcrae [sic] just before. He and I are agreed that if you
need protection we will provide it.
We don’t like women and girls being
threatened or harmed. ...
Bailey replied on the same day, in an elevated manner, expressing the opinion
that Mr Bell helped Mr McKee call her part of “that
group” and that
he put “us” in danger, including by publishing her name and where to
7 November 2022, Ms Bailey sent a “concerns notice” (which must be
given to proposed defendants before commencing defamation
proceedings) to
Facebook Messenger accounts in the names of Mr McCrae, Mr Bell and Dia Beltran.
The account of Dia Beltran was said
to be operated by a Ms Claudia Benitez.
22 December 2022, the operator of the “Jesse Eurekanzo” Facebook
account, which Ms Bailey claims was operated by Mr
Bell, sent a message to Ms
Bailey, stating: “Come after me bitch. Dean and I offered you protection
and you go after Dia. Dean
and Dia had nothing to do with the
interview.”
23 December 2022, the operator of the “Jesse Eurekanzo” Facebook
account sent another message to Ms Bailey, stating:
“you cannot prosecute
a civil case from another State or Territory.”
24 December 2022, “Jesse Bell” referred in a Facebook post to his
interview of Luke McKee then stated: “Then
myself and the owner of the
platform were threatened with legal action.” He said that person
“backed off” then
Ms Bailey “waited until Christmas to
threaten me and two of my mates the same way”.
or around 28 December 2022, the operator of the “Jesse Bell”
Facebook account posted:
Short story long I interviewed a bloke
called Luke McKee (an exposer of pedophiles) in good faith during February on a
did a Veteran segment on. It turned out that while he is right on
many things, he is wrong on many things...
Then myself and the owner of the platform were threatened with legal
action ... He backed off quickly. The video was taken down in
Now one of the ones my guest mentioned and falsely accused of being OTO
... had waited until Christmas to threaten me and two of my
mates the same way.
Her name is Katrina Bailey...
late January 2023, Ms Bailey searched the Australian Electoral Commission roll
for the addresses of Mr McCrae and Mr Bell. The
roll showed that Mr Bell resided
at an address in Queensland (the
Electoral Roll
5 February 2023, a person operating the “Jesse Bell” Facebook
account sent Ms Bailey a message stating:
Dean Mcrae [sic] and I
offered you protection after I interviewed Luke McKee and Bottrill came after
us. He backed off very quickly.
Then you “come after” Dean and Dia
out of sheer spite 9+ months after the fact...
3 March 2023, Ms Bailey filed a civil dispute application in the tribunal naming
Mr McCrae, Ms Benitez and Mr Bell as respondents
and claiming $25,000 in damages
for defamation. Ms Bailey claimed that the Video conveyed defamatory imputations
that she was a member of a paedophile cult. Ms Bailey
claimed that Resolute TV is owned by Dean McCrae and that the interview was
conducted by Mr Bell who was a team member and contributor to Resolute TV.
her application, Ms Bailey identified Mr Bell’s address as being the
Electoral Roll Address.
17 March 2023, the tribunal’s registrar posted Ms Bailey’s civil
dispute application to the three respondents, by way
of service. The registrar
stamped the application with a stamp indicating that the registrar had served
the application and a “Form
4”, signed by the registrar to certify
that the application had been served in that way. This is the registry’s
process when serving documents under the
Service and Execution of
Process Act 1992
(Cth) with the “Form 4” contained in a schedule
Service and Execution of Process Regulations 2018
21 April 2023, the tribunal held a directions hearing. At that directions
hearing, a solicitor, Mr Boulos, told the tribunal that
he appeared on behalf of
the first and second respondents (that is, Mr McCrae and Ms Benitez). The
following exchange then occurred
between the tribunal member and Mr
member: All right, is anyone here for or on behalf of the third respondent,
Jesse Bell?
Mr Boulos: I am not instructed on that behalf on that regard so I really
don’t know.
Tribunal member: All right Mr Boulos, have you had any contact with Jesse
Mr Boulos: Yes my firm has had some contact with Mr Bell. Unfortunately he
does not seek to be legally represented in this matter
so that’s the
extent of my knowledge of his involvement in this matter.
Tribunal member: All right, thank you.
preliminary hearing on the question of whether a concerns notice had been issued
to each respondent, as required by section 124B(1)(a)
(Wrongs) Act 2002
), was held on 21 June 2023 and 31
July 2023. On 31 July 2023, Senior Member Stewart found that Ms Bailey had not
provided a concerns
notice to Ms Benitez, and dismissed the application against
senior member provided reasons for his decision that Ms Bailey had provided a
concerns notice to Mr Bell and Mr McCrae. He found
that Ms Bailey’s
evidence was “sufficient to establish” that Mr Bell and Mr McCrae
were “given the concerns
notice in the sense that they read and had the
opportunity to respond to the
He also found, on
the basis of Ms Bailey’s evidence of Facebook Messenger exchanges, that Mr
Bell had consented to the information
in the concerns notice being given by
means of an electronic communication, namely by the use of Facebook Messenger,
for the purposes
subsection 8(1)
Electronic Transactions Act
5 October 2023, Senior Member Stewart held another preliminary hearing to
determine whether the applicant had established the “serious
element” of her claim; that is, whether the publication of defamatory
matter about her has caused, or is likely to cause,
serious harm to her
reputation.
At the end of that
hearing, the Original Tribunal concluded that serious harm was
established.
Written reasons for
that finding were given in the Original Tribunal’s final written
10 November 2023, a substantive hearing was held in relation to Ms
Bailey’s claims against Mr Bell and Mr McCrae. Mr Bell
did not appear at
the hearing. Mr McCrae was represented by the solicitors appearing in this
appeal. Senior Member Stewart commented
that, “with respect to service on
Mr Bell, and his awareness of the proceedings here today”, the senior
member was “satisfied
that he’s been served and he’s chosen
not to appear”.
28 October 2024, Senior Member Stewart dismissed the application against Mr
McCrae, finding that he was not a publisher of the
Video. The senior member was,
however, satisfied that the claim against Mr Bell was established. He stated in
his reasons that orders
were made in Mr Bell’s absence under section 47A
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
He also stated in his reasons that it was “not in dispute” that Mr
Bell was a publisher of the Video.
The senior member accepted that Mr Bell’s conduct had aggravated the hurt
or injury suffered by Ms Bailey following the publication
of the defamatory
He ordered Mr Bell to pay
Ms Bailey the sum of $10,000, comprising $5,000 for general damages and a
further $5,000 for aggravated
27 November 2024, Mr Bell appealed from the decisions of Senior Member Stewart
made on 10 November 2023 and 28 October 2024.
application for appeal was lodged out of time. On 18 December 2024, President
Daniel ordered Mr Bell to give to the Tribunal and
the other parties any
application under section 56(c)(i) of the ACAT Act seeking to set aside orders
made in his absence and evidence
and submissions in support of that application
and the application to extend time to appeal.
Bell did not apply to set aside the Tribunal’s orders. However, he filed a
witness statement dated 17 January 2025 in support
of his application for an
extension of time.
5 February 2025, I held a directions hearing and made an order extending time to
the date of lodgement of the appeal. I also made
orders requiring the parties to
exchange and lodge documents, including any proposed further evidence for the
hearing of the appeal.
I directed them to liaise to prepare an agreed index of
documents for the appeal hearing. A note to my orders stated that parties
ensure their witnesses are available at the hearing of the appeal in the event
that admission of fresh evidence on the appeal
is permitted.
Evidence post-dating the original hearing
parties applied for leave to rely on evidence which was not before the Original
section 82(2)(c) of the ACAT Act, an appeal tribunal may, if leave is granted,
receive further evidence about questions of fact,
either orally in a hearing, by
written statement or in another way.
overarching principle to be applied when considering whether to allow new
evidence on appeal is whether that would be in the interests
Whilst it is not usually
in the interests of justice to allow new evidence on appeal, in some cases it
may be if there is an acceptable
reason for the evidence not being brought at
the original hearing.
consideration when deciding whether to give an appellant leave to rely on
further evidence on an appeal conducted by way
of a rehearing, is whether the
evidence is likely to have affected the outcome of the decision made at first
granted Mr Bell leave to rely upon his witness statement of 17 January 2025 and
a witness statement of Georges Boulos, a solicitor,
made on 16 May 2025. I
decided that it was in the interests of justice to admit this evidence because
one of the main grounds of
appeal was that Mr Bell had not received a concerns
notice or been served with Ms Bailey’s civil dispute application. I
that the evidence was potentially relevant to establishing those
propositions. If it were to be accepted, as he claimed, that he
had not been
served with the application and was not aware of it, he would not have had an
opportunity to provide that (or any other)
evidence to the Original Tribunal.
However, I told the parties at the hearing that there would be a question as to
how much weight
I would give the statements and that there was an issue as to
the extent to which they were relevant in establishing error when they
before the Original
his witness statement dated 17 January 2025, Mr Bell stated that he had not
received a concerns notice from Ms Bailey via Facebook
Messenger or at all and
that he was not served with a copy of the originating process. He stated that he
did not become aware of
the proceedings until after the decision made by the
Original Tribunal on 28 October 2024. Mr Bell’s evidence is that he was
informed of the proceedings by the second respondent, Dean McCrae, on 28 October
2024. Mr Bell also stated that he was not the owner
or operator of Resolute
Bell’s evidence is that he was living in a stated address in Queensland
between 2020 and October 2024 (
), and that he was not living at
the Electoral Roll Address. Mr Bell provided receipts from a real estate agent
showing payment of
rent, by him, at Address B between 9 March 2022 and 5 April
Boulos stated in his witness statement of 16 May 2025, in response to Ms
Bailey’s allegation that he had taken instructions
from Mr Bell during the
first instance proceedings, that he had not done so. He stated that he did not
recall ever speaking with
Mr Bell, nor telling Ms Bailey that he had done so.
Bailey sought leave to rely upon a witness statement which she made on 23 May
2025. This covered various topics, including Mr Bell’s
alleged awareness
of the concerns notice, some of which Mr Bell dealt with in his statement. Mr
Bell’s solicitor did not object
to leave being granted to admit that
statement into evidence. In those circumstances, I considered that it would be
in the interests
of justice to grant such leave, and did so.
Relevant legislation
person may make a civil dispute application to the tribunal, by operation of
section 17 of the ACAT Act. A “civil dispute
application” is defined
to include a damages
application.
application” is “an application for damages for negligence or for
any other tort except nuisance or
It includes an
application for damages for defamation.
tribunal’s jurisdiction is limited to civil dispute applications claiming
amounts of not more than $25
The tribunal has, in
relation to civil dispute applications, the same jurisdiction and powers as the
Magistrates Court has under
Magistrates Court Act 1930
(Civil jurisdiction).
Magistrates Court Act 1930
262 Cause of action arising, or defendant resident,
outside ACT
The Magistrates Court has jurisdiction to hear and decide a proceeding
(a) the defendant was resident in the ACT when the claim was served on the
defendant, even though all of the cause of action in the
proceeding arose
outside the ACT; or
(b) both of the following apply, even though the defendant is not in the
(i) a material part of the cause of action in the proceeding arose in the
ACT, even though part of the cause of action arose outside
(ii) the claim is served on the defendant in Australia or an external
9 of the Wrongs Act is entitled “Defamation” and relates to the tort
of defamation at general law.
The objects of the chapter include to enact provisions to promote uniform laws
of defamation
in Australia.
person is required to give the proposed defendant a “concerns
notice” before commencing defamation proceedings. Subsection
the Wrongs Act
124B Defamation proceedings
cannot be commenced without concerns notice
(1) An aggrieved person cannot commence defamation proceedings
(a) the person has given the proposed defendant a concerns notice in
relation to the matter concerned; and
(b) the imputations to be relied on by the person in the proposed
proceedings were particularised in the concerns notice; and
(c) the applicable period for an offer to make amends has elapsed.
term “concerns notice” is defined in subsection 124A(1) of the
Wrongs Act, which
124A Concerns
(1) For this division, a notice is a
concerns notice
(a) the notice—
(i) is in writing; and
(ii) states the location where the matter in question can be accessed;
Example—location
a webpage address
(iii) informs the publisher of the defamatory imputations that the aggrieved
person considers are or may be carried about the aggrieved
person by the matter
in question (the imputations of concern); and
(iv) informs the publisher of the harm that the person considers to be
serious harm to the person’s reputation caused, or likely
to be caused, by
the publication of the matter in question; and
(v) for an aggrieved person that is an excluded corporation—also
informs the publisher of the financial loss that the corporation
considers to be
serious financial loss caused, or likely to be caused, by the publication of the
matter in question; and
(b) a copy of the matter in question is, if practicable, provided to the
publisher together with the notice.
Note Section 124B requires a concerns notice to be given before
proceedings for defamation can be commenced.
(2) To remove any doubt, a document that is required to be filed or
lodged to commence defamation proceedings cannot be used as a
122A(1) of the Wrongs Act provides for the “serious harm element” of
a cause of action for defamation as follows:
122A Serious harm
element of cause of action for defamation
(1) It is an element (the serious harm element) of a cause of action for
defamation that the publication of defamatory matter about
a person has caused,
or is likely to cause, serious harm to the reputation of the person.
47A of the ACAT Act relevantly provides:
47A Procedure in
absence of party
(1) This section applies if—
(a) the tribunal requires a party to appear either personally or by a
representative before the tribunal in relation to an application;
(b) the party fails to appear.
(2) The tribunal may—
(b) if the party is the respondent—decide the application;
(d) do any of the following:
(i) continue with the hearing in the absence of the party either generally
or in relation to any relief claimed in the application;
Grounds of appeal
Bell filed amended grounds of appeal on 22 May 2025. These were the same as the
grounds originally filed with the application to
appeal, except that he added an
additional ground, being the first ground.
first four grounds of appeal concern the alleged lack of compliance with
legislative requirements concerning the service of the
tribunal application upon
Mr Bell and of the concerns notice upon him.
are as follows:
Grounds in respect of Service
the Tribunal did err in determining the proceedings in the absence of Jesse
Bell, wherein Mr Bell had not been served with Ms
Bailey’s application
filed on 3 March 2023.
Particulars
1.1 That the Senior Member proceeded in the absence of any participation
by Mr Bell, and in circumstances where Ms Bailey had provided
no evidence of
service that would satisfy the requirements of the ACT Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Procedures Rules 2020.
the Tribunal did err in its finding of fact that the Facebook page which was
served by ‘Messenger’ application, was
indeed operated by Mr
Particulars
2.1. That the Senior Member did err in finding that the Facebook page was
operated by Mr Bell, the appellant, as there was no evidence
to establish before
the Tribunal to establish the factual basis for this finding.
2.2. That nowhere in evidence was it established or admitted that Mr Bell
ran the page.
2.3 That the evidence was insufficient to establish, on the balance of
probabilities, that Mr Bell personally operated the page.
the Tribunal did err in application of
Electronic Transactions Act
(ACT) (“the Act”), in drawing an inference of consent to
service of the concerns notice given under s 124A of the Civil
Law (Wrongs) Act
2001 (ACT) (“Wrongs Act”) by Facebook
Particulars
3.1. That the Senior Member did err in his interpretation and application
of the statutory definition at s 5 of the Act;
3.2. That the requisite standards to infer consent were not met, namely,
that the conduct of the appellant could not meet the requirements
inference to be drawn at law.
3.3 The mere fact that the appellant allegedly communicated in general
terms with the respondent by Facebook Messenger, would not
be indicative of a
consent to receive service by that means, nor would it satisfy the indicia for
an inference to be drawn.
the Tribunal did err in its finding that s 8 of the Act contemplates and permits
the service of a ‘concerns notice’
by Facebook
Particulars
4.1 That the Senior Member erred in finding that the application known as
‘Facebook Messenger’ was an appropriate means
of electronic
communication.
4.2 That the application does not meet the standards of s 8(1)(b), i.e.,
that “it was reasonable to expect that the information
would be readily
accessible so as to be useable for subsequent reference.”
4.2 Unlike emails and other forms of electronic communications, made
permissible for service by the various Acts of the ACT Legislative
‘Facebook Messenger’ has an “unsend” feature, which
renders messages unavailable at the discretion
of the sender. Therefore, such
messages are not presumed to be so permanent as to make them presumptively
“usable for future
reference” by a recipient of a concerns notice
under the Wrongs Act.
4.3 That this form of communication, though an electronic communication,
is otherwise inconsistent with the accepted standards of
service of legal
documents, i.e., that a document be “given” to the recipient for
their records permanently - as it can
be “unsent” and therefore the
recipient deprived of the communication.
5 to 7 of Mr Bell’s appeal grounds concern the Original Tribunal’s
finding that the publication had caused, or
was likely to cause, serious harm to
Ms Bailey; its finding that Mr Bell was a publisher and when awarding damages.
They are as follows:
Grounds in respect of Serious
the Tribunal did err in paragraphs [24] – [39], in its application of s
122A of the Wrongs Act, in finding that serious
harm had been established by the
Particulars
5.1 That the Tribunal did err on the law, in its application of the test
for serious harm propounded in the case of Supaphien v Chaiyabarn
[2023] ACTSC
5.2 That the Tribunal did err on a matter of mixed facts and law, in
finding the Respondent’s evidence was sufficient to establish
‘serious harm’ to reputation had occurred.
5.3 That the Tribunal did err on a matter of mixed facts and law, in
finding that the Respondent’s evidence was sufficient to
causation between the ‘serious harm’ and the representations of Mr
Grounds in respect of Publication
the Tribunal did err in its findings at paragraphs [40] – [55] relating to
publication, in finding that the Appellant was
the publisher.
Particulars
6.1 That the Tribunal did err on a matter of law in finding that the
Appellant was a publisher in the absence of evidence.
6.2 That the Tribunal did err on a matter of mixed fact and law in finding
that the Respondent’s evidence was sufficient to
draw an inference that
Appellant was the publisher.
Grounds in respect of Damages
the Tribunal did err in its finding at paragraphs [64] – [79] relating to
the award of Damages to the Respondent.
Particulars
7.1 That the Tribunal did err at law, in making an award of damages, by
failing to properly consider and apply s 139E of the Wrongs
7.2 That the Tribunal did err on a matter of mixed fact and law, in
finding that the Respondent’s evidence was sufficient to
establish any
nexus between the quantum and non-economic loss.
7.3 That the Tribunal did err on a matter of mixed fact and law, in
quantifying damages, by failing to consider the previous apology
Appellant and finding without evidence that any such apology would be
“insincere”.
7.4 That the Tribunal did err as a matter of law in awarding aggravating
damages in circumstances where the Respondent had not pleaded
any basis for
aggravated damages in her application.
7.5 That the Tribunal did err as a matter of mixed fact and law, between
paragraphs [73] – [74], in awarding aggravated damages
against the
Appellant for his alleged communications.
Amended Grounds of Appeal were filed and served, without leave, on 22 May 2025.
5 May 2025, I made orders on Mr Bell’s application, vacating a hearing
listed for 8 May 2025 and extending the dates for
compliance with previous
timetabling orders. The new orders required Mr Bell to give to the tribunal and
Ms Bailey a list of the
errors of fact, errors of law or discretionary errors in
the decision which affected the decision, by 9 May 2025. Mr Bell did not
with that order but rather filed the Amended Grounds of Appeal, and other
material, nearly two weeks later.
Amended Grounds of Appeal are, in substance, a list of errors of fact, law and
discretion. They were, as I have said, filed late.
Ms Bailey understandably
complained about Mr Bell’s repeated non-compliance with the
tribunal’s orders, but did not claim
to have been prejudiced by it. In
those circumstances, I have allowed Mr Bell to rely upon the Amended Grounds.
Nature of the appeal
appeal tribunal may, as it considers appropriate, deal with an appeal as a new
application or as a review of all or part of the
Original Tribunal’s
Generally, the appeal
tribunal determines how it is going to deal with an appeal at the first
directions hearing.
That is what
occurred in this case. On 5 February 2025, the appeal tribunal directed that the
appeal hearing would proceed as a review
of the original decision unless the
appeal tribunal ordered otherwise.
Mansour v Dangar
[2017] ACAT 49
, Presidential Member Daniel (as she then
was) summarised the distinguishing features of the two different approaches to
as follows:
For a new hearing, established principles
dictate that the hearing starts afresh, evidence is given again, and the appeal
view on any question of fact or law is determinative of the
issue. Any discretion to be exercised by the original tribunal is exercised
by the appeal tribunal.
By contrast, for a rehearing, the appeal tribunal relies upon the evidence
given to the original tribunal, supplemented by any additional
evidence which
the parties are given leave to adduce. The appeal tribunal’s findings on
questions of law are determinative.
The appeal tribunal will not lightly
substitute its own findings of fact for the original tribunal’s primary
findings of fact,
but may be less constrained in relation to drawing inferences
of fact. The appeal tribunal is not at liberty to interfere with a
discretionary
decision unless satisfied that there has been an error in the exercise of
discretion.
(Footnotes omitted)
have adopted that approach to an appeal by way of rehearing in this
First Ground: Originating Application not Served
Bell’s first ground of appeal is that the Original Tribunal erred in
proceeding to hear and determine Ms Bailey’s application
in circumstances
where Mr Bell had not been served with it.
Bailey’s application gave Mr Bell’s address as the Electoral Roll
Address and also provided an email address for Mr
Bell. The tribunal’s
file contains a listing notice which was sent to Mr Bell at the Electoral Roll
Address, attaching Ms Bailey’s
application.
of the application upon Mr Bell is essential for the tribunal to have
same jurisdiction as the
Magistrates Court has under the
Magistrates Court Act 1930
That court only has jurisdiction to hear a proceeding where the defendant is not
in the ACT when the claim is served if, relevantly,
the claim is served on the
defendant in Australia.
Relevance of and weight given to Mr Bell’s
Bell stated, in his statement of 17 January 2025, that he was not served with a
copy of the originating process and only became
aware of it when his lawyers
brought it to his attention almost two years after it was filed by Ms
have decided to give Mr Bell’s statement very little weight. That is for
the following reasons.
indicated above, Mr Bell’s statement of 17 January 2025 was initially
provided to the Tribunal and given to Ms Bailey in
support of Mr Bell’s
application for an extension of time. Mr Bell did not comply with my directions
of 5 February 2025 to
give to Ms Bailey and the Tribunal a copy of any proposed
further evidence for the hearing of the appeal and any submissions by 19
21 April 2025, Ms Bailey sent to the Tribunal and Mr Bell’s solicitor a
draft index of documents, stating in her email that
this needed to be completed
and submitted by 29 April 2025. Mr Bell’s solicitor did not reply or take
any steps to comply with
my order requiring Mr Bell to liaise with Ms Bailey and
file an agreed index of documents by 29 April 2025. Ms Bailey said at the
hearing of the appeal, “I never received a draft index from the other
party. I did try to co-ordinate, but it [sic: I] didn't
Mr Kutasi, the
solicitor appearing for Mr Bell, did not disagree.
30 April 2025 at 6.56pm, Mr Bell lodged an application for interim orders,
seeking orders vacating the hearing listed on 8 May
2025. An urgent hearing of
that application was held before me on 5 May 2025. Mr Kutasi, for Mr Bell, told
the Tribunal that Mr Bell
had been sick and in hospital and that Mr Kutasi had
had difficulty getting instructions, but there was no evidence to support those
assertions. Mr Kutasi did not adequately explain why he had not contacted the
Tribunal when his client failed to comply with its
directions, and why he left
it to a week before the hearing before making his application to vacate the
hearing. Both Mr Bell and
Mr Kutasi as his authorised representative have an
obligation to comply with the Tribunal’s
directions.
the unsatisfactory nature of the application, I vacated the hearing and relisted
it on 11 June 2025, in order to give Mr Bell
a final opportunity to lodge his
evidence and submissions. I ordered him to provide any proposed further evidence
and any submissions
by 9 May 2025, with Ms Bailey also having further time for
lodging her material. Mr Bell was again directed to liaise with Ms Bailey
prepare and file an index of documents for the appeal hearing by 5 June 2025. Mr
Kutasi assured me at the interim hearing that
Mr Bell could comply with those
directions.
Bell did not comply with any of them. On 22 May 2025, he filed Amended Grounds
of Appeal, without leave, along with submissions,
some transcripts, his witness
statement of 17 January 2025 and a witness statement of Mr Boulos. Mr
Bell’s solicitor did not
of that material late, nor did he provide any evidence to explain the delay in
complying with the Tribunal’s directions.
these circumstances, Ms Bailey could not have known until the day before her
material was due whether or not Mr Bell was seeking
leave to rely upon his
statement of 17 January 2025. It had been prepared for the extension of time
hearing and Mr Bell had not identified
it as a document on which he relied in an
index of documents. Ms Bailey filed her material, in accordance with the
directions, the day afterwards, on 23 May 2025.
Bell was not made available at the hearing for questioning (or at all). As
indicated earlier in these reasons, a notation to my
orders of 5 February 2025
stated that parties should ensure their witnesses are available at the hearing
of the appeal in the event
that admission of fresh evidence on the appeal is
Bailey indicated that she would have liked to question Mr Bell about his
statement “to find out what is the actual
She explained that
she had not contacted Mr Bell’s solicitor to ask him to make Mr Bell
available for cross examination because
she said she “was under the
assumption that they’d actually said Mr Bell would be at
indicated that he disagreed. Ms Bailey identified a number of matters about
which she wished to question Mr
Kutasi informed the Tribunal that, if Ms Bailey wanted to cross examine Mr Bell,
the Tribunal would have to take an
adjournment.
“strenuously” objected to that
indicating that Ms
Bailey had ample opportunity to notify him that Mr Bell was required for cross
examination but did not do so.
KUTASI: - - - you'll actually find that the appeal will succeed on different
grounds, in any event, which will not require a rehearing
in any event because
the underlying application by Ms Bailey should have been dismissed from the very
outset. So I think it's a moot
point in any event, President.
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER: Yes. Well, yes. As I understand your argument, Mr
Kutasi, it is that the tribunal shouldn't have been satisfied
on the evidence
before it that your client had been served.
MR KUTASI: Correct.
PRESIDENTIAL MEMBER: So in that sense, that witness statement isn't - I
mean, a finding to that effect, if you're right, could be
made without the
witness statement.
MR KUTASI: Yes. Absolutely.
Mr Bell’s failure to comply with the appeal tribunal’s directions,
and his failure to make himself available at
the hearing, notwithstanding the
notation to my orders of 5 February 2025, it would be unfair to place a
significant amount of weight
on this statement.
have also considered the first ground of appeal to be circumscribed by the
particulars and the submissions made on behalf of Mr
Bell in support of it. In
other words, I have considered whether the Original Tribunal erred in
determining the proceedings in Mr
Bell’s absence, where Mr Bell had not
been served with the application, in circumstances where Ms Bailey had not
provided evidence
of service. That is a separate question from whether Mr Bell
in fact knew about the application or had in fact received it, as Mr
implicitly acknowledged at the hearing. Mr Bell had an opportunity to lodge an
application to set aside the Tribunal’s
orders under section 56(c)(i) of
the ACAT Act, on the basis that the orders were made after hearing an
application in the absence
of a party, but chose not to do so.
Was Ms Bailey’s application personally served on Mr
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedures Rules 2020
), which have been repealed, were in force when Ms Bailey filed her
civil dispute application on 3 March 2023.
19(1) of the 2020 Rules provided as follows:
19 Who serves
(1) The registrar must serve an application unless—
(a) the party lodging the document—
(i) undertakes to serve it; or
(ii) is required to serve it under these rules, a practice note or by order;
(b) these rules provide for another form of service; or
(c) the registrar requires a person to serve the document.
Note 1 For service of an application generally, see r 35 (8).
Note 2 A rule or practice note for each jurisdiction may set out how the
registrar serves an application for the jurisdiction.
Note 3 An issuing party is required to personally serve a subpoena (see r
registrar was responsible for serving the application in this case by operation
of rule 19(1) of the 2020 Rules. Mr Bell’s
first ground is premised upon
the erroneous assumption, repeated at the
that Ms Bailey was
required to serve the application. The particular to this ground, that the
tribunal proceeded “
in circumstances where Ms Bailey had provided no
evidence of service
”, reflects that misconception, as does Mr
Bell’s submission that Ms Bailey was obliged to give the tribunal proof of
service under rule 28(1) of the 2020 Rules.
sealed application in the tribunal’s file contains a stamp indicating that
the registrar served the civil dispute application
in accordance with the
Service and Execution of Process Act 1992
(Cth) and in accordance with
the tribunal’s usual processes. The stamp includes a certification that
the application was served
by sending a copy of it by pre-paid post to the
respondents’ last known address, and appears to be signed by a registrar
dated, in handwriting, 15 March 2023.
35(8) of the 2020 Rules provided, in relation to an application to start
proceedings:
(8) A sealed copy of the application must be served on all the other parties
named in the application—
(a) by personal service; or
(b) as directed by the tribunal.
tribunal did not make any directions about service of the application, such that
personal service was required.
24 of the 2020 Rules provided that, for service outside the ACT but within
Australia, a “document must be served in accordance
and Execution of Process Act 1992
Bell did not refer in his written submissions to the
Service and Execution of
Process Act 1992
(Cth). Mr Bell’s legal representative, Mr Kutasi,
made a passing reference to that Act in his oral submissions, but did not
to its provisions.
Service and Execution of Process Act 1992
(Cth) concerns the
service of process of tribunals. Division 2 of
, headed “Service of
initiating and other process related to adjudicative functions,” applies,
relevantly with respect
to a proceeding in a tribunal in connection with the
performance of an adjudicative function by the tribunal that concerns an act
omission within “the State in which the tribunal is
established.”
“State” includes a territory such as the Australian Capital
Territory (
“adjudicative function,” in relation to a tribunal,
function of determining the rights or liabilities of a person in a proceeding in
which there are 2 or more parties, including
the function of making a
determination:
(a) altering those rights or liabilities; or
(b) relating to any matters of a kind mentioned in section 48.
am satisfied that the Original Tribunal was performing an adjudicative function
that concerned an act or omission within the ACT.
The relevant
“acts” were the publication of the Video on the internet and its
downloading in the ACT. The evidence indicates
that Mr Bell likely conducted the
interview the subject of the Video in Queensland. However, the evidence also
indicates that the
material was downloaded in the ACT. As Gleeson CJ, McHugh,
Gummow and Hayne JJ observed in
Dow Jones & Co Inc v
the case of material on the World Wide Web, it is not available in
comprehensible form until downloaded on to the computer of a
person who has used
a web browser to pull the material from the web server. It is where that person
downloads the material that the
damage to reputation may be done. Ordinarily
then, that will be the place where the tort of defamation is committed.
these reasons, Division 2 of
Service and Execution of Process
(Cth) applied to the service of Ms Bailey’s civil dispute
application.
Service and
of Process Act 1992
(Cth), within
Division 2 of
, relevantly provides:
50 Initiating
process may be served in any part of Australia
(1) An initiating process issued in a State may be served in another
(2) Service on an individual must be effected in the same way as service
of such an initiating process in the place of issue.
Accordingly,
and Execution of Process Act 1992
(Cth) required service of
Ms Bailey’s civil dispute application to be effected in the same way as
service of an initiating
process in the place of issue, being the ACT. That is,
it was required to be served in accordance with the 2020 Rules.
20(1) of the 2020 Rules concerns personal service. It
20 Personal service
(1) In these rules:
personal service
, of a document on a person
(a) giving a copy of the document to the person; or
(b) personal service by post; or
Note Rule 21 sets out the requirements for personal service by
(c) giving the document to the person in a way agreed by the person;
(d) if the person has instructed the person’s solicitor to accept
service for the person—serving the document on the
solicitor; or
(e) if the person is a corporation—serving the document on the
corporation in a way mentioned in rule 23.
Example—par (c)
A party may agree to receive an application by email.
21 of the 2020 Rules concerns personal service by post. It
21 Personal service by post
(1) A document, including an application, may be served personally on a
person (the recipient) by post if—
(a) if the recipient’s address for service is an address in the
ACT— the document is sent to the recipient by prepaid
post in accordance
with subrule (2); or
(b) if the recipient’s address for service is an address outside the
ACT but within Australia—
(i) the document is served in accordance with the Service and Execution of
Process Act 1992 (Cwlth); and
(ii) the document is sent to the recipient by prepaid post in accordance
with subrule (2).
(2) The document must be sent in an envelope—
(a) addressed to the recipient at the recipient’s address for service;
(b) marked with the return address GPO Box 370, Canberra ACT 2601;
(c) the return address must not be identified as the registry’s
(3) If the envelope contains an application and is returned to the
registry by the postal authority as not having been delivered
respondent—
(a) the application is taken not to have been served on the respondent;
(b) the registrar must—
(i) if judgment has been entered on the basis of the postal
service—set aside the judgment; and
(ii) tell the applicant—
(A) that the application has not been served; and
(B) if judgment has been set aside—that judgment has been set
(c) if the registrar has set aside the judgment—the applicant must,
within 2 days after being told that judgment has been set
aside, tell any
enforcement agency that the judgment has been set aside.
to rule 26(b) of the 2020 Rules, a document is taken to be served under those
rules if “the document is served by post
in Australia in accordance with
[the 2020 Rules]—7 days after the day it is posted, unless the contrary is
proved”. Rule
26 is principally concerned with the timing of service, not
with how service is effected.
29 of the 2020 Rules relevantly provides that, unless the tribunal or registrar
orders otherwise, a party’s address for
service must be the most recent
address provided in the application.
note also that
section 11(3)
Service and Execution of Process Act
(Cth) makes provision for when service is taken to have been proved. To
the extent that it is inconsistent with rule 26(b) of the
2020 Rules, it would
prevail. Section 11(3) provides:
(3) Service of a process,
order or document under this Act by post on an individual is taken to have been
proved only if the following
are proved:
(a) it was sent by pre‑paid post to the person’s
last known address, or the person’s address for service in the
proceedings
(ab) it was addressed to the person, or, if it was sent to an
address for service that is the office of a solicitor, to that
(b) the day on which it was posted.
civil dispute application was sent to Mr Bell’s last known address (being
the Electoral Roll Address) and also to his address
for service in the
proceedings concerned.
to Mr Bell’s submission, the Original Tribunal did not err in determining
the proceedings in his absence, in circumstances
where he had not been served.
The Original Tribunal was entitled to conclude that Mr Bell had been served with
the originating application
in accordance with the 2020 Rules and the
and Execution of Process Act 1992
(Cth) in circumstances where:
registrar served the application on him, in accordance with rule 19(1) of the
2020 Rules;
registrar effected personal service by post, in accordance with rules 20(1)(b)
and 21(1)(b) of the 2020 Rules, at the address
specified in the application, in
accordance with rule 29;
is nothing to suggest that the envelope containing the application was returned
to the registry, as contemplated by rule 21(3)
of the 2020 Rules;
Bell was served in accordance with the
Service and Execution of Process Act
(Cth), as required by
, because that Act required service to be
effected in the same way as service of an initiating process in the
remaining issue is whether Ms Bailey’s nomination of Mr Bell’s
address as his address shown on the electoral roll
rendered service ineffective.
Section 101(4)
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
(4) Every person who is entitled to have his or her name placed on the Roll
for any Subdivision whether by way of enrolment or transfer
of enrolment, and
whose name is not on the Roll upon the expiration of 21 days from the date upon
which the person became so entitled,
or at any subsequent date while the person
continues to be so entitled, commits an offence unless he or she proves that the
non‑enrolment
is not in consequence of his or her failure to send or
deliver to the Electoral Commissioner, a claim, duly filled in and signed
accordance with the directions printed thereon.
section 65(3)
Electoral Act 1992
(Qld), a person is required
to update his or her address within 21 days of changing address.
Section 65(3)
(3) If a person who is enrolled on an electoral roll for an electoral
district changes address within the electoral district, the
person must, within
21 days, give notice to an electoral registrar for the district in the form and
way approved by the commission.
Bell was under a legal obligation to update his address on the electoral roll
within 21 days of changing address but, if his own
evidence is accepted, he did
not do so. According to Mr Bell’s statement on 17 January 2025 (which was
not before the Original
Tribunal), he was living at Address B in Queensland
between 2020 and 2024 but, when Ms Bailey searched the electoral roll in January
2023, it showed him to be living at a different address. Mr Bell did not explain
in his statement whether he had ever lived at the
Electoral Roll Address or, if
so, when he lived there, and whether he had his mail forwarded or maintained a
correction to that address.
Nor did he explain why the address shown on the
electoral roll was incorrect.
may be effective in some circumstances, even where the document in question was
not actually received.
service by post, under the 2020 Rules, and service by post under
section 11(3)
Service and Execution of Process Act 1992
(Cth), do not require
proof that the recipient received the document. It is not strictly relevant to
Mr Bell’s first ground
of appeal whether he was aware of the proceedings
Original Tribunal was entitled to proceed in Mr Bell’s absence, under
section 47A of the ACAT Act, and did so. The entitlement
of the tribunal to
proceed with a hearing in a party’s absence, under section 47(2)(d)(i) of
the ACAT Act is to be read in
the context of a party’s entitlement to
apply to set aside an order made in the party’s absence, under section 56
the ACAT Act, as a note to section 47 suggests. Any potential unfairness in
the tribunal making orders in a party’s absence
is mitigated by the
entitlement to make an application to set the orders aside.
it is not necessary for me to determine whether or not Mr Bell was aware of the
proceedings before the Original Tribunal, and
I do not do so, I note that there
is some evidence to support the conclusion that he was so aware.
Bell’s evidence that he was unaware of the proceedings, if that is what
his statement means, is in tension with Mr Boulos’s
statement to the
Tribunal in the directions hearing on 21 April 2023 that his firm had had some
did not seek to be legally represented in the
matter. In his statement dated 16 May 2025, Mr Boulos states that he did not
take instructions
from Mr Bell during the first instance proceedings and that he
does not recall speaking with Mr Bell. That is not inconsistent with
Boulos said at the directions hearing on 21 April 2023 about the contact between
his firm and Mr Bell and Mr Bell’s
indication to the firm that he did not
wish to be legally represented. Whilst the report about contact between Mr
firm and Mr Bell is hearsay, it appears to be credible. Mr Bell
has not suggested that Mr Boulos’s statement at the directions
hearing was
is other evidence which casts doubt on Mr Bell’s evidence that he did not
know about the proceedings, and that he did
not receive the civil dispute
application. That includes the post from the “Jesse Bell” Facebook
account, which I have
found was operated by Mr Bell for reasons given below, on
24 December 2022 stating that Ms Bailey had threatened him and two of his
“mates” in the same way as another person had threatened them; that
is, with legal action. A similar comment was made
in a post from that account on
28 December 2022. Whilst the civil dispute application had not been served at
that time, it indicates
an awareness on Mr Bell’s part that it might be
served and that Mr Bell likely discussed this with his “mates”
the time. Had Mr Bell made himself available for cross examination at the appeal
hearing, questions might have been asked of him
Mr McCrae after this time, and whether Mr McCrae discussed the proceedings with
Bell annexed receipts from a real estate agent showing payment of rent, by him,
at Address B between 9 March 2022 and 5 April 2022.
However, he has not provided
any documentary proof of his residence in January 2023, when Ms Bailey searched
the electoral roll for
his address, or in March 2023, when the Tribunal’s
registrar sent the application to the Electoral Roll Address. As Ms Bailey
pointed out at the hearing of the appeal, Mr Bell would have been required to
vote in the period he said he did not live at the Electoral
Roll Address. Had he
made himself available for cross examination, the appeal tribunal may have asked
him questions about whether
it was an address of family or friends, and what
Conclusion on first ground
the reasons given above, the first ground must fail. Mr Bell has not discharged
his onus of proving that the Original Tribunal
erred in proceeding in his
absence where he had not been served with Ms Bailey’s application and in
circumstances where Ms
Bailey had provided no evidence of service that would
satisfy the requirements of the 2020 Rules.
Grounds 2 to 4: Service of concerns notice by Facebook
Bell’s second to fourth grounds of appeal challenge the Original
Tribunal’s finding that Ms Bailey gave Mr Bell a concerns
notice before
commencing the proceedings, within the meaning of section 124B(1)(a) of the
Wrongs Act. Mr Bell challenges:
(a) the Original Tribunal’s
factual finding that Mr Bell operated the Facebook page which was served by
Messenger application;
the Original Tribunal’s inference that Mr Bell had
“consented” to service of the concerns notice by Messenger, within
Electronic Transactions Act 2001
(c) the Original Tribunal’s conclusion that
Transactions Act 2001
contemplates the service of a concerns notice by
Facebook Messenger.
Second ground: Was Original Tribunal wrong to conclude that Mr
Bell operated the “Jesse Bell” account?
first question, raised by second ground of appeal, is whether the Original
Tribunal’s factual finding that Mr Bell operated
the Facebook page which
was served by Messenger application was erroneous and should be disturbed. In
the particulars to Ground 2,
Mr Bell claims that there was “no evidence
... to establish the factual basis for this finding”.
Original Tribunal found that “the evidence provided by the applicant is
sufficient to establish [Mr McCrae and Mr Bell]
were given the concerns notice
in the sense that they read and had the opportunity to respond to the
Bell submitted in writing, in relation to Ground 2, that “[t]his standard
of proof does not satisfy the test of the civil
standard of proof outlined in
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34]
”. I take that
submission to be that the evidence relied upon by the Original Tribunal was not
sufficient to satisfy it that
the concerns notice had been served on Mr Bell, to
submission is misconceived.
does not import a different
standard of proof from the civil standard, but rather is authority for the
principle that the degree of
satisfaction required in determining that the civil
standard has been discharged may vary according to the seriousness of the
allegations
that are made. That principle may be relevant when determining
whether a person has made a defamatory statement. It does not have
relevance to the question of whether a concerns notice has been served.
order to succeed on the “no evidence” ground, Mr Bell needs to
establish that there was no probative evidence before
the Original Tribunal that
he operated the “Jesse Bell” account. In
Pty Ltd v WorkCover Authority of New South
Basten JA observed of
the “no evidence” ground of judicial review that
depends not on the reasoning of the decision-maker, but on a
comparison between the material available to the decision-maker and the
conclusion reached. Secondly, care must be taken with the term "no evidence", as
an administrative decision-maker is usually entitled
to take into account
material which would not count as "evidence" in a judicial context. In what is
essentially an inquisitorial
inquiry, that material is not necessarily limited
to the material placed before the decision-maker by the applicant for review.
it is important to bear in mind that the decision-maker may be entitled
to seek support for a particular inference from the absence
of material
supportive of a contrary view. Fourthly, where an evaluative judgment is to be
formed on the basis of conflicting indicators,
it will be difficult if not
impossible to establish a "no evidence" ground of review.
Tribunal found that Ms Bailey had messaged each of the respondents the concerns
notice on 7 November 2022.
Bailey said in her submissions on appeal that the concerns notice was not sent
to the “Jesse Eurekanzo” Facebook account,
as Mr Bell claimed, but
rather to the “Jesse Bell” Facebook account. Ms Bailey has provided
evidence in an annexure to
her statement of 23 May 2025 that she sent the
concerns notice to the “Jesse Bell” Facebook account via Messenger
7 November 2022 and I am satisfied that this occurred.
Bailey also provided to the Original Tribunal in an annexure to a submission by
Ms Bailey dated 25 May 2023 a screenshot of a message
sent from the “Jesse
Bell” account to Ms Bailey on 6 April 2022. In the exchange between Ms
Bailey and the “Jesse
Bell” account, “Jesse Bell”
referred to an offer of protection made by Mr McCrae and stated: “I have
nothing you have accused me of”. Another screenshot in evidence shows
Mr McCrae making that offer of protection.
the hearing on 31 July 2023, Ms Bailey told the Original Tribunal that on
Christmas Eve, Jesse Bell “made a post that
referenced the fact
they’d received the concerns notice”. She then clarified that there
was no mention of the concerns
notice, but that Mr Bell had said that she had
threatened them with legal
screenshot of a message from “Jesse Bell” to Ms Bailey on 23
December 2022, which was in evidence before the Original
Tribunal and which is
referred to above, states: “you cannot prosecute a civil case from another
State or Territory”.
That appears to reference, implicitly, Ms
Bailey’s concerns notice. In a post dated 24 December 2022, “Jesse
referred to his interview of Luke McKee then stated: “Then
myself and the owner of the platform were threatened with legal
...”. He said that person “backed off” then Ms Bailey
“waited until Christmas to threaten me and two
of my mates the same
way.” Again, that may be taken to refer to Ms Bailey’s threat of
defamation proceedings in the concerns
to Ms Bailey’s civil dispute application is a screenshot from “Jesse
Bell” dated 3 February stating “Going
live in 30 minutes with a
pedophile hunter.” That post helps to establish that the “Jesse
Bell” account is operated
by the appellant, being the person who appeared
in the defamatory interview. Other screenshots of messages and Facebook posts
the “Jesse Bell” account interacting with Ms Bailey in relation
to the defamatory video.
support of this ground of appeal, Mr Bell relies upon the case of
Mothership Music
[2013] NSWCA 268.
In that case, Macfarlan JA
evidence before the primary judge did not in any event constitute a sufficient
basis for the making of the substituted service
order insofar as that order
provided for notice to be given to Flo Rida by means of Facebook. The evidence
(see [11(b) and (c)] above)
did not establish, other than by mere assertion,
that the Facebook page was in fact that of Flo Rida and did not prove that a
on it was likely to come to his attention in a timely fashion (see
Chappell v Coyle
[1985] 2 NSWLR 73
case is not authority for the proposition that the Original Tribunal erred in
concluding that the Facebook page operated by “Jesse
Bell” was in
fact operated by the appellant. There was probative evidence before the Original
Tribunal, cited above, which
supported that conclusion, including Ms
Bailey’s oral evidence. It is relevant to note, additionally, that the
tribunal was
not bound by the rules of evidence, unlike the court in
these reasons, I do not accept that there was no probative evidence on which the
Original Tribunal could conclude that he operated
the account of “Jesse
evidence on appeal also supports that conclusion. In his statement dated 17
January 2025, Mr Bell admits to appearing on the YouTube
video with Mr McKee,
the subject of these proceedings. He also states that Ms Bailey contacted him
“via Facebook Messenger
in March 2022 to remonstrate with [him] about the
McKee interview”. The annexed correspondence contains screenshots of
with Ms Bailey’s Facebook name appearing at the top. These are in
the same terms as those which Ms Bailey’s screenshots
show were sent from
the “Jesse Bell” Facebook account.
Accordingly,
even if I am wrong to find that there was probative evidence before the Original
Tribunal supporting its finding that
Mr Bell operated the “Jesse
Bell” Facebook account, evidence before me on appeal establishes that fact
on the balance
of probabilities.
second ground is dismissed.
Grounds 3 and 4: Did the Original Tribunal err in its reasoning
Electronic Transactions Act
McCrae and Ms Benitez submitted to the Original Tribunal that the requirements
for service of a concerns notice under the
Electronic Transactions Act 2001
had not been met. The Original Tribunal considered whether the concerns
notice had been validly served by applying the provisions
Transactions Act 2001
. It found that the history of communications between
Mr McCrae and Mr Bell and Ms Bailey provided the inference for consent to the
information in the concerns notice being given by means of an electronic
communication, for the purposes of
Electronic Transactions
note, for completeness, that section 139O of the Wrongs Act, which permits a
notice under Chapter 9 of the Wrongs Act
to be served on a person by
messaging or other electronic communication, had not commenced at the relevant
time. It was inserted into
the Wrongs Act by the
Civil Law (Wrongs) Amendment
and was not in force in November 2022, so has no application in
these proceedings.
Ground 3, Mr Bell contends that the facts do not support a finding that he
consented to “service” of the concerns notice
by Facebook Messenger.
Mr Bell submitted that the Original Tribunal erred in finding that a course of
conduct in which parties regularly
communicate by Facebook Messenger could
constitute implied consent. He
is said that the mere use of a medium automatically implies consent, then
would have no work to do. A notice giver would only need to establish
that the recipient was indeed the person who was required to
be given the
relevant requirement under section 124B(1)(a) of the Wrongs Act, before an
aggrieved person can commence defamation proceedings,
is that the “person
the proposed defendant a concerns notice” (emphasis
Electronic Transactions Act 2001
provides for circumstances
in which a requirement to give information in writing is “taken to have
been met”. The term
“giving information” includes
“giving, sending or serving a
notification”.
inclusive term which is broad enough to include giving a concerns notice. Mr
Bell did not suggest otherwise.
is a question as to whether section 124B(1) of the Wrongs Act is a territory law
under which “a person is required to
give information in writing”
for the purposes of
subsection 8(1)
Electronic Transactions Act
. The provision makes the giving of a concerns notice a prerequisite for
commencing defamation proceedings, but, on one view, does
“require” a person to give the concerns notice. It may be that,
under subsection 124B(1) of the Wrongs Act, “a
person is permitted to give
information in writing” within
subsection 8(2)
Transactions Act 2001
. It is not necessary to decide this question because,
in either case, there is a requirement that the recipient of the information
“consents to the information being given by means of an electronic
communication.”
“consent” is defined to include “consent that can reasonably
be inferred from the conduct of the person
concerned” but not to include
“consent given subject to conditions unless the conditions are complied
Original Tribunal referred to the explanatory memorandum to the
Transactions Bill 2000
, as well as the revised explanatory statement
accompanying the
Electronic Transactions Bill 1999
(Cth) (the law on
Electronic Transactions Act 2001
of the ACT was
The Original Tribunal
the explanatory statements suggest, the question of consent is directed to the
means or medium used, i.e., there is consent
to the use of a form of electronic
communication rather than relying on an alternative means of communication such
as delivery of
a letter by post. It is not a question of whether the recipient
has consented to being given the content of the communication, in
this case a
concerns notice, but rather the use of electronic means to communicate that
31. There is limited case law on this issue, and none was presented by the
parties. In my view, the terms of the
Electronic Transactions Act
, as confirmed
by the explanatory statement accompanying introduction of those terms support a
broad approach being taken to when
consent may be inferred.
Original Tribunal found that the issue of consent had to be determined at the
time of the communication in
It identified the
following factors as being relevant to whether Mr Bell, Mr McCrae and Ms Benitez
had consented to the use of electronic
communications:
(a) the prior
use of electronic communications between Ms Bailey and the respondents;
(b) the content of those communications to the extent they relate to the
subject matter of the communication in question;
(c) any opportunities presented to object to or condition the use of
electronic communications; and
(d) the alternative forms of communication
Original Tribunal inferred that Mr Bell “consented to the use of
electronic communication, and Facebook messenger in particular”
his exchanges with Ms Bailey indicate that he initiated communication with Ms
Bailey in relation to the publications in question
and actions that he could
take in response.
Original Tribunal did not find “that the mere use of a medium
automatically implies consent”, as Mr Bell suggested
Rather, it found that Mr
Bell’s consent to the giving a concerns notice by means of an electronic
communication (and in particular,
by means of Facebook Messenger) could be
inferred from Mr Bell’s use of Facebook Messenger to discuss the Video and
that he could take in response to Ms Bailey’s concerns.
Bell submitted that the mere fact that he communicated “in general
terms” with Ms Bailey by Facebook Messenger did
not indicate consent to be
served by that means. The Original Tribunal inferred consent, however, not from
communications “in
general terms,” but rather from communications
am not persuaded by Mr Bell’s submissions that the Tribunal erred in
drawing an inference that Mr Bell had consented to service
by Facebook
Messenger. The express inclusion of “consent that can reasonably be
inferred from the conduct of the person concerned”
in the definition of
Electronic Transactions Act 2001
indicates a legislative intention to allow consideration of a person’s
conduct generally. It is very unlikely that the legislature
“conduct,” as it appears in the definition of “consent,”
to be limited to conduct in relation to
service (for example, whether the person
had consented to service by electronic means in the past). In my view, the
approach of considering the use of electronic communications in
the past, and the subject matter of those communications, is correct.
these reasons, Ground 3 is dismissed.
Ground 4, Mr Bell contends that the Original Tribunal erred in its finding that
Electronic Transactions Act 2001
contemplates and permits the
service of a concerns notice by Facebook Messenger. He submits that serving a
concerns notice in this
way does not meet the standards of
Electronic Transactions Act 2001
, being that “at the time the
information was given, it was reasonable to expect that the information would be
readily accessible
so as to be useable for subsequent reference”. The
basis for this submission is Mr Bell’s assertion that Facebook Messenger
has an “unsend” feature which renders messages unavailable at the
discretion of the sender.
Bailey’s position was that “when it comes to unsending, just like
with email, you can only unsend a Facebook message
before it has been
Bell did not identify any evidence before the Original Tribunal to support his
claim that Facebook Messenger has an “unsend”
feature which renders
messages unavailable at the discretion of the sender. Nor did Mr Bell seek leave
to provide any such evidence
to the appeal tribunal. In the absence of any
evidence to that effect, Mr Bell’s fourth ground cannot succeed.
note that, contrary to Mr Bell’s position,
section 8(1)(b)
Electronic Transactions Act 2001
may not require information to be
readily accessible indefinitely. It may be that the words “at the time the
information was
given,” properly construed, mean that the question of
ready accessibility is to be determined that time, and that, if information
readily accessible at time the information was given, such that it may be
downloaded by the recipient then “for subsequent
reference”, that is
sufficient. However, in the absence of evidence to support Mr Bell’s
contention about the way in
which he says Facebook Messenger operates, it is not
necessary to resolve this question of construction.
Ground 5: Serious harm
Ground 5, Mr Bell contends that the Original Tribunal erred in its application
of s 122A of the Wrongs Act,
finding that Ms Bailey had established serious harm.
122A(1) of the Wrongs Act provides that “[i]t is an element
serious harm element
) of a cause of action for
defamation that the publication of defamatory matter about a person has caused,
or is likely to cause,
serious harm to the reputation of the person”. By
section 122A(4), the question of whether the serious harm element is established
may be determined before the “trial”.
this case, the Original Tribunal held a separate hearing on the question of
whether Ms Bailey had established the serious harm
element on 5 October 2023. Ms
Bailey relied upon witness statements from herself, David Bottrill and Lillian
Bailey. The Original
Tribunal noted, in its reasons for decision, that
“[n]o written submissions or material was filed by either respondent in
to orders made on 31 July 2023 for consideration at the hearing of the
serious harm element”. The transcript of hearing on
that day indicates
that there was no appearance for the respondents. At the hearing, Ms Bailey
indicated that both Mr Bottrill and
Ms Lillian Bailey were available for cross
examination.
Ms Bailey gave some
oral evidence at the hearing.
5 October 2023, the Original Tribunal made orders indicating that it had
determined that the serious harm element as set out in
section 122A of the
Wrongs Act was satisfied. It provided reasons for its decision on the serious
harm element at the conclusion
of the substantive proceedings.
Reasoning of Original Tribunal on serious harm
Original Tribunal correctly stated, in its reasons for decision, that serious
harm is concerned with harm to reputation and not
with harm to feelings or
It stated, again
that there must be
evidence of the actual or likely future reputational damage arising from the
tendency of the words and their actual
impact on those to whom they were
communicated.
Original Tribunal found that the Video conveyed “extremely grave
imputations” and inferred from “[t]he tone
of the views expressed in
the Video and the subsequent posts linking to the Video” that the
Video’s content “is
likely to be taken seriously by a significant
proportion of those viewers”. It also referred to evidence that a
substantial
number of people had seen the Video, at least in part. The Original
Tribunal accepted that the imputations in the Video were believed
individuals and accepted Ms Bailey’s evidence that persons who knew her,
at least through her social media persona,
had viewed and commented on the
response to the “suggestion” that access to the Video had been
restricted after a few weeks, the Original Tribunal
accepted the evidence of Ms
Bailey and Mr Bottrill that access was still available to the Video through use
of the relevant URL,
which could be found through
It found that the
continuing ability to locate copies of the Video was relevant to the
“grapevine effect” and the harm
to reputation likely to arise in the
indicated that it was satisfied that the harm to Ms Bailey’s reputation
was more than merely substantial and determined that
the serious harm element
was met by her in this
Mr Bell’s submissions on “serious
Bell relied upon the Curtin AJ’s discussion of the “serious
harm” test in
Supaphien v Chaiyabarn
[2023] ACTSC 240
at [101]–[121]. He submitted that there
was “insufficient evidence to acquit the serious harm test required by
the following additional submissions in support of that
proposition:
in the absence of any witnesses other than her daughter and her advocate, Mr
Bottrill – neither of whom attested
they had a diminished opinion of her
– it is hard to fathom how the Tribunal could conclude that she had
acquitted such an
65. Second, the Tribunal was presented with no actual evidence of anyone
who had seen the video, nor anyone who had commented upon
it to Ms Bailey. She
merely vaguely asserted it, and Mr McCrae was denied any opportunity to
cross-examine upon that. Additionally,
a Jones v Dunkel inference ought to have
been drawn by the failure of Ms Bailey to present anyone to the Tribunal to give
such evidence
66. Third, no evidence was led by Ms Bailey as to whether anyone had even
seen anything in the publication that was defamatory. The
whole video ran for
something like an hour. It contained a wide-ranging conversation between the
Appellant and his interview subject
that covered many topics. The comments that
Ms Bailey complains of was only a factional snippet of the video. Yet there is
in evidence as to who viewed that small fragment, if anyone.
67. Fourth, it is well-known that Ms Bailey is a frequent abuser of
ACAT’s civil wrongs jurisdiction. She has no reputation
that can suffer
serious harm, and the Senior Member gave no consideration to this fact in his
68. Fifth, as is developed below in relation to the issue of damages, Ms
Bailey never presented anything to the Tribunal that outlined
her loss, save for
hurt feelings, which are irrelevant to the test of serious harm. Ms Bailey
certainly never asserted the existence
of any economic loss.
71. Additionally, it is highly notable that the award of damages in this
matter was a mere $5,000 (doubled for aggravation). So implicitly,
the Tribunal
through the determination of damage acknowledged that this was a matter that did
not meet the test of serious harm because
it made a merely nominal award of
Ms Bailey’s submissions on “serious
Bailey submitted, at the hearing, that she provided significantly more evidence
than evidence about people asking how she felt,
including evidence about the
abuse she received. She referred, in addition, to the seriousness of the
imputations, and submitted
that it could be inferred that allegations of serious
criminal activity meet the serious harm
Consideration of serious harm ground
the extent that Mr Bell’s ground concerns the sufficiency of evidence to
support the Original Tribunal’s findings,
as opposed to the absence of
evidence, it does not raise an error of law. Mr Bell has also contended that
the Original Tribunal
made errors of mixed fact and law.
will deal with Mr Bell’s points in the order he has adopted.
it was not necessary that Ms Bailey establish that her witnesses had a
diminished opinion of her before the Original Tribunal
could be satisfied of the
serious harm element, as Mr Bell submitted. Ms Bailey’s evidence included
that persons who knew her
had viewed and commented on the Video. The Original
Tribunal was entitled to rely upon that evidence. It is also relevant that the
test of serious harm extends to evidence of likely reputational damage. In
Greenwich v Latham
[2024] FCA 1050
, O’Callaghan J said at
The question of whether a statement has caused or is
likely to cause serious reputational harm is a matter of fact, which can be
established
only by reference to the impact which the statement is shown
actually to have had. It depends on a combination of the inherent tendency
the words and their actual impact on those to whom they were
communicated.
Honour cited, with apparent approval, a passage from the judgment of Richard
Parkes KC in
Wilson v Mendelsohn
[2024] EWHC 821 (KB)
(1)The ‘harm’ of defamation is the reputational
damage caused in the minds of publishees, and may be (but does not have
established by evidencing specific instances of serious consequences suffered by
a claimant as a result of the reputational
(2)Serious harm may be shown by general inferences of fact, drawn from a
combination of evidence about the meaning of the words, the
situation of the
claimant, the circumstances of publication and the inherent probabilities. That
brings into play the scale of publication
(but serious harm is not simply a
‘numbers game’), whether the statement complained of is likely to
have come to the
attention of anyone who knew the claimant, and the seriousness
of the allegations complained of.
(3)It is relevant to consider the risk of percolation of defamatory
allegations, especially on social media. It may in such cases
be very hard to
identify unknown publishees who thought less well of a claimant.
was thus open to Ms Bailey to establish serious harm through general inferences
of fact. Given the seriousness of the imputations,
the unchallenged evidence as
to the number of people who had viewed the Video, and the evidence that people
who knew Ms Bailey had
seen it or knew about it, the Tribunal was entitled to
conclude that Ms Bailey had established that the publication of defamatory
matter about Ms Bailey had caused, or was likely to cause, serious harm to her
reputation.
to Mr Bell’s second point, for reasons given above, it is not necessary
for Ms Bailey to provide the Tribunal with evidence
from a person who had seen
the Video for it to be satisfied of the serious harm element. The Tribunal is
not bound by the rules of
evidence and may accept hearsay evidence. Further,
direct evidence from a third party who had seen the Video is not necessary to
establish likely reputational harm.
the extent that Mr Bell submits that Mr McCrae was denied any opportunity to
cross-examine Ms Bailey’s witnesses, that is
incorrect. As indicated
above, a hearing concerning the serious harm element was held and Mr McCrae did
not appear at that hearing.
Ms Bailey’s witnesses were available to be
cross-examined. When Mr Kutasi complained that he had never had an opportunity
cross-examine Ms Bailey’s witnesses (on behalf of Mr McCrae) at a
subsequent hearing, the senior member quite properly pointed
out that there had
been an opportunity to do so at the previous
It is hard to see, in
any event, how any denial of procedural fairness to Mr McCrae would properly
found a complaint by Mr Bell.
is no basis for drawing a
inference on the
basis of any failure of Ms Bailey to present anyone to the Tribunal “to
give such evidence firsthand”.
Mr McCrae apparently sought to raise the
serious harm finding at the final hearing, after the issue of serious harm had
been determined,
conclusively, at a hearing held for that purpose. Ms
Bailey’s witnesses were available to be cross-examined at the hearing
without merit.
Mr Bell contends, there was no evidence was led by Ms Bailey as to whether
anyone had even seen anything in the publication
that was defamatory. He
suggests that the viewers may not have watched the whole of the Video. In my
view, the Original Tribunal
was entitled to infer from the evidence as to the
number of views of the Video, and Ms Bailey’s other evidence, that people
had seen it or heard about it and that it was likely to cause serious harm to Ms
Bailey’s reputation.
any event, Mr Bell’s contention that Ms Bailey did not lead evidence about
others seeing the Video is not accurate. Ms Bailey’s
evidence included
that she had “had friends disassociate due to the unpleasant nature of
these materials”
the publication had “strained numerous friendships and
relationships”.
provided a timeline, which was accepted into evidence as part of the serious
harm hearing,
in which she
stated that in February 2022 she was contacted by a YouTube viewer and informed
the content. The timeline also recorded that, on 6 April 2022, Ms Bailey had
been contacted by
a named person on Instagram, who stated that she was
“suspect” and that between April and May 2022 she had been described
as a “satanic jezebel” and a “pedophile protector” by
people on Instagram. All of this is evidence from which
it may be inferred that
others had an awareness of the imputations in the Video.
Bell’s fourth point is that “it is well-known that Ms Bailey is a
frequent abuser of ACAT’s civil wrongs jurisdiction”
and that she
“has no reputation that can suffer serious harm”. That is a
concerning submission to make and one for which
no evidence was proffered. I
relation to the fifth point, concerning an alleged lack of evidence of loss, the
absence of loss is not determinative of serious
harm. What needs to be shown is
serious harm or likely serious harm to reputation, not economic loss.
Bell’s submission that the quantum of the damages constitutes an implicit
acknowledgement, by the Original Tribunal, that
the serious harm test was not
met, should also be rejected. An equally available argument is that the
circumstance that the Tribunal
found that serious harm had been established
suggests that the amount of damages it awarded was too low.
am not persuaded by Mr Bell’s submissions that the Original Tribunal erred
in concluding that Ms Bailey had established that
the publication of defamatory
matter about her had caused, or was likely to cause, serious harm to her
reputation. Mr Bell’s
fifth ground is dismissed.
Ground 6: Publication
Bell’s sixth ground is that the Original Tribunal erred in finding that Mr
Bell was a publisher of the defamatory material.
He says that he was not
“Resolute TV,” the entity responsible for publishing the Video, and
that there is no evidence
that he participated in the publication.
its reasons for decision, the Original Tribunal stated that it was not in
dispute that Mr Bell was a publisher of the
It did not explain on
what basis it found that he had published it. However, Mr Bell was directed to
provide a response to the civil
dispute application and, thereafter, was
directed on multiple occasions to provide evidence in support of his case. He
did not provide
any documents to the Original Tribunal or participate in the
proceedings in any way. The Original Tribunal was entitled to accept
Bailey’s evidence supporting her case that Mr Bell published the
defamatory material. On one view, the failure to file a
response or to appear in
the proceedings is a deemed admission of Ms Bailey’s claims, as contained
in her civil dispute
application.
if that is not so, there was sufficient material before the Original Tribunal
for it to conclude, lawfully, that Mr Bell was
a publisher of the Video.
Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd v
), three members of the High Court held that all that is
required for publication is proof that the defendant voluntarily participated
the communication of the defamatory matter (that being sufficient to establish
that publication was
intentional).
The other two
members of the High Court in the majority stated that every voluntary and active
participant in the process of making
matter available for comprehension by a
third party is a publisher for the purposes of defamation
Google LLC v Defteros
), Kiefel CJ and Gleeson J (Gageler J, agreeing) referred
and stated that “a person who has been instrumental in,
or contributes to any extent to, the publication of defamatory matter
publisher”.
Their Honours
with approval, to the
observation of Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson JJ in
breadth of activity captured by the traditional publication rule is vast”.
Edelman and Steward JJ, in that
case, observed that there were four ways in
which a defendant might be found to be a publisher of defamatory
first is where a defendant performs the actual act of communication. The other
three are based on the attribution to a defendant
of another’s acts that
form part of the process of communication: (ii) where a defendant authorises
another to perform an act
of communication and the communication is within the
scope of that authority; (iii) where a defendant assists, in the sense of
provokes or conduces, another in performing the act of communication;
and (iv) where a defendant ratifies or adopts the communication
of another.
(footnotes omitted)
Bailey submitted at the appeal hearing, in respect of the Original
Tribunal’s finding that Mr Bell had published the Video,
that Mr Bell was
the interviewer and that his face was on the
She also said that he
opened the Video stating that it is his Video and that it is part of a series he
is doing. She relied upon
evidence that Mr Bell had further shared the Video
and upon Mr McCrae’s evidence that Mr Bell was responsible for the Video.
Ms Bailey stated that Mr Bell had admitted to Mr Bottrill (who had also made a
claim of defamation in relation to the same Video)
that he was the
She referred to Mr
McCrae’s evidence that “Mr Bell was more than capable of adding and
removing videos as he saw fit,
and that he had full autonomy to do whatever he
wanted with Resolute
her witness statement dated 19 October 2023, Ms Bailey provided evidence that
Jesse Bell was sharing the Video around 27 March
2022. She annexed a post
apparently forwarded from Mr Bell in which he stated “you can find the
video at” then provided
a website address.
Bottrill’s witness statement filed on 1 September 2023 contained evidence
that Mr Bell had promoted the Video. Mr Bottrill
stated in that witness
Resolute TV presenter Bell posted text introducing the video on both Youtube and
Facebook which directed viewers to McKee’s
channel on the platform
‘Ever wonder why high-ranking rock-spiders get away with it so much?
Today we have our first guest on ‘Day of Thunder’
a brave man who is
a refugee – Luke McKee. Who exposes pedophiles in the Australian and
international elite be it government,
deep state, media or otherwise in the
public arena. ... Again I would like to say a massive thanks to Luke for coming
on Resolute
and exposing these arseholes. ...’
to David Bottrill’s statement are print-outs of various posts made by Mr
Bell, including one made a few days after the
Video, which is as
This man who is an Australian political refugee proves
forensically the people involved in the pedo cult in Australia – including
in the police, government, judiciary, sports, media (not least the ABC) and
NGO’s. You can find him in the description and
further links in the
comments below the video on YouTube. I warn you – this is a hard one:
[followed by links to the Video
on YouTube and Facebook]
response to a comment following this post from a third party that the
“whole depraved network of compromised and corrupt
officials ... has got
to be exposed”, Mr Bell replied, “agreed mate. I hear
is abundant evidence supporting the Original Tribunal’s conclusion that Mr
Bell was a publisher and that he voluntarily
participated in the communication
of the defamatory matter. The evidence established that he conducted the
interview the subject
of the Video, in a “program” run by him, he
invited Mr McKee to participate in the interview, he advertised it beforehand
online and provided a link to the website on which it would be streamed, he
provided a link to the Video afterwards in a social media
post, endorsing Mr
McKee’s comments and the position he took in the Video and, on Mr
McCrae’s evidence, Mr Bell was capable
of adding and removing videos to
the Resolute TV channel. Mr Bell falls within the second, third and fourth
categories of publisher
as described by Edelman and Steward JJ in
Bell contends, finally, that “Ms Bailey’s pleadings admitted that
the ‘video was already depublished’ at
the time she commenced
proceedings” and submits that this means that “the demand in her
Concerns Notice was heeded; meaning
that there was no cause of action at the
time of her application”.
Mr Bell did not provide any authority to support that proposition and I reject
if the proposition that a cause of action in defamation is extinguished upon a
defendant “heeding” the demands in
a concerns notice were legally
correct (which I do not accept), the factual basis for Mr Bell’s claim is
not made out. Ms Bailey’s
civil dispute application plainly states that
the Video “can still be viewed via these links” (which she provided
the application). Whilst the Video may have been taken down from the Resolute
TV site, it was still available for viewing elsewhere
at the time Ms Bailey
lodged her application.
these reasons, the sixth ground must be dismissed.
Bell’s seventh ground of appeal is that the Original Tribunal erred in its
reasons for the award of damages. Mr Bell says
that the Original Tribunal failed
to properly consider and apply s 139E of the Wrongs Act; that it erred in
finding that Ms Bailey’s
evidence was sufficient to establish any nexus
between the quantum and non-economic loss; that it erred in quantifying damages,
failing to consider Mr Bell’s apology and finding without evidence that
any such apology would be “insincere”;
in awarding aggravating
damages, particularly in circumstances where Ms Bailey had not pleaded any basis
for aggravated damages in
her application.
its reasons concerning general damages, the Original Tribunal set out section
139E of the Wrongs Act, which provides as follows:
Damages to bear rational relationship to harm
In determining the amount of damages to be awarded in any defamation
proceedings, the court is to ensure that there is an appropriate
and rational
relationship between the harm sustained by the plaintiff and the amount of
damages awarded.
am not persuaded that there was no rational relationship between the alleged
harm suffered by Ms Bailey and the award of $5,000
in general damages, as Mr
Bell submits.
Assessing damages
in a defamation action is “essentially a matter of impression and not
Original Tribunal referred
the principles for determining an award of general damages, as set out in
Wilson v Bauer Media Pty
It stated that it had
considered the evidence given in cross-examination by the applicant and Lillian
Bailey to be generally credible
and supportive of the evidence provided in their
witness statements.
It commented
that the gravity of the imputations in the defamatory material was
“substantial” and that the accusation
that Ms Bailey was a member of
a group which engaged in child sexual assault was “very serious”.
The Original Tribunal
referred to the number of views of the original material;
to the grapevine effect which was “likely to be substantial”;
evidence that the Video had been viewed by people with whom Ms Bailey
associates; to the abusive comments about Ms Bailey
on social media; and to the
adverse health effects suffered by Ms Bailey due to the effect on her reputation
and other matters.
It also found
that the “relatively short time in which the Video was available”
was a relevant factor when assessing
considered the cases referred to in submissions by the applicant, taking into
account the serious but indirect nature of
the accusation, limited time in which
the Video was available from the Resolute TV sites, and evidence of harm
presented, I consider
that an award of $5,000 for non-economic loss to be
appropriate given the hurt and injury suffered due to the initial publication
the defamatory material and effect on and vindication of the applicant’s
reputation.
reasoning does not outline which cases referred to in the submissions by the
applicant (being Ms Bailey), nor any analysis
of how they compare to the facts
of her application. It’s as if the Senior Member simply decided that
$5,000 seemed like a
nice round number to select.
may be accepted that the Original Tribunal did not analyse, in its reasons for
decision, the cases on which Ms Bailey relied. That
would have been desirable,
but the absence of such analysis may be explained by the circumstance that no
argument was presented on
behalf of Mr Bell to the Original Tribunal as to why
those cases should not apply. Further, each case must be considered on its own
facts when damages are awarded.
do not accept that “the Senior Member simply decided that $5,000 seemed
like a nice round number to select”, as Mr Bell
contends. The Senior
Member took into account the gravity of the imputations in the defamatory
material, the number of views and
the grapevine effect, and Ms Bailey’s
evidence as to the adverse effect upon her of publication; and discounted the
which might otherwise have been awarded by reference to the limited time
the Video was available and the indirect nature of the accusation.
Bell’s submission that he “ought to have received some credit for
removing the publication”
overlooks the circumstances that there was no evidence that he did remove the
publication and that the Original Tribunal took into
account the limited time
the Video remained available on the Resolute TV site. Bearing in mind that
assessing damages in defamation
is a matter of impression, Mr Bell has not
established that the Original Tribunal erred when doing so, or that it failed to
consider and apply s 139E of the Wrongs Act.
Bell claimed that the Original Tribunal erred by failing to take into account
his apology. It is not surprising that the Original
Tribunal did not refer to
each matter which may have been favourable to Mr Bell in circumstances where Mr
Bell did not participate
in the proceedings. Mr Bell did not provide evidence to
the Original Tribunal of having made an apology to Ms Bailey, within s 139I
the Wrongs Act. Mr Kutasi did not make any submissions about Mr Bell’s
apology at the hearing of the appeal, and it is not
entirely clear from the
written submissions what is said to constitute that apology. It may be that, by
an “apology,”
Mr Bell is referring to his message to Ms Bailey on 3
April 2022, in which he stated, “if you need protection we will provide
it”. After a strongly-worded exchange, particularly on the part of Ms
Bailey, Ms Bailey texted: “so no apology for publishing
lies... for agreeing I should be dead? Hmmmm.” Mr Bell replied:
“Apology for fucking what? Flip the script
you fucking
Original Tribunal did not err in failing to take into account the statement made
on 3 April 2022 (if indeed it was not taken into
account). That statement was
followed by various inflammatory statements and posts made by Mr Bell in the
following weeks and months,
some of which were made publicly, when Mr Bell did
not receive the response from Ms Bailey which he apparently expected.
Bell also submits that the award of aggravated damages was affected by error,
because Ms Bailey did not seek aggravated damages
in her application. He claims
that the award of aggravated damages was a denial of procedural fairness.
Mr Bell submits, there was no mention of aggravated damages in Ms Bailey’s
application. However, in the box on the application
form next to the words
“Amount claimed”, Ms Bailey wrote “$25,000.” There was
nothing on the application
form asking the applicant to identify what kind of
damages were sought.
Original Tribunal may have denied Mr Bell procedural fairness if it had awarded
Ms Bailey more than the amount she sought in the
application. That was not the
claim for aggravated damages was raised by Ms Bailey during the proceedings
before the Original Tribunal. In her submissions on
serious harm filed on 1
September 2023, Ms Bailey referred to some case law and to what she described as
“further attacks by
the defamatory video creators,” then stated:
“it can be argued that the further attacks by the defamatory video
would aggravate the harm caused by the defamatory materials”. The
issue of aggravated damages was alluded to by Ms Bailey at
the hearing on 10
November 2023. Ms Bailey stated, in response to a question from the Senior
Member about whether she was seeking
the same orders in relation to Mr Bell and
Mr McCrae, “I do think Mr Bell’s behaviour has been somewhat more
aggravating”
(than that of Mr
The Original Tribunal
remarked, “you’re seeking aggravated damages in relation to the
conduct, as I’ve just heard
you correctly, for both Mr McCrae and Mr
appearing for Mr McCrae, did not object to Ms Bailey’s application for
aggravated damages.
am satisfied that Mr Bell was given an adequate opportunity to respond to the
claim for aggravated damages. He was notified, by
letter sent to the Electoral
Roll Address, of the hearing on 10 November 2023 and was, generally, given an
opportunity to participate
in the proceedings. Mr Bell’s claim that
“Ms Bailey had not pleaded any basis for aggravated damages in her
application”
is misconceived because the tribunal is not a court of strict
pleadings. The tribunal is entitled to decide its own
The Original Tribunal
did not make any direction that the parties provide pleadings and the
application did not constitute a “pleading”.
also reject Mr Bell’s claim that, in awarding aggravated damages, the
Original Tribunal “jumped to many findings of
fact” which could not
be supported by the evidence. The Original Tribunal had sufficient evidence on
which to ground its factual
findings and Mr Bell did not provide any evidence to
refute Ms Bailey’s evidence. Further, the finding that any future apology
by Mr Bell would be insincere was not taken into account in relation to
aggravated damages, but was made in order to reject Ms Bailey’s
application for an order requiring him to issue an apology. The material before
the Original Tribunal amply demonstrates that Mr
Bell conducted himself in a way
which aggravated the harm caused.
the reasons given above, Mr Bell has not established that the Original Tribunal
erred in any of the ways claimed by him. His
application for appeal must
therefore be dismissed.
......................................
Presidential Member J Lucy
Date(s) of hearing:
Solicitors for the Appellant:
Solve Legal
First Respondent:
Solicitors for the Second Respondent:
Solve Legal
Statement of Katrina Bailey
dated 23 May 2025, Annexure D.
Bailey v McCrae &
[2023] ACAT 51
Bailey v McCrae &
[2023] ACAT 51
Wrongs Act s 122A(1)
Bailey v McCrae &
[2024] ACAT 82
Transcript of hearing dated 10
November 2023, page 2, lines 33 to 36
Bailey v McCrae &
[2024] ACAT 82
Bailey v McCrae &
[2024] ACAT 82
Kolodzeij v Ali & Anor
[2021] ACAT 114
Amer v Eriksson
[2019] ACAT 108
Amer v Eriksson
[2019] ACAT 108
Krutsky v Commissioner
for Social Housing
[2023] ACAT 68
Amer v Eriksson
[2019] ACAT
Transcript of hearing dated
11 June 2025, page 7, lines 7-14
ACAT Act s 16(1)(b)
ACAT Act s 15
ACAT Act s 18
ACAT Act s 22(1)
Wrongs Act s 118(1)
Wrongs Act s
ACAT Act s 82(1)
Mansour v Dangar
[2017] ACAT 49
Magistrates Court Act
Witness Statement of Jesse
Bell, filed 17 January 2025, paragraph 18.
Transcript of hearing dated
31 July 2023, page 3, lines 9-10
ACAT Act s 7A(b)
Transcript of hearing dated
11 June 2025, page 16, lines 9-10
Transcript of hearing dated
11 June 2025, page 15, lines 46-47
Transcript of hearing dated
11 June 2025, page 16, lines 14-36
Transcript of hearing dated
11 June 2025, page 15, lines 41-42
Transcript of hearing dated
11 June 2025, page 16, line 43
Transcript of hearing dated
11 June 2025, page 16, line 15-34
Transcript of hearing dated
11 June 2025, page 13, lines 7-12
Transcript of hearing dated
11 June 2025, page 14, line 7
Service and Execution of
Process Act 1992
(definition of
“proceeding”)
Service and Execution of
Process Act 1992
Service and Execution of
Process Act 1992
Dow Jones & Co Inc v
[2002] HCA 56
; Gaudron J expressing agreement at [56]
Service and Execution of
Process Act 1992
Newsnet Pty Ltd v
[2011] NSWSC 690
, esp at [41]-[42]
Bailey v McCrae &
[2023] ACAT 51
L&B Linings Pty Ltd v
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales
[2012] NSWCA 15
Transcript of hearing dated
31 July 2023, page 6, lines 24-27
Flo-Rida v Mothership
Music Pty Ltd
[2013] NSWCA 268
Bailey v McCrae &
[2023] ACAT 51
Appellant’s Outline of
Submissions filed on 22 May 2025 at [38]
Electronic Transactions
Electronic Transactions
Electronic Transactions
and Dictionary
Bailey v McCrae &
[2023] ACAT 51
Bailey v McCrae &
[2023] ACAT 51
Bailey v McCrae &
[2023] ACAT 51
Riley v St Vincent De Paul Society
Canberra/Goulburn
[2025] ACAT 16
Bailey v McCrae &
[2023] ACAT 51
Bailey v McCrae &
[2023] ACAT 51
Appellant’s Outline of
Submissions filed on 22 May 2025 at [38]
Transcript of hearing dated
11 June 2025, page 38, lines 8-10
Bailey v McCrae &
[2024] ACAT 82
Transcript of hearing dated
5 October 2023, page 4 at lines 14-17.
Bailey v McCrae &
[2024] ACAT 82
Rader v Haines
[2022] NSWCA 198
Bailey v McCrae &
[2024] ACAT 82
Bailey v McCrae &
[2024] ACAT 82
Bailey v McCrae &
[2024] ACAT 82
Bailey v McCrae &
[2024] ACAT 82
Bailey v McCrae &
[2024] ACAT 82
Appellant’s Outline of
Submissions filed on 22 May 2025 at [61]
Appellant’s Outline of
Submissions filed on 22 May 2025 at [64]-[71]
Transcript of hearing dated
11 June 2025, page 38, lines 32-46
Transcript of hearing dated
10 November 2023, page 7, lines 31 to 37
[1959] HCA 8
Statement of Katrina Bailey,
31 March 2023 at paragraph 36
Transcript of hearing dated
10 November 2023, page 141, lines 25 to 26
Transcript of hearing dated
10 November 2023, page 53, lines 46-47
Bailey v McCrae &
[2024] ACAT 82
Faithfull v Woodley
[1889] UKLawRpCh 192
(1890) 43 Ch D 287
at 289, cited in
City of Stirling v Dueschen
[2021] HCA 27
[2021] HCA 27
, Kiefel CJ,
Keane and Gleeson JJ at [18]-[22], [26]–[30], [32]
[2021] HCA 27
, Gageler and
Gordon JJ at [59], [62], [66].
[2022] HCA 27
[2022] HCA 27
[2022] HCA 27
[2021] HCA 27
[2022] HCA 27
Transcript of hearing dated
11 June 2025, page 39, lines 1 to 8
Transcript of hearing dated
11 June 2025, page 44, lines 31 to 35
Transcript of hearing dated
11 June 2025, page 44, lines 37 to 39; see also Transcript of Hearing dated 10
November 2023, page 105,
lines 33 to 36
Witness statement of David
Bottrill, filed 1 September 2023, paragraph 43
Appellant’s Outline of
Submissions filed on 22 May 2025 at [80]
Appellant’s Outline of
Submissions filed on 22 May 2025 at [85]
Lazarus v Azize
[2015] ACTSC 344
Cassell & Co Ltd v Broome
[1972] UKHL 3
at 1072 and
Humphries v TWT Ltd
[1993] FCA 577
(1993) 120 ALR 693
[2024] ACAT 82
[2017] VSC 521
[2024] ACAT 82
[2024] ACAT 82
[2024] ACAT 82
[2024] ACAT 82
Appellant’s Outline of
Submissions filed on 22 May 2025 at [87]
Appellant’s Outline of
Submissions filed on 22 May 2025 at [90]
Transcript of Hearing dated
10 November 2023, page 142, lines 37-38
Transcript of Hearing dated
10 November 2023, page 142, lines 45-47
ACAT Act s 23(1)
RTF format (534 KB)
Signed PDF/A format