Tattersall v Dormakaba Australia Pty Ltd [2025] ACTCA 30 (31 July 2025)
Tattersall v Dormakaba Australia Pty Ltd [2025] ACTCA 30 (31 July 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
Tattersall v Dormakaba Australia Pty Ltd
[2025] ACTCA 30
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Baker and Taylor JJ, Ainslie-Wallace AJ
(1) The appeal is dismissed.
(2) The appellant is to pay the respondent’s costs of the appeal to
be agreed or assessed.
Catchwords:
– CIVIL LAW – Costs – whether
plaintiff’s offer of compromise clearly identified proposed orders
for disposal of claim – whether Primary Judge erred in finding
offer non-compliant with r 1002 of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
– where offer did not state whether it could be accepted by all defendants
jointly or by one or more alone – offer
open to two possible constructions
– offeror’s intention capable of being discerned by inference
– inferring intention
does not cure deficiency – offer ambiguous and
non-compliant with the Rules – appeal dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Court Procedures Rules
(2006) rr 1002, 1003
Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) r 20.27
Cases Cited:
Calderbank v Calderbank
[1975] 3 All ER 333
Farmer v Broadspectrum (Australia) Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2024] NSWSC
Tattersall v Dormakaba Australia Pty Ltd
[2023] ACTSC 390
Tattersall v Dormakaba Australia Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC
Benjamin John Tattersall (Appellant)
Dormakaba Australia Pty Ltd (First Respondent)
Zavindi Pty Ltd t/as Goulburn Roller Doors (Second Respondent)
Nathan Flanagan (Third Respondent)
Representation:
A Muller SC w/ B Jullienne (Appellant)
M Nesbeth (First Respondent)
B Kelleher SC w/ J Moffett (Second and Third Respondent)
Blumers Personal Injury Lawyers (Appellant)
Barry Nilsson Law (First Respondent)
Mills Oakley (Second and Third Respondent)
File Number:
ACTCA 3 of 2024
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: ACT Supreme Court
Before: Mossop J
Date of Decision: 14 February 2024
Case Title: Tattersall v Dormakaba Australia Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 28
Court File Number: SC 47 of 2023
factual background to these proceedings is comprehensively set out in the
judgment of Ainslie-Wallace AJ. I agree with her Honour
that the appeal should
be dismissed, and that the appellant should pay the respondents’ costs, as
agreed or assessed.
observed by Ainslie-Wallace AJ, Mossop J (the Primary Judge) identified two
possible constructions of the Offer of Compromise,
(i) That it was an offer made to all three defendants jointly, which could only
be accepted by all three acting jointly; or
(ii) That it was an offer made to any one of the defendants to accept, whether
or not the other defendants accepted the offer.
Tattersall v Dormakaba Australia Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 28
Judgment) at [28].
Primary Judge concluded that the first construction was “probably
intended” by the appellant: Primary Judgment at
[31]. His Honour queried
whether such an offer would have complied with r 1002 of the
Court Procedures
(ACT) (the Rules): Primary Judgment at [32], citing
Yurisich (No 2)
[2007] FCAFC 51
, but did not find it necessary
to determine this issue, as the offer did not “identify ... the proposed
orders for disposal
of the claim”, and hence did not comply with
r 1002(2)(a)(ii) of the Rules: Primary Judgment at [32].
appellant contended that the Primary Judge erred in so finding. It submitted
that the second construction was correct, and that,
so construed, it was an
offer which satisfied r 1002 of the Rules.
Specifically,
the appellant submitted that because the appellant’s personal injury claim
was non-apportionable, the claim was
capable of disposition “by way of a
judgment or settlement for a monetary sum in the appellant’s
favour”. In these
circumstances, the appellant contended that it
“required no more or less than an acceptance of his monetary offer, and a
in his favour to that effect, to dispose of the claim he made”.
the appellant submitted that if any defendant accepted the
Offer of Compromise,
it would then be open to that defendant to seek a determination from the Court
as to the issue of apportionment
between itself and the other defendants.
support of this contention, the appellant noted that the terms of the orders
that were ultimately made by the Primary Judge, namely
that there be
“judgment in favour of the plaintiff against the defendants in the sum of
$347,470”, and that the orders
made in relation to apportionment were
simply in the form of a declaration as to the relative contributions of the
defendants. The
appellant submitted that this form of orders provided support
for its contention that the appellant’s claim could have been
resolved by any individual defendant accepting liability for the amount sought
by the appellant.
was initially attracted to these submissions. However, after careful
consideration, I have concluded that the Primary Judge was
correct to conclude
that there was insufficient clarity in the orders proposed in the Offer of
Compromise to satisfy r 1002(2)(a)(ii)
of the Rules, which requires that
the offer identify “the proposed orders for disposal of the claim or part
of the claim ...”.
noted at [2] above, the Offer of Compromise could have been read as an offer
e defendants jointly, which could only be accepted by all
three acting
, or as an offer made to
defendants to accept, whether or not the other defendants accepted the offer. On
the appeal, the appellant contended that
the second construction was
even if the appellant’s construction is accepted, the proposed orders for
disposal of the claim remain unclear. In
particular, within the construction set
out at [2(ii)] above, there are two further possible readings of the Offer of
Compromise:
(i) That if any one defendant accepted the Offer of Compromise and the others
did not, the Court would deliver verdicts in favour
of the residual defendants
in respect of the plaintiff’s claims; or
(ii) That if any one defendant accepted the Offer of Compromise, and the others
did not, the Court would still need to determine
whether verdicts should also be
made in favour of the plaintiff against the residual defendants.
construction specified at [9(ii)] above would, contrary to the terms of the
Offer of Compromise, fail to resolve the “whole”
plaintiff’s claim. Accordingly, such an offer would fail to comply with r
1002(2)(b)(i) of the Rules, which provides
that if an offer only relates to part
of the proceeding, the offer must state “whether the remainder of the
proceedings would
be abandoned or pursued”.
construction specified at [9(i)] above would resolve the whole of the
plaintiff’s claim. However, the terms of the Offer
of Compromise were not
sufficiently clear to conclude that this should be the preferred construction of
the Offer. The outcome specified
in [9(i)] could have been particularly
disadvantageous to the appellant if the offer were accepted by only one
defendant. If a defendant
who accepted the Offer of Compromise was later found
to lack capacity to pay damages, the entry of verdicts in favour of the residual
defendants would preclude the appellant from recovering from other defendants
who may have had capacity to pay. The entry of verdicts
in favour of the
residual defendants may also have had adverse costs consequences for the
appellant with respect to the claims made
against those defendants. Given these
potential adverse consequences, it would have been necessary for the appellant
to expressly
state in the Offer of Compromise that acceptance of the offer by
one or more defendant(s) would necessarily result in verdicts in
favour of the
remaining defendant(s) for the Offer of Compromise to be so read. The appellant
did not do so.
Ultimately,
the fundamental defect in the Offer of Compromise is, as the Primary Judge
concluded, in its ambiguity. The Offer did
not clearly state the proposed orders
for the disposal of the appellant’s claim. Accordingly, the Offer of
Compromise did not
comply with r 1002(2)(a)(ii) of the Rules.
decision is a salutary warning to solicitors of the importance of precision in
the drafting of letters of compromise under r
1002. As the Primary Judge
observed (at [23]),
Even in a relatively straightforward claim for
personal injury, it is highly desirable that r 1002(2)(a)(ii) be complied
with by setting
out in numbered paragraphs the actual terms of the orders that
would be made by the court.
this practice will ensure that the requirement in r 1002(2)(a)(ii) is not
overlooked.
agree with the judgment of Ainslie-Wallace AJ and the additional comments of
AINSLIE-WALLACE AJ:
Introduction
Tattersall (the appellant) appeals against the refusal of the Primary Judge to
make a special costs order consequent on the
making of an offer of compromise in
proceedings brought by the appellant against Dormakaba Australia Pty Ltd,
Zavindi Pty Ltd (trading
as Goulburn Roller Doors) and Nathan Flannagan (the
respondents, who were the defendants to the proceeding).
principal proceedings concerned an application for damages for personal injuries
sustained by the appellant at work when the chain
box for a manually operated
roller door fell on his head causing injury and damage. The appellant claimed
that the weld which held
the box on its mounts was defective causing it to fall
and injure him.
appellant sued four defendants. The first defendant is the company that was
responsible for preventative maintenance on the roller
door. The fourth
defendant is the person who the plaintiff alleged performed the welding which
secured the chain box to the building.
The third defendant is the company of
which the fourth defendant is a director.
the hearing in December 2023, on 2 May 2023 the first defendant gave notice to
the second, third and fourth defendants claiming
contribution or indemnity from
them in the case. On 5 December 2023, during the hearing of the proceedings, the
third and fourth
defendants served notices claiming contribution or indemnity
from the first defendant.
served the Offer of Compromise, the plaintiff’s claim against the second
defendant was settled before the hearing of
the suit on terms that there be a
verdict for the second defendant against the plaintiff with no order made as to
costs. The notices
of contribution filed by the second defendant were dismissed
with no order as to costs and the first defendant’s notice claiming
contribution from the second defendant was also dismissed with no order as to
plaintiff succeeded in his claim against all three remaining defendants and the
Primary Judge found a verdict for the plaintiff
against the defendants and
ordered damages in the sum of $347,470. His Honour apportioned those damages as
to 30 percent the responsibility
of the first defendant and 70 percent the
responsibility of the third and fourth defendants: Primary Judgment.
12 October 2023 the plaintiff made an offer to the defendants to compromise the
proceedings. There is significance to the appeal
in the terms of the offer which
we set out here:
This is an offer of compromise under
Court Procedures Rules
We are instructed to offer to settle this matter in the sum of $245,000.00 plus
costs as agreed or assessed.
This offer is made in relation to the entirety of the plaintiff’s claim SC
47 of 2023 in the Supreme Court of the Australian
Capital Territory.
We propose that a verdict be entered for the plaintiff in the above sum plus
costs as agreed or assessed at ACT Supreme Court scale.
We consider that you have been provided with ample particulars and documents to
properly consider this offer however if there is
any disagreement we draw your
attention to
rule 1002(4).
Should the Plaintiff obtain judgment no less favourable than this offer, unless
the court orders otherwise the plaintiff is entitled
to costs assessed on a
solicitor and client basis for the whole of the proceeding.
This offer of compromise will remain open for a period of 28 days.
This offer of [sic] is also made pursuant to the principles in Calderbank v
Calderbank. In the event that the verdict in this matter
exceeds this amount, we
reserve the right to produce this letter with respect to the issue of costs and
will seek indemnity costs
from the time that this offer is made or expired,
whichever is appropriate.
of the remaining defendants responded to the offer.
we have said, the Primary Judge delivered a verdict for the plaintiff against
all three defendants in a sum greater than the offer.
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) (the Rules) provides
that where an offer of compromise is made by the plaintiff in relation to a
claim, but not accepted by
the defendant, and the plaintiff obtains an order or
judgment on the claim no less favourable to the plaintiff than the terms of
offer, then in the circumstances of this being a personal injury case, unless
the court orders otherwise, the plaintiff is entitled
to a costs order against
the defendant assessed on a solicitor and client basis for the whole of the
proceeding.
plaintiff’s application for a special costs order based on the offer of
compromise was rejected by the Primary Judge: Primary
Judgment. It is from this
decision that the present appeal is brought.
appellant contends that the Primary Judge erred in his interpretation of r 1002
as it applied to the appellant’s offer of
settlement made on 12 October
2023 and erred in finding that the offer was not an offer of compromise within
the meaning of r 1002.
is helpful then to set out the relevant
(1) A party may, by written notice, make an offer to another party to
compromise any claim in proceedings, either in whole or in part,
(2) An offer under this rule must—
(a) identify—
(i) the claim or part of the claim to which it relates; and
(ii) the proposed orders for disposal of the claim or part of the claim
including, if a monetary judgment is proposed, the amount
of the judgment;
(c) not include an amount for costs or state that it is inclusive of costs;
(d) state that the offer has been made in accordance with this part; and
(e) state the period of acceptance.
The Primary Judge’s
determination
considered the terms of the offer against the provisions of r 1002, his Honour
[22] The offer indicated that it related to the entirety of the
plaintiff’s claim. The language of the offer is consistent
with it being
an offer made to all of the defendants jointly. That is indicated by the
reference to “the entirety of the plaintiff’s
claim SC 47 of
2023”, rather than identifying the offer as relating to the entirety of
the plaintiff’s claim against
any one of the defendants.
[23] The offer did not directly identify the proposed orders for the disposal of
the claim. Even in a relatively straightforward
claim for personal injury, it is
highly desirable that r 1002(2)(a)(ii) be complied with by setting out in
numbered paragraphs the
actual terms of the orders that would be made by the
court. This eliminates any ambiguity as to what is proposed that might arise
a result of any paraphrasing of the effect of the orders.
In the present
case, because the orders were not set out, the content of the offer being made
was not clear and was only able to be
determined by inference.
(Emphasis added.)
Honour found that the terms of the offer as it related to the orders for the
action’s disposal admitted of two interpretations
(a) that it was an offer made to the three defendants jointly, open to be
accepted by all of them acting jointly; or
(b) that it was an offer made to any one of the defendants to accept whether or
not the other defendants accepted the offer.
Honour concluded that the facts favoured the interpretation that the offer was
made to the three defendants jointly because it
was addressed to all of the
defendants, it was expressed as relating to the entirety of the
plaintiff’s claim in SC 47 of 2023
rather than the claim made in relation
to each of the defendants and made no reference to any order that would address
the circumstance
where some but not all of the defendants accepted the offer (at
Honour said that if the offer was interpreted as open to being accepted by some
but not all of the defendants then:
[31] ... the offer would not have the effect of resolving “the entirety of
the plaintiff’s claim SC 47 of 2023 in the
Supreme Court of the Australian
Capital Territory”. It would leave unresolved the status of the claim made
by the plaintiff
against the non-participating defendants. That would leave the
plaintiff exposed to the possibility of costs orders in favour of
non-participating defendants. That would be inconsistent with resolving the
entirety of the claim through the acceptance of
the offer and makes it very
unlikely that that is what the plaintiff’s solicitors intended.
Honour continued and said that while it is possible to infer what probably was
the intention of the offer, that is, that it was
an offer made to the defendants
jointly to be accepted jointly, the offer was nevertheless non-compliant with r
1002 because the
offer did not “identify ... the proposed orders for
disposal of the claim” (at [32]).
the offer by its terms expressed it to have the effect of a Calderbank offer
Calderbank v Calderbank
[1975] 3 All ER 333)
, his Honour considered
whether the letter was sufficient to amount to an offer of compromise, and the
failure of the defendants to
accept rendered them liable for the
plaintiff’s costs. His Honour however concluded that the offer by its
terms required it
being accepted by all three defendants. In the circumstances
where the defendants were not agents of each other, they were not acting
unreasonably in failing to accept the offer. There is no appeal from this part
of his Honour’s decision.
the result the Primary Judge ordered that up to and including 1 December 2023,
the first, third and fourth defendants pay the plaintiff’s
costs on an
ordinary basis in the proportions consistent with the liability orders, that is
as to 30% to the first defendant and
70% to the third and fourth defendants. His
Honour ordered the third and fourth defendants to pay the plaintiff’s cost
proceedings from and including 2 December 2023.
argument on appeal was a narrow one – did the offer of compromise identify
the proposed orders to dispose of the plaintiff’s
we turn to the arguments on the issue, it is important to refer to r 1003 which
relates to an offer made under the Rules and
the offer having been accepted.
Rule 1003(3)
(3) If an offer is accepted under this rule, any party to the offer may apply
for judgment to be entered accordingly.
20.27(3) of the
Uniform Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) is identical in its
terms to r 1003(3) and was considered by Garling J in
Farmer v Broadspectrum
(Australia) Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2024] NSWSC 53
where his Honour observed that an
offer made under those rules, having been accepted, then any party may apply for
judgment accordingly.
His Honour observed that neither notice to, nor the
consent of the other party is required before judgment on the accepted offer
sought. His Honour continued at [86]:
For this reason, at least, clarity of expression and formality of the orders
offered, are essential.
appreciation of the effect of r 1003(3) as enabling judgment to be entered on
its acceptance brings into sharp focus the Primary
Judge’s attention to
the question of whether the offer complied with the provisions of r
1002(a)(ii).
The appellant’s
appellant argued that his Honour erred in finding that the terms of the offer
failed to identify the orders for the disposal of
the claim because the order
proposed in the offer did not identify whether it could be accepted by all
defendants acting jointly
or by one or more defendants acting alone. It was
argued that this was an error because the offer, if entered as a judgment would
“entitle the plaintiff to recover the judgment sum from any of the
defendants if jointly accepted, or if singularly accepted
defendant”. The appellant contended that it was “immaterial”
whether the offer could be accepted by one
defendant alone or by all defendants
appellant argued that the Primary Judge’s conclusion would have the effect
of requiring the plaintiff to include in the
offer orders which dealt with
apportionment as between the defendants. This interpretation was said to flow
from the Primary Judge’s
consideration of the effect if one defendant
accepted the plaintiff’s offer and his view that the orders proposed to
of the suit should have contemplated that circumstance.
this last point, the appellant argued that the offer could not have included
orders as to costs depending on how the offer was
accepted because the
provisions of r 1002(2)(c) prohibit the making of an offer which is
“inclusive of costs” or specifying
an amount of costs, but does not
prevent an offer specifying how costs are to be concluded as between the
respondents argued that while the offer may have been capable of being accepted
by one defendant, if it was, it would not dispose
of the plaintiff’s claim
because it would have the effect of producing a verdict for the plaintiff
against the defendant who
accepted the offer but no verdict in relation to the
plaintiff’s claims against the other defendants. Further, as the
had each claimed contribution or indemnity one against the other, the
settling defendant would be unable to seek contribution from
defendants because they were not fixed with liability for the plaintiff’s
injury and consequential loss and damage.
Consideration
is clear that to give effect to the intention of r 1002 and particularly having
regard to r 1003(3) it is necessary for the offeror
to indicate the orders
proposed to dispose of the claim without ambiguity. Where, as here, the offer
was such that its intention
could only be divined by inference, it was
necessarily ambiguous. Even though the Primary Judge found the facts favoured
one interpretation
of the offer over another, he concluded that where the offer
on its face did not provide for the orders necessary to dispose of the
inferring the offeror’s intention could not cure the inadequacy.
Honour’s conclusion that the plaintiff’s offer was ambiguous in not
indicating the intention as to how the offer might
be accepted was entirely
correct. Moreover, where the appellant contends that it is immaterial whether
one or all defendants accept
the offer, it inexorably leads to the conclusion
that the proposed order “verdict for the plaintiff” did not identify
the orders necessary to dispose of the suit.
the plaintiff’s offer had been accepted by one defendant only, the terms
of the order proposed in the offer would result
in a verdict for the plaintiff
in the identified sum against that particular defendant. The appellant argued
that in that case, while
accepting the proposition that there would be no
verdict rendered as between the plaintiff and the non-participating defendants,
the acceptance by one defendant must, by inference, release the
non-participating defendants from their liability to the plaintiff.
view, to infer the effect of acceptance, of itself demonstrates the fatal
ambiguity identified by the Primary Judge.
even if that inference was admitted, it would not have the effect of rendering
verdicts in relation to the plaintiff’s
action against the
non-participating defendants nor would it bring an end to any costs orders the
non-participating defendants might
seek against the plaintiff consequent on the
plaintiff settling with just one defendant. The claim would thus not be
disposed of
in its entirety by the proposed order.
appeal will be dismissed and we will order the appellant to pay the
respondents’ costs of the appeal to be agreed or assessed.
the above reasons, the Court makes the following orders:
(1) The appeal is dismissed.
(2) The appellant is to pay the respondent’s costs of the appeal to be
agreed or assessed.
I certify that the preceding forty-nine [49] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Court.
RTF format (230 KB)
Signed PDF/A format