Police v Keir [2025] ACTMC 3 (28 January 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Police v Keir
[2025] ACTMC 3
Hearing Dates:
12 November 2024, 10 January 2025, 24 January 2025
Decision Date:
Special Magistrate Hassall
The application for a permanent stay of proceedings is granted
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
– Stay of proceedings – Application
for permanent stay – Alleged assault of corrections officer by detainee
Defendant and other detainees involved in melee at detention centre
– Defendant unintentionally but possibly recklessly struck
corrections
officer – Defendant and other detainees disciplined for
“fighting” – Whether prosecution barred
Corrections Management Act 2007
(ACT) – Whether defendant
disciplined only for interaction with other detainees – Fighting with
other detainees inextricably
linked with unintended striking of corrections
officer – Prosecution barred by
due to previous administrative
penalty– Stay application granted.
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Corrections Management Act 2007
Branko Tadic (Informant)
Annette Lea Keir (Defendant)
Representation:
T Kelliher (ACT Director of Public Prosecutions)
S Jackson (Defendant)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Crown)
In Private Law (Defendant)
File Numbers:
CAN 5206 of 2023
MAGISTRATE HASSALL:
Introduction
defendant, Ms Annette Keir, is charged with a single offence contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT), alleging that on 28 April
2023, at about 3.00 pm, she assaulted a frontline community service
provider. The prosecution does
not rely on the statutory alternative of common
assault. An offence contrary to
is punishable by a maximum of two
years' imprisonment and is therefore summary by nature.
defendant entered a plea of not guilty to the charge on 17 July 2023 and
the matter proceeded by way of hearing before me on 12
November 2024 and
10 January this year. The matter was then adjourned to today for
prosecution case is that during a short confrontation and melee between the
defendant and two other female detainees in the women's
accommodation compound
at the Alexander Maconochie Centre (
on 28 April 2023, the
defendant recklessly struck the complainant, Corrections Officer Michelle
Chalker, on the left side of her face
around the area of her eye, which caused
subsequent red marks, swelling and bruising.
relating to the alleged offence is in several forms. First, the prosecution
tendered CCTV footage of the relevant area of
the women's accommodation compound
which showed the lead-up to and part of the alleged assault. The prosecution
provided a zoomed-in
version of the incident, although as it happens, as I will
refer to in due course, even that zoomed-in version was unable to capture
was perhaps the critical moment.
prosecution also relied on photos of the injury sustained by Corrections Officer
Chalker, which were not objected to, and which
established beyond any doubt that
she was injured. The dispute from the defendant's perspective, amongst other
things, was as to
the mechanism of injury.
evidence was given by Corrections Officer Chalker, who responded to the incident
with another Corrections Officer, Craig Whittle.
Evidence was given by the other
two detainees involved in the melee, Ms Lila Walto, and Ms Hayley John. Evidence
was also given by
Ms Cindy, Botha, who I understood to be the director of
women's accommodation at the AMC. Ms Botha was not an eyewitness but was
involved in the aftermath of the incident and in the making of decisions about
what to do with the detainees who were involved.
evidence was given by Corrections Officer Owen Hawkins, who was the acting area
manager for the relevant part of the accommodation
on the day. His evidence was
to the effect that he proposed a particular form of disciplinary action against
the three detainees
which was approved by Ms Botha.
is fair to say that at its highest, the prosecution case was that the defendant
recklessly, rather than intentionally, assaulted
Corrections
Officer Chalker. Mr Kelliher, who appeared for the prosecution, made
it clear that the prosecution case was put on that
Corrections
Officer Whittle, who was an eyewitness to the alleged assault, gave
evidence to the effect that in his opinion, the defendant
had not intended to
strike Corrections Officer Chalker. Although he did not say so, it seems
implicit that the opinion of Corrections
Officer Whittle was that the
defendant was attempting to strike one of the other female detainees,
Ms Walto. That interpretation
is supported by CCTV footage, the details of
which I will return to in due course.
prosecution tendered paperwork relating to the disciplinary action taken against
the defendant and the two other female detainees.
On the day of the alleged
assault, being 28 April 2023, each detainee was issued with a charge notice
alleging a disciplinary breach
within the meaning of
Corrections Management Act
(ACT), namely
”, contrary to para 152(k).
confinement authorities for each detainee were signed by Ms Botha. Those
documents together indicated that the punishment
imposed on each of the three
detainees was separate confinement for a period of 28 days. The wording of
the charges differed slightly
as between the detainees. The charge notice
against Ms Walto, which was Exhibit P6, alleged that,
“Detainee was involved in a fight within her accommodation
whereas the charge notices addressed to the defendant
and Ms John alleged that each was involved in
“fighting with other
detainees within your accommodation are
as recorded in
Exhibits P7 and P11.
of the three detainees sought to contest either the charge or the sanction of
28 days’ separate confinement. The evidence
is to the effect that
each served the relevant period of confinement in 2023.
of the stay application
the hearing, it emerged that there was an issue as to the potential operation of
Corrections Management Act
(ACT). That
section applies if a detainee
“engages, or is alleged to have engaged,
in conduct that is both a disciplinary breach; and an offence against territory
In such circumstances, in accordance with
subs 155(2),
“The detainee must not be prosecuted for the criminal
offence if an administrative penalty has been imposed on the detainee
the disciplinary breach
Section 155
at least arguably applies in the present case because, after the melee to which
I referred, and as I have noted, the defendant and
each of the other two
detainees who were involved were subject to a disciplinary process which
resulted in the imposition of an administrative
penalty, being in each case
28 days’ separate confinement. As I have noted, none of the detainees
contested the relevant charge
or sanction and the 28 days’
confinement was served.
prosecution's position in respect of
was that the penalty to which I
have referred was imposed on each detainee specifically and only for the conduct
of fighting with
each other and that no sanction was imposed on the defendant
for the conduct of assaulting Corrections Officer Chalker, meaning that
there is no bar to the prosecution of the defendant in respect of that
comparison, the position of the defendant, at least by the end of the hearing,
was that the conduct for which the defendant was
punished included the alleged
striking of Corrections Officer Chalker, that the injury to Corrections
Officer Chalker informed the
relative seriousness of the administrative
penalty which was imposed – being 28 days separate confinement
there had been specific discussion of this issue at the time
the detainees were served with the disciplinary paperwork or perhaps
earlier time. The defendant alleged, for example, that she heard Hayley John
query Ms Botha as to why the penalty of 28 days
separate confinement
was so long, to which Ms Botha had responded, “
Corrections officer was injured
”. I will return to the evidence
relating to that alleged discussion.
the time final submissions were made by the parties on 10 January this
year, the parties approached
on the basis that it provided a defence
to a prosecution of the present kind. In response to queries from me, the
parties in effect
submitted that there was an evidentiary onus on the defendant
to show that
was in play; then, it was for the prosecution to prove
beyond reasonable doubt that the prosecution was not barred by
understanding was one which I shared at the time.
I reserved my decision, however, I informed the parties that I had formed a
different view, namely, that
does not provide a defence to a
prosecution but might provide a basis for a stay application. This issue was
ventilated with the
parties briefly in court last Friday, 24 January 2025.
Ultimately, the parties agreed that it was appropriate for the court to regard
the defendant as having made an informal application for a stay which could be
determined by reference to the evidence adduced in
prosecution proceedings.
parties each agreed that the stay application should be determined as a
preliminary matter followed, if necessary, by a determination
of the defendant's
guilt or innocence of the substantive assault charge. The parties each also
agreed and accepted that they had
received procedural fairness in relation to
what was to be treated as a stay application and that neither sought to adduce
any additional
evidence nor make any further submissions in the circumstances. I
proceeded in that manner.
Corrections Management Act 2007
turn then to
, the terms of which I have already described. I have
been unable to find any jurisprudence in the ACT regarding the application
interpretation of the provision. It seems to me, however, that when one is
considering the potential application of
in a context like the
present, two matters fall for determination:
is this a case where the defendant has “
engaged, or is alleged to have
engaged, in conduct that is both a disciplinary breach; and an offence against
territory law
”? In other words, does the section apply, that being
the test created by subs 155(1)?
if the answer to the first question is in the affirmative, has an administrative
penalty been imposed on the defendant “
disciplinary breach, that being the question asked by
subs 155(2)?
the second question is also answered in the affirmative, it seems to me that the
prohibition on prosecution is enlivened.
with all stay applications, the defendant as applicant bears the onus of proof
in respect of each of the above matters. I understand
that the standard of proof
is the balance of probabilities.
Evidence and findings of
is not possible in my assessment to answer the two above questions that I have
identified above without examining the evidence
and making findings of fact. I
will deal first with the evidence regarding the alleged assault and then set out
my findings of fact,
at least to the extent necessary at this point, in relation
to the alleged assault. I will then turn to the evidence relating to
disciplinary action taken against the defendant and other detainees and then set
out my findings of fact relating to that disciplinary
Evidence – assault
I have noted, the evidence relating to the alleged assault includes CCTV footage
which became Exhibit P5. That footage indicates
that at almost exactly
3.00 pm on 28 April 2023, there was a short melee in the women's
accommodation area of the AMC involving three
detainees and two Corrections
Officers. I will refer to parts of the CCTV by reference to the time markings
which appeared on the
05:16, detainee Hayley John becomes visible in the women's accommodation area.
She can be seen exchanging words in an animated
fashion with another detainee
who is off-screen, apparently in a living area to the left of the camera
05:24, Ms Lila Walto, who is considerably larger in stature than
Ms John, can be seen walking aggressively towards Ms John, apparently
in response to the verbal exchanges between them. She then stands over and
squares off against Ms John.
three seconds later, approximately, at 05:27, the defendant can be seen
entering the accommodation area from the left of the
screen. She approaches
Ms Walto from behind and outside the range of vision of Ms Walto. She
then pushes Ms Walto hard in the middle
area of her back from behind,
causing Ms Walto to lose her balance momentarily and stagger round a
corner. It is apparent that, although
there is no audio for the CCTV footage,
the defendant had overheard the verbal altercation between Ms John and
Ms Walto and was seeking
to come to the assistance of Ms John.
05:31, Corrections Officer Whittle enters the area from the same direction
the defendant had come, closely followed by Corrections
Officer Chalker who
can be seen speaking into a radio. They both move towards the detainees and can
be seen issuing what I infer
to have been verbal commands for the detainees to
cease and desist.
response to having been shoved by the defendant, Ms Walto attempts to advance
aggressively towards the defendant but is pulled
back initially by Ms John.
Shortly afterwards, Corrections Officers Whittle and Chalker arrive in the
kitchen area of the accommodation
block where the three detainees are.
Corrections Officer Whittle moves towards Ms John, whilst Corrections Officer
Chalker stands
next to Ms Walto.
one point, Ms Walto breaks free of the hold Ms John has on her and
advances aggressively towards the defendant, apparently seeking
to retaliate to
the push which had caused Ms Walto to stagger. Ms Walto lunges at the
defendant and commences throwing punches whilst
the defendant backs away through
the kitchen area to the left of the screen.
Corrections
Officer Chalker attempts to restrain Ms Walto as Ms Walto lunges
towards the defendant. As Ms Chalker explained in her
oral evidence, she
placed Ms Walto in a seatbelt hold over Ms Walto's right shoulder and
then successfully took Ms Walto to the ground.
In the course of doing so,
both Corrections Officer Chalker and Ms Walto can be seen falling to
the ground. Corrections Officer Chalker
appears to fall with her back
towards the pantry in the kitchen.
defendant can be seen then making two quick blows. It is not possible to see
with whom or with what, if anything, those blows
connected because the view is
impeded by a kitchen island between the CCTV camera and the relevant
participants. It is tolerably
clear though, in my view, as Corrections
Officer Whittle explained in his oral evidence, that the defendant was
attempting to punch
Ms Walto in retaliation for the lunging and attempted
punches by Ms Walto and that the defendant was not seeking to strike
Corrections
Officer Chalker.
after the defendant's blows or attempted blows, a third Corrections Officer
arrives at the scene and both the defendant and
Ms John leave. The melee at
that point is effectively over.
I have said, the CCTV footage does not disclose what is perhaps the critical
part of the interaction, being the alleged striking
of Corrections
Officer Chalker by the defendant. All that can be seen is the defendant
apparently attempting two blows and it is
not clear with whom or with what, if
anything, they connected, at least from the CCTV footage.
next item of evidence to which I refer is the photographs showing a mark on
Corrections Officer Chalker's back consistent with
her having come into contact
with something hard whilst falling, and secondly, significant reddening and the
onset of bruising in
the area on the left-hand side of her face below and around
her left eye.
defence also tendered a report of Dr Johan Duflou. Dr Duflou is a
consulting forensic pathologist who was asked to express an
opinion regarding
the way in which the injury, particularly to Corrections Officer Chalker's
face, could have been sustained. Dr
Duflou opined that the relevant injury
could have been caused by a blow by the defendant of the type alleged by the
prosecution,
but equally could have been caused, in his opinion, by Corrections
Officer Chalker impacting a door or door handle in the course
of falling.
Dr Duflou expressed the view that these scenarios were equally plausible as
mechanisms by which the injury around Corrections
Officer Chalker's eye
could have been sustained. I note that Dr Duflou was provided with the CCTV
footage to which I referred.
turn then to the oral evidence of Corrections Officer Chalker, which is to the
effect that she was hit on the left side of her face
by the defendant as she was
falling. She denied that it was possible that the injury to her face had been
caused by hitting a door
or door handle, pointing out that she had been facing
the other way and falling away to her right, meaning that the left upper area
her face was exposed. She thought the defendant had probably struck her with her
right arm but was unsure whether it was with
an open or closed fist.
found Corrections Officer Chalker to be a generally reliable witness. I
have no doubt that she was focused principally on controlling
Ms Walto, but
it seems to me she is nevertheless likely to have been able to tell, if not see,
whether an injury to her face was
caused by a blow from the defendant as opposed
to hitting something while she was falling. She did not display any uncertainty
her opinion that the injury to her facial area was caused by the
Corrections
Officer Whittle gave evidence to the effect that he saw the defendant throw
a couple of punches. His evidence was to the
effect that, at least as he
perceived it, the defendant had not intended to hit Corrections
Officer Chalker but one of her punches
did in fact connect. He thought that
the defendant had struck Corrections Officer Chalker to the right side of
her face with a clenched
found Corrections Officer Whittle as generally reliable and credible. He
had what seems to have been a close, unimpeded view and
was not himself
physically involved in controlling a particular detainee at the time of his
observations.
was clearly incorrect as to which side of Corrections Officer Chalker's
face was injured, otherwise, however, I regard his evidence
as reliable. In
particular, I accept his evidence that one of the defendant's punches connected
with Corrections Officer Chalker
but also accept his evidence that he did
not believe the defendant was intending to hit Corrections Officer Chalker.
That obviously
leaves open the question of recklessness.
Detainees Ms
Walto and Ms John also gave evidence which ultimately, in my assessment at
least, was not particularly helpful. Ms Walto
initially gave evidence to
the effect that she thought she had not been struck at all. After watching the
CCTV footage, however,
she agreed she had been struck in the head but was not
sure by whom and she did not at any time see any strikes to anyone. Her evidence
ultimately did not assist the court.
claimed that she saw the defendant strike Ms Walto once but did not see any
blow by the defendant which connected with Corrections
Officer Chalker. I
am not satisfied that Ms John had an unimpeded view of the incident given
that Corrections Officer Whittle was
standing between her and the
defendant, Ms Walto and Corrections Officer Chalker. The relevant part
of the melee happened very quickly
several metres from her.
my view, her evidence was tainted, not necessarily consciously, by a desire to
be loyal to the defendant who had come to her aid
in her confrontation with
Ms Walto. Ultimately, I regarded her evidence as not being of particular
assistance to the court and as
unreliable.
Findings of Fact
turn then to my findings of fact regarding the alleged assault. I am satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that the injury to the left
side of Corrections Officer
Chalker's face around her eye was caused by a blow by the defendant. I am also
satisfied that the defendant
did not intend to strike Corrections Officer
Chalker. I am satisfied she was attempting to strike Ms Walto who had just been
and throwing punches at her.
entire melee lasted no more than 30 seconds and the part involving the
defendant attempting to strike Ms Walto whilst Ms Walto
was being taken to the
ground by Corrections Officer Chalker a mere second. The defendant and the other
two detainees each had roughly
equal levels of involvement in the melee. The
verbal stoush and some initial pushing and shoving was initiated by
Ms John. Ms Walto
then responded aggressively initially towards Ms
John, although without involving physical contact, and then towards the
after she had been shoved by the defendant, including lunging
aggressively at and attempting to strike the defendant.
defendant came to the assistance of Ms John but shoved Ms Walto with
possibly excessive force. The defendant then continued on
with the melee by
attempting to strike Ms Walto as, and notwithstanding, Ms Walto was being taken
to ground by Corrections Officer
am satisfied that Ms Walto and the defendant each ignored verbal commands from
the Corrections Officers to cease and desist. In
a general sense, in my view,
all three detainees were responsible for the melee that resulted in the injury
to Corrections Officer
Chalker and it was in the course of the detainees
fighting with each other, rather than because of any separate interaction with
Corrections Officer Chalker, that Corrections Officer Chalker's facial
injury was sustained.
Evidence – Disciplinary Action
turn then to the evidence relating to the disciplinary action taken against the
three detainees. I have already referred to the
charge sheets and separate
confinement authorities for each detainee which were admitted into
was also something called a “Notice of Incident Referral' dated
30 April 2023, which indicates that the defendant was
at that time referred
to ACT Policing for investigation in relation to a possible assault of
Corrections Officer Chalker. I infer
from the date of the document that
the decision was made to refer the defendant to ACT Police in respect of a
possible assault some
two days after an initial decision was made about
disciplinary action against the defendant and the other detainees.
is next an email from Corrections Officer Dean Smith dated 23 May
2023, some four weeks after the alleged assault, which become
Exhibit P3,
which is addressed to the informant and states:
I can confirm that
the three detainees, being Ms Keir, Lila Walto and Hayley Johns(sic), were all
disciplined in relation to their
involvement in a physical altercation with
and Ms Keir did not receive additional
penalty/disciplinary action in relation to the assault of CO2 Chalker. [original
was then some oral evidence of the detainee Ms John asserting that, in the
aftermath of the melee, during a conversation with
Ms Botha and with the
defendant and two other Corrections Officers also present in the room in which
she was being detained at that
time, there was specific mention of the fact that
the punishment would be 28 days’ separate confinement. Ms John
stated words to the effect,
“Why? That was our first
,” to which, according to Ms John, Ms Botha had
responded, “
A corrections officer was hurt
should be noted that Ms Botha denied having been present during any
conversation with any of the three detainees at which a specific
punishment was discussed.
gave evidence that other detainees sometimes only got 7 days’ separate
confinement for being involved in fights.
Corrections
Officer Hawkins gave evidence that the penalty of 28 days’
separate confinement was proposed by him and imposed
within hours of the
incident on the same night. He stated that he proposed that penalty and
Ms Botha approved it. He explained
that primarily his concerns at the time
were with maintaining order. He stated that there had been a period of poor
behaviour relating
to the three detainees which preceded this incident, and his
view was that stern action needed to be taken in order to restore order.
stated that he and Ms Botha had visited each of the detainees who had been
placed in separate cells after the incident. He stated
that Ms Botha had
stated to at least one of the detainees that she was disappointed and
one of our officers has been hurt
Corrections
Officer Hawkins stated that at the time he proposed the penalty which he
nominated, he was unaware of any allegation that
Corrections
Officer Chalker had been injured or assaulted by a particular detainee. He
accepted that 28 days was at the upper end
of the scale in terms of
punishment for fighting. He stated that he could not recall any conversation
with any of the detainees
where it had been explained that the length of
punishment was because a Corrections Officer had been hurt.
gave evidence that she had approved the penalty proposed by Corrections
Officer Hawkins of 28 days’ separate confinement.
that she had mentioned to both Ms Walto and the defendant that a
Corrections Officer had been injured. Ms Walto, according
Ms Botha, became upset and was crying to the extent that she was later seen
by medical staff. She stated that the defendant reacted
in a different
denied being present when there was any conversation regarding penalty with the
detainees and denied, in particular, the
version of events about which
Ms John had given evidence, namely, that there was a specific conversation
regarding 28 days being
a long period of confinement and the explanation
being that a Corrections Officer was injured. As I said, however, she confirmed
that she did mention to at least two of the detainees that an officer had been
Findings of Fact – Disciplinary Action
relevant findings of fact I make in relation to the disciplinary action taken
against the detainees are as follows. At the time
Corrections
Officer Hawkins proposed the administrative penalty of 28 days’
separate confinement for each detainee and Ms Botha
approved that sanction,
each of them was aware in general terms of the details of the melee and also
that a Corrections Officer had
been injured as a result of the melee.
Corrections Officer Hawkins explained that he had, amongst other things,
reviewed the CCTV
footage. The ultimate decision-maker in relation to the
administrative penalty was Ms Botha because, as I understood it, a sanction
involving separate confinement required her approval.
sanction which was the same for all three detainees was proposed by Corrections
Officer Hawkins and approved by Ms Botha based
on an operational
assessment of the overall seriousness of the melee, which included the fact that
it had resulted in a Corrections
Officer being injured notwithstanding details
of the mechanism of injury were not yet apparent.
was, of course, open to Corrections Officer Hawkins and Ms Botha to
have elected not to take any disciplinary action against any
of the three
detainees if they wanted unambiguously to preserve the option of prosecution.
Alternatively, they could have elected
not to take any such action against the
defendant for the same purpose.
note further that under the
Corrections Management Act
, it is open to those who administer the AMC to segregate detainees for
“safety and security”
reasons rather than as a disciplinary
penalty. Again, if this course had been taken, this would unambiguously have
preserved the
option of prosecution of the defendant.
assessment is that neither Corrections Officer Hawkins nor Ms Botha
intended to exclude from the punishment which was imposed any
part of the melee
which gave rise to that punishment. It was imposed in respect of the melee and
the consequences of the melee as
a whole. In my assessment, it was for that
reason that each of the detainees was given an equal punishment in circumstances
as I have observed, each of them had some responsibility for the
Determination
turn then to answering the two questions which I identified as critical in terms
First, is this a case where the defendant has engaged or is
alleged to have engaged in conduct that is both a disciplinary breach
offence against territory law within the meaning of subs 155(1)? The
conduct in which the defendant was alleged to have engaged
for the purposes of
the disciplinary action, according to the charge sheet relating to her, was
” contrary to para 152(k), of the
Corrections
Management Act
, and more specifically,
“fighting with other detainees
in her accommodation area”.'
the evidence, I am satisfied that this was a general reference to the melee in
which the defendant, Ms John and Ms Walto were involved,
included the unintentional striking of Corrections Officer Chalker whilst
the defendant was trying to strike Ms Walto. The
conduct in which the
defendant is alleged to have engaged, for the purposes of the prosecution
proceedings, comprises one component
of the melee, namely, the striking by the
defendant of Corrections Officer Chalker whilst attempting to strike
Ms Walto, which the
prosecution says was reckless, notwithstanding that it
may not have been intentional.
my assessment, on the balance of probabilities,
therefore applies.
The unintended striking of Corrections Officer Chalker formed part of the
conduct which constituted a disciplinary
breach, namely, fighting with other
detainees, and is also alleged to constitute the offence of reckless assault of
a frontline community
service provider, being Ms Chalker.
next question required to be considered for the purposes of
whether an administrative penalty has been imposed on the defendant
” the disciplinary breach. Again, in my opinion,
on the balance of probabilities the answer to this question is yes. Although
alleged reckless assault of Corrections Officer Chalker was not the sole focus
of the administrative penalty imposed on the defendant
and other detainees, my
assessment of the evidence is that it was one of the factors taken into account
in deciding on the period
of 28 days’ separate confinement for each
Corrections Officer Hawkins nor Ms Botha, in my assessment, intended
to exclude any part of the conduct constituting the melee,
including that part
of it which they were aware at the time had resulted in a Corrections Officer
being injured. It follows, therefore,
that the 28‑day separate confinement
administrative penalty was imposed “
” one component
of the relevant disciplinary breach.
conclusion, in my view, is that the defendant was the subject of an
administrative penalty of 28 days’ separate confinement
in respect of a
disciplinary breach comprising conduct which included the unintentional striking
and injuring Corrections Officer
Chalker. The defendant did not challenge the
charge or penalty and served the 28 days’ separate confinement in
I have noted, the authorities at the AMC could have elected not to take
disciplinary action against the defendant in order, unambiguously,
to preserve
the option of prosecution, or could have elected to segregate her under other
powers conferred by the
Corrections Management Act
but did not do
defendant is now the subject of attempted prosecution action for an ingredient
of the conduct constituting the disciplinary breach,
being the unintended
striking of Corrections Officer Chalker. In the circumstances, in my
assessment, the defendant has established
on the balance of probabilities that
the prosecution action against her is barred by
section 155
Corrections Management Act 2007
, and I therefore uphold the application for
a permanent stay of the prosecution proceedings against her.
I certify that the preceding seventy-two [72] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of his Honour Special
Magistrate Hassall.
Associate: Vishanee Allaire & Lucy James
Date: 18/02/2025
RTF format (239 KB)
Signed PDF/A format