O'Connell v DPP [2025] ACTCA 20 (27 June 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
O’Connell v DPP
[2025] ACTCA 20
Hearing Date:
12, 13 February 2024
Decision Date:
McCallum CJ, Loukas-Karlsson and Taylor JJ
the appeal.
aside the verdict of guilty of murder and the sentence imposed by Baker J on 7
February 2024 and order a verdict of not guilty
the question of whether another verdict should be entered.
Catchwords:
– Appeal against conviction – verdict by jury
– whether verdict unreasonable or unable to be supported by the evidence
– whether there was a miscarriage of justice resulting from the
prosecutor’s closing address – whether there was
a miscarriage of
justice resulting from the trial judge’s failure to direct the jury as to
the meaning of the term “probability”
– whether there was a
miscarriage of justice resulting from the trial judge’s failure to remind
the jury of other evidence
when a recording of the principal prosecution
witness’s evidence was replayed – whether jury ought to have
entertained
a doubt as to the requisite mental element of reckless indifference
– role of appellate court
Legislation Cited:
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), r 5531
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
Supreme Court Act 1933
Cases Cited:
Boughey v The Queen
Coughlan v The Queen
[2020] HCA 15
Cutter v The Queen
[1997] HCA 7; 71 ALJR 638
[2022] HCA 25
274 CLR 651
[2025] NSWCCA 85
[2008] NSWCCA 203
DPP v O’Connell (No 5)
[2024] ACTSC 17
Gately v The Queen
[2007] HCA 55
Gipp v The Queen
[1998] HCA 21; 194 CLR 106
[2021] NSWCCA 324
[2025] HCA 9
99 ALJR 676
v The Queen
[1992] HCA 56
175 CLR 495
Liberato v The Queen
159 CLR 507
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
268 CLR 123
The Queen v
[1985] HCA 22
156 CLR 464
R v Baden-Clay
R v Baden-Clay
[2016] HCA 35
258 CLR 308
[2002] NSWCCA 243
Royall v The
[1991] HCA 27
172 CLR 378
Shamoun v R
[2015] NSWCCA
SKA v The Queen
[2011] HCA 13
243 CLR 400
Stevenson v The Queen
[2022] NSWCCA 133
Warne v The
[2023] ACTCA 1
374 FLR 311
Michael O’Connell (Appellant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
Representation:
K Weston-Scheuber with N Deakes (Appellant)
K McCann (Respondent)
Legal Aid ACT (Appellant)
ACT Director of Prosecutions (Respondent)
File Number:
ACTCA 21 of 2023
Decision Under Appeal:
Court: Supreme Court of the ACT
Before: Baker J
Date of Decision: 15 June 2023
Case Title: DPP v O’Connell
Court File Number: SCC 251 of 2022
McCALLUM CJ:
O’Connell appeals against his conviction for the murder of his intimate
partner, Danielle Jordan. Ms Jordan sustained
a severe head injury on 15 April
2022 when she fell onto the road from the appellant’s car as he drove away
from her home.
She died in hospital two days later after it was determined that
she could not survive and life support was switched off.
appellant was tried before Baker J with a jury. The prosecution case was that
Ms Jordan was seated on the bonnet of the appellant’s
car and that
the appellant deliberately drove off knowing that she was on the bonnet. The
central issue in the trial was whether
Ms Jordan was on the bonnet of the car
when she fell. The prosecution case on that issue turned on the evidence of a
13-year-old
girl who was living with Ms Jordan at the time and who was out
on the road with Ms Jordan and the appellant when he left (referred
judgment as Ms X). Her evidence was that Ms Jordan was on the bonnet the whole
time from when the appellant drove away
from Ms Jordan’s home. The trial
judge treated that as an essential link in the prosecution case and directed the
they could not find the appellant guilty unless they were satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that Ms Jordan was on the bonnet when
the appellant
drove off. The statutory alternative of manslaughter was left to the jury on
the basis of a dangerous and unlawful
jury found the appellant guilty of murder. He was sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of 15 years with a non-parole period of
O’Connell (No 5)
[2024] ACTSC 17.
There is no appeal against
appeal is brought under
Supreme Court Act 1933
is by way of rehearing.
amended notice of appeal was filed in court at the outset of the hearing
specifying the following grounds of appeal in paragraph
4 (omitting two grounds
that were not pressed):
(a) The verdict is unreasonable and cannot be supported having regard to the
(b) There was a miscarriage of justice occasioned by:
repeated reversal of the onus of proof by the prosecutor in his closing
prosecutor in his closing address urging the jury to draw inferences from the
evidence which were not fairly available and which
had not been advanced in the
Crown case;
prosecutor in his closing address changing his case from that upon which he
(c) The trial judge, having directed the jury be replayed the evidence in chief
interview of the witness [Ms X], erred in failing
to direct the jury to consider
the recorded evidence in the context of other, countervailing evidence, whether
recorded or not, and
of any arguments of the accused relevant to that evidence.
(e) That the judge erred in failing adequately to direct the jury on the meaning
of “probability” within
the outset of the hearing of the appeal, the appellant sought leave to adduce
evidence, being the affidavit of Nathan Deakes affirmed
on 9 February 2024. The
affidavit addressed three issues. First, it explained the reasons for an
application to add a new ground
of appeal. That part of the affidavit,
including annexures A and B, was admitted. Secondly, the affidavit annexed
material that
formed part of the record of the trial (principally, photographs).
That part of the affidavit, including annexures F to L, was also
the affidavit also annexed the submissions and transcript from the proceedings
on sentence (annexures C, D and E). The Court
reserved its decision on the
admissibility of that material. That issue is addressed below in the discussion
of the unreasonable
verdict ground.
The unreasonable verdict
4(a), if upheld, would result in the entry of a verdict of acquittal, whereas
the success of any of grounds 4(b), 4(c) or 4(e)
would result in a retrial of
the count of murder. Accordingly, it is appropriate to consider ground 4(a)
already explained, the prosecution case relied critically on the evidence of a
single witness, Ms X. The appellant submits that
her evidence was inherently
unreliable and that the evidence in the prosecution case apart from her evidence
was either inconsistent
with her evidence or at best neutral.
Principles to
4(a) invokes
s 37O(2)(a)(i)
Supreme Court Act
. That section
provides that on an appeal against conviction this Court must allow the appeal
if it considers that the verdict of
the jury should be set aside on the ground
that it is unreasonable, or cannot be supported, having regard to the evidence.
principles to be applied in determining such a ground of appeal have been
settled by the High Court and are well known. The proper
approach was
summarised recently by this Court in
Warne v The King
[2023] ACTCA 1
as follows:
... the role of the Court in dealing with this ground of appeal is not limited
to considering whether there was evidence capable
of satisfying a jury of the
appellant’s guilt. The Court must conduct its own independent review of
the evidence and consider
whether it entertains a reasonable doubt as to his
guilt. However, the Court will not act on its own view that there exists
doubt if its disagreement with the jury can be explained by the jury
having had the advantage of seeing and hearing the witnesses
To put the point another way, success for the appellant on this ground involves
a subjective event (the Court has a reasonable doubt)
from which a normative
proposition (the jury should have had the same doubt) must be established (cf
R v Bragias
[2016] NSWCCA 219
, [5], [8] (McCallum J)). Proceeding from
one to the other, in the light of
, involves excluding the advantage
enjoyed by the jury as an explanation for it not having had the doubt
entertained by the Court.
That will usually be achieved if (as it was put in
) the evidence as it appears from the record “contains
discrepancies, displays inadequacies, is tainted or otherwise lacks probative
a case where, as here, the impugned verdict rests critically on the evidence of
a single witness, the appellate court must proceed
on the premise that the jury
accepted the evidence of that witness to be credible and reliable. The function
of the appellate court
in such a case was explained by the High Court in
v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
268 CLR 123.
While that was a case involving the
evidence of a complainant in a sexual assault matter rather than a critical
eyewitness, the
principle must be the same. The High Court said at [39]:
The function of the court of criminal appeal in determining a ground that
contends that the verdict of the jury is unreasonable or
cannot be supported
having regard to the evidence in a case such as the present, proceeds upon the
assumption that the evidence of
the complainant was assessed by the jury to be
credible and reliable. The court examines the record to see whether,
notwithstanding
that assessment – either by reason of inconsistencies,
discrepancies, or other inadequacy; or in light of other evidence –
court is satisfied that the jury, acting rationally, ought nonetheless to have
entertained a reasonable doubt as to proof of
statement of principle emphasises the primacy of the jury’s assessment of
the witness. To demonstrate that a verdict resting
on the evidence of a single
witness accepted by the jury is unreasonable, or cannot be supported, the
appellant must demonstrate
inconsistencies, discrepancies or other inadequacy of
such a kind as to demonstrate that although the jury that heard the evidence
accepted it as credible and reliable, a
jury ought to have
entertained a reasonable doubt. Short of that, the verdict must stand.
making that assessment, the appellate court must be astute to consider the
nature of the alleged inconsistencies, discrepancies
or inadequacy of the
evidence and the implications of those shortcomings for the verdict. Not every
inconsistency or discrepancy
in an eyewitness account will indicate that the
evidence is unreliable proof of the central events.
Overview of
the prosecution case
put Ms X’s evidence in context, it is necessary to give a brief overview
of the prosecution case. The appellant and Ms Jordan
had a tumultuous
relationship. On the evening of 14 April 2022, he had come over to her house
and stayed the night. Her house was
at 6 Coutts Place. They had an argument at
trying to make him stay. He eventually got away from her and left but
returned sometime later and they started arguing again. He
tried to leave
again. She sat on the bonnet of his car, a Mitsubishi Triton, to stop him from
leaving. She would not get off.
prosecution case was based solely on Ms X’s evidence that the appellant
ultimately drove off at speed with Ms Jordan still
on the bonnet. The case was
opened on the basis that it was the act of driving at speed with Ms Jordan on
the bonnet that caused
her death. Ms X said that, when Ms Jordan would not get
off the bonnet outside 6 Coutts Place, she (Ms X) stood in front of the
stop the appellant driving off with Ms Jordan on the bonnet. He proceeded to
drive forward slowly and she stepped back.
That continued until they reached
the top of Coutts Place. Ms X said the appellant then reversed back down the
street before accelerating
back up the street and around the corner into Alfred
Hill Drive with Ms Jordan still on the bonnet. The prosecution case was that
Jordan fell from the bonnet onto the bitumen further down Alfred Hill Drive.
The appellant put her in the car and took her to
distance from 6 Coutts Place to the point on Alfred Hill Drive where Ms Jordan
fell was 266.8 metres. The prosecution case was
that the appellant drove that
whole distance with Ms Jordan on the bonnet of his car knowing that she was on
the bonnet of the car.
the hospital, the appellant told a number of people, including members of Ms
Jordan’s family and medical staff, that Ms Jordan
had fallen from the
stairs at the back of the house. The appellant later admitted to police that
that was a lie. However, the prosecution
did not rely on those lies as evidence
of consciousness of guilt. They are of course relevant to an assessment of the
appellant’s
credibility.
the appellant left in his car to take Ms Jordan to hospital, Ms X went back to
Ms Jordan’s house and fell asleep. She
did not have a mobile phone.
At some point she became aware that the appellant had told family members that
Ms Jordan had fallen
from the stairs in her backyard. Ms X’s mother was
one of the people to whom the appellant gave that false version of events.
mother gave evidence in the trial that the appellant had sent her a text message
saying something like “Hey mate. Just
wanting to let you know that
Danielle has fallen off the steps out of her backyard and that she’s
having surgery on her head”.
learning what the appellant was telling people, Ms X rang ‘000’ in
the company of her mother. That call was made
at about 1:30pm on 15 April 2022.
A recording of the call (edited to eliminate irrelevant material) was played to
the jury. A transcript
of the edited recording was given to the jury as an aid
and marked for identification.
X told the operator that her friend was in hospital “with tubes keeping
her alive because of a fight she had with her boyfriend”.
“And, um, I was there and I witnessed the whole thing”. Ms
X’s mother then told the operator that the
boyfriend was telling “a
whole different story to all of the family that is at the hospital”. The
operator asked Ms
X what happened. The conversation continued as follows:
Ms X: Um, basically, they were fighting. And then, um, she was sitting on the
bonnet of his car, trying to say, ‘Michael come
inside. I want to talk to
you. Don’t leave.’ And then he was really mad and cracked out.
And I was standing in front
of the car so he wouldn’t drive off with her
on the bonnet, like – you know.
ACT Police: Yeah.
Ms X: And then I got scared because he was coming at me full speed. So I moved
and then he just went and zoomed – like, I
literally couldn’t see
the car. So I started sprinting. Mind you, she’s still on the front of
the car. So I start
sprinting. I hear a screech ---
ACT Police: So he’s driven with her on the front of the car?
Ms X: Yes. And then I hear a screech and then a thud, so I start sprinting. I
see Michael pick up Danielle, put her in the car,
and then I hear him say
‘Baby, I’m so sorry.’ So I start sprinting ---
response to further questions from the operator, Ms X confirmed that the
appellant drove off with Ms Jordan on the bonnet of the
car and that he
“took her, like, around the corner” while she was still on the
bonnet. Ms X said she did not see Ms
Jordan fall because she (Ms X) was still
at the top of her street and that they “zoomed” to the next street.
“so I couldn’t – I didn’t see it but I heard,
like, screech, and then I heard a thud, so I started sprinting
corner”. She said she then saw the appellant pick Ms Jordan up off the
ground and put her in the car. She said
Ms Jordan wasn’t talking and she
had “blood everywhere”.
interview recorded at Coutts Place on 15 April
that day, police went to Coutts Place and spoke to Ms X at the scene of the
incident. That conversation was recorded and there
was a transcript of the
recording which was marked for identification. However, the recording was not
played to the jury and they
were not given the transcript. Instead, the
evidence was led through one of the police officers who was present during the
Constable Mann. For that reason, although the transcript of the
recording was included in the appeal books, I have considered only
the evidence
of Constable Mann, as that is what was before the jury.
X told Constable Mann that she was woken at about 2:00am that morning by
“banging and clanging and shit smashing”.
She got up and told the
appellant and Ms Jordan to “calm the fuck down”. She went back to
bed and got up again at about
appellant had come in and “just started like ranting and raving”.
Ms Jordan went out the front and sat on the front
of the car because there had
been an earlier incident involving a vape that ended up in the car
(inferentially, Ms Jordan’s
vape and she wanted to get it back). Ms
Jordan was sitting on the bonnet of the car. She said to the appellant,
give me my vape and come inside because I want to fucking talk to
you”. The appellant was trying to drive off with Ms Jordan
on the bonnet,
so Ms X stood in front of the car. She said she was “shitting herself the
whole way up the street that she
was standing in front of the car”. When
she was at the top of the street (“we got to the top of the
the appellant reversed “back down to here”, where
she was standing
at the time of the interview
. Constable Mann said that
was just out the front of her house in Coutts Place.
evidence established that the distance from the top of the street to where they
were standing was about 57 metres. A car reversing
or rolling backwards could
travel the best part of that distance in 10 seconds (the significance of this
point is explained below).
In assessing Ms X’s evidence about the
reversing down the hill, it must also be recalled that she was describing the
the Triton moved backwards away from her as she perceived it from the
top of the street, in the dark, at a time when she was extremely
X told police the appellant then “put his foot down all the way on the
pedal and went so fast”. She thought he was
going to hit her, so she
jumped out of the way. The appellant turned left “and then just like
zoomed”. Within a split
second she couldn’t see the car anymore,
but she could still hear it. She started sprinting down the road and she heard
like a screech and then a “doosh”, as if a body had
“dooshed” on the ground. She kept running and then saw
appellant picking up Ms Jordan from the road and putting her in the car. The
appellant was saying “Baby I’m so sorry,
I’m sorry”.
The appellant started trying to tell Ms X what had happened and she didn’t
care, she just said “get
her to the fucking hospital now, if you
don’t I’ll fucking kill you”.
evidence in the trial established that the appellant arrived at Calvary Hospital
Evidence in
chief interview
next conversation between Ms X and police was the recording of her
evidence-in-chief interview two days later, 17 April 2022,
starting at about
12:30pm. That interview was also conducted at the scene of the incident. It
may be noted that the jury went on
a view to that scene, which must inevitably
have enhanced their capacity to assess Ms X’s evidence and the CCTV
the hearing of the appeal, at the invitation of the appellant, the Court watched
part of the audio-visual recording of that interview
(from questions 80 to 120)
for the limited purpose of giving spatial context to the answers given. This
approach accorded with the
remarks of the High Court in
Court accepted at [36] that, in cases where there is “something particular
in the video-recording that is apt to
affect an appellate court’s
assessment of the evidence, which can only be discerned visually or by
sound”, there will
be a “real forensic purpose” for the
appellate court to examine the video-recording. The physical features of the
in question are important to an understanding of the evidence in this case.
In adopting that course, I have been mindful of the caution
at [37] that, in watching part of an available video or audio recording, the
appeal court “should not seek to duplicate the
function of the jury in its
assessment of the credibility of the witnesses where that assessment is
dependent upon the evaluation
of the witnesses in the witness-box”. That
is neither appropriate, having regard to the constitutional role of the jury as
the tribunal of fact, or necessary, having regard to the principle stated in
at [39] set out above that the function of the appeal court assumes
as a premise that the evidence of the complainant (or witness)
was assessed by
the jury to be credible and reliable.
interview followed the usual format of police first asking the witness to tell
them everything that happened without leaving anything
out, then going back and
teasing out any further detail required.
X began with a lengthy narrative of what she said had happened. She told police
the appellant came over and it was his payday.
He had not been over in a while
because they had a fight. Then he “just randomly came over”. They
seemed happy, so
Ms X went to bed. She woke up at about 2:00am to
“something smashing” and Ms Jordan and the appellant arguing. The
appellant was trying to leave the house and Ms Jordan was not letting him leave.
Ms Jordan was holding the appellant’s shirt
and would not let go. The
appellant dragged the shirt down the internal hallway with Ms Jordan still
holding onto the shirt (other
evidence established that she weighed about 47kg).
The appellant ultimately freed himself and left but returned later that morning,
at around 4:00am. They started arguing again. Ms Jordan, the appellant and Ms
X ended up out the front of the house.
summarising the next part of Ms X’s evidence, it will be helpful to
explain that Coutts Place, where Ms Jordan lived,
is on a hill. At the bottom
of the hill, it ends in a cul-de-sac. At the top of the hill, it meets Alfred
Hill Drive in a T-intersection.
Ms Jordan’s house is roughly halfway
between the cul-de-sac and the T-intersection. The appellant’s car was
up the hill towards Alfred Hill Drive.
X said that they got outside and the appellant was leaving. Ms Jordan did not
want him to leave “so she jumped on the bonnet”.
Ms X was telling
Ms Jordan to get off the car and Ms Jordan was telling the appellant to come
inside because she wanted to talk.
The appellant then got out of the car and
went down the street towards the cul-de-sac. Ms Jordan “dived in the
the car] to find her vape”. The appellant started walking back
up the street saying, “is she in my car?”. The
appellant dragged Ms
Jordan out of the car and she again asked him to come inside and talk. She then
got back onto the bonnet.
The appellant got back into the car and Ms X got on
the side of the car. Ms X said to the appellant “just get the vape
I’ll get her off the car and, like, we can go inside”. However,
the appellant started driving so Ms X got off the side
of the car and stood in
front of it with Ms Jordan still on the bonnet. Ms X was telling Ms Jordan to
get off the car.
appellant started driving slowly towards Ms X. She kept taking a step back, and
a step back, and he kept coming towards her.
They did that all the way up the
street. Then he reversed “all the way back down to Danielle’s
place”. Ms X
was still at the top of the street. She said the appellant
then “put his foot down” and was coming straight towards
her, so she
jumped out of the way. He turned left and headed off down Alfred Hill Drive.
She ran after him but stopped to walk
and catch her breath after about a block.
Then she heard “a screech and, like, a doof”, so she started
sprinting again.
She did not see Ms Jordan fall from the car. As she
approached the point where the car had stopped, she saw the appellant get out
the car, walk to the back of the car, pick Ms Jordan up and put her in the
passenger seat.
X said she looked at Ms Jordan and saw that she was “all, like, fucked
up” and that the appellant said, “I’m
sorry, mate, I
didn’t mean to do it” and “I’m sorry Bub, I’m so
sorry, I didn’t mean to do that”.
He got in the car and went to
explain what happened but Ms X did not care, she just told him, “Take her
to the fucking hospital
or I’m going to kill you”. He drove off.
She picked up a little blue rock from the road that had fallen out of Ms
pocket. Then she went back to the house and fell asleep.
answering further questions, Ms X gave some further detail but her account
remained consistent. She said Ms Jordan was sitting
cross-legged on the bonnet.
She said at the point when the appellant was leaving the second time, Ms Jordan
was calm because she
did not want him to leave so she calmed herself down. She
said the appellant was “still, like, schizo”, “like,
police officer asked Ms X to describe how they moved up the road. The interview
continued as follows:
Interviewer: So can you describe how that happened?
Ms X: Basically, like I was standing, like – after, like, he
wouldn’t, like, give me the vape, I walked in front of the
wouldn’t leave. And then he was slowing going forwards, and I was just
slowly walking backwards, and he was just
slowly going forwards. And then we
did that all the way to top of the street. And then he reversed all the way
down. And I was
just, like, standing there, and I looked at him and I was,
like, ‘Fuck.’ And then he just put his foot down and was,
coming straight for me. So then I jumped out of the way.
Interviewer: Okay. And where was Danielle when the car went up?
Ms X: On the bonnet.
Interviewer: The whole time?
Interviewer: Okay. So it’s come back down, and then you said that
he’s put his foot down?
Ms X: Mm-hmm.
Interviewer: How did you know he put his foot down?
Ms X: Because he – like, he was, like, at a stop.
Interviewer: Yeah.
Ms X: And then he just instantly just, like, went so fast up the street, like,
coming for me. So I jumped out of the way, yeah.
Interviewer: So when he’s gone fast up the street, coming for you, where
were you standing exactly?
Ms X: Like, in the middle of the road up there.
Evidence in
X’s evidence in the trial was pre-recorded in May 2023, when she was 14.
In cross-examination, she accepted that, on the
morning of these events, she had
been smoking cannabis with Ms Jordan and had not had much sleep. She further
accepted that she
blames the appellant for the death of her friend. She agreed
that she spoke to him by telephone when he was still at the hospital
presumably after she had called police) and said, “have fun being locked
up”. However, it was not put to her at
any stage that she was lying about
having seen Ms Jordan on the bonnet of the car when the appellant was driving
X was cross-examined about how far the appellant reversed the car before driving
straight at her. The exchange was as follows:
Mr White: Now, you have said – you said in the interview, if you remember
this that at one stage Michael reversed to the end
of the street or towards the
end of the street and then I think you – the expression you used was,
‘He put his foot down
and drove the car at you’?
Mr White: And I think you said in the interview that in fact that was the time
when the car continued around corner and that’s
when ultimately Danielle
fell off the car further down Alfred Hill Drive. Is that correct or not
Ms X: Correct.
Mr White: So just to be very clear. You say that Michael took the car right back
to the end of Coutts Place. Is that correct or
not correct?
Ms X: Correct.
Mr White: Put his foot to the floor – in other words, put the gas on so
the car came up at speed towards you. Is that correct
or not correct?
Ms X: Correct.
noted in the prosecution’s appeal submissions, the first question in that
exchange was misleading. Ms X had not said at
any point before then that the
appellant reversed to
the end of the street
. She had said that he
reversed from the top of Coutts Place to Danielle’s place, which was
roughly halfway down the street.
was put to Ms X that, before the car went around the corner, it was stopped.
She disagreed. It was further put to her that she
did not see whether Ms Jordan
was on the bonnet of the car when it left Coutts Place. She said she saw
Danielle on the bonnet at
X agreed with the cross-examiner that when she spoke to police on the day of the
incident and two days later, she was confused
that had happened”. The main “detail” about which she was
pressed was her confusion
as to the particular intersection at which the
accident happened. On the afternoon of 15 April 2022, Ms X was asked to take
Janssen to the corner of Alfred Hill Drive and Levey Place, whereas
was further along Alfred Hill Drive, at the next intersection, that Ms Jordan
fell. When Ms X took police to the intersection
of Alfred Hill Drive and Levey
Place, she became confused as to why there was no blood there. She inferred
that the appellant must
have washed the blood away. A police officer then went
further down the road and found blood at the next intersection.
X also told police she had stopped to catch her breath at Flower Place. In
cross-examination, when being pressed as to why she
would need to catch her
breath so close to where she started, Ms X told the cross-examiner that Flower
Place was further from Coutts
Place than Levey Place. That turned out to be
wrong, as she readily accepted when she was shown a map. The explanation was
she was confusing Flower Place with Crossley Crescent.
is very much the kind of confusion the jury was well-placed to assess. Parsing
and analysing a cross-examination on paper can
tend to amplify apparent
weaknesses that were assessed and properly dismissed as insignificant by those
listening to the evidence
as it was given.
appellant relies on Ms X’s confusion about the streets in support of
ground 4(a). I do not accept that it has the significance
the appellant
contends. It does not derogate from her consistent and repeated evidence that
Ms Jordan was on the bonnet of the appellant’s
car as he turned out of
Coutts Place and drove off down Alfred Hill Drive. Ms X had sprinted along
Alfred Hill Drive after her friend,
in the dark. She paused to catch her breath
but then, after hearing a screech and a sound she took to be the sound of her
falling from the car, the very outcome she had tried to prevent, she took
off again. As she was running towards that intersection
in the dark, she was
watching the appellant pick up Ms Jordan, who was covered in blood, and put her
in the car. She was not counting
intersections.
is hardly surprising that, when Ms X was asked later the same day, in daylight,
to take police back to the intersection where Ms
Jordan fell, she pulled up
short. The distance between the top of Coutts Place and the point on Alfred
Hill Drive where Ms Jordan
fell was measured by police at 209.9 metres. On the
morning of the incident, Ms X was sprinting that distance in the dark as fast
she could go. It is unsurprising that, when she went back with police later
that day, in daylight, she experienced the distance
differently.
X’s confusion about the intersection where Ms Jordan fell is not something
that should engender general scepticism as to
the reliability of her evidence.
It is not as if there was no fall, or no blood. The identification of the wrong
intersection in
different circumstances on a surburban Canberra street with
several intersections does not cause me to doubt the reliability of Ms
account of the appellant’s conduct.
prosecution called evidence from Mr Fritschy, who lived on Alfred Hill Drive
near the intersection with Coutts Place. His home
had a CCTV security camera
which was activated by sound or motion. Mr Fritschy was in Queensland at the
time of the incident but
had remote access to the footage from the camera.
After hearing about the incident on the news, he isolated the relevant footage
and provided it to the informant, Constable Love.
Fritschy’s house was on the opposite side of the road from the top of
Coutts Place and a few houses down from that intersection.
The CCTV camera was
positioned on the outside wall of the house and was angled into the courtyard.
The angle of the camera was
such that the intersection of Coutts Place and
Alfred Hill Drive was caught in the background, albeit mostly obscured behind
courtyard wall and a considerable amount of foliage. This meant that the
footage captured the appellant’s headlights and,
at times, a view of the
car when it was in the intersection, when it turned left into Alfred Hill Drive
and as it travelled along
Alfred Hill Drive. The parts of the footage that are
relevant occupy only a small portion of the whole screen. The quality of the
images is poor.
the first five seconds of the footage, the headlights cannot be seen. The
soundtrack at that time includes several sounds that
are difficult to
distinguish, including several knocking sounds (possibly a car door but that is
by no means clear), a human voice
and, more clearly, the sound of car tyres
screeching slightly as the car lurches forward. After the car tyre sound is
first heard,
the headlights come into view. At that point, the headlights can
be seen only very faintly, as tiny pinpoints. The car can then
be seen and
heard lurching forward before stopping again, at which point the sound of an
engine starting is heard. Ms X did not
say anything about the engine stopping
and being restarted. However, having listened to the audio repeatedly, I do not
omission of that detail is significant. The stopping and restarting
of the engine happened very quickly and formed part of what
appears to have been
a process of inching the car forward in the manner described by Ms X in her EICI
when, on her evidence, she
was standing in front of the car moving backwards
step by step to stop the appellant from driving off with Ms Jordan on the
soon as the engine restarts, the headlights can be seen briefly moving backwards
(back down Coutts Place towards Ms Jordan’s
shouting something (either “fuck!” or possibly “aghh!”).
The headlights then
disappear completely from the screen for about five seconds.
This coincides with the engine sounding quieter, consistent with the
that it is moving further away from the CCTV camera for those five seconds.
That is ample time for the vehicle to have
reversed back to 6 Coutts Place or at
least the best part of that distance. When the headlights reappear, the sound
of the engine
gets louder again and the car is clearly turning left, as Ms X
described. As the car turns the corner, Ms X is heard to shout
“Michael!”.
The car proceeds along Alfred Hill Place before going
out of sight off the righthand edge of the screen.
10 seconds later there is the sound of a sudden screech and, almost
instantaneously, a man (accepted to be the appellant) first
shouting “you
dickhead!” and then some further, higher-pitched words (possibly
“fucking idiot”). A further
10 seconds later, Ms X is seen running
across the screen in the direction of the car. No other person is seen crossing
separately from the car.
discussed above, Ms X said that, after the screech, she heard a
“doof” sound. It was put to her in cross-examination
that she did
not hear that sound. It may be accepted that a sound of that description cannot
be heard on the audio from the CCTV
camera. It does not follow that Ms X was
mistaken, or that her evidence that she heard a sound is unreliable. By the
time she says
she heard that sound she was closer to the point of the fall than
to the CCTV camera. Furthermore, it is beyond dispute that Ms
Jordan in fact
fell. It is not impossible that Ms X heard her fall, or heard some other sound
at that point that was not picked
up by the CCTV camera equipment.
appellant submitted that the CCTV footage is entirely inconsistent with Ms
X’s evidence. He submitted that the CCTV audio
and visual shows the
vehicle’s engine being “started while it is parked at the top of
Coutts Place, drifting back slightly
(as for a manual vehicle) and then turning
the corner”. The appellant submitted that there was no time for him to
have started
the engine, reversed to the bottom of Coutts Place with
Ms Jordan on the bonnet, and then driven at speed towards Ms X.
do not accept that submission. As already noted, the sound of the engine
starting follows immediately after the sound of the car
lurching forward. It is
not the sound of a parked car being started. It was open to the jury to
interpret the audio as the sound
of the car stalling as it was inched uphill and
then immediately being restarted. Furthermore, I do not accept that there was
time for the appellant to have reversed back down Coutts Place before driving
back at speed towards Ms X. As noted above, the video
footage shows the
headlights disappearing from view for five seconds. That is ample time for the
car to have reversed some distance
back down the road. The roar of the engine
described by Ms X can be heard on the audio, as can her calling out
“Michael!”.
The fact that she called out and the desperate tone in
which she did so is consistent with Ms Jordan still being on the bonnet at
time. Ms X can be seen sprinting after the car, exactly as she described.
There was no reason for her to chase the car if
her friend was no longer on it.
She said her friend was on the bonnet the whole time and I see no reason to
doubt that account.
may be accepted that Ms Jordan cannot be seen on the bonnet of the car in the
video footage, but nor can she be seen on the back
of the car, or running behind
it. It is the fact that Ms Jordan ended up some 200m further down the road.
She must either have
been on the car or running behind it. But the video
footage clearly shows Ms X running after the car and no other person can be
crossing the screen on foot at any time. The only rational explanation is that
Ms Jordan was on the car as the appellant sped
off down Alfred Hill Drive. The
CCTV footage is otherwise equivocal, as she cannot be seen on either the bonnet
or the back. For
those reasons, I reject the appellant’s contention that
the CCTV footage shows that the version of events given by Ms X did
Appellant’s
Record of Interview
appellant participated in a recorded interview with police on 16 April 2022.
That was the day after the incident but the day
before Ms Jordan’s life
support was turned off. Accordingly, the allegation put to the appellant by
police was of culpable
driving causing grievous bodily harm. In short, his
version was that Ms Jordan was
not on the car
when he turned the corner
into Alfred Hill Drive and that she must have run after him and jumped on the
back when he stopped (in
Alfred Hill Drive) to check that he had everything. It
is nonetheless important to consider his answers on those matters in full.
accordance with the common interview procedure, police began by asking the
appellant to tell them about his involvement in the
matter. The interview
continued as follows:
Interviewer: Please don’t leave anything out. Okay, mate?
Appellant: There was nothing – nothing there in that respect at all. See,
um, when I left – I was leaving the house,
she jumped onto my car and
grabbed – bent my, um, windscreen wiper back, and then – then I
jumped out and then she got
off the car. And then, um – and then I drove
– I drove – drove onto the road and then they – then she
back on the car again, and she wouldn’t get off. I ended up
walking, and leaving my car there where it was, and walked down
street. And then, um – and then we – I end up getting –
getting, um, back and went inside again
for a bit. That was it. And then it
just – and as I walked – walked out, I said, ‘I can’t be
Like, because I was just letting her know that, like I know how
much she wanted to be here, but I couldn’t be there because
Interviewer: Mm-hmm.
Accused: And, um, so she was trying to stop me again, and stop me from going,
and (indistinct). And then, um, yeah, she jumped back
on the car and then she
jumped onto the back or whatever, and I said, ‘I couldn’t – I
wasn’t – wasn’t
going to go anywhere’. So ended up
– she got off again, and ended up getting – getting me driving up
a bit. And then she caught up and jumped back on the car again and
then I went out of the car, and then she tripped and went –
as soon as I
got out of the car, she tripped, I think. And that’s when –
that’s actually when she fell down ---
Interviewer: Yep.
Accused: --- and hit her head. And so it wasn’t me driving at all. That
was just sad. It was just – just picturing
that. It’s just
(indistinct) fell off the bloody thing (indistinct) so I got out. No, it was
just – it was just bloody
obviously a real – um, a freak accident
that shouldn’t have happened. If I hadn’t have been there, it
have – it wouldn’t have happened. It’s my
fault that – that (indistinct) for me being in there. Then she
wouldn’t have had that accident. But no, it wasn’t me driving that
had caused that injury. I wouldn’t –
I couldn’t do that to
anybody. Like – like (indistinct) happen to anyone. I don’t want
it – would never
is significant that the appellant said during that answer that Ms Jordan
“jumped onto the back or whatever” before
he left Coutts Place.
That issue is addressed below.
in the interview, the appellant was asked where the incident occurred. He said:
Um, well – it started off, like, in the street, and then I got –
when I got off, I – I drove up the street and
around the corner, and then
I stopped to check – make sure I had (indistinct) and that, and
that’s when Danielle caught
back up to me again and jumped onto the bloody
– jumped onto the back of the bloody ute. And then, when I got out to try
stop (indistinct) so I got out, and that’s when she – as I was
getting out, she jumped – jumped off and then just
tripped. She
couldn’t get her foot in properly. Just tripped and fell straight onto
the bloody thing.
later volunteered the following:
But, um – yeah. It was just – the other one, she bloody – I
bloody drove off, and then – then she caught
up to me and I stopped to
sort of make sure I had everything with me, and then she jumped back onto the
back of the thing. Oh, she’s
just so persistent.
questioner then went back through the events step by step. The appellant said
that, when he tried to leave, Ms Jordan jumped
onto the bonnet and tore or bent
one of the windscreen wipers (other evidence established that one of the wipers
was damaged). After
a series of questions about the car, the appellant returned
to the topic of his attempts to leave and said:
But, yeah, they, um – at that point on, um, [Ms X] and that was out the
front as well trying to stop me, and they – and
that was the other part of
And they – they grabbed – [Ms X] was at the front of the car
grabbing on – on – onto the bull bar and stuff
and stopped me so I
couldn’t drive. And that was – oh, sorry, Danielle wasn’t
there and [Ms X] was at the side
of the car.
more questions about the car, the appellant again returned to the topic of his
attempts to leave. He said:
So, um, yeah, that was after that. Like, I can’t remember. There was a
few – few times that I just (indistinct) like,
I went inside at one point,
then I come back out and when they jumped on the car again, I walked down the
street and left them there
and left Danielle there, and come back. Um, yeah,
that was the last time that Danielle had – Danielle had actually grabbed
on. And then I drove off and then I stopped around the corner. And she’s
chasing me, and she jumped onto the back, and then
that’s when – and
then I got out of the car and then she – and she’s jumping –
coming to jump off and
that’s how she literally fell down and – and
– and – yeah. (indistinct) it wasn’t really nice to see
And that was the worst thing I’ve ever seen in my life.
later said that, after walking off and then coming back, he jumped back in his
car and went to go. He said Danielle was not on
the car when he came back, she
was standing on the lawn and asking him to come inside. He then said:
And, ah, then I jump back in the car, and when I jumped back in the car, and
then she’s tried to jump on it again.
Jumped on and that. And then that’s the third time, when I finally got
– got out and, you know, I drove around the corner,
– and then I stopped, and then she - she’s chased and caught up to
me and jumped on the thing. And
that’s exactly how it was.
later said there had been at least two times when she got on the car to stop him
leaving and he got out and walked away. He then
described the third or last
time he tried to leave, as follows:
Interviewer: At least twice?
Accused: Yep, and then the third time I – I – I – it was the
last time anyway, was when I – literally she
– she got – got
away, and got around the corner a bit.
Interviewer: Mm-hmm.
Accused: And then I stopped the car because I thought maybe she had her wallet
and everything there. And then she’s caught
up and jumped straight on the
back of – on my ute to try and stop me. And then I (indistinct) you know,
went to get out of
the car, and then when – as I was getting out, and then
obviously she – she knew I was getting out of the car, so that’s
when she went to come off and – and fell – fell off it then, tripped
and fell off.
questioner then confirmed by reference to a map that he meant he left Coutts
Place and drove partway down Alfred Hill Drive.
He confirmed that he stopped
somewhere between Coutts Place and Levey Place and that was where Danielle
caught up with him and jumped
on the back of the car. He said the car was
stopped at the time she jumped on because he had stopped to make sure he had
everything.
He said he thought he was “out of sight” when he
stopped to check that he had everything. He said when he heard her
and saw her
on the car, he got out and went to get her off and that’s when she fell,
as she was getting off the car. He said
she hit her head and was unconscious
“pretty much straight away”.
appellant said that Danielle fell off the driver’s side of the car.
appellant said that the only time he drove the car with Danielle on the bonnet
was as he backed out of the driveway at her house.
He said he was going very
slowly at that point and the car moved about two metres. He said she was not on
the car at any point
when he drove up Coutts Place. He said she “caught
up around the corner, when I stopped”.
his answers to police, the appellant repeatedly said that he drove around the
corner, that he stopped after driving around the
corner and that that was when
Danielle caught up with him and jumped onto the back of the car.
then told him that a witness had said he had driven up Coutts Place with
Danielle on the bonnet, that he had reversed down,
still with Danielle on the
bonnet, and that he had then driven aggressively out of Coutts Place onto Alfred
Hill Drive with Danielle
still on the bonnet. He denied each of those
allegations. He was told that the witness then heard a loud screech and a
He said he did not brake heavily at all. However, the screech can be
heard on the CCTV audio.
appellant said that the point where Danielle fell was not far from the middle of
the street.
appellant agreed that he had sent a text to Ms X’s mother saying:
Hey mate, just letting you know that Danielle is in hospital. She fell from the
top of her back steps. They are doing scans on
her now. You can tell [Ms X] as
well. Thank you.
appellant also agreed that he had told the same thing to others. He explained
that he did not want to “tell people that
she’d been a loony and
– and – and running and chasing after me”. Police asked why
he would tell Ms X the
same story, knowing that she had seen where Danielle
actually fell. He said:
She didn’t – she didn’t know – oh I don’t know. I
just bloody told – told her that to tell –
Importantly,
whereas the CCTV footage is not inconsistent with Ms X’s account, it is
inconsistent with the appellant’s
account. Ms X can clearly be seen
running along Alfred Hill Drive after calling out “Michael!”. No
other person is
seen on foot behind the car.
crime scene investigator examined the Triton. Much of her evidence was
equivocal as to the appellant’s guilt. She observed
dust disturbance on
the bonnet, which is unsurprising as it is common ground that Ms Jordan was on
the bonnet at some point. She
also found dust disturbance on the tonneau cover
on the back of the Triton, which was a soft cover. Ms Jordan’s
fingerprints
were found on the sports bar on the back. The crime scene officer
also found glitter on the tonneau cover which, based on other
evidence, probably
came from Ms Jordan.
crime scene investigator said that fingerprints were also found on the bonnet
but there was insufficient detail to identify whose
appellant submitted that this combination of forensic evidence obtained from the
back of the Triton (the dust displacement, the
fingerprints and the glitter)
establishes the existence of a reasonable possibility that Ms Jordan was on the
back of the Triton,
not the front, when the appellant turned the corner and
drove down Alfred Hill Drive and that he did not know she was on the Triton
that point. That is not what the appellant told police but it must still be
excluded as a reasonable possibility. He noted that
the CCTV footage does not
reveal any calling out at that point, which he submitted supports the
possibility that he did not know
she was there. The appellant submitted that
this evidence taken in combination should have caused the jury, acting
rationally, to
have a reasonable doubt.
as noted above, the appellant himself told police in his record of interview
that Ms Jordan had jumped “on the back
or whatever” when they were
still at Coutts Place and before he drove off. Forensic evidence indicating
that Ms Jordan was
on the back of the Triton at
point does not
disprove or cast doubt on Ms X’s account that Ms Jordan was on the
bonnet when the appellant drove off.
evidence of the forensic pathologist, Professor Duflou, did not take the issue
any further. If anything, his evidence supported
the prosecution case that Ms
Jordan fell from the Triton while it was travelling at speed rather than falling
after stepping off
the car while it was stationary or almost stationary. He
described injuries that suggested “further movement after impact”
(grazes to the face and other parts of the body) which he did not think were
consistent with a fall from a vehicle that was either
stationary or moving at
only one or two kilometres an hour. He accepted that, if Ms Jordan attempted to
step off the side of the
vehicle as it was moving at some speed and either
slipped or jumped, that could have resulted in the type of head injury observed.
However, he considered that it was much
likely that she fell from
the vehicle while it was either stationary or moving very slowly. He gave two
reasons for that opinion.
First, he said the skull fracturing was more severe
than would be expected from a fall from a stationary vehicle. Secondly, he
if there had been a fall from a slow-moving or stationary vehicle, if that is
what caused the grazes and other injuries to the
front of the face, “you
wouldn’t get an injury to both the back of the head where the impact is
and then the front from
presumably rolling”.
appellant submitted that all of the evidence, with the exception of the evidence
given by Ms X, was either consistent with Ms
Jordan having leapt onto the back
of the vehicle and the appellant stopping when he saw that she was there, or
neutral in that respect.
If the only point of the submission was to emphasise
that the prosecution case rested critically on the evidence of Ms X, I agree.
There is no dispute about that. However, it appeared also to be suggested that
some of the evidence was more consistent with Ms
Jordan being on the back
of the vehicle than on the bonnet. If that was the submission, I do not accept
it. It is accordingly necessary
to address each aspect of the evidence relied
on to support the submission.
the appellant relied on the fact that the CCTV footage did not show Ms Jordan on
the front of the vehicle. However, nor did
it show her on the back, or on foot
chasing the vehicle. Accordingly, all that can be concluded is that the quality
of the footage
is too poor to show where she was on the vehicle.
the appellant relied on “the undisputed evidence that the appellant picked
Ms Jordan up from the back of the vehicle”.
That is equivocal. If
she fell from the bonnet while the vehicle was moving, it would have come to a
stop in front of her. Separately,
the appellant relied on the fact that the
medical evidence showed no signs of Ms Jordan having been run over. However, if
to the side of the vehicle, as the appellant told police, she would not
have been run over. In short, the placement of her body
by reference to where
the vehicle stopped was equivocal.
the appellant relied on the forensic evidence indicating that Ms Jordan had been
on the back of the vehicle. That included her
fingerprints on the sports bar,
the dust disturbance on the tonneau cover, marks in the dust on the tonneau
(possibly caused by a
foot in a sock but ruled out to be from a shoe) and the
glitter on the tonneau cover. However, none of that evidence fixes a time
Ms Jordan was on the back of the vehicle. As already noted, the appellant told
police that, when Ms Jordan was trying to stop
him from leaving, she
“jumped onto the back or whatever” and “got off again”
before he drove “up the
road a bit”.
appellant further submitted that there were no fingerprints located on the
bonnet notwithstanding that Ms X demonstrated Ms Jordan
“holding onto the
lip of the bonnet”. Upon analysis of the forensic evidence, the
fingerprint evidence concerning the
bonnet is equivocal. Fingerprints were
found but were not of sufficient quality to enable comparison with known
fingerprints.
appellant next relied on the fact that, while the appellant’s and Ms
X’s voices can be heard on the CCTV audio, Ms
Jordan is not heard to call
out. He submitted that her silence at that time is “consistent with her
stowing away on the vehicle
rather than being driven terrified on the
bonnet”. That is a submission that is available to be made, but the fact
did not call out is not inconsistent with her being on the bonnet.
appellant next relied on the fact that there was evidence that Ms Jordan had
consumed methylamphetamine and cannabis, which could
cause her to act in an
aggressive or unpredictable way and engage in risk-taking behaviour. That
evidence is also equivocal as to
where she was on the Triton when she fell.
Sitting on the bonnet while the appellant was in the driver’s seat with
running to stop him from leaving is equally as aggressive,
unpredictable and risk-taking as jumping on the back while he was stopped
appellant relied on the fact that the photographic evidence demonstrated that it
would have been difficult for the appellant to
see Ms Jordan if she was on the
back or side of the vehicle. That is not a factor that makes it more likely one
way or the other
that she was on the back or on the bonnet. It is consistent
with the accused’s explanation, but the prosecution case was that
deliberately drove knowing she was on the bonnet.
appellant further relied on his reaction between breaking and stopping. It was
submitted that he spoke in a tone of shock and
surprise, saying “you
fucking idiot” and “why did you do this to me”. Counsel
submitted that a tone of surprise
or shock is inconsistent with the prosecution
case, where it is alleged that he deliberately tried to dislodge her. Again,
is a submission, but it is not a piece of evidence that stands in the way
of acceptance of Ms X’s evidence that Ms Jordan was
unreliability of Ms X’s evidence
appellant submitted that, in light of the fact that other evidence in the case
was either consistent with Ms Jordan having leapt
onto the back of the vehicle
or neutral, the prosecution case was entirely reliant on the jury accepting the
evidence of Ms X that
the appellant drove off with Ms Jordan sitting on the
bonnet. So much may be accepted. That is the basis on which the trial judge
directed the jury. However, I do not accept that Ms X was an inherently
unreliable witness, as contended by the appellant.
appellant contended that there were “numerous inconsistencies and
inaccuracies” in Ms X’s evidence. First,
he relied on the fact that
she was initially confused about where the accident happened. For the reasons
explained above, I do not
think that is a factor that undermines the reliability
of what she said she saw as the car rounded the corner.
the appellant relied on the fact that Ms X claimed to have heard a
“doof” sound after the sound of breaking
whereas that sound is not
audible on the enhanced CCTV audio. However, the point of the accident was
almost 200m beyond the CCTV
camera. The fact that the sound cannot be heard
does not undermine Ms X’s reliability as a witness. The sound of the
is a high-pitched screeching sound. The sound described by Ms X as a
“doof” is a very different kind of sound. There
is no reason to
infer that any sound she described should necessarily have been audible on the
CCTV audio.
the appellant relied on the fact that Ms X told police in her EICI that she was
asleep when the appellant returned to the house
at 4:00am (before the accident)
but also said that she had been awake and smoking cannabis with Ms Jordan. The
transcript of the
EICI suggests that this was a correction by the witness rather
than an inconsistency. She said that he came back at 4:00am and that
up from “just noise, I guess, and yelling. I don’t know”.
Two answers later, when she was asked what
his demeanour was like when he came
back, she said “Oh, it just clicked. It came back to me”. She then
told police
that, when he left at 2:00am, she and Ms Jordan were sitting in Ms
X’s room smoking bongs. If that can even be regarded as
an inconsistency,
it is an inconsequential inconsistency that does not derogate from the
reliability of Ms X’s evidence on
the central issues.
the appellant relied on the fact that Ms X told police Ms Jordan looked
“terrified” as the appellant drove off,
whereas her evidence had
been that Ms Jordan was sitting cross-legged facing the windscreen of the
vehicle. That is not an inconsistency.
Ms X was observing a dynamic situation
where the vehicle she was watching turned a corner as she stood at the
intersection. It
is not implausible that at some point she saw Ms
Jordan’s face.
those matters, the appellant relied on the contention that the CCTV footage
demonstrates Ms X’s account to be “patently
incorrect”. For
the reasons explained at length above, I do not accept that characterisation of
what is shown on the CCTV
footage. On the contrary, I consider that the CCTV
footage is consistent with the evidence of Ms X.
Submissions
and transcript of proceedings on sentence
noted at the outset of this judgment, the appellant sought leave to rely by way
of additional evidence on material from the proceedings
on sentence. That
evidence was relied upon principally in support of the unreasonable verdict
ground. It was also relied upon in
support of ground 4(b)(iii) alleging
miscarriage of justice arising from the prosecutor inviting the jury to draw
inferences that
were not fairly available. That aspect of the application is
addressed separately below in the discussion of that ground.
sentencing submissions were said to support the unreasonable verdict ground
because the prosecutor, having addressed the jury
to the effect that the CCTV
footage was entirely consistent with the evidence of Ms X, appeared to resile
from that position at the
proceedings on sentence. When addressing the trial
judge as to the findings her Honour should make for the purpose of sentencing
the offender, the prosecutor identified two areas of the dispute between the
parties. The first was “the degree to which,
if at all, your Honour finds
that the offender reversed part of the way down Coutts Place with the victim on
the bonnet prior to
moving forward and turning left into Alfred Hill
Drive”. The prosecutor said he had not, in his sentencing submissions,
“in toto” the evidence of Ms X, saying “it’s not
our case that the offender reversed all the way back down
Coutts Place”.
He said that the judge could not act on that evidence “in the face of the
CCTV footage”.
were two difficulties with that submission. First, as already explained, Ms X
did not say (until the words were put in her
mouth by a misleading question)
that the offender reversed
all the way
down Coutts Place. At the time
she was first asked about that by police, she was standing outside Ms
Jordan’s house, which
was roughly halfway up the street. She told police
that he had reversed back down to where she was
standing. The
inconsistency obtained during cross-examination, when the cross-examiner
repeated his own misleading question, was
not drawn to Ms X’s attention.
She was not given the opportunity to correct or explain it.
the CCTV footage
support the conclusion that the offender reversed
down the hill to some extent. All that the prosecutor conceded was that the car
had not been reversed all the way to the end of Coutts Place.
any event, it is well established that, in determining an unreasonable verdict
ground, the appeal court is required to make an
independent assessment of the
evidence. For that reason, the appeal court is not even bound by any finding or
opinion of the sentencing
judge, let alone a concession made by a prosecutor at
the proceedings on sentence.
High Court considered a related question in
SKA v The Queen
243 CLR 400.
In that case, in a judgment granting appeal bail to the
applicant, the trial judge recorded his assessment that the applicant appeared
to be “a perfectly honest witness” and also that he “found the
complainant a very compelling witness”. The
judge then said: “I
find it impossible to see how any jury acting reasonably could be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt ...
In my opinion the jury acting reasonably could not
have convicted the accused”.
NSW Court of Criminal Appeal dismissed an appeal against conviction. In his
appeal to the High Court, one of the applicant’s
arguments was that the
Court of Criminal Appeal had erred in failing to take the trial judge’s
opinion into account. The argument
was framed by reference to the power of a
trial judge under
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
provide a report to the appeal court “giving the judge’s opinion
upon the case, or upon any point arising in
the case”. The High Court
rejected that aspect of the appeal. Crennan J (with whom French CJ, Gummow and
Kiefel JJ agreed)
stated the principles that apply where such a report is
provided at [112]:
First, whilst a trial judge's report may be a factor to be taken into account it
would be wrong to substitute the opinion of the
judge for that of the jury.
Secondly, the weight to be given by an appellate court to a trial judge's report
will vary with the circumstances.
Such a report will be of greatest assistance
when expressing views about matters not readily apparent from the written record
a trial. Less weight will be given to a trial judge's report in circumstances
where the judge's opinion appears to be based almost
wholly upon the assessment
of the evidence which an appellate court is obliged to undertake for itself, or
is an opinion which is
not fully reasoned.
principles were applied by the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal in
[2015] NSWCCA 246
, a case that considered the weight to be given to
the findings of the sentencing judge.
those reasons, I would reject annexures C, D and E to Mr Deakes’
affidavit, being the submissions and transcript from the
proceedings on
sentence, as additional evidence in the appeal.
as I must on the assumption that Ms X’s evidence was assessed by the jury
to be credible and reliable, my examination
of the record of the trial has not
persuaded me that, notwithstanding that assessment, the jury, acting rationally,
ought nonetheless
to have entertained a reasonable doubt as to proof of guilt.
I would reject ground 4(a).
Prosecutor’s closing
remaining grounds invoke
s 37O(2)(a)(iii)
Supreme Court Act
which provides that this Court must allow an appeal against conviction if it
considers that, “on any other ground” (apart
from grounds (i) and
(ii) in that section) “there was a miscarriage of justice”.
Application of
4(b) contends that there was a miscarriage of justice resulting from three
aspects of the prosecutor’s closing address.
Director of Public Prosecutions submitted that the appellant requires leave
under r 5531 of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) to raise these
grounds. However, that rule applies only in the case of grounds of appeal
alleging failures on the part of
the trial judge. The rule
Appeals to Court of
Appeal—grounds of appeal against conviction or sentence
Unless the Court of Appeal otherwise orders, the following must not be
allowed as a ground for appeal against conviction or sentence
unless objection
was taken at the trial by the party appealing:
(a) a direction given by the trial judge;
(b) the trial judge’s failure to give a direction;
(c) the trial judge’s decision about the admission or rejection of
rule does not impose a requirement for leave to rely on a ground of appeal
alleging a miscarriage of justice arising from the
conduct of counsel. That
said, the absence of objection at the trial by the party appealing, or the fact
of that party’s agreement
at the trial with the manner in which any
objection was resolved by the trial judge, may inform this Court’s
assessment of
the ground for appeal. It is well recognised that those immersed
in the atmosphere of the trial are ordinarily best placed to assess
what is fair
in the circumstances. In the present case, the trial judge consulted carefully
with counsel in respect of every concern
raised. In each case, trial defence
counsel expressed his satisfaction with the manner in which the trial judge
proposed that the
objection should be addressed. That is a significant factor
in assessing the contention, after the event, that aspects of the trial
Reversal of
the onus of proof
4(b)(i) contends that, during his closing address, the prosecutor repeatedly
reversed the onus of proof. The appellant’s
submissions focussed on
individual remarks and did not address them in the order or context in which
they were made. It is preferable
to consider the points raised in the order in
which they were made during the prosecutor’s closing address and to assess
fairness and likely impact of each remark in the context in which it was
prosecutor began his opening address by acknowledging areas of the evidence
where, by and large, there was no real dispute. He
referred in that context to
the fact that Ms Jordan’s attitude towards the accused was
“excessively emotional”
and that, in the early hours of the morning
on which the incident occurred, there were a number of arguments, some of which
physical. He said, “it is against that background of a turbulent
relationship that you come to assess the version of events
provided by [Ms
X]”. The prosecutor reminded the jury that Ms X had given several
accounts on different occasions. He said,
“she might be 13 but she
presents as articulate, switched on and making absolutely no attempt whatsoever
to dissemble or dodge
or spin an answer or do anything other than tell police
exactly what she can recall as best she can”. He submitted, “every
time [she made a statement], the critical details of the acts leading to the
death of Ms Jordan are retold by her, it’s the
then going to the detail of Ms X’s various statements, the prosecutor
paused to explain to the jury (in accordance with
the decision of the High Court
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
159 CLR 507
but without referring
to that decision), that:
this is not a case about competing versions. If a single one of you goes out
into that jury room and asks the question “who
do I believe” or
“whose evidence do I prefer” then you have failed to discharge the
oaths or affirmations that
you took, because that is not the question. The
question is: has the prosecution established the elements of the offence beyond
that caution, the prosecutor turned to what he described as “the
consistency and inherent credibility of [Ms X’s]
version” against
the “moving feast” that was the accused’s version. He
proceeded to make a series of points
statements with other evidence. In making that point, the prosecutor played the
enhanced audio
of the CCTV footage for the purpose of pointing out that the
appellant’s tone shifted, just as Ms X had described.
first remark by the prosecutor said to have conveyed a reversal of the onus of
proof was made in that context. The prosecutor’s
point was that there was
objective evidence in the enhanced audio that the appellant’s tone
changed. He said:
“after you hear the accused say ‘Del, fuck me dead’, while you
may not be able to make out in any clear fashion
the words that are spoken, the
tone is consistent with the type of demeanour and words spoken about which [Ms
X] gave evidence.
The point is, she is accurate again. This witness who, it may be suggested to
you, was sleep-deprived, young, under the influence
of cannabis, perhaps emotive
to bend her version, is accurate again, even under the stress and pressure that
your life experience
might tell you she was experiencing as she arrived at that
Articulate and reliable, she may be, but she is still 13. Is she really going
to include the words ‘I’m sorry, bub’
if she’s bending
the truth in some way because by the time of her version, she has a dislike for
the accused. Really?”
appellant contends that the last sentence in that part of the prosecutor’s
address was in the nature of a “why would
she lie?” submission (a
topic addressed below). I do not accept that submission. Read in the context
of the point the prosecutor
was making, the jury would not have focused on that
single question (as the appellant has) as an invitation to reverse the onus of
proof. A prosecutor is entitled to make submissions as to why a witness should
be believed. This was that. The rhetorical point
was, would a 13-year-old have
the wit to add that kind of detail (that the accused said, “I’m
sorry, Bub”) if she
was embellishing? It was not an invitation to
speculate about motive to lie.
second remark complained of is in a different category. Unfortunately, shortly
after the first remark (about five pages of transcript
later), the prosecutor
actually asked the rhetorical question, “why would she lie about
that?” The question came at
the end of a submission about the consistency
of Ms X’s evidence, both as between her several statements given on
occasions and with the CCTV footage. The prosecutor noted that, at
the time she spoke to police, Ms X did not know about “the
forensics” or the CCTV footage. He was making a fair point, which was
that the jury could not reason that Ms X had tailored
her evidence to suit other
evidence in the prosecution case because she was not aware of that evidence when
she spoke to police.
He was inviting the jury to accept for that reason that
she had simply described what she had seen. The prosecutor then said:
Ms Jordan on the bonnet: consistent all the way through. And how on earth would
a 13-year-old know it makes any difference whether
she’s on the front or
back? Why would she lie about that?
is established that a jury should not be invited to speculate as to why a
prosecution witness would lie. The vice of doing so
has been described as
“the risk that, in the search for an explanation for why false allegations
might be made against the
accused, the onus of proof is transferred from the
Crown to the accused”:
[2008] NSWCCA 203
with whom Spigelman CJ and Hidden J agreed at [1] and [2]).
prosecutor realised his mistake as he spoke and (as he later told the trial
judge) immediately tried to “walk it back”,
Now, the question is not why she would lie but if it is suggested to you somehow
that she is mistaken or had some motive to tailor
the version, you would be
entitled, in my submission, to ask yourself why wouldn’t she just say she
was on the back, if that’s
what she saw, if that’s where Ms Jordon
after making those further remarks, the prosecutor suggested it might an
appropriate time for a break. The trial judge agreed
and sent the jury out,
after which the appellant’s counsel made immediate complaint, raising two
issues. The first concerned
the rhetorical “why would she lie?”
question. Secondly, counsel complained that the prosecutor was
“haranguing”
the jury in a manner and tone that crossed the line of
appropriate rhetoric for a prosecutor.
accepting the complaint about tone, the trial judge suggested the prosecutor
“moderate” it. He indicated that
he would. As to the rhetorical
question, her Honour accepted that such a question has a “clear tendency
to reverse the onus”,
but expressed the view that it could be remedied,
first, by the prosecutor withdrawing it and secondly, by “forceful
directions”
in the summing up which counsel for the accused would be able
to foreshadow in his closing address to the jury.
the morning tea break and before the jury came back, counsel for the accused
raised a further point, which was something the
prosecutor had said about Ms
X’s consumption of cannabis. The prosecutor had said to the jury that
there was no basis for
them to conclude that Ms X had anything other than
“the same low level of cannabis that Ms Jordan had when her blood was
As Ms X’s blood had not been analysed, that submission
should not have been made. There was simply no evidence as to whether
smoked more or less than Ms Jordan or was affected to any greater or lesser
counsel submitted that there was “a hint of a reversal of onus” in
the prosecutor’s submission. However,
that particular complaint is not
part of this ground of appeal; it is an aspect of ground 4(b)(ii) discussed
below. It is recounted
here simply as part of the narrative.
trial judge (with respect, correctly) did not take up the “reversal of
onus” point but responded that the difficulty
was in saying there was
“no basis” for concluding anything other than that both women were
affected to the same degree
whereas in fact there was no evidence on the issue
either way. Neither counsel had explored that issue with Ms X in her
the jury was brought back into court, the trial judge reminded them that
counsel’s address is not evidence and that they
must disregard any
submission not founded in the evidence and disregard any speculation. The trial
judge did not refer specifically
to the submission concerning the consumption of
cannabis at that time. That was an agreed approach. Before bringing the jury
the trial judge had told counsel that she proposed to direct the jury
(again) that what counsel say is not evidence; that they should
disregard any
submission that is not founded in the evidence and that they should disregard
any speculation that is not in the evidence.
Her Honour then said,
“Unless you want to be heard otherwise, I wouldn’t propose to go
further into this example”.
Trial defence counsel responded
the trial judge had given the jury the directions foreshadowed, the prosecutor
picked up the judge’s point and repeated
that the jury should disregard
anything tantamount to speculation. He then outlined exactly what the evidence
was on the issue of
consumption of cannabis. In accordance with the exchange in
the absence of the jury, he did not expressly withdraw the submission
was no basis for concluding anything other than that Ms X and Ms Jordan were
affected to the same degree.
prosecutor then turned to the “why would she lie?” submission, which
he did withdraw, as follows:
The other thing I need to correct is something I said to you about [Ms
X’s] evidence of Danielle's location on the vehicle.
The effect of what I
asked you to do was consider what she says, but then to go on and question why
she would be untruthful about
that. You need to be really, really, really clear.
That is a submission that I need to withdraw and it is not – I repeat not
– a chain of reasoning that you are entitled to engage in. You can't do
it. It follows from a number of things that I have
already said to you: (1) the
case is not a question of who do you believe; (2) the accused has nothing to
prove – even now,
even after giving versions, he doesn't have anything to
prove; and (3), as I have said to you on a number of occasions, her Honour
said and will again, the prosecution bears the onus even now, even at this late
stage, so you can't ask yourself the question
why would she have said that if it
wasn't true?
due course (in her summing up), the trial judge proceeded to direct the jury as
foreshadowed. Of course, that direction was given
in addition to the general
direction as to the onus of proof and the particular direction required in this
case arising from the
circumstance that the prosecution case depended on a
single witness. All three directions are set out below.
the trial judge gave the following direction (which her Honour had earlier
provided to the parties for comment) in relation
to the onus of proof:
The next direction, onus of proof, follows logically from the first and it is a
critically important direction. The prosecution brings
the charge and it is the
prosecution who bears the onus of proving the charge beyond reasonable doubt.
That onus never shifts during
the trial. At no stage is there any onus or
obligation on the accused to prove he is innocent. It is the prosecutor who has
of proving guilt.
It is not a question of who you believe. Simply stated, it is not for the
accused to establish his innocence but the prosecutor to
establish the accused's
guilt beyond reasonable doubt. This is very important and so I will emphasise it
again. At no point in your
reasoning should you be asking why the accused has
not proved something. If there is an absence of evidence, this must be taken
account in considering whether the prosecution has proved its case beyond
reasonable doubt. There is never any onus on the accused
either in respect of
any individual piece of evidence or as to the case as whole.
You have heard submissions about reasons for accepting the prosecution case and
reasons why you may not accept the prosecution's
case, but the correct legal
question, which is the ultimate question for your determination, is whether the
prosecutor has proved
the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt. If the
answer to that question is yes, the appropriate verdict is guilty. If the
is no, the verdict must be not guilty.
trial judge then gave a direction concerning the fact that the prosecution case
relied on acceptance of the evidence of Ms X:
[Ms X] is a critical witness in the prosecution case ... She is the only witness
who sees Ms Jordan on the bonnet of the car. Now,
as I have said, the
prosecution has alleged, and only alleged, that Ms Jordan was on the bonnet of
the vehicle when she fell onto
the roadway. If you are not satisfied of that
fact beyond reasonable doubt, you must acquit the accused of both the offence of
and the statutory offence of manslaughter. So, accordingly, unless you
are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that [Ms X] is both
an honest and accurate
witness in the account she has given, you cannot find the accused guilty. For
this reason, before you can
convict the accused of either count – [of]
either murder or the statutory alternative – you should examine the
of [Ms X] very carefully to satisfy yourself that you can safely act on
that evidence to the high standard required in a criminal
with the “why would she lie?” submission, the trial judge directed
the jury as follows:
Now, in his closing address, the prosecutor rhetorically asked why [Ms X] would
say that the deceased was on the back of the car
– was on the front of the
car if she was in fact on the back of the car. But, as the prosecutor properly
corrected when he
returned after the break, you must not proceed by way of
asking why would she say this. To do so is to reverse the onus of proof.
repeat the accused bears no onus. He has nothing to prove.
appellant submitted that, despite the prosecutor’s emphatic backstep and
the trial judge’s correction, it would have
been very hard for the jury to
unthink the “why would she lie about that?” line of reasoning and
that their minds would
have already been infected by the prosecutor’s
authorities do not support such an absolute approach. In
comprehensive review of cases in which the question “why would she
lie?” was raised, Latham J noted at [55]
that not all of cases in which
the question was directly put to the jury had resulted in a miscarriage of
justice. Her Honour identified
the following principles relevant to the present
case at [59]-[60]:
Where there is no direct evidence of a motive to lie on the part of a central
Crown witness, or evidence from which one can be reasonably
inferred, a
miscarriage of justice may be occasioned by:
(i) cross-examination of an accused as to the reasons why the witness would make
the allegations that are central to proof of the
Crown case;
(ii) a Crown submission to the jury that draws attention to the fact that the
defence case did not, by cross-examination of the
witness, advance a motive to
(iii) a Crown submission to the jury which directly invites them to ask the
question "Why would he/she lie?" in order to promote
the acceptance of the
witness as a witness of truth;
(iv) a summing up that endorses or approves or fails to qualify a Crown
submission falling within (ii) or (iii), or contains directions
to the same
Ultimately, whether the conduct outlined in (i), (ii) or (iii) leaves the jury
with the impression that the accused bears some onus
of proving the existence of
a motive for the fabrication of the allegations against him/her, falls to be
determined on the strength
of the directions in the summing up. Full, firm and
clear directions on the onus of proof, including a direction that the accused
bears no onus to prove a motive to lie, may be sufficient to correct such a
misapprehension. Much depends upon the particular circumstances
of the case.
offending submission in the present case falls well short of the circumstances
in which a miscarriage of justice will be established.
The jury cannot have
been under any misapprehension about their task. The prosecutor’s mistake
was immediately walked back
by him, then emphatically withdrawn by him after the
break, then the subject of clear direction by the trial judge.
Separately,
the appellant submitted that the trial judge’s direction was insufficient
because her Honour “did not reiterate
that regardless of whether [a motive
to lie] had been raised, the issue was whether they accepted the critical
aspects of [Ms X’s]
evidence beyond reasonable doubt” and that
“this was particularly significant in circumstances where [Ms X’s]
was critical to the Crown case”. As set out above, the trial
judge gave the clearest direction on that issue earlier in the
summing up. It
was not necessary to repeat the point.
third remark complained of by the appellant as allegedly reversing the onus of
proof is based on the prosecutor’s remarks
Senior Constable Smorhun, who gave evidence about the appellant’s likely
speed at the time he
applied the brakes immediately before Ms Jordan fell from
the car. For context, it is necessary to explain that Leading Senior Constable
Smorhun gave evidence of his opinion based on articulated assumptions. In
cross-examination, as is orthodox in the case of expert
opinion evidence, he was
challenged as to the assumptions he had made. He made a number of concessions
appropriateness of the assumptions.
point made by the prosecutor in respect of that evidence was that,
notwithstanding the concessions, the jury would still be satisfied
accused was driving “at speed”.
making that point, the prosecutor noted one of the concessions made by Leading
Senior Constable Smorhun, which was that the field
of view from the CCTV camera
“could have been out by a metre or two”. The prosecutor continued:
What you then need to go and do in favour of the accused is to undertake the
task of, in a similar fashion to what you might think
I ultimately asked Leading
Senior Constable Smorhun to do, make all of the assumptions in favour of the
slowest speed.”
passage complained about by the appellant immediately followed those remarks.
The prosecutor said:
That is a fair way and an appropriate way for you to approach Leading Senior
Constable Smorhun's evidence bearing in mind the margins
for error and the
potential assumptions. The point is this, that even when you do that, even when
you make all of the assumptions
in favour of the accused, the assumptions that
Leading Senior Constable Smorhun was asked to make, even adopting the margin for
at its highest in favour of the accused, you still are at a point where
that vehicle, as it travels through the field of view and
in the moment before
the ABS engaged, is going fast.
afterwards, he said:
Even making – [some] of you might decide that in order to discharge your
oaths and affirmations you need to make these assumptions
in favour of the
accused, even making a concession that the ABS braking time was shorter and
taking in excess of 10 per cent off
the friction value in favour of the accused,
Leading Senior Constable Smorhun’s evidence was that that vehicle was
still travelling
in excess of 40 kilometres an hour at the time immediately
before the brakes were applied.
That is, you might think on an assessment of his evidence, the best case for the
accused. The way I ask you to approach it is this,
there is little material
difference between 45 kilometre[s] an hour and 63 kilometres an hour when a
person weighing what Ms Jordan
weighed in on the bonnet of the vehicle, that
vehicle travelled as far as it did, heading in what you might have concluded
view in a slightly downhill direction.
appellant complains of the use of the expressions “at its highest in
favour of the accused” and “the best case
for the accused”.
He noted that this issue was raised by defence counsel at the trial.
the trial, defence counsel submitted to the trial judge that the words
“the best case for the accused” again introduced
“this idea of
reversing the onus if one talks about the best case for the accused”. He
complained that the prosecutor
seemed to have “a tendency to make these
frankly unfair submissions which frankly undermine the onus of proof”. He
by saying, “there is no best case for the accused. There is
what the evidence suggests in light of the retractions and corrections
[Leading Senior Constable] Smorhun made.”
trial judge asked defence counsel whether he was making an application or
“just shooting another warning across the bow”.
Counsel responded,
“I am shooting a warning, your Honour. And I shouldn’t have to,
with respect”.
prosecutor sought to defend the submission by saying that he was doing no more
than asking the jury to adopt the fairest approach
or that which was of greatest
assistance to the accused in terms of calculating the speed of the vehicle. The
trial judge indicated
that she understood the point but said the form of words
was unfortunate because it suggested that the accused had “a
respectfully agree that the form of words was unfortunate for the reason
identified by the trial judge. However, the prosecutor
was making a perfectly
legitimate point. It could have been made more simply and in more appropriate
language by acknowledging that
Leading Senior Constable Smorhun made various
concessions but that, even on the worst case for the prosecution, his evidence
established that the Triton was travelling “at speed” along
Alfred Hill Drive. However, the infelicitous language did
not result in a
miscarriage of justice in the circumstances of this case.
appellant’s final complaint about the alleged reversal of the onus of
proof in the prosecutor’s closing address concerned
the following remarks
made by the prosecutor:
Now, ladies and gentlemen, as I understand it, the version of events that you
are going to be asked to accept is the one that gives
rise to a possibility that
the accused is innocent of both the charges is the version that comes through in
the AMC calls that you
have before you.
appellant submitted that this reversed the onus of proof in suggesting to the
jury that, in order to acquit the accused, they
would need to accept a version
of events that he had given.
argument takes a single remark out of context. In that part of the
prosecutor’s address, he was making the point that,
whereas Ms X’s
version of events had remained consistent over the telling on four separate
occasions (the 000 call, the first
statement to police on the day of the
incident, the second statement to police in the EICI two days later and the
pre-recorded evidence
in the trial), the accused had given three very different
versions as to what had occurred. That is a point the prosecutor was entitled
to make as going to the accused’s credit.
addressing the versions given by each person, the prosecutor explained to the
jury (in accordance with the decision of the
High Court in
it was not a question of “competing versions” or asking themselves
“whose evidence do I prefer?”.
He gave that caution before going
into the detail of Ms X’s evidence (in the remarks set out at [112] above)
and again before
going into the detail of the versions given at various times by
the accused. At that point, the prosecutor said:
I now propose to deal with the versions given by the accused. Before I do I
reiterate this: if you ask who do you believe, you have
failed in your duties.
The question is, has the prosecution established the elements of the offence
beyond reasonable doubt? In
that regard though I expect her Honour will direct
you that in the event that you conclude that the accused’s account of what
occurred might be true, might be true, then you are duty bound to find the
accused not guilty.
prosecutor then noted that the jury might legitimately ask, by way of response,
“which version?”, because there were
a number of different versions
(from the accused) to choose from. It was in that context that the prosecutor
made the remark of
which the appellant complains, “as I understand it, the
version of events that you are going to be asked to accept is the one
rise to a possibility that the accused is innocent of both the charges is the
version that comes through in the AMC calls
that you have before you”.
with the previous complaint, the language was unfortunate. It would have been
preferable to describe the relevant version as the
one the jury was going to be
asked to accept “might reasonably be true”. It was the use of the
word “innocent”
that prompted complaint by defence counsel at the
read in the context of the closing address as a whole, there was no unfairness
in the prosecutor’s remark. The principles
not hold that a prosecutor cannot address the jury as to why they should not
accept a version of events given by an accused person.
The difficulty for the
prosecutor was that the appellant had given at least three different versions of
first was the lie he told to a number of people at the hospital that Ms Jordan
had fallen from the stairs at the back of her home.
next was the version told to police during the record of interview. At that
time, the appellant admitted to police that the first
version was a lie. He
explained that he had been trying to get away from the house. He said he
“got away, and got around
the corner a bit”. He said, “then I
stopped the car because I thought maybe she had her wallet and everything there.
And then she’s caught up and jumped straight on the back of – on my
ute to try and stop me”. Later in the interview,
police told the
appellant that there was a CCTV camera at a neighbour’s house facing the
street. They asked whether that CCTV
footage was going to show what he had
described. His answer is not recorded because it was “indistinct”.
However, the
CCTV footage does not show Ms Jordan chasing after the car down
Alfred Hill Drive. Indeed, it shows she did
chase the car down
Alfred Hill Drive. It may be taken that, when told about the CCTV footage, the
appellant appreciated that his
second version would also be shown to be
third version was the one the accused gave on the phone from the gaol to his
father and others after he had been told that there
was CCTV footage. His
opening line is explained by the fact that, in the time between the police
interview and the phone call, Ms
Jordan had died.
appellant said to his father:
Yeah, so I got charges to manslaughter now so, um, which is bullshit because
– because even – even though – because
like when she jumped on
the bonnet the first time I jumped out of the car and walked off. And then
– then she jumped –
then when I come back she jumped back on again.
So I drove out the driveway and onto the road and I jumped out and walked off
and then – and then the – then I’d come back and jumped
in the car and then she jumped on again so I just drove
up the road – end
of the road – end of the road with her on the bonnet, and then she got
off. So I thought, “okay,
cool, excellent.” So I started driving
and when I drove – drove around the corner and kept on driving and then
next second
I looked in my rear vision mirror and there she is on the back. And
I thought, “oh fuck”, so I started to slow down
and then – and
as I was slowing down she looked she was just about – like she was still
right and she was just about
to jump off. And like she left – lost her
footing or something, and then she fell. And I slammed my brakes on real bloody
quick as soon as she fell, and that’s when I picked her up and took her to
prosecutor was entitled to address the jury as to the inconsistencies between
the various versions given by the appellant as a
matter going to the
appellant’s credit. The fact that the prosecution bears the onus of proof
does not mean that an accused
person is immune from submissions as to
addressing those versions, the prosecutor was evidently mindful of the principle
that “the jury must be told that, even if they do not
positively believe the evidence for the defence, they cannot find an
against the accused contrary to that evidence if that evidence gives rise to a
reasonable doubt as to that issue” (at
appellant did not give evidence in the trial, but the jury had evidence of the
several versions he had given at various times.
As the order of closing
addresses is that the prosecution goes first, the prosecutor had to anticipate
what would be submitted on
behalf of the appellant and to do so in the context
direction the judge would give in due course. It was in
those circumstances that the prosecutor made the remarks objected to (“as
I understand it, the version of events that you are going to be asked to accept
is the one that gives rise to a possibility that
the accused is innocent of both
the charges is the version that comes through in the AMC calls that you have
before you”).
prosecutor was entitled to address the jury on his apprehension that the first
two versions given by the appellant would likely
not be pressed in defence
counsel’s closing address (because one was an admitted lie and one was
disproved by other evidence).
As already stated, it would have been preferable
if the prosecutor had referred to the third version as the one the jury would be
asked to accept “might reasonably be true”. However, read in the
context of the address as a whole, I am not persuaded
that there was any
unfairness in the alternative formulation, “the one that gives rise to a
possibility that the accused is
innocent”. For the reasons explained
above in the discussion of the “why would she lie?” complaint, this
cannot have been left in any doubt as to their task.
the appellant further submitted that the trial judge’s direction
concerning the “why would she lie?” submission
was insufficient
because it failed to address the other occasions on which the prosecutor
(allegedly) reversed the onus of proof.
As I have explained, I do not accept
that the other occasions relied upon by the appellant had that effect.
those reasons, I would reject ground 4(b)(i).
Inferences not
fairly available
4(b)(iii) is that there was a miscarriage of justice occasioned by the
prosecutor inviting the jury to draw inferences that
were not fairly available.
The appellant specified eight matters under this complaint.
he relied on the fact that the prosecutor said to the jury that the car
“reverses down the hill then comes up at speed
before it turns around the
corner” and that the prosecutor told the jury that was what the CCTV
appellant submitted that the submission put by the prosecutor is completely
inconsistent with the CCTV footage. For the reasons
explained above in the
discussion of the unreasonable verdict ground, I disagree. It was plainly open
to the jury to accept Ms X’s
statement made two days after the incident
that the appellant reversed only back to where she was standing when she spoke
It was open to the jury to accept that, when she agreed with the
proposition put by the cross-examiner that he reversed all the
way to the end of
the street, she did not attend to the fact that he was putting a different
proposition (the questions that misstated
her evidence were not objected to).
Most importantly, it was open to the jury to accept that the CCTV footage
supports Ms X’s
original statement. The prosecutor’s concession
at the proceedings on sentence was directed to the reliability of the answer
given in cross-examination, not to the consistency of Ms X’s evidence with
the CCTV footage. The prosecutor’s submission
to the jury had a proper
foundation in the evidence and was not inappropriate.
the appellant relied on the prosecutor’s submission to the jury about the
extent to which Ms X was affected by cannabis.
The prosecutor’s
submission invited the jury to make an assumption about Ms X based on Professor
Duflou’s evidence as
to the “low levels” of cannabis in Ms
Jordan’s blood. He said:
No evidence - no evidence - of how much. No basis whatsoever - smoking bongs
with Danielle - no basis whatsoever upon which you could
conclude that [Ms X]
had anything other than the same low level of cannabis that Ms Jordan had when
her blood was analysed. The evidence
is she's smoking cannabis with Ms Jordan
over that period. You know how low the levels in Ms Jordan were because
Professor Duflou
fairness to the prosecutor, it should be noted that the very next sentence was
“[n]ow, true it is, you don’t have an
analysis of [Ms X’s]
blood”. Even so, there was no foundation for the invitation to the jury
to speculate that Ms X
had the same level of cannabis in her blood as Ms Jordan.
The appellant noted that the error was not corrected by the prosecutor’s
“correction” (set out above) or specifically corrected by the judge.
However, as already explained, what was to be said
to the jury at that point was
the subject of careful consideration by the trial judge in the absence of the
jury. Her Honour outlined
what she proposed to say to the jury and both counsel
indicated they had no objection to what was proposed.
the jury should not have been invited to infer that the two women had the same
level of cannabis in their blood, I am not
persuaded that this was of any great
significance. As submitted by the prosecutor when the complaint was made during
his closing
address, trial defence counsel had made a forensic decision not to
explore with Ms X the extent to which she was affected by cannabis.
of cannabis in her blood was unknown; the only evidence on the issue was what
she said, which was that she conceded feeling
the effects of smoking cannabis.
The jury was reminded that submissions are not evidence and they were reminded
of what the evidence
the appellant contended that the prosecutor misstated Ms X’s evidence in
relation to what the appellant said when she
approached the vehicle. The
prosecutor said to the jury “she doesn’t observe the accused saying,
know” or “I didn’t see her”. The
appellant relied on the fact that, in fact, Ms X gave evidence that the
appellant, when asked what had happened, had said “I don’t
know” and “I don’t know what happened”.
There is no
substance in this complaint. The prosecutor’s point was that the
appellant did not say, immediately after the
accident, that he did not know Ms
Jordan was on the car. That was correct. Saying he did not know what happened
was not the same
as saying he did not see Ms Jordan on the car.
prosecutor returned to the point (a few pages later in the transcript) where he
noted Ms X’s unchallenged evidence that,
when the appellant returned to
the house at 6:00am, he said:
Danielle is in hospital. I do not know what the fuck to do. Like, I’m
freaking out. I shouldn’t have done it. Like,
how did it get this far? I
love her. I love her. I shouldn’t have done it.
prosecutor’s point in each case was that, according to that evidence, the
one thing the appellant did not say was that he
had not realised Ms Jordan was
on the back of the car. There was no unfairness in those submissions.
the appellant submitted that the prosecutor “invited the jury to find that
they could see Ms Jordan on the bonnet
of the vehicle in the CCTV” even
though he could point to no portion of the recording where that was the case and
had not opened
the prosecution case on that basis.
submission does not fairly reflect what the prosecutor said. The impugned
remark comes at the end of a lengthy portion of the
closing address in which his
whole point was that it was a matter for the jury to determine what could be
seen on the CCTV footage.
He noted that he had made multiple references to the
CCTV footage and that they had that footage in various forms and enhanced in
various ways. He said, “[w]hat you make of those various portions and
extractions from the CCTV footage is quintessentially
a matter for you”.
He said if they thought they could “discern certain things” they
would take that into account
but that if they arrived at the view that it was of
little assistance because the footage was “just not clear enough”
they would put that evidence aside, in which event they would need to consider
whether the prosecution had established the elements
of the offence beyond
reasonable doubt “based on everything else”. He then recapitulated
the point he had been making,
telling the jury they could use the footage for
the things he submitted could be seen (“you can plainly see the vehicle
back, you can plainly see it moving at a much faster pace and then
going down Alfred Hill Drive”) and then saying “but
so far as the
precise portion of CCTV where you may or not [sic] think you can see something
on the vehicle, and if you arrive at
a view it’s not sufficient quality,
you just, in my submission, would put it to one side and consider the rest of
the evidence”.
That is the impugned remark. It was scarcely an
invitation to find that they could see Ms Jordan on the bonnet. If anything,
jury may have taken the prosecutor to be implicitly accepting that Ms Jordan
be seen on the car in the footage. The burden of the submission
was, “you may or may not, it’s a matter for you”.
the appellant submitted that the prosecutor suggested that Ms Jordan may have
been on the rear of the vehicle at some other
time. The appellant noted that Ms
X was not questioned about that possibility. He contended that there was
“no evidence whatsoever”
as to Ms Jordan being on the rear of the
vehicle at any time other than the time at which she fell. That is wrong. As
already noted,
the appellant told police in his record of interview that, when
he was trying to leave the house, Ms Jordan got on the back and got
The relevant answers are set out above.
the appellant relied on the prosecutor’s suggestion that the dust
disturbance on the rear was significantly less than
on the front. The appellant
submitted that there was no basis for this submission and that it is
“plainly inconsistent with
the photographic evidence”.
do not think there is any force in this complaint. The photographs were there
for the jury to see. They were directed that submissions
are just submissions
and that the assessment of the evidence was a matter for them.
the appellant relied on the fact that the prosecutor suggested to the jury that
the evidence of the broken windscreen wiper
was consistent with its having been
broken when Ms Jordan was on the bonnet. He noted that this was not put to Ms X
and that an explanation
was given by the appellant for the broken wiper. He
submitted that there was no basis for the jury to draw an inference that Ms
Jordan was hanging onto the wiper.
do not accept that submission. As noted in the prosecution submissions on
appeal, the submission was made in the context of the
trial prosecutor noting
that the appellant had given police a version of events as to how the windscreen
wiper came to be broken.
The prosecutor told the jury this was a matter for
their assessment and said he would “simply ask [the jury] to note that
seems the broken wiper is in the general area of where [Ms X] described Ms
Jordan initially hanging onto the lip of the bonnet”.
submission was properly made. If Ms Jordan was holding onto the bonnet in the
manner described by Ms X, there is every likelihood
that she would have grabbed
the windscreen wiper as she slid off. That was a submission that was open on
the evidence and properly
put in response to the version given by the accused.
A trial prosecutor’s obligation of fairness does not require them to
entirely passive.
the appellant relied on the fact that the jury was asked to consider whether the
state of the canopy was consistent with
anyone being on it. The appellant noted
that there was no evidence from any police officer or forensics as to the
strength or robustness
of the canopy. In the absence of any evidence about the
nature of the material from which the tonneau cover was made, the
prosecutor’s
submission on that issue invited speculation and probably
should not have been made, particularly standing alongside the submission
(properly made) that Ms Jordan could have been on the back of the Triton at some
time other than the point when she fell. However,
the jury was directed that
counsel’s submissions were just that. They were directed that the
assessment of the evidence was
a matter for them and that no one could tell them
how to decide the case. They were directed more than once that, unless they
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Ms Jordan was on the bonnet when she
fell, they must acquit. I am not persuaded that the
point about the state of
the tonneau cover resulted in any unfairness.
appellant submitted that, in combination, these misstatements of the evidence on
the part of the prosecutor created the potential
to affect the result of the
trial. He submitted that, although the jury was directed that the addresses of
counsel were not evidence,
the jury was invited to reason from the evidence in a
manner that was not open to them. For the reasons explained above, I am not
persuaded that the prosecutor made misstatements that had the capacity,
individually or taken in combination, to affect the result
of the trial or
resulted in a miscarriage of justice.
appellant submitted that the trial judge’s directions did not “cure
the impropriety”. The only issue as to
which the trial judge was asked to
(and did) give a corrective direction was the issue of the level of cannabis in
Ms X’s blood.
The relevant exchange and the direction given are
considered above in the discussion of ground 4(b)(i).
appellant accepted that it is not ordinarily appropriate for a trial judge to
give an opinion on the evidence but submitted that
there will be circumstances
in which fairness requires the trial judge to correct an impression mistakenly
left by a party’s
“plainly untenable suggestion” as to an
inference to be drawn from the evidence. The appellant submits that the
relied upon here fell within this category.
expectation that the trial judge will not ordinarily express any opinion about
the evidence is founded in the constitutional roles
of judge and jury
respectively. The judge’s overriding function is to ensure that the trial
is fair. The proper discharge
of that function will occasionally require that
some comment correcting an overly zealous submission be made, but that should be
done sparingly. The judgment as to when a correction is called for is one the
trial judge is ordinarily best placed to make, balancing
the entitlement of both
parties to a trial that is fair (not perfect). As I had occasion to say in a
previous case, the law does
not assume that juries are witless:
[2021] NSWCCA 324 (McCallum
JA at [24], N Adams J and Cavanagh J agreeing
at [41] and [42]). It is appropriate, having regard to the respective functions
judge and jury, to leave the facts to them, with appropriate direction as to
how they are to go about their task. There can be no
criticism of the trial
judge’s approach in the present case. Her Honour stayed within the
confines of her constitutional role
as the judge of the law.
it is necessary to address the submission that there was unfairness in the
prosecutor inviting the jury to draw an inference
from which he later resiled at
the proceedings on sentence. The appellant argued that, had the concession been
made during the trial,
the result may have been different.
are two difficulties with that submission. First, it mistakes the effect of the
concession in fact made at the proceedings
on sentence. Secondly, it overlooks
the significance of the different functions of jury and sentencing judge.
inconsistency between the answers given by Ms X in cross-examination (where she
appeared to accept that the appellant reversed
all the way to the bottom of
Coutts Place) and what she told police (that he reversed “back down to
here” when she was
standing outside Ms Jordan’s house) was a matter
for the jury’s assessment. Importantly and perhaps unsurprisingly,
prosecutor did not adopt the version given in cross-examination. In addressing
the jury as to what he argued was the consistency
between Ms X’s evidence
and the CCTV footage, he acknowledged one matter of difference, if not
inconsistency (the fact that
she had not mentioned that the engine stalled):
One of the things that you will need to consider is that [Ms X] does not
describe in terms of the accused’s engine switching
off. That is
something you will need to take into account when you sit [Ms X’s] version
against the CCTV. You can hear the
engine start. There’s no getting away
prosecutor then went on to invite the jury to accept that the next part of the
CCTV footage was consistent with Ms X’s account:
I’ll return to the timing shortly but the important and critical aspect is
what [Ms X] tells you happens next. He reversed
all the way back down to
Danielle’s house.
prosecutor then played a portion of the CCTV footage and then said:
That, ladies and gentlemen, is the accused reversing his car back down Coutts
Place, exactly as [Ms X] described it.
no point did the prosecutor invite the jury to accept that the Triton had
reversed all the way to the end of Coutts Place.
the proceedings on sentence, the prosecutor conceded that the Triton did not
reverse all the way down to the end of Coutts Place.
There was no inconsistency
between that concession and what the prosecutor had invited the jury to accept.
The concession did not
have the effect of conceding a point that had not been
conceded during the trial.
the submission overlooks the respective tasks of the jury and the sentencing
judge. While the jury is directed that they
need be satisfied only as to the
essential elements of the offence, the trial judge is often required at any
proceedings on sentence
to make additional findings of fact that are consistent
with the jury’s verdict but which go to the seriousness of the offence.
The prosecutor’s concession was made in fairness to the offender. It was
a concession that reduced the seriousness of the
offence. It did not derogate
from the soundness of the verdict because it was entirely consistent with the
case put to the jury
by the prosecution.
those reasons, I would reject ground 4(b)(iii).
Departure from
the case as opened
4(b)(iv) is that there was a change in the prosecution case during the trial.
Importantly, as noted in the Director’s
submissions on appeal, there was
no complaint or application to discharge the jury on that basis.
prosecutor opened the case on the basis that the act relied upon was
“driving at speed with Ms Jordan on the bonnet of the
vehicle” and
that this was the act relied on as causing the death of Ms Jordan. The
alternative count of manslaughter was
opened as being based on an unlawful and
dangerous act. Particulars of the act were neither given nor sought. The
defence opening
to the jury indicated that the location of Ms Jordan on the
car was the central issue, telling the jury that the allegation that
the bonnet would be “heavily contested”.
was the trial judge who first raised the issue of the particulars of the
unlawful and dangerous act, particularly the requirement
that the act be
unlawful. The prosecutor initially stated that the unlawful act was driving
negligently by driving at speed with
Ms Jordan on the bonnet. However,
after considering some authorities identified by the trial judge, the prosecutor
particularised
the unlawful and dangerous act as an act of assault based on the
appellant’s driving with Ms Jordan on the bonnet with the
intention that
she would fall from the vehicle and collide with the roadway. Trial defence
counsel agreed with that basis for leaving
manslaughter by an unlawful and
dangerous act.
trial judge prepared a written “elements” document for the jury on
that basis. No change or correction to that document
was sought by trial
defence counsel.
appellant submits that there was a change during the prosecution case regarding
the charge of manslaughter from being one based
at which the
appellant was travelling to one based on an
of the appellant to
dislodge Ms Jordan from the bonnet of the vehicle. However, as submitted by the
Director of Public Prosecutions,
the prosecution case was always based on the
act of driving at speed with Ms Jordan on the bonnet. The formulation of the
as to the elements of the offence crystallised what was plain from
the outset, namely, that the obvious intention of speeding off
with a person on
the bonnet is that they will fall onto the roadway. [Note: this issue is
addressed further in the addendum below.]
appellant submits that, by inference, the specification of the act of driving at
speed with Ms Jordan on the bonnet also supplied
the mens rea for the offence,
being that the appellant was recklessly indifferent as to whether Ms Jordan died
as a result of his
act. In my assessment, that submission reflects hindsight
reasoning. As the case was opened, the act forming the basis for both
manslaughter was driving at speed with Ms Jordan on the bonnet. As outlined in
the submissions of the Director of Public
Prosecutions on the appeal, the case
for murder was on the basis that this act was done with reckless indifference to
whereas if the jury were satisfied that Ms Jordan was on the bonnet
but that the appellant did not have the requisite foresight or
realisation as to
the probability of death, they should consider whether the act was done with the
intention that she would fall
off the vehicle (necessarily onto the roadway), in
which event they would return a verdict of manslaughter.
appellant relies on the fact that, in his closing address, the prosecutor told
the jury that in relation to manslaughter the prosecution
case was that the
appellant drove with the
objective of dislodging
Ms Jordan from the
vehicle. The appellant submits that the reference to the objective being
consistent with an intention to kill
or cause grievous bodily harm rather than
the reckless indifference on which the Crown had opened created the risk that
would confuse the different mens rea requirements for the offence of
murder and manslaughter.
do not accept that submission. As submitted by the Director of Public
Prosecutions in the appeal, the trial judge’s directions,
which conformed
to what had been agreed in the absence of the jury, drew a clear distinction
between foresight or realisation that
driving at speed would probably cause Ms
Jordan’s death but continuing regardless (murder) and driving without that
or realisation but with the intention of having Ms Jordan fall off the
vehicle onto the roadway (manslaughter). This conclusion
is fortified by the
fact that trial defence counsel made no complaint as to the formulation of the
unlawful and dangerous act element
by the prosecutor and the trial judge, no
complaint as to the way in which the prosecutor addressed the jury on this issue
closing address and no complaint as to the trial judge’s
directions. As submitted by the Director of Public Prosecutions,
that is cogent
evidence that trial defence counsel saw no prejudice or risk of confusion on the
part of the jury as to their task.
Director of Public Prosecutions submits that this ground requires leave under r
5531 and that leave should be refused. As this
ground was framed as a complaint
issue concerning the
directions of the trial judge), I am inclined to think that
r 5531 does not apply. I would reject ground 4(b)(iv).
Alleged failure to direct
when the witness’s EICI was replayed
4(c) is that the trial judge, having directed the jury be replayed the evidence
in chief interview of the witness [Ms X], erred
in failing to direct the jury to
consider the recorded evidence in the context of other, countervailing evidence,
whether recorded
or not, and of any arguments of the accused relevant to that
jury initially requested to have the evidence in chief interview of Ms X made
available to them in the jury room. That was declined
but they were told they
could view it in open court, which they then asked to do. The appellant’s
complaint is that the trial
judge did not remind them at that point of the
countervailing evidence and arguments of the appellant. It was submitted that
had the effect of allowing additional weight to be given to the evidence of
counsel for the appellant initially requested that a direction be given in
accordance with the decision of the High Court in
Gately v The Queen
[2007] HCA 55
232 CLR 208
and that the jury be reminded of the
appellant’s arguments. The appellant relied on the decision in
at [28] as establishing the following principles when pre-recorded
evidence is played again in open court:
(a) the attention of the jury should ordinarily be drawn to the need to take
account of any cross-examination or contrary evidence
that may exist and the
need to guard against selective reinforcement of particular oral evidence
received for a second time out of
(b) the judge should consider whether there is a need to warn the jury to avoid
giving undue weight to evidence that is recorded
against evidence that is
(c) the judge should consider the need to warn the jury to consider the recorded
evidence in the context of other countervailing
evidence and of any arguments of
the accused relevant to that evidence.
appellant accepts that the trial judge’s directions adequately addressed
the requirement in (b). However, he submits that
her Honour’s directions
failed to fulfill the requirements in (a) and (c). He submitted that her
Honour’s reference
to “the whole of the evidence, including the
CCTV” was not a reference to contrary evidence. That submission assumes
acceptance of the appellant’s arguments about the CCTV footage. Had the
trial judge chosen to go down that path, it would
arguably have been necessary
also to remind the jury of the prosecutor’s arguments concerning the CCTV
appellant further submitted that the trial judge did not warn the jury against
“selective reinforcement” of the pre-recorded
evidence taken out of
to the requirement in (c), the appellant noted that trial counsel had expressly
referred to the CCTV footage and the defence submission
that what Ms X described
“just could not have happened in terms of basically the time that the
vehicle was parked at the top
of the street and then left the street”. He
submitted that the reference to “other evidence ... as well as
addresses” was not sufficient to counterbalance the
replaying of Ms X’s evidence. The appellant submitted that this
failing must be viewed in the context of the importance of Ms X’s evidence
to the Crown case.
ground requires leave under r 5531 as objection was not taken at the trial to
the alleged failure adequately to direct the jury
on that issue. It is
accordingly necessary to pay close attention to the exchanges that took place
when the issue was raised.
jury’s note asked if they could view both Ms X’s and her
mother’s recorded evidence again. Trial defence counsel
reminded the
trial judge that she had foreshadowed directing the jury that they were to bear
in mind they had not been replayed the
other evidence and that they needed to
put the evidence into perspective.
trial judge responded as follows:
So, the direction I’d be proposing to give them is this, “you are
listening to the evidence of [Ms X] and Ms Leonard,
given a second time, and
well after the other evidence. You must guard against the risk of giving this
evidence disproportionate
weight for that reason. You must bear in mind all the
other evidence in the case.”
trial judge then asked trial defence counsel whether he wanted “a specific
reference to the accused’s record of interview
or any other evidence at
that point. He responded “[n]o, just the other evidence. Thank you, your
decision not to have the jury reminded of the accused’s record of
interview at that point must be taken to have been a deliberate
decision, given that the version told to police in that record of interview was
proved incorrect by the CCTV footage. In
such cases, there is always a
difficult balance for the trial judge to strike between, on the one hand,
reminding the jury of any
arguments favourable to the accused and, on the other
hand, not reminding the jury of obvious points against the accused. Sometimes,
the safest course is to say less rather than more. The appellant’s
reliance on
rather tends to assume a dichotomous analysis of the
replayed evidence and the countervailing evidence. Not every case fits neatly
into that binary classification.
doubt recognising the potential for such complexities, the High Court in
did not purport to prescribe a mandatory direction or immutable
practice for directing a jury that seeks access to pre-recorded evidence
the jury deliberations. The Director of Public Prosecutions relied in this
context on the observation made by Hayne J in
at [96], that what
will ultimately be required by way of directions and warnings will depend on the
facts and circumstances of the
case with the overriding consideration being
fairness and balance of the evidence. The Director of Public Prosecutions
further relied
in this context on the decision of the New South Wales Court of
Criminal Appeal in
Stevenson v The Queen
[2022] NSWCCA 133
and [65]-[67] where that Court held that the failure to adopt the procedures or
suggested warnings of the kind suggested in
does not of itself
give rise to a miscarriage of justice.
Director of Public Prosecutions submitted that the trial judge’s warnings
were adequate to address the risk that the jury
would give the replayed
pre-recorded evidence undue weight. It was noted, first, that the jury’s
request to view the evidence
again came shortly after the conclusion of the
summing up. Before sending the jury out again on verdict after a long weekend,
trial judge reminded them of the onus and standard of proof and the fact
that the accused did not have to prove anything. They retired
at 10:00am. They
were brought back in at 11:19am with a note requesting to see the evidence in
chief interview conducted on 17 April
2022. The trial judge directed them that,
as the evidence in chief interview was not an exhibit, they could not have it in
room, but they could ask to view it in open court. At 12:45pm, the
court reconvened after the jury sent a note asking to do that.
a break in the replaying of the video, trial defence counsel drew the trial
judge’s attention to a passage in the Chief
Justice’s judgment in
reminding the jury of arguments of the accused.
defence counsel said:
Now, I’m not – I just feel obliged to mention it, your Honour,
because – and I am not expecting, with respect,
your Honour to regurgitate
the arguments of counsel but I think maybe as a counterpoint... If your Honour
can just reinforce maybe
in terms of (a) and (b) of those points with reference
to counsel’s arguments...
trial judge asked whether there was any specific argument counsel wished her to
address. Her Honour noted the undesirability
of descending into a process of
reminding the jury of what the accused said and what the prosecution said. She
proposed “in
more neutral terms” reminding the jury to consider the
replayed evidence against the whole of the evidence and also counsel’s
closing addresses. Her Honour ultimately proposed that she would give that
reminder at the conclusion of the replaying of the evidence.
Trial defence
counsel agreed to that course.
the conclusion of the evidence, the trial judge said:
Members of the jury, that’s the conclusion of [Ms X’s] evidence. I
again remind you to consider the whole of the evidence,
including the CCTV from
1 Flower Place as well [as] counsel’s addresses when considering the
evidence you’ve just heard.
trial judge then proceeded to replay Ms Leonard’s evidence and, before
doing so, reminded them of what she had said before
replaying Ms X’s
evidence “about the importance of not giving evidence disproportionate
weight because you are rehearing
these portions of the evidence and not other
portions of the evidence”. Her Honour reminded the jury to consider the
evidence in the context of the whole of the evidence in the case and in
particular what counsel had said in their closing addresses.
concern was raised following those directions.
my assessment, the position adopted by trial defence counsel and the approach
taken by the trial judge reflected good forensic
judgment in the circumstances
of this case, for the reason already explained. I am not persuaded that there
was any miscarriage
of justice. There was forensic risk for the appellant in
reminding the jury of his various versions of events at that point in the
jury’s deliberations. The principal point to be made in his favour was to
remind the jury of the arguments about the CCTV,
but trial defence counsel
expressly accepted that there was no need for her Honour to
“regurgitate” those arguments.
regard to the careful exchange on this issue initiated by the trial judge and
the fact that trial defence counsel clearly made
a forensic choice in the
position he adopted, leave to rely on this ground should be refused.
Failure to direct as to
the meaning of “probability”
the outset of the hearing of the appeal, the appellant sought leave to amend his
notice of appeal to rely on a further ground of
appeal (ground 4(e)) as follows:
That the judge erred in failing adequately to direct the jury on meaning of
“probability” within
was granted subject to the requirement for leave under r 5531 to rely on the new
ground. Leave should be refused.
direction now sought is one trial defence counsel asked the trial judge not to
give because it would be “risky”.
The relevant discussion came in
response to two questions from the jury. One sought clarification of the term
“reasonable
doubt” and expansion on the term “recklessly
indifferent”. The second note asked, “I would like any amount
clarity you are able to give about the terms “reasonable” and
“probable” within the context of the legal
direction. Does
“probable” mean more likely than not? Is it something very likely,
nonetheless reasonable?”
the course of discussion of those notes, trial defence counsel drew the trial
judge’s attention to the decision of the New
South Wales Court of Criminal
[2002] NSWCCA 243
[33], the Court said:
In order for an accused to be convicted of
murder by reckless indifference to
, the Crown needs to show that he or she knew that the probable
result of his or her act (or omission), in this case the act of firing
was to cause the death of another, and knowing of that likelihood (which has to
be a substantial or real chance as distinct
from a mere possibility) he or she
went ahead and did the act regardless:
Crabbe v The Queen
[1985] HCA 22
(1985) 156 CLR
Royall v The Queen
[1991] HCA 27
(1991) 172 CLR 378
Boughey v The Queen
(1986) 161 CLR 10
(a code case).
trial judge asked, “how about if I direct in accordance with the first
line of [33]?”. Trial defence counsel responded
that paragraph 33 was
really a “job lot” and that, if her Honour was to “give the
first part”, she had to
give “the bracketed part”, a reference
to the words “which has to be a substantial or real chance as distinct
a mere possibility”. It appears to have been common ground, and was
certainly the position of trial defence counsel, that
“that bracketed part
judge proposed that she should direct the jury “another way of putting it
is, in order for the element of reckless indifference
to be satisfied, the
prosecution needs to prove beyond reasonable doubt that ... the accused had
actual knowledge that the probable
result of his act, that is the driving of the
car with Ms Jordan on the bonnet, was to cause Ms Jordan’s
circumstances where trial defence counsel actively discouraged the judge from
giving the direction now sought, leave should not
be granted under r 5531 to
rely on the new ground.
preparing this judgment, I have had the opportunity of reading in draft the
judgment of Taylor J. Her Honour would allow the
appeal because, having
reviewed the evidence, she is left with a doubt as to the mental element of the
offence of murder, which doubt
is not resolved in her Honour’s mind by
consideration of the benefit enjoyed by the jury. Loukas-Karlsson J agrees
with Taylor
Notwithstanding
Taylor J’s careful and incisive analysis of the issue, I remain of the
view that the appeal should be dismissed.
In my respectful opinion, once it is
accepted that the appeal is to be determined on the premise that Ms Jordan was
on the bonnet
of the Triton for the whole time while the appellant drove up
Coutts Place (including reversing back and driving up again), around
and down Alfred Hill Drive, as described by Ms X, the hypothesis that he did not
foresee the probability of death can
be excluded. It was not raised, or at best
was only barely raised, as an issue in the trial. To the extent that it was
on my assessment of the evidence, it was not a reasonable hypothesis.
Further, in my respectful opinion, it is excluded as a hypothesis
considered by this Court by the appellant’s versions of events, for the
reasons explained by the High Court in
R v Baden-Clay
[2016] HCA 35
J has set out the closing submission made by trial defence counsel on this
issue. While he introduced the submission as one
put in the alternative to his
primary submission (that the jury would entertain a doubt as to whether Ms
Jordan was on the bonnet
the whole time), the alternative point became mixed
with the primary submission. The high point was this:
I submit that on the evidence – the evidence doesn't on any view support
Michael O'Connell having a reckless indifferent state
of mind. He was trying
patiently you may think to leave, Danielle was trying to stop him. He didn't
rush off, he waited. You might
think he waited until he thought she was finally
off the car.
submission did not put a hypothesis that, if Ms Jordan was not “finally
off the car” but in fact still on the bonnet
when the appellant turned the
corner and drove off down Alfred Hill Drive, he may nonetheless not have
foreseen the probability that
she would fall hard on the road and suffer mortal
injury. Counsel’s reference to the appellant’s state of mind when
he was “trying patiently to leave” (which in any event was
inconsistent with Ms X’s considerably more damning account
of his conduct
even at that time) cannot be understood as a reference to his state of mind when
he was driving off down Alfred Hill
Furthermore,
the decision not to put that hypothesis squarely was explicitly a forensic
decision (“I don't want to weaken [the
primary submission] by referring to
other possible scenarios”). With respect, that reflected good forensic
judgment on the
part of trial defence counsel. To argue that the appellant
might have driven with Ms Jordan clinging onto the bonnet over the distance
at the speeds established by the evidence, even allowing for the concessions
made by Leading Senior Constable Smorhun, and yet
not turned his mind to the
probability that she would fall onto the road and suffer fatal injury such as
cracking her head, may well
have significantly undermined the jury’s
confidence in both counsel and his primary submission.
the extent that the submission was put, in my assessment it was not a reasonable
hypothesis. On the version accepted by the jury,
it was Ms X’s action,
not the appellant’s patience, that initially stopped him from driving off
with Ms Jordan on the
bonnet. Ms X described him as “schizo” and
“really angry” at that point. Once he had frightened Ms X out
the way, he was no longer waiting, patiently or otherwise, for an opportunity to
leave; he was off, with Ms Jordan on the bonnet.
Whatever concessions were made
by Leading Senior Constable Smorhun, it is beyond doubt in my view that the
appellant was driving
too fast down Alfred Hill Drive not to foresee the
probability that Ms Jordan would fall onto the road and suffer mortal injury.
do not consider it reasonably possible that the appellant did not have the
necessary foresight to establish recklessness at that
in my respectful opinion, the hypothesis accepted by Taylor J is excluded from
consideration by this Court by the appellant’s
versions of events, just as
. The High Court said in that case at [48]:
a criminal trial is accusatorial but also adversarial. Subject to well-defined
exceptions, “parties are bound by the conduct
of their counsel, who
exercise a wide discretion in deciding what issues to contest, what witnesses to
call, what evidence to lead
or to seek to have excluded, and what lines of
argument to pursue”. [citations omitted]
, the accused was charged with the murder of his wife. He gave
evidence at the trial to the effect that he had nothing to do with
circumstances in which she was killed. He was convicted by a jury. On appeal
to the Queensland Court of Appeal, he accepted
that it was open to the jury to
be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he had unlawfully killed his wife, but
contended that they
could not properly be satisfied of the necessary intent for
R v Baden-Clay
[2015] QCA 265
. The Court of Appeal
upheld the appeal on that basis, finding at [48]:
there remained in this case a reasonable hypothesis consistent with innocence of
murder: that there was a physical confrontation
between the appellant and his
wife in which he delivered a blow which killed her (for example, by the effects
of a fall hitting her
head against a hard surface) without intending to cause
serious harm; and, in a state of panic and knowing that he had unlawfully
her, he took her body to Kholo Creek in the hope that it would be washed away,
while lying about the causes of the marks on
his face which suggested conflict.
High Court held at [58] that the Court of Appeal “should not have treated
the case as one in which it was open to it to
identify a hypothesis as to the
circumstances of the death of the deceased on the basis that the respondent's
evidence could be disregarded
as if it had not been given at all”.
position here is not the same because the appellant did not give evidence in the
trial. Mr Baden-Clay did, and that was a premise
of the High Court’s
analysis as to what inferences were open to the jury and as to the limits on the
role of the Court of Appeal.
Even so, as Taylor J accepts, any inference as to
the appellant’s state of mind must be informed by “the nature and
manner of his driving” and his conduct before and after Ms Jordan
fell. None of the appellant’s out-of-court versions
addressed the nature
and manner of his driving with Ms Jordan on the bonnet, because he denied she
was there. The point made by
the High Court in
at [57] was
that, the accused having given evidence that he had nothing to do with the
killing of his wife, “it was open to
the jury to consider that the
hypothesis identified by the Court of Appeal was not a reasonable inference from
the evidence when
the only witness who could have given evidence to support the
hypothesis gave evidence which necessarily excluded it as a possibility”.
the present case, the appellant’s version was that Ms Jordan was not on
the bonnet. He gave no account of his acts or his
state of mind on the premise
that she was, as the jury must be taken to have found. Accordingly, any
inference as to the appellant’s
state of mind in that different and
necessarily inconsistent circumstance necessarily calls for speculation as to
the factual basis
for any such inference.
J has undertaken a careful analysis of the evidence on that issue. In my
respectful opinion, however, it is necessarily speculative
to hypothesise that
the appellant might have been driving slowly and carefully enough to exclude
what was otherwise an obvious and
probable consequence of driving down a road
with a person on the bonnet.
was the vice of the reasoning of the Court of Appeal identified by the High
. The Court of Appeal hypothesised a factual scenario
(“he delivered a blow which killed her (for example, by the effects of
fall hitting her head against a hard surface) without intending to cause serious
harm”). The High Court held at [59] that
this hypothesis was
“contrary to, and excluded by, the case that the respondent put to the
jury”. The position is the
same here. The appellant’s version was
that he was driving as one would without a person on the bonnet. Once it is
that Ms Jordan was on the bonnet the whole way – as he persisted
in inching up Coutts Place while Ms X walked backwards in
front of him,
literally putting her body on the line to stop him from driving off; as he swore
or exclaimed in frustration at the
top of the road; as he reversed backwards and
the “zoomed” towards Ms X to frighten her out of the way; as he
the corner and then drove for 200 metres downhill – any hypothesis
as to his nonetheless driving in a manner that did not carry
the obvious
likelihood of fatal injury those acts carried is speculative.
submissions
foregoing addendum was written before the Court received and addressed the
parties’ further submissions as outlined below.
it was not apparent that the appellant had taken the point on which the appeal
was to be determined by Loukas-Karlsson and Taylor
JJ, it was necessary for the
Court to invite further submissions. The parties were asked to address the
following questions:
(i) If it is accepted that it was open to jury to find that Ms Jordan was on the
bonnet of the vehicle when she fell from it, ought
the jury have entertained a
reasonable doubt as to reckless indifference to the probability of death?
(ii) Was this (proof of reckless indifference in those circumstances) an issue
raised in the trial?
(iii) Was it raised in the appeal?
appellant’s further submissions did not squarely answer the question
whether the issue was raised in the trial and expressly
accepted that it was not
raised in the appeal. However, the appellant submitted that the
“reasoning” contained in his
further submissions “is capable
of being encapsulated within ground 4(a)”. The substance of the matters
there addressed
has been dealt with in my original judgment. The
appellant’s submissions have not raised any point I have not considered
have not caused me to change my mind.
Director submitted (with respect, correctly) that the Court’s questions
raised the following issues:
(i) Was the appellant’s state of mind, on the assumption Ms Jordan was on
the bonnet, an issue at trial and on the appeal?
(ii) If not, should the Court entertain the issue under appeal ground (a)
(whether the verdict is unreasonable or cannot be supported
by the evidence);
(iii) If so, did the prosecution establish the appellant’s state of mind
for the offence of murder?
(iv) If not, in circumstances where manslaughter was left as an alternative,
what is the appropriate order of this Court?
Director’s further submissions on questions (i) – (iii) were in line
with my conclusions explained above. Importantly,
the Director acknowledged
that of course proof of the appellant’s state of mind for the offence was
at trial given that it is an element of the offence.
However, she submitted that, “as a practical matter, the jury were
a very narrow issue to resolve, being whether they could be satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt Ms Jordan was on the bonnet and the
case largely, if
not exclusively, rose and fell on this critical issue”. The Director
noted that both counsel at the trial
addressed the jury extensively as to
whether Ms X could be believed about Ms Jordan being on the bonnet, in that way
presenting it
as an “all or nothing case”. A submission about the
appellant lacking “murderous intent” was made specifically
context of a submission that he did not know Ms Jordan was on the back of the
car. The Director noted that trial defence
counsel did not seek to defend the
charge by “embracing the factual linchpin of the prosecution case but
contending the appellant
lacked the requisite state of mind”.
Director further submitted that this was clearly a forensic decision. As
already indicated, I agree. The Director noted in that
context that, trial
defence counsel having made “repeated references to Ms Jordan’s size
and stature which were relied
upon to support the notion it was likely Ms Jordan
was on the back of the car without the appellant knowing ... there was a
risk in [trial defence counsel] embracing the proposition that Ms
Jordan was on the bonnet as he drove away, but that the jury would
conclude the
appellant did not turn his mind to the probable fatal consequences of his
parties’ further submissions made reference to the recent decision of the
High Court in
The King v ZT
[2025] HCA 9
99 ALJR 676.
The appellant
submitted that, because the reasoning in his further submissions is
“capable of being encapsulated” within
the unreasonable verdict
ground, his position in his further submissions does not fall foul of what the
High Court said in that case
at [11] (Gageler CJ, Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones
JJ). I reject that submission. In the passage relied upon, the High Court
M v The Queen
requires that the appellate court undertake an
“independent assessment” of the sufficiency and quality of the
of the evidence”. However, that assessment is undertaken in
a context in which an appeal is as much of an adversarial process
criminal trial from which the appeal is brought and in which it is for the
parties to identify the evidence that the appellate
court must review and assess
and the features of that evidence that support their respective cases on appeal.
The appellate court
does not determine the grounds of appeal by simply
reconsidering the parties’ respective cases at the trial.
my respectful opinion, Taylor J’s decision (with which Loukas-Karlsson J
agrees) contravenes those principles. This is not
in the nature of what might
in another field of jurisprudence be termed a technical pleading point.
Observance of the adversarial
nature of criminal proceedings and confinement to
the issues raised by the parties is an incident of the requirement of
impartiality.
Director’s further submissions relied in this context on the remarks of
McHugh and Hayne JJ in their dissenting judgment
Gipp v The Queen
[1998] HCA 21; 194 CLR 106 at [48]-[52]. The appellant in that case had in the
High Court raised two errors that had not been identified
in the trial or on
appeal to the Queensland Court of Appeal. In the High Court, he submitted:
the duty of an appellate court to be vigilant and to conduct its own independent
inquiry must extend to an assessment not only of
the evidence but also of the
circumstances attending the conduct of the trial. It must be satisfied not only
that upon the whole
of the evidence that it was reasonably open to the jury to
be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty, but
also be satisfied that there is nothing apparent on the record which constitutes
a failure in observing the conditions essential
to a fair trial or which raises
a substantial possibility that the jury may have been mistaken or misled.
and Hayne JJ rejected that suggested test for determining whether a conviction
is unsafe or unsatisfactory or constitutes a
miscarriage of justice. After
noting that it was unsupported by authority and would place an inordinate burden
on courts of criminal
appeal, their Honours said:
Moreover, such an approach would be contrary to the adversarial nature of our
legal system, which relies on an impartial judge as
arbiter of the issues and
which requires that the parties determine which issues will be put before a
court for decision.
Honours proceeded to explain the importance of respecting the tenets of an
adversarial system by reference to the institutional
role of the courts.
Acknowledging “the duty of trial judges and courts of criminal appeal to
take every step that they thought
was appropriate to protect the accused’s
interests at the trial or on appeal”, their Honours continued at [55]:
But it is quite a different matter to say that an appellate court has a duty to
examine the whole record and determine whether that
record contains error
requiring the quashing of the accused’s conviction notwithstanding that
the appellant has not relied
on an issue or on evidence. Courts of criminal
appeal would no longer be courts of appeal; they would be tribunals for the
review of criminal convictions. Their role would cease to be that of an
appellate court deciding issues selected by the Crown and
the accused. They
would necessarily become active parties in the proceedings; the members of an
appellate court would become judicial
ombudsmen whose function was to
investigate the records of criminal trials to determine whether convictions
should be set aside because
of some factual or legal error on the part of the
trial judge whether or not the appellant had raised the error. Inevitably, the
investigatory function of the “court” would break down the doctrine
of separation of powers and result in appellate courts
becoming part of the
executive branch of the State, as they effectively are in many jurisdictions
that reject the adversary system
of justice.
share the concerns expressed in those remarks. The constraints of an
adversarial system are an aspect of the institutional role
of the courts. As
submitted by the Director, while the judgment of McHugh and Hayne JJ in
was a dissenting judgment, and was not cited in
the principle echoed in
those reasons, I would have refused leave to rely on grounds 4(c) and 4(e) and
dismissed the appeal.
LOUKAS-KARLSSON J:
agree with Taylor J, for the reasons that her Honour has
Introduction
judgment of the Chief Justice sets out a comprehensive summary of the evidence
presented in the trial which I need not repeat
and for which I am grateful.
Subject to what follows with respect to ground 4(a) I otherwise agree with the
reasons and the conclusions
of McCallum CJ.
(a) challenged the jury’s verdict on the basis that it was unreasonable
and cannot be supported having regard to the
evidence. After a careful review of
the evidence, I entertained doubt about whether the evidence established beyond
reasonable doubt
that when the appellant was driving along Alfred Hill Drive and
Ms Jordan fell from his vehicle, she was on the bonnet. I also had
a doubt about
whether it was open to the jury to find beyond reasonable doubt, that the
appellant possessed the
for murder pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
namely, reckless indifference to death.
the Chief Justice records, it is well established that an appeal that contends a
verdict was unreasonable or cannot be supported
having regard to the evidence
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
268 CLR 123
... proceeds upon the assumption that the evidence of the complainant was
assessed by the jury to be credible and reliable. The court
examines the record
to see whether, notwithstanding that assessment – either by reason of
inconsistencies, discrepancies, or
other inadequacy; or in light of other
evidence – the court is satisfied that the jury, acting rationally, ought
nonetheless
to have entertained a reasonable doubt as to proof of guilt.
appellate court considering such a ground of appeal asks itself “whether
it thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it
was open to the jury to be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty”:
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
High Court in
The King v ZT
[2025] HCA 9
99 ALJR 676
v The Queen
at 493, observed:
In answering that question, the appellate court must not disregard or discount
either the consideration that the jury is the body
entrusted with the primary
responsibility of determining guilt or innocence or the consideration that the
jury has had the “benefit
of having seen and heard the witnesses”.
am mindful of the limitations of an appellate court and that it does “not
perform the same function in the same way as the
jury, or with the same
advantages that the jury brings to the discharge of its function”:
at [37]. The appellant function is not a retrial “on the
Cutter v The Queen
[1997] HCA 7; 71 ALJR 638 per Kirby J
at 649, see also
R v Baden-Clay
[2016] HCA 35
258 CLR 308
restraint required in service of that rule recognises not only the advantage of
the trier of fact but the disadvantage that
an appellate court faces in
comparison. The setting aside of a jury verdict on the basis that it is
unreasonable is a “serious
step” not to be taken without paying
regard to the particular advantage of the jury over a court of appeal:
was observed in
at [9] citing
Dansie v The Queen
[2022] HCA 25
274 CLR 651
with respect to the jury’s advantage, the nature and
scope of those advantages will “vary from case to case depending
form in which the evidence was adduced and the nature of the issues that arose
at the trial”.
those principles, after performing my own independent review of the sufficiency
and quality of the whole of the evidence,
the doubt that I had entertained with
respect to the presence of Ms Jordan on the bonnet of the vehicle, is a doubt
that I am satisfied
can be explained by the advantage of the jury in seeing and
hearing the evidence, which included a view of the scene where the incident
the reasonable doubt I have with respect to proof of reckless indifference on
the part of the appellant, which is necessary
to establish the offence of
murder, is not a doubt that I consider can be explained by the advantage of the
jury. In coming to that
conclusion, I have been careful not to merely substitute
my own assessment of the evidence for the assessment the jury was entitled
make. Noting my conclusion relates to the state of mind of the appellant, I have
heeded the caution of Kirby J in
at 649, where his Honour (citing
Knight v The Queen
[1992] HCA 56
175 CLR 495
at 511 in dissent),
observed, “[t]he conclusion, on the elusive matter of intention, may
emerge more forcefully from the impressions
derived during the trial than from
reading ‘the printed transcript of the evidence’”.
Notwithstanding
the wisdom of that caution I am certain that the doubt I have is not resolved by
the jury seeing and hearing the evidence
during the trial. Like Hamill J in
[2025] NSWCCA 85
I have concluded that “in
drawing inferences from the direct evidence, and deciding whether all inferences
consistent with
innocence have been excluded, the trial court has no discernible
advantage over this Court in considering the whole of the record
Coughlan v The Queen
[2020] HCA 15
the High Court observed that an acknowledgement of the
advantage of the jury with respect to seeing and hearing the witnesses in a
trial “did not relieve the appellate court of assessing the capacity of
their evidence, taken with the other circumstances
on which the prosecution
relied” to prove guilt (at [52], [55]) and concluded:
An assessment of the sufficiency of the evidence to support the verdict of guilt
in a circumstantial case such as this one requires
the appellate court to weigh
all the circumstances in deciding whether it was open to the jury to draw the
ultimate inference that
guilt has been proved to the criminal standard. That
inference will not be open if the prosecution has failed to exclude an inference
consistent with innocence that was reasonably open (Footnote omitted).
I do not disagree with the treatment by the Chief Justice of the ground of
appeal which asserted error with respect to the
trial judge’s redirection
on “probability” in light of the position adopted by the
appellant’s counsel, it
is uncontroversial to acknowledge that which
[2002] NSWCCA 243
; 131 A Crim R 523 affirmed at [33] (citing
Queen v Crabbe
[1985] HCA 22
(1985) 156 CLR 464
Royall v The Queen
(1991) 172 CLR
Boughey v The
(1986) 161 CLR 10)
namely, that the probability of death means a
likelihood which is a “substantial or real chance as distinct from a mere
possibility”.
conclusion I have drawn about proof of reckless indifference defers to the
findings of the jury with respect to the reliability
of the evidence of Ms X.
The evidence presented in the trial, detailed in the judgment of McCallum CJ and
upon which I have formed
my assessment can be summarised as follows:
(i) The appellant and Ms Jordan were involved in a tumultuous relationship. The
appellant attended Ms Jordan’s residence at
6 Coutts Place with the
intention of staying the night. In the early hours of the morning of her death
they argued about him leaving
her residence. The appellant did leave Ms
Jordan’s residence only to return and the argument continued.
(ii) Ms Jordan was a slightly-built woman. The appellant’s vehicle was a
utility vehicle.
(iii) As part of the conflict between them Ms Jordan got onto the
appellant’s vehicle and settled on the bonnet of the vehicle.
would not get off the vehicle.
(iv) In response to Ms Jordan’s refusal to get off the vehicle, the
appellant “inched” the vehicle up the incline
on Coutts Place. Ms X
stood in front of the vehicle after Ms Jordan told her do so. The appellant
“inched” it forward
up the hill while Ms X, still in front of the
vehicle, stepped back from it. As part of this process the vehicle engine
stopped and
restarted quickly near to the intersection of Coutts Place with
Alfred Hill Drive.
(v) The appellant then reversed the vehicle down the hill on Coutts Place coming
to a stop near Ms Jordan’s home; a distance
of around 57 metres. Ms Jordan
was still on the bonnet of the vehicle. Ms X remained where she had come to stop
after stepping back
as the vehicle inched forward.
(vi) After reversing the vehicle down Coutts Place the appellant drove the
vehicle “at speed” back up Coutts Place to
where Ms X was standing
and she jumped out of the way of the vehicle, fearing it would hit her.
Ms Jordan was on the bonnet of the
(vii) The appellant continued to drive and turned left onto Alfred Hill Drive.
Ms Jordan remained on the bonnet of the vehicle. Ms
X yelled out
“Michael!”.
(viii) The vehicle progressed along Alfred Hill Drive. Ms Jordan fell from the
vehicle at a point 209 metres from where Coutts Place
intersected with Alfred
Hill Drive. The vehicle made a “screech” sound.
(ix) Ms X was running behind the vehicle but did not see Ms Jordan fall from the
(x) The appellant got out of the vehicle and yelled words which included
“you dickhead”, “you fucking idiot”
and “why did
you do this to me?” immediately after Ms Jordan fell from the vehicle. The
appellant picked Ms Jordan up
from the road, placed her in the vehicle and
transported her to hospital.
(xi) The appellant later said to Ms X “I shouldn’t have done
a careful, independent review of the whole of the evidence and accepting the
reliability of the evidence of Ms X with respect
to the presence of Ms Jordan on
the bonnet of the vehicle, I am of the view that the jury, acting reasonably,
must have entertained
a reasonable doubt about the guilt of the appellant with
respect to murder. That is, they must have entertained a doubt about whether
appellant knew that the probable result of driving in the manner that he did,
with Ms Jordan on the bonnet, was her death and
knowing the likelihood of that
result, he went ahead and did the act regardless.
another way, I do not consider that the jury could have rejected, as a rational
inference, the possibility that the appellant
drove the vehicle with Ms Jordan
on the bonnet
knowing or realising that her death was
the outset I acknowledge that this element of the prosecution case was not
originally nor specifically raised by the appellant
as a part of appeal ground
4(a). Accordingly, I initially formed a view without the benefit of full
McCallum CJ sets out at [244]-[246], it became apparent that to finalise the
appeal it was necessary to seek further submissions
from the parties on the
issue and I have now had the benefit of comprehensive submissions. I have since
revised my judgment and in
doing so have incorporated the additional submissions
from the parties in my analysis.
had the benefit of submissions from the parties, I remain of the view that the
jury ought to have entertained a doubt with
respect to proof of reckless
indifference.
am mindful of the need to have regard to the conduct of the defence at trial and
the issues that consequently emerged. I agree with
McCallum CJ that the adequacy
of the evidence with respect to reckless indifference did not strictly fall
within a consideration
of appeal grounds 4(b)(i), 4b(iii) or 4(e).
addition to the ultimate conclusion as to ground 4(a), there are two matters
must address. First, whether
proof of reckless indifference was raised at trial. Secondly, whether it is open
to this Court to consider
it on appeal as part of the assessment of whether the
verdict was unreasonable.
Was proof of
reckless indifference an issue at trial?
In my view, notwithstanding that the conduct of the trial undoubtedly
concentrated on the presence of Ms Jordan on the bonnet of
the vehicle, proof of
reckless indifference was contested. Nor do I consider that the conduct of the
trial excluded a reasonable
hypothesis consistent with innocence such that this
Court is precluded from considering it: cf
the High Court, in determining that the appellate Court had
given effect to a hypothesis that was not open, observed at [54]:
The evidence given in the present case by the respondent narrowed the range of
hypotheses reasonably available upon the evidence
as to the circumstances of the
death of the respondent's wife. Not only did the respondent not give evidence
which might have raised
the hypothesis on which the Court of Appeal acted, the
evidence he gave was capable of excluding that hypothesis.
appellant did not give evidence. As is the case with matters where an accused
does not give direct evidence, or a believable version
of events, the jury were
left to infer the appellant’s state of mind from the facts proved in the
this instance neither the rejection of the appellant’s version of events
revealed in out of court statements, nor the conduct
of the trial, necessarily
excluded the reasonable hypothesis that in driving the vehicle with Ms Jordon on
the bonnet, he did not
know her death was probable. This was not a case where
the only evidence “which actually related” to the reasonable
came from the appellant, nor did the versions he gave contesting her
presence on the bonnet, exclude it. In rejecting the appellant’s
as to the presence of Ms Jordan on the bonnet, his state of mind was not
settled. The appellant’s state of mind when
driving the vehicle with Ms
Jordan on the bonnet and the circumstances that bore upon it, remained necessary
to determine.
the High Court additionally observed at [59] that a
“difficulty” with the approach of the appellate court was that the
hypothesis on which they relied “was never put to the jury by the
respondent's counsel, either directly or indirectly. The
hypothesis was
contrary to, and excluded by, the case that the respondent put to the
is not the situation that this Court faces.
approach of senior counsel for the appellant at trial focused on persuading the
jury that the evidence did not establish beyond
reasonable doubt that
Ms Jordan was on the bonnet of the appellant’s vehicle, at the very
least when he turned left from Coutts
Place onto Alfred Hill Drive. This
approach was one which raised the prospect of an acquittal on the offence of
murder and on the
alternative offence of manslaughter.
is unsurprising in those circumstances that the closing address to the jury for
the appellant primarily pursued that outcome. Notwithstanding
that approach,
there was no concession explicit or implied, that if the prosecution proved
beyond reasonable doubt that Ms Jordan
was on the bonnet of the
appellant’s vehicle, it followed that reckless indifference had been
established.
conduct of the appellant’s defence at trial was not “all or
nothing”. Whilst senior counsel made clear to the
jury that there was a
critical issue as to the presence of Ms Jordan on the bonnet, it was also clear
that there was a contest as
to the capacity for the evidence to establish
reckless indifference. Indeed, a consideration of reckless indifference only
necessary if the jury found that Ms Jordan was on the bonnet of the
vehicle when she fell from it. Senior counsel, whilst careful
“embrace” the alternative proposition, did not ignore the
significance of reckless indifference on the evidence.
conduct relied upon for the offence of murder was the same conduct for the
alternative offence of manslaughter. The case for manslaughter
was put as the
“unlawful and dangerous act” of the appellant driving with Ms Jordan
on the bonnet of the vehicle intending
to dislodge her. The same conduct,
accompanied by a realisation by the appellant that her death was probable, was
the case for murder.
The mental element then was the critical distinguishing
feature between the two offences.
resolution of the contest with respect to whether Ms Jordan was on the bonnet
alone did not answer the question as to which of
the offences had been proved on
the prosecution case. A finding that Ms Jordan was on the bonnet of the vehicle
when she fell from
it required the jury to go on and determine what mental state
the appellant had when he drove the vehicle in those circumstances.
The approach
of senior counsel for the appellant was entirely consistent with that
for the appellant made the following closing submission to the jury:
I remind you Smorhun also gave evidence that, had the car accelerated from the
– at full capacity from the time that it left
the CCTV footage, it could
have got up to 100 kilometres an hour. That was his evidence. And I have already
put to you – take
that back to the corner of Coutts Place, and he comes
around at speed which you can see – if he had, you could see he
because you’ve seen it on the CCTV, but if he had been trying
to dislodge Danielle Jordan from the bonnet in some kind of rage,
which is what
it seems to be suggested, he could have been going a lot more than 100
kilometres by the time he reached the corner
of Cade Place [sic]. So you have to
really bear that in mind, as I said to you, that’s really the Crown case
on murderous intent.
It’s a very strange murderous intent, you may think.
on toward the end of his closing address counsel further submitted to the jury:
I want to close this closing address just by dealing with the issue of reckless
indifference. Essentially this is a murder trial.
Essentially, the mental state
if you like – what the lawyers call mens rea – is the reckless
indifference. And again,
her Honour will of course give you clear directions
that's the case, then it's not guilty on both charges.
I don't want to weaken
that submission by referring to other possible scenarios, because they're not
borne out, in our submission,
on the evidence. But I will say this: I submit
that on the evidence – the evidence doesn't on any view support Michael
having a reckless indifferent state of mind. He was trying patiently
you may think to leave, Danielle was trying to stop him. He
didn't rush off, he
waited. You might think he waited until he thought she was finally off the car.
I have already referred to the
anger turning immediately to shock and despair
when he realised that Danielle had fallen off the car. He cradled her tenderly
a baby and rushed her to hospital. He was distraught. And just to
illustrate that – you may have forgotten this piece of evidence,
remind you of one of Danielle’s relatives who gave pre-trial evidence and
that is Ashley Crump, and I will just acquaint
you with that evidence again. So,
Mr Crump was I think a half brother to Danielle and had been brought into the
hospital and it was
all pretty terrible, but this is what Mr Crump said:
So certainly in the time that you observed Michael’s interactions with
Danielle he was clearly distraught? ---That is correct.
And he was very emotional? ---Very much so.
Now, I think he actually addressed Danielle directly whilst speaking to her
saying things like, ‘Danielle, you’re beautiful’?
---Yes, some
– I can’t remember the exact words but they were along those lines,
And so, this is when they’re all in with Danielle in hospital in those
terrible circumstances. So that is relevant to this
case when the Crown puts a
case of reckless indifference to the life of Danielle. And in that regard, as I
have already said to you,
there is nothing to indicate this driving is furious.
There is no swerving, there is no accelerations, there is no braking that is
relied upon by the Crown. Michael was just driving and none of that supports the
notion that he was recklessly indifferent to her.
Indeed, you have heard many
times in his evidence his profession of love to her, which was a love that she
certainly returned on
the evidence.
Director’s submission that “as a practical matter, the jury were
presented a very narrow issue to resolve, being whether
they could be satisfied
beyond a reasonable doubt Ms Jordan was on the bonnet and the case largely, if
not exclusively, rose and
fell on this critical issue” does not grapple
with the way manslaughter and murder were put to the jury. As I have observed,
finding of guilt for
did not follow from the resolution of the
contest about Ms Jordan’s presence on the bonnet. The presence of Ms
Jordan on the
bonnet was the necessary pathway to a finding of guilt on either
offence. Once satisfied of that fact, the outcome as between the
alternative
offences “rose and fell” on the state of mind of the appellant.
with her obligation to identify the real issues and with the conduct of the
defence, the trial judge identified in her
directions to the jury that reckless
indifference was an element about which they would need to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt
to find the appellant guilty of the offence of murder. The two
questions asked by the jury which sought clarification about reckless
indifference, demonstrated some understanding that there was a contest, even if
Ms Jordan was on the bonnet of the vehicle when she
fell from it, about whether
the appellant was recklessly indifferent.
trial judge made plain that the difference between the case for murder and the
case for manslaughter was the difference between
the appellant driving with Ms
Jordan on the bonnet of the vehicle knowing that her death was
and a determination by him to drive regardless (murder) and the appellant
driving with Ms Jordan on the bonnet with the intention
of dislodging her from
the vehicle (manslaughter). There was no suggestion in the directions to the
jury or the answers given to
their questions that the case for murder
“rose and fell” entirely on the resolution of whether Ms Jordan was
on the bonnet
when she fell from the vehicle.
Respectfully,
I do not consider that the conduct of the trial in this instance and the view I
have formed relies on ‘speculation’
or a hypothesised factual
scenario excluded by the case the appellant put to the jury. A rejection of the
versions given by the appellant
as to the presence of Ms Jordan on the bonnet
did not inevitably lead to a finding that he was recklessly indifferent. The
was conducted accordingly.
reckless indifference was not identified as a specific issue for consideration
under ground 4(a), the inclusion of grounds
of appeal which did require
consideration of reckless indifference confirms my view that it was an issue
directly raised in the trial.
Should this
Court consider reckless indifference as part of appeal ground (a) if it was open
to the jury to find that Ms Jordan was
on the bonnet of the appellant’s
vehicle when she fell from it?
her further submissions, the Director contended that a move by this Court to
consider the issue as part of ground 4(a), it not
having been specifically
raised under this ground, contravened the principles articulated in
said to echo the remarks of McHugh and Hayne JJ who were in the minority in
Gipp v The Queen
[1998] HCA 21; 194 CLR 106.
appellant submitted that whilst proof of reckless indifference was not
originally a specific issue under ground 4(a), it was “inextricably”
part of the unreasonable verdict ground in circumstances where the focus of the
ground was the establishment of the act relied on
for the “conduct element
of the offence”
by inference to establish “the
for the offence of murder”.
have reflected on the careful analysis of the Chief Justice and the concern
expressed as to this Court’s capacity to consider
whether it was open to
the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to reckless indifference. Of
course, I do not cavil with
the principles which guide this Court’s role
in approaching the function required by
M v The Queen
, acknowledging the
adversarial nature of the trial and the appeal. This Court “does not
determine the grounds of appeal by
simply reconsidering the parties' respective
cases at the trial” (
at [11]) nor is it “obliged to
‘trawl through’ the record to identify errors of law or of procedure
no specific complaint was made” (per Kirby J in
agree with the conclusions of the Chief Justice on the grounds of appeal which
alleged specific error with respect to the conduct
of the trial and the
treatment of reckless indifference. That said, I have concluded that a
consideration of it under ground (a)
in circumstances where the resolution of
the critical factual dispute was necessary for a finding of guilt on both
offences and did
not inevitably lead to a finding of guilt for murder, does not
fall foul of the principles affirmed in
Director also drew on the analysis of Kirby J in
, said to endorse
the sentiment of McHugh and Hayne JJ, when his Honour observed at [130] the
necessity for an appellate court to
“rely on the parties’ legal
representative to raise the points that may reasonably and properly
argued”. In so
observing, his Honour stated:
Furthermore, where a challenge is raised to a verdict having regard to the
evidence, courts of criminal appeal are required by authority
to undertake an
independent assessment of the evidence in order to determine whether it was open
to the jury to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the
accused. These principles do not mean that such courts are obliged to accept
belated "second
round" points of objection, conceived for the first time in an
appeal, sometimes by new counsel, possibly overlooking tactical decisions
at the trial which might explain the failure to press the points earlier.
in the context of the circumstances in
Kirby J also concluded at
[136] that “the Court is not obliged to ignore a manifest miscarriage of
justice demonstrated to
it simply because the grounds to demonstrate it were not
earlier raised”, I nevertheless acknowledge that the limitation Kirby
expressed as to the nature of the appellate task enunciated in
consistent with the minority remarks in
, founds the concern the
Chief Justice has as to the position I am to entertain.
are three matters I observe in response to that concern. First, if in light of
the questions asked by this Court seeking further
submissions from the parties,
the appellant had sought to amend his grounds of appeal to include reckless
indifference as a specific
issue under ground 4(a), I would have granted leave
to do so and allowed the appeal: see similarly Gaudron J in
Secondly, the treatment of reckless indifference was raised in the appeal albeit
under specific grounds alleging error in
the trial. Finally, and perhaps most
significantly, the focus of the unreasonable verdict ground being the factual
foundation necessary
for a finding of guilt for both offences, in my view
necessarily and properly raises for this Court’s consideration whether,
having concluded that Ms Jordan was on the bonnet of the vehicle when she fell
from it, it was open to the jury to find the appellant
guilty of murder.
another way, I do not consider reckless indifference to be a “second
round” point on the appeal. It was raised as
an issue for this Court to
consider under other grounds of appeal and in coming to consider whether the
verdict was unreasonable
it is, as the appellant submitted,
“inextricably” bound up in an assessment of the factual dispute
around which the ground
was framed.
determined that the issue was contested at trial and that my approach does not
contravene the principles which guide this Court’s
role, it follows that I
do not consider that this Court is precluded from considering reckless
indifference under ground (a).
Was it open to
the jury to find that the appellant was recklessly indifferent when he drove his
vehicle with Ms Jordan on the bonnet?
the following reasons I have concluded that it was not open to the jury to find
that the appellant was recklessly indifferent
when he drove with Ms Jordan on
the bonnet of his vehicle.
was not enough that a reasonable or ordinary person would have foreseen the
probability of death in the circumstances faced by
the appellant. It was not
enough that the appellant foresaw any harm, or even very serious harm, or that
he realised death was
and went ahead anyway. Proof of murder
based on reckless indifference required proof beyond reasonable doubt of a state
the part of the appellant that involved
, a realisation
that death would probably occur and
, a decision to engage in the
act of driving with Ms Jordan on the bonnet regardless of his realisation of
that likelihood.
was to be distinguished from proof of the alternative offence of manslaughter
which did not require the prosecution to establish
any specific intention on the
appellant’s part to bring about an outcome beyond an intention to dislodge
Ms Jordan from her
position on the vehicle – a perhaps fine but necessary
distinction. As was observed in
with respect to manslaughter on the
basis of unlawful and dangerous act at [38]:
... the Crown does not have to prove that the act or omission was done (or
omitted) with any specific intent, or that the
appreciated or foresee [sic] that the act
(or omission) was a dangerous one. The test of dangerousness in this regard, is
an objective
one, the relevant question being whether a reasonable person, in
the position of the accused, would have realised that, by his or
her act (or
omission), the deceased was being exposed to an appreciable risk of really
serious injury:
Wilson v The
[1992] HCA 31
(1992) 174 CLR 313.
was a matter where the appellant’s state of mind with respect to his
knowledge of the probability of death occurring, and
a determination to
disregard that likelihood, had to be inferred from the evidence. The finding of
guilt relied upon inferential
reasoning as to his realisation of the probability
of death and his determination to proceed regardless. As the trial judge
the jury were presented with a circumstantial case that included
direct evidence. Accordingly, the prosecution relied on the drawing
inferences to prove the guilt of the appellant beyond reasonable doubt.
nature and manner of the appellant’s driving as well as his conduct
immediately before and after the event of Ms Jordan
falling from the vehicle
were all matters capable of influencing the drawing of an inference with respect
to his state of mind. The
inference necessary for the jury to draw about the
appellant’s state of mind, as the trial judge directed, must be the only
reasonably possible inference in the circumstances established on the evidence.
my opinion, having deferred to the jury on the question of Ms Jordan’s
position on the vehicle, it was not open to them to
be satisfied that all
inferences consistent with innocence had been excluded on the evidence.
coming to that conclusion, I have considered the following matters.
the admission relied upon by the prosecution, “I shouldn’t have done
it”, was neutral with respect to proof
of the state of mind necessary to
establish reckless indifference for murder. The presence of Ms Jordan on the
bonnet of the vehicle
was a finding necessary for murder and for manslaughter.
“I shouldn’t have done it” does not admit of any matter
might distinguish between the two different mental elements. In addition, I
observe that the prosecution did not rely on any
lies contained in the
appellant’s versions of the incident as evidence of a consciousness of
guilt nor on the admission as
to the establishment of reckless indifference.
the nature and manner of the driving. Whilst the appellant’s driving was
consistently characterised as “at speed”,
it was not the case that
the appellant was alleged to have been travelling at a speed above any
applicable speed limit. The prosecutor
submitted to the jury:
...there were various speeds posited between 30, 40, 50, 60 I won’t take
you in painful detail through it. What I simply say
to you is as you go about
assessing the evidence, take all the assumptions in favour of the accused and
what you still reach is a
point where that vehicle was going fast. Fast in the
sense of Ms Jordan is positioned precariously on the bonnet.
“at speed” and “fast” description served to highlight
that the prosecution case was that the vehicle was
moving at a speed faster than
“slow” and was not stationary when Ms Jordan fell from it.
Professor Duflou’s evidence
supported that the vehicle was moving and not
“slowly” when Ms Jordan fell from it. So too the evidence of Ms X.
evidence as to the speed of the vehicle as it drove toward her on Coutts
Place was that it was “so fast” after the appellant
foot down all the way on the pedal”. Of course, Ms X, positioned as she
was outside the vehicle, could not have
known whether the appellant did apply
the accelerator “all the way” and her evidence as to speed was her
impression of
it as the vehicle travelled toward and past her.
evidence of Professor Duflou and Ms X sat alongside that of
Leading Senior Constable Smorhun who was the
prosecution expert witness with respect to the speed of the vehicle. Leading
Senior Constable
Smorhun made a number of significant concessions in
cross-examination.
his evidence in chief Leading Senior Constable Smorhun told the jury that the
speed of the vehicle when it passed through the field
of view captured by the
CCTV camera was 42.5 kilometres per hour and that the vehicle continued to
accelerate as it moved out of
the frame of the CCTV camera “up until the
point that it starts the emergency brake”. His evidence was that at the
the brakes were applied the vehicle was travelling at 63.1 kilometres per
hour “rounded down” to 63 kilometres per hour.
cross-examination
Leading Senior Constable Smorhun
conceded that discrepancies in the CCTV images left a margin of error because
the images were possibly
a “metre or two out” in terms of plotting
where the vehicle was from the time markings recorded on the CCTV footage.
officer accepted that these discrepancies would affect the calculations that he
made with respect to the speed of the vehicle.
officer also conceded that when he calculated the speed of the appellant’s
vehicle on the night, from the speed of the police
vehicle that he drove along
the route travelled by the appellant’s vehicle, there was a margin of
error of three kilometres
officer also conceded that the accuracy of speed calculations for speed under
100 kilometres per hour was plus or minus two kilometres
per hour. The overall
effect of which was a margin of error of at least five kilometres per hour. The
officer conceded that the effect
upon his calculations of the margins of error
was that where he calculated speeds of 40 and 45 kilometres per hour, the actual
of the appellant’s vehicle could have been 35 to 40 kilometres per
hour or less.
Senior Constable Smorhun also agreed in cross examination that the speed of the
vehicle was indicative of “modest acceleration”
and that the noise
of the vehicle that he identified as indicative of acceleration was not
indicative of “heavy or rapid acceleration”.
He agreed that the
vehicle could have accelerated at a much quicker rate than he calculated it to
have increased in speed and that
by the time the vehicle came to brake it was
capable of having reached speeds “close” to a hundred kilometres per
He also agreed that his initial calculation that the vehicle was
travelling at 63 kilometres per hour at the point of braking could
have been as
low as 51.5 kilometres per hour.
light of the concessions made by the prosecution expert it was not open to the
jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
the appellant was driving 63
kilometres per hour when the brakes were applied after Ms Jordan fell from the
take an example of the effect of Leading Senior Constable Smorhun’s
evidence on the calculation of the vehicle’s speed,
applying the margin of
error he conceded, or put another way, making the assumption “in favour of
the accused”, reduced
the speed of the vehicle from 42.5 kilometres per
hour as it passed through the view of the CCTV camera, to 37.5 kilometres per
speed of the vehicle was a significant feature of the prosecution case because
of the absence of other features of the appellant’s
driving which
supported an inference as to his intention to dislodge Ms Jordan (for the
offence of manslaughter) or his advertence
to the probability necessary to
attribute to him (for the offence of murder) for example swerving or otherwise
driving erratically.
The prosecution case did not rely at all on the appellant
applying the brakes of the vehicle as the act demonstrating an intention
dislodge Ms Jordan from the bonnet or as an act reflective of reckless
indifference.
closing submission by the prosecutor that there was no “material”
difference between the vehicle travelling at 45
kilometres per hour and
travelling at 63 kilometres per hour glossed over the significance of speed to
the prosecution case. The
significance of the speed of the vehicle required
careful consideration to determine what the evidence could establish with
to the speed of the vehicle and further, what the speed of the vehicle
revealed, if anything, about the appellant’s state of
mind. In the
circumstances of this case the “painful detail” as to what the
evidence demonstrated in relation to speed
was critical to an assessment of the
state of mind of the appellant and to proof of reckless indifference.
evidence with respect to the speed of the vehicle also fell to be assessed
alongside the CCTV footage which captured the appellant
driving the vehicle. The
CCTV footage, whilst too poor in quality to allow any unequivocal conclusion as
to Ms Jordan’s position
on the vehicle as the Chief Justice observed,
nonetheless gave an indication of the speed at which the vehicle was travelling.
the CCTV footage the vehicle can be observed travelling at a pace that was
not crawling along or very slow. Nor could it be observed
to be travelling
manner of driving could also be observed in the CCTV footage. The vehicle
maintained a straight course for the period it could
be observed in the field of
vision immediately in front of the CCTV camera along Alfred Hill Drive. There
was nothing remarkable
or erratic about the manner of driving. Any sounds made
by the vehicle’s engine fell to be assessed alongside the evidence
respect to the speed and what could be observed on the CCTV footage as to the
manner of driving. To the extent that the CCTV
footage captured the vehicle
turning left onto Alfred Hill Drive it did not demonstrate a dramatic escalation
in the speed of the
vehicle or in the manner of driving such that it appeared
uncontrolled, erratic or more intense as to the risk it presented. This
case for the entire period that the vehicle could be observed on the CCTV
as the prosecutor did in his closing address to the jury, the Director described
the position of Ms Jordan on the bonnet
of the vehicle as
“precarious”. It is important to recall what the evidence
established. Ms X described Ms Jordan’s
position on the bonnet as her
sitting crossed legged on it and indicated that she was holding onto the
“lip” of the bonnet,
just below the windscreen wipers. It was a
position, on Ms X’s version, that Ms Jordan was able to maintain
while the appellant
“inched” the vehicle toward Ms X up Coutts
Place, reversed it back down to Ms Jordan’s house and drove it back
Coutts Place “at speed” until the vehicle turned left onto Alfred
Hill Drive. Ms Jordan fell from the bonnet of the
vehicle some 200 metres after
the vehicle made the turn on Alfred Hill Drive. It was not a position that could
be characterised as
a “safe” one on a moving vehicle, but it was a
position that Ms Jordan was able to maintain for a period while the vehicle
moving including, on the prosecution case, as it turned a corner.
the Director contended that “[a]s a matter common sense, a person on the
bonnet of a moving vehicle presents a high
risk of probable death”. The
appellant pointed out that for the appellant to be aware of the probability of
must be the case that driving with the deceased on the bonnet at
a speed between 35 and 40 km/hr would in probability result in the
death of the
deceased. (That is, for the appellant to be aware that something is probable, it
must in fact be probable)”.
the act presented a “high” risk of probable death or a risk of
probable death is a matter that seems to me to
be dependent on the circumstances
in which it occurred. That probability is to be distinguished from a
characterisation of the act
as one which carried inherent risk. The risk
involved may not always include death. By reference to the nature, extent and
of the injury suffered by Ms Jordan, Professor Duflou excluded the
possibility that the appellant’s vehicle was “stationary
at most one to two kilometres an hour” explaining that “skull
fracturing was more severe than expected from
a fall from a stationary
vehicle”. The available inference being that the speed of a vehicle when a
person was travelling on
the outside of it was a factor which could affect the
severity of harm that might be suffered.
was evidence about the make and model of the vehicle the appellant was driving
and there were photographs of the vehicle before
the jury. There was some
evidence about the capacity for crime scene investigator Trebilcock, who was 163
centimetres tall, to reach
parts of the sports bar when standing on the ground.
CSI Trebilcock gave evidence about the dimensions of the vehicle.
Duflou’s evidence was that Ms Jordan suffered a “severe head injury
as a result of falling backwards with an
impact point of the back of the
head”. He explained this kind of injury is referred to as a
“contrecoup head injury”
and can be caused by a fall “from
one’s own height”. Professor Duflou characterised Ms Jordan’s
head injury
as an “accelerated” injury and said that a fall which
was “accelerated” in some way could be expected to
cause “more
severe injury”. He explained that in a fall from “a good ... height,
you tend not to get contrecoup
head injury. It appears to be that rotational
movement backwards that is the important one.” The effect of his evidence
that acceleration could cause the “rotational movement
backwards”. Professor Duflou said that a fall from a “moving”
vehicle involved “additional forces” because the fall is
“faster” and “probably at a high position
that [sic] just
standing... at ground level and when you add those together... you get greater
forces. There’s greater acceleration,
probably technically deceleration at
the time of impact and you get more severe injury”.
objection the prosecutor then put several ‘scenarios’ to Professor
Duflou which involved Ms Jordan falling from
various points on the vehicle while
it was moving “at some speed” and “at a reasonable
speed”. It is in this
context that Professor Duflou expressed the view
that Ms Jordan’s injury was inconsistent with a fall from a vehicle that
moving only 1 or 2 kilometres per hour. Professor Duflou was then asked
whether any one of the other scenarios which
involve acceleration
were “more or less likely” to cause the injury such as the one Ms
Jordan suffered. He responded,
“I don’t know. In all cases you could
certainly get that amount of injury”.
the references in his evidence to height and speed as factors that could
influence the nature and the extent of an injury,
Professor Duflou was not asked
to consider the probability of fatal injury by reference to the actual height of
the bonnet of the
appellant’s vehicle (which the evidence demonstrated was
97 centimetres from the ground) and the speed of the vehicle upon
prosecution relied.
was no other evidence adduced by the prosecution as to the factors which might
influence the risk or severity of harm that might
arise when a person falls from
the bonnet or any other position on a vehicle while it is moving.
being a probability, “high” or otherwise, of death in the
circumstances was a matter to be proved on the evidence.
probability
death could not be said to be present on every occasion a person is present on
the bonnet or elsewhere on the outside of a moving
vehicle. The presence of
slightly built Ms Jordon on the bonnet of the utility vehicle and the fact that
it was moving did not evidence
a probability or a “high” probability
of death, nor the appellant’s advertence to it.
the conflict between the appellant and Ms Jordan was undoubtedly part of the
circumstances in which the appellant drove
the vehicle with Ms Jordan on the
bonnet. But the appellant’s desire to leave the scene, having
“inched” up, reversed
down and driven back up Coutts Place, could
not be conflated with a realisation that in driving with Ms Jordan on the
bonnet, the
result would probably be her death. The fact of the
appellant’s frustration and anger at Ms Jordan’s attempt to thwart
his departure was no substitute for the specific state of mind that the
prosecution was required to establish.
is important to recall that the appellant’s anger was described at
different points of the conflict. The Director highlighted
that Ms X said the
appellant pushed Ms Jordan’s head into a bed and dragged her down the
hallway. This conduct occurred, Ms
X said, at around 2:00am when the appellant
and Ms Jordan were arguing over the appellant’s shirt and the appellant
her down the hallway, like, by, like him holding the shirt and
her holding the shirt”. After this interaction the appellant
residence and Ms Jordan and Ms X went to bed.
X said that the appellant returned to the residence at 4:00am and the conflict
between he and Ms Jordan recommenced and he attempted
to again leave. Ms X said
she told Ms Jordan to get off the vehicle and the appellant to “calm
down”. In response the
appellant got out of the vehicle and “went
down the street”. Ms X said she followed the appellant because Ms Jordan
her to “chase him”. Ms X said she asked the appellant if he was
going to just leave his vehicle and he responded “yeah”.
she “ran back up” and Ms Jordan “dived” in the window of
the vehicle to find her vape. It was at
this point Ms X said that the appellant
dragged Ms Jordan out of the vehicle, got into it and began to drive while she
and Ms Jodan
were both on the bonnet.
point to make is that the appellant’s anger and the conduct reflecting it,
varied over the hours of the conflict. The conduct
in pushing Ms Jordan on the
bed and dragging her down the hallway as they each pulled on the same shirt
occurred hours prior to the
driving with her on the bonnet of his vehicle. On Ms
X’s version immediately prior to getting into his vehicle the appellant
had determined to leave the scene without it, until Ms Jordan instructed Ms X to
chase after him. The interaction at 2:00am, after
which the appellant departed,
could not substantially inform his state of mind on the mental element necessary
for the prosecution
to establish when he drove the vehicle with Ms Jordan on the
bonnet hours later.
was one thing for the appellant to drive with Ms Jordan on the bonnet, angry at
her conduct and her refusal to get off the bonnet,
it was another thing for him
to drive intending to dislodge her. Neither his anger nor that intention alone
fulfilled the necessary
mental element for murder based on reckless
indifference. The “slow” (on Ms X’s version) inching up and
then reversing
back before stopping reflected some desire to provide opportunity
for Ms Jordan to get off the bonnet. The acceleration back up Coutts
movement around the corner onto Alfred Hill Drive, given the speed the evidence
revealed the vehicle achieved as it moved
through the CCTV footage, was not a
dramatic or aggressive escalation of the appellant’s driving, bearing in
mind the evidence
as to the speed the vehicle could have achieved over that
distance. The Director submitted that the appellant’s anger culminated
his acceleration up Coutts Place and the only inference from that conduct was a
realisation of the probable consequences and a
preparedness to nonetheless
“ignore the consequences in order to leave the area”.
Director’s submission demonstrated the risk of substituting the
appellant’s anger with the state of mind for murder
in the circumstances
of this case. The consequence of his intention to dislodge Ms Jordan from the
vehicle was the same tragic consequence
of knowing that her death would probably
result if he continued to drive. Whilst the outcome of the conduct was the
same, it was
necessary to distinguish the appellant’s state of mind. A
preparedness to “ignore” the consequence because of anger
necessarily, or only, admit of a realisation of probable death. Consistent with
that observation the prosecutor, in summarising
for the jury the factors relied
upon in support of reckless indifference, did not draw upon or even refer to the
anger of the appellant.
The appellant’s anger was invoked by the
prosecutor in his closing address
as a factor relevant to proof of
the appellant’s intention with respect to the alternative offence of
manslaughter.
the appellant’s conduct in the immediate aftermath of Ms Jordan falling
from the vehicle in my view was at odds with
a state of mind where he had just
engaged in an act, knowing that it would probably cause her death.
expressions, tone and reaction of the appellant, captured in part by the CCTV
footage, were not compatible with him having already
realised that the probable
result of his driving with Ms Jordan on the bonnet was her death. That the
appellant immediately stopped
the vehicle upon realising that Ms Jordan had
fallen from it and attended to her, was difficult to reconcile with an actual
realisation
on his part, that as a result of his driving such an event would
probably occur and a determination by him to go ahead nonetheless.
The surprise
that can be heard in the appellant’s tone and his immediate response, was
contrary to him having just brought
the versions given by the appellant as I have already recorded did not exclude a
hypothesis consistent with innocence: cf
at [56]. In rejecting
the appellant’s version on the critical question of Ms Jordan’s
presence on the bonnet, there remained
a hypothesis consistent with innocence
that had to be excluded. In my view, it was not. It was not a hypothesis that
was fanciful,
impossible or merely theoretical.
the whole of the evidence that was accepted by the jury, in my opinion, the
reasonable inference that when the appellant drove
the vehicle with Ms Jordan on
the bonnet, he did not know or realise that her death was
was not excluded. It follows that it was not open to the jury to be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the appellant’s guilt
with respect to
the offence of murder.
would allow the appeal, set aside the verdict of guilty of murder and the
sentence imposed by Baker J on 7 February 2024, order
a verdict of not guilty of
murder and reserve the question of whether another verdict should be
I certify that the preceding three hundred and forty-six [346] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
the Court of
Date: 27 June 2025
RTF format (1.03 MB)
Signed PDF/A format