Law Society v Ford (No 3) [2025] ACTSCFC 1 (27 March 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Law Society v Ford (No 3)
[2025] ACTSCFC 1
Hearing Date:
Decided on the papers
Decision Date:
Mossop and McWilliam JJ, Ainslie-Wallace AJ
(1) The defendant is to pay the plaintiff’s costs of the
proceedings.
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– COSTS – Where defendant struck
off roll of solicitors – where plaintiff wholly successful in the
proceedings
– where plaintiff had made settlement offers – where
defendant sought not to pay plaintiff’s costs – where
pointed to range of factors in the history of this and other proceedings –
defendant’s submissions contained
arguments that either were scandalous,
attempted to relitigate resolved matters, had no proven foundation, or indicated
lack of understanding
of judicial process – plaintiff’s choice of
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– COSTS – Where arguments raised
to depart from the usual rule as to costs – argument as to appropriateness
plaintiff’s choice of forum, namely the ACAT, where plaintiff could
have commenced proceedings in Supreme Court – argument
defendant’s own impecuniosity – argument that costs in past related
proceedings encompass all or much of subsequent
proceedings – arguments
Legislation Cited:
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), r 1721
Legal Profession Act 2006
Cases Cited:
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Giles
[2020] ACTSCFC 2
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR
Law Society (ACT) v Bangura
[2024] ACTSCFC 1
Law Society of the ACT v Stubbs
[2017] ACTSCFC 3
Law Society
v Ford (No 2)
[2024] ACTSCFC 2
Northern Territory v Sangare
265 CLR 164
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
Oshlack v Richmond River Shire Council
(1994) 82 LGERA
The Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Lester
[2022] ACTSCFC
The Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v
[2020] ACTSCFC 3
The Council of the Law Society of the
Australian Capital Territory v Hoyle (No 2)
[2020] ACTSCFC 4
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Davey
[2019] ACTSCFC 2
14 ACTLR 159
Wu v Wu (No 3)
[2024] ACTCA 35
The Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
(Plaintiff)
Hugh Russell Ford (Defendant)
Representation:
DA Moujalli (Plaintiff)
Self-represented (Defendant)
Thomson Geer (Plaintiff)
Self-represented (Defendant)
File Number:
SC 10 of 2024
Introduction
reasons relate to the determination of the question of costs after the Full
Court of the Supreme Court ordered that the defendant,
Hugh Russell Ford, be
removed from the roll of legal practitioners kept under
Legal Profession Act 2006
Law Society v Ford (No 2)
Ford (No 2)
Evidence and submissions
plaintiff relied upon an affidavit of Samuel Harper dated 31 January 2025 which
outlined some of the correspondence between the
parties and, in particular, the
offers made by the plaintiff to resolve the matter in a way that minimised the
legal costs required
to be incurred.
plaintiff’s submissions outlined the applicable principles and provided
examples of cases in which a Full Court had made
costs orders. The essential
submission put on behalf of the plaintiff was that it was wholly successful in
the proceedings and had
made appropriate offers in an attempt to reach an
agreement with the defendant in order to minimise the cost and court time
to resolve the proceedings. In those circumstances, the plaintiff
submitted that — consistent with the principles outlined
by the Court of
Wu v Wu (No 3)
[2024] ACTCA 35
— it should be compensated
for the liability that it has incurred in prosecuting the originating
application and addressing
the defendant’s application in relation to
submissions of the defendant took as their starting point the judgment of
Oshlack v Richmond River Shire Council
(1994) 82 LGERA
(wrongly attributed by the plaintiff to a “Judge Preistly”), in
which his Honour emphasised that the general discretion
in relation to costs was
developed in an era of private litigation and that there was a need to
distinguish such litigation from
applications to enforce public law obligations.
The defendant submitted that the majority of the High Court in
Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
this approach.
that background, the defendant then submitted that, while the discretion in
r 1721 of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) is unfettered, the
principles surrounding its application had become so hardened that they
“look like rules of law”.
The defendant also stated that he
“claims that he has at all times been acting in the public
interest”. There are a number
of reasons articulated for this
contention:
(a) the conduct of the Law Society in this matter, “and many other
matters”, was unlawful;
(b) there was no legal authority for Mr Reis, the former Director of
Professional Standards at the Law Society, to conduct investigations;
(c) most of the defendant’s clients as a migration lawyer were pro bono;
(d) “In most cases the detention and removal of refugees is unlawful. Many
refugees have died because of the unlawful conduct
of the Australian
government.”
are then a series of submissions put under different headings. They may be
summarised as follows:
(a) “Punishment of the Defendant”
: The defendant submitted
that the only reason that the plaintiff commenced proceedings in the ACAT was to
obtain costs, and that
the “entire ACAT proceedings was an abuse of
process” seeking to punish the defendant.
(b) “Disentitling conduct”
: The defendant made a number of
allegations of disentitling conduct.
(i) First, he alleged bullying and harassment by the former Director of
Professional Standards at the Law Society, Mr Reis, as well
as bullying and
harassment by the solicitor acting for the plaintiff.
(ii) Second, he alleged that proceedings ought to have been commenced in the
Supreme Court’s inherent jurisdiction, and that
the proceedings were
commenced in the ACAT in order to occasion unnecessary expense.
(iii) Third, he alleged that the plaintiff did not comply with court orders, but
said he did not have space to substantiate the claim.
(iv) Fourth, he alleged that the decision by the plaintiff not to rely upon the
affidavit of Mr Reis, and hence not make him available
cross‑examination, was “highly improper”.
(c) “Lack of Financial Resources”:
The defendant submitted
that he has been denied an income for approximately seven years and has already
paid $40,000 in costs to
the plaintiff.
(d) “Good Faith Efforts”:
The defendant asserted that, at all
times, he has been “acting in good faith” and has “never
benefitted from any
of these matters”.
(e) “Other Jurisdictions”
: The defendant submitted:
“The only jurisdiction which claims exorbitant costs is the ACT. The cost
of such a matter in another
State or Territory would be approximately
(f) “The Defendant has Already Paid Costs”
: The defendant
submitted that in previous related proceedings, he had been ordered to pay the
Law Society $40,000, and that the plaintiff
did not incur any additional costs
in bringing the current proceedings in the ACAT, the Appeal Tribunal of the
ACAT, or the Supreme
Court. Therefore, he submitted that he has already paid
costs and the plaintiff “should not be allowed to double dip”.
defendant concluded by reiterating his submission that the plaintiff could have
commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court rather
than in the ACAT, and by
submitting that he had ceased the practice of law and, hence, there was no need
to have him removed from
plaintiff made submissions in reply which are not necessary to recite, other
than to note that they referred to the decision of
the High Court in
Territory v Sangare
[2019] HCA 25
265 CLR 164
where it was held that the
impecuniosity of an unsuccessful party is, without more, not a consideration
that justifies denying the
successful party its costs.
obvious starting point is r 1721, which provides that the costs of
proceedings are in the discretion of the court. The defendant
is correct in
submitting that caution must be applied in order to avoid the “arterial
hardening” referred to in
at [38], so that rules of
practice do not harden into rules of law. Having said that, the compensatory
purpose of costs orders is
deeply entrenched, the best example being
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534.
principles summarised in
at [8] were formulated by the Court of
Appeal in a strictly private law context. As the decision in
illustrates, different considerations may be given weight where the proceedings
have a public law context. The present case involves
the plaintiff exercising a
regulatory function in relation to the legal profession. The proceedings before
the Full Court and the
earlier proceedings in the ACAT and the ACAT Appeal
Tribunal involved a process at the very centre of the regulation of the legal
profession: the determination of whether or not a lawyer should remain on the
roll of legal practitioners. Those circumstances do
distinguish this case from
the sort of private law case in which the principles in
articulated. However, the mere fact that proceedings exist in a regulatory
context does not determine one way or another whether
rule” as to costs should apply.
Legal Profession Act 2006
(ACT) does not provide a statutory rule
requiring the defendant to pay costs in circumstances such as the present.
Nevertheless,
the practice of the court has been to make an award of costs in
favour of the Law Society when an order is made for the removal of
the name of a
lawyer from the roll:
Law Society (ACT) v Bangura
[2024] ACTSCFC 1
The Council of the Law Society of the Australian
Capital Territory v Hoyle
[2020] ACTSCFC 3
The Council of the
Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Hoyle (No 2)
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital
Territory v Giles (No 2)
[2020] ACTSCFC 2
The Council of the Law
Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Davey
[2019] ACTSCFC 2
Law Society of the ACT v Stubbs
[2017] ACTSCFC 3
. Where the lawyer has not opposed removal from the roll, at least in one
case, the court has made only a limited costs order in favour
of the Law Society
which excluded the costs of the hearing of the proceedings:
The Council of
the Law Society of the ACT v Lester
[2022] ACTSCFC 1.
question of costs in the present case has to be determined in the context of the
history of the proceedings. Those proceedings
have included a decision by the
ACAT, a decision by the ACAT Appeal Tribunal, and a decision by a single judge
of the Supreme Court
to refuse leave to appeal. At every stage of that process,
the defendant has opposed the findings sought by the plaintiff, and at
stage he has been unsuccessful. In the Full Court, the defendant made
misconceived applications relating to the jurisdiction
of the court and
mediation of the proceedings. The plaintiff made reasonable offers in order to
minimise the costs of the proceedings,
to which the defendant made no relevant
response. The hearing before the Full Court ran for two days and the defendant
was completely
unsuccessful. In those circumstances, subject to consideration of
the specific arguments put forward by the defendant, it would be
an appropriate
case in which to order that he pay the plaintiff’s costs.
specific arguments put by the defendant in his written submissions have been
summarised above. Unfortunately, the written submissions
provided by the
defendant only serve to reinforce the conclusion reached by the Full Court in
Ford (No 2)
at [140] that the defendant was unfit, and would
indefinitely remain unfit, to practise as a lawyer. They contain submissions
either were scandalous, attempted to relitigate matters already determined
against him, had no proven foundation in fact, or indicated
understanding of the judicial process.
specific arguments made by the defendant may be addressed relatively
(a) There is no foundation for the contention that the proceedings were
commenced in the ACAT purely in order to obtain costs. While
it would have been
open to the plaintiff to have commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court, those
proceedings would have required
the same fact‑finding process that the
ACAT was required to conduct. There was nothing inappropriate about the
plaintiff bringing
the proceedings in the ACAT.
(b) Similarly, the allegations of disentitling conduct have no proven
foundation. Insofar as it is alleged that the failure to call
Mr Reis was
improper, that submission cannot be accepted in circumstances where that issue
was addressed during the hearing and reasons
were given for the approach adopted
by the court: see
Ford (No 2)
at [52]-[55].
(c) Insofar as the defendant pointed to a lack of financial resources, that is
not supported by any evidence. He refers to having
been denied an income for
approximately seven years. That is a consequence of the plaintiff having refused
him a practising certificate,
a decision in relation to which he abandoned his
appeal to the Supreme Court. In any event, neither impecuniosity per se (had it
been proved), nor the circumstances that may have led to that impecuniosity,
would provide a basis for declining to make a costs
order in favour of the
plaintiff in this case.
(d) The submission relating to “acting in good faith” is unclear.
Similarly, it is not clear what is meant by the submission
that the defendant
“has never benefited from any of these matters”.
(e) There is no evidentiary foundation for the submission that the costs
“of such a matter” in another State or Territory
approximately $10,000. Nor can it be accepted, without evidence, as likely to
be the case.
(f) The submissions contending that the payment of $40,000 in relation to
earlier proceedings would encompass the whole, or any substantial
portion of,
the costs of the subsequent proceedings in the ACAT, the ACAT Appeal Tribunal,
the Supreme Court or the Full Court are
not realistic. It is clear that, in
order to perform its regulatory functions, the plaintiff would have had to incur
significant
legal costs in preparing and presenting its case at each level,
notwithstanding the earlier proceedings.
the circumstances, it is an appropriate case in which to order that the
defendant pay the plaintiff’s costs of the proceedings.
Rule 1721(2)
provides that “costs of the proceeding include the costs of an application
in the proceeding”. It is therefore
not necessary to separately address
the costs of applications made by the defendant in the proceedings.
order of the Court is:
(1) The defendant is to pay the plaintiff’s costs of the proceedings.
I certify that the preceding sixteen [16] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Court.
RTF format (174 KB)
Signed PDF/A format