DPP v Shang (No 2) [2025] ACTSC 484 (30 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
DPP v Shang (No 2)
[2025] ACTSC 484
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
McWilliam J
The offender is convicted and sentenced to a term of imprisonment of one
year, 9 months and 4 days, to be suspended from 30 October
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – aggravated burglary by joint
commission – assault occasioning actual bodily harm – where no prior
criminal history and conduct isolated – parity
with sentence imposed for
co-offender – partially suspended sentence appropriate
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT) ss 312
Cases Cited:
Dawson v The Queen
[2019] ACTCA 9
DPP v Brymer
[2025] ACTSC 430
DPP v Clissold
[2023] ACTSC 250
DPP v Shang
[2025] ACTSC 277
[2024] ACTSC 292
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
Laipato v The Queen
[2020] ACTCA 35
Le Clair v The Queen;
Achanfuo-Yeboah v The Queen
MT v The Queen
[2021] ACTCA 26
17 ACTLR 22
[2022] ACTSC 362
374 FLR 260
R v Hasnrahan
[2020] ACTSC 10
[2019] ACTCA 25
279 A Crim R 232
R v Newman; R v Reid
[2016] ACTSC 102
Rubino v The Queen
[2015] ACTCA 22
Director of Public Prosecutions
Xiantao Shang (Offender)
Representation:
M Lucero (DPP)
J Maher (Offender)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Andrew Byrnes Law Group (Offender)
File Number:
SCC 246 of 2023
McWILLIAM J:
Offences for sentence
) is before the court for sentence having been
found guilty, following a trial by judge alone, of the following
(a) one count of aggravated burglary by joint commission, contrary to s 312 of
Criminal Code
Criminal Code
) (CAN 6522/2023); and
(b) two counts of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, also by joint
commission, contrary to
) (CAN 6521/2023 and CAN
6523/2023).
maximum penalty for aggravated burglary is a fine of $300,000, a term of
imprisonment for 20 years, or both.
maximum penalty for assault occasioning actual bodily harm is a term of
imprisonment for 5 years.
facts have been discussed in detail
DPP v Shang
[2025] ACTSC 277
). The incident that founded all three
offences occurred around 7:00pm on 25 June 2023. The offender and a co-offender
an apartment in Belconnen for the purpose of seeking to recover money
owed to them by a debtor. The offenders believed that their
debtor was inside
and intended to surprise her and compel her to enter into a payment arrangement.
they arrived, it was in fact the offender and co-offender who were surprised, as
the debtor they sought was not there. Instead,
there was a couple who denied
any knowledge of the whereabouts of the debtor.
interaction between the offenders and the couple escalated into an oral
argument, which in turn became a physical altercation.
The offender punched the
male occupant. He also punched or pushed the female occupant and kicked her. The
co-offender beat the male
occupant with his fists and then kicked him once he
was no longer standing. The co-offender also punched and kicked the female
multiple times.
occupants suffered injuries in the form of serious bruising to their heads and
other parts of their bodies, with the male occupant’s
injuries being more
at [103], [114], [223].
The court’s task on
court’s task is to sentence the offender in accordance with the sentencing
purposes set out in
(Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act
), which include
(in summary form) making the offender accountable and denouncing and adequately
punishing his conduct, deterring
the offender and other people from committing
the same or similar offences, recognising the harm done to the victims of the
and the community and promoting an offender’s rehabilitation. Those
considerations have been taken into account in the reasoning
that follows.
mandatory relevant considerations set out in s 33 of the
Sentencing Act
have also been considered below insofar as they relate to the offender’s
circumstances, and in accordance with the principle
of individualised justice:
MT v The Queen
[2021] ACTCA 26
17 ACTLR 22
Nature and circumstances of the offence
(s 33(1)(a) of the
Sentencing Act
consideration of the nature and circumstances of the offences includes an
assessment of the objective seriousness of the offence.
I referred recently to
the principles guiding that assessment in
[2025] ACTSC 430
[25]-[26]. The court takes an objective approach, with the maximum
penalty for the offence acting as a yardstick. The assessment
then informs the
ultimate sentence, which must be proportionate to the gravity of the offending.
is preferable to articulate the factors that inform the character of an
offence’s objective seriousness:
[2019] ACTCA 25
279 A Crim R 232
Laipato v The Queen
[2020] ACTCA 35
Thus, for the aggravated burglary, applying
[2023] ACTSC 250
and the cases
there-cited, I have taken into account:
(a) The nature of the premises where the burglary occurred (here, residential,
in the occupants’ home where they were entitled
to feel safe);
(b) Whether damage, not separately charged, was caused to the premises (no
damage here);
(c) Whether the occupants of the premises were present at the time the burglary
was committed (the occupants were present);
(d) The motivation for the burglary (personal recovery of a debt); and
(e) Whether the burglary was pre-meditated, planned or organised and the level
of sophistication (the attendance at the premises
was planned but on the
findings in
at [202]-[206], the formation of the intent to threaten
harm occurred spontaneously upon the discovery that the debtor was not present
in the apartment).
have also taken into account the circumstances of aggravation, being that the
offender was in company.
each offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, the objective
seriousness of the offence must be judged by reference to
both the nature of the
behaviour in which the offender has engaged, as well as the nature and extent of
the actual bodily harm suffered
Newman; R v Reid
[2016] ACTSC 102
. The harm suffered
here included injuries to the head of each victim. That is a vulnerable part of
the body and can have serious
consequences. The harm that was inflicted was
also a product of multiple blows on each victim.
where an offence is committed by joint commission, one of the features for
consideration will include the offender’s
role in the offending. In
[2022] ACTSC 362
Baker J stated at [27]:
The offender is liable for the assault occasioning actual bodily harm by joint
commission. Although the offender is liable for the
actions of the other
participants, when sentencing the offender it is necessary to draw distinctions
between the roles and culpability
of each of the individual
[2012] NSWCCA 32
per Latham J (Whealey
JA and Harrison J agreeing) at [19] - [22];
Burrows v R
to the offender’s submission with regard to the aggravated burglary, I was
not satisfied that there was any difference
in the roles and culpability of the
offender and the co-offender. They each made different contributions to the
threat of harm that
resulted, but I do not accept that the offender’s role
was lesser.
position is different with regard to the assault offences. I do accept that the
offender’s role with respect to the female
victim was markedly different
and that his commensurate degree of responsibility (s 33(1)(i) of the
Sentencing Act
) was less. For the harm inflicted on the male victim, the
extent of the harm was greatly exacerbated by the conduct of the co-offender,
which is relevant to the overall seriousness of the conduct vis-à-vis the
co-offender.
Injury, loss or damage from offending
(s 33(1)(e) of the
Sentencing Act
were injuries suffered from the offending. However, as the fact of harm was an
element of two of the offences and has already
been considered as part of the
nature of the offence, this consideration does not carry separate or additional
Victim impact statements
33(1)(f) of the
Sentencing Act
there were no formal victim impact statements before the court, the court did
have the benefit of the evidence given by each
victim in the trial and the
impact upon them was part of the evidence that was accepted. I have taken it
into account.
Subjective circumstances of the
(s 33(1)(m) of the
Sentencing Act
offender is 38 years old. He was born in China and had a positive upbringing.
He was educated in China, moved to Australia in
2016 and is now a permanent
resident. He has been self-employed in the construction industry since 2021.
His financial circumstances
are stable (s 33(1)(n) of the
). He is married. His spouse does not work. The offender is fortunate
that he does not have issues with drugs or alcohol. He has
reasonable physical
and mental health.
offender has no prior criminal history. The character references provided on
behalf of the offender demonstrate that apart from
this one incident, he is
known to be a kind and gentle individual. He is entitled to leniency, and I am
satisfied that what occurred
was an isolated event in the offender’s life.
Probable effect of any sentence/order
of the offender’s family/dependants
(s 33(1)(o) of the
offender has a wife and young family. A full-time custodial sentence would
weigh heavily on his dependants. While certain consequences
may be inevitable,
this consideration does impliedly invite the court to craft a sentence in a
manner that limits the ripple effect
of criminal conduct on a person’s
(s 33(1)(w) of the
Sentencing Act
offender pleaded not guilty. Any belated remorse following the findings of
guilt has very little weight here.
Pre-sentence custody
offender has spent 2 days in custody referrable to the offences. This will be
taken into account by way of backdating.
Current sentencing practice
33(1)(za) of the
Sentencing Act
prosecution helpfully provided a table of cases said to be comparable. The
offender also drew attention to the cases that were
provided to Christensen AJ
when the co-offender was sentenced:
[2024] ACTSC 292
). I have taken these cases into
account to ensure consistency in sentencing practice, accepting that the
objective in doing so is
not to bind the sentencing court to achieve numerical
equivalence with similar sentences imposed in the same jurisdiction: see
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
the various authorities reviewed, many involve conduct of significantly greater
objective serious. Specifically, I considered
[2020] ACTSC 10
as being more serious than the conduct here in
terms of the aggravated burglary.
of the matters that I consider to have been more influential on sentence than
the numerous cases cited was the sentence imposed
on the co-offender:
at [62]. In that regard, the sentences imposed were as follows:
(a) For the aggravated burglary, a sentence of imprisonment of 12 months was
imposed, reduced from 15 months on account of the co-offender’s
(b) For the assault occasioning actual bodily harm in respect of the female
victim, a sentence of 8 months’ imprisonment was
imposed, reduced from 10
months on account of the co-offender’s plea of guilty; and
(c) For the second assault occasioning actual bodily harm in respect of the male
victim, a sentence of 10 months’ imprisonment
was imposed, reduced from 12
months on account of the plea of guilty.
sentence was structured with a significant degree of concurrency, with a total
effective sentence of imprisonment for 1 year and
10 months imposed, which was
suspended immediately on the condition of a good behaviour order with 100 hours
of community service
to be performed.
applicable principle on parity is that subject to any relevant differences, like
cases should be treated alike and neither offender
should be left with a
justifiable sense of grievance from the sentences imposed on each other:
Le Clair v The
Achanfuo-Yeboah v The Queen
[2017] ACTCA 19
Rubino v The Queen
[2015] ACTCA 22
difficulty here is that although the co-offender has been sentenced in respect
of the same offences with the same victims, the
facts upon which he was
sentenced were substantially different from those that transpired following a
contested trial. The role
of each offender was clarified through that
Importantly,
I have found that the role of the offender here was reduced with regard to harm
to the female victim. That will be reflected
in the overall sentence.
approach to principles of concurrency and accumulation has been set out in
Dawson v The Queen
[2019] ACTCA 9
(and the cases there-cited). Here, there were two separate victims, but the
three offences were effectively simultaneous and that
permits for a significant
degree of concurrency. I consider the assault against the male victim to have
overlapping criminality
with the threat of harm element in the burglary offence
in that the threat of harm materialised into actual harm in close proximity.
also consider that the criminality of the assault against one victim can
substantially comprehend the criminality of the conduct
involving the other
victim, but some accumulation is required to recognise the separate victims.
Disposition
Acknowledging
that the imposition of a term of imprisonment is a sentence of last resort (s 10
Sentencing Act
), there was no dispute that it was appropriate in
respect of each of the offences here. The length of the sentences has been
influenced by my assessment of the different roles between the offender
and co-offender and takes account of the fact that this offender
did not plead
guilty and so does not have the benefit of any discount. Otherwise, the
offender was found suitable for an intensive
correction order but given my
finding that this was an isolated event that will not be repeated and was not
the product of any ongoing
criminogenic risk factor, I will not make an
intensive correction order (that is, I am not persuaded there is any matter
specifically
requiring correction).
whole process and expense of undergoing a criminal trial coupled with the two
days in custody has, in my view, served as sufficient
immediate punishment and
personal deterrence for this offender.
fact of imprisonment and the length of the sentences to be imposed give effect
to denunciation, general deterrence and recognition
of harm to the two victims.
Of course, the punishment includes the offender’s daily knowledge that he
is at risk of further
full-time custody if he breaches any of the conditions of
a sentence that will be suspended.
in the community is the clear and obvious choice for a sole income earner
responsible for the welfare of three people, two
of whom are his children. It
supports rehabilitation. I have not considered it appropriate to impose any
community service condition
in further deference to the different role this
offender played in what occurred.
orders of the Court are:
(1) For the offence of aggravated burglary by joint commission, contrary to s
312 and 45A of the
Criminal Code 2002
Criminal Code
(CAN 6522/2023) the offender is convicted and sentenced to a term of
imprisonment for 15 months, backdated to commence on 28 October
conclude on 27 January 2027.
(2) For the offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, by joint
commission, contrary to
and by virtue of s
Criminal Code
(CAN 6523/2023), the offender is convicted and
sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 10 months to commence on 1 July 2026 and
on 30 April 2027.
(3) For the offence of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, by joint
commission, contrary to
) and by virtue of s 45A of the
Criminal Code
(CAN 6521/2023), the offender is convicted and sentenced to
a term of imprisonment of 6 months to commence on 1 February 2027 and
on 31 July 2027.
(4) The total effective sentence of 1 year, 9 months and 4 days is suspended
from today, 30 October 2025 until the conclusion of
the sentence (31 July 2027)
on the condition that the offender undertake to comply with the core conditions
of a good behaviour order
pursuant to
Crimes (Sentence
Administration) Act 2005
(ACT) for the period of the remainder of the
sentence (30 October 2025 to 31 July 2027).
I certify that the preceding thirty-six [
] numbered paragraphs
are a true copy of the Reasons for Sentence of her Honour Justice
RTF format (235 KB)
Signed PDF/A format