Raytheon Australia Pty Ltd & Ors and ACT Human Rights Commission [Scanned] [2008] ACTAAT 19 (24 July 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: RAYTHEON AUSTRALIA
PTY LTD & ORS AND ACT HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
[2008] ACTAAT 19
Catchwords:
Discrimination – application for exemption from
operation of provisions of
Discrimination Act 1991
making discrimination in work
unlawful – discrimination on grounds of race – whether
discrimination justified on grounds
of national defence and security and impact
on employment opportunities afforded by applicants’ operations –
interpretation of legislation – considerations relevant to
exercise of discretion to grant exemption – reasonable limits
rights – test of proportionality – relationship between purposive
and human rights – compliant interpretation.
Discrimination Act 1991
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1989 ss. 37, 44
Legislation Act
Human Rights Act 2004
Human Rights
and Responsibilities Act 2006 (Vic) s. 32
Human Rights Act 1998 (UK) s.
ADI Limited
[2004] VCAT 1963
(5 July 2004)
Boeing Australia
Holdings Pty Ltd
[2007] VCAT 532
(3 May 2007)
Boeing Australia
Holdings Pty Ltd
[2003] QADT 21
(19 November 2003)
ADI Limited
[2005] WASAT 259
(28 September 2005)
Raytheon Australia Pty Ltd
[2007] VCAT 2230
(17 October 2007)
Raytheon Australia Pty Ltd and Ors
[2008} SA EOT 3
(31 March 2008)
BAE Systems Australia Ltd
[2008] SAEOT 1
(21 January 2008)
Raytheon Australia Pty Ltd and Ors
[2008] QADT 1
(25 January 2008)
Kingsley’s Chicken Pty Ltd and Queensland Investment Corporation
and Canberra Investments Pty Ltd
[2000] ACT A 9 (2 June 2006)
Stevens v. Kabushiki Kaisha Sony
[2005] 224 193
Commissioner for Equal Opportunity v ADI Limited
[2007] WASCA 261
(dated 28 November 2007)
Lange v. Australian Broadcasting Corp
[1997] HCA 25
189 CLR 520
Ghaidan v Godin-Mendoza
[2004] UKHL 30
(2004) 2 AC 557
Mr M H Peedom, President
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT07/73
GENERAL DIVISION )
AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
SERVICES PTY LTD
SURVEILLANCE PTY
AERONAUTICAL
CONSULTING,
ENGINEERING
ACT HUMAN RIGHTS
Mr M H Peedom, President
Further to the decision of the Tribunal dated 24 July 2008 and pursuant to
section 109(1)
Discrimination Act 1991
the applicants are granted an exemption from the operation of sections 10, 13,
23 and 69 of the Act on the following conditions:
(a) The exemption applies only in respect of actions or omissions which are
reasonably necessary for the applicants to meet the requirements
Department of State of the United States of America, the United States
Department of Commerce and the United States Federal
Aviation Authority,
contained in or referable to the International Traffic in Arms Regulations and
the Export Administration Regulations
“the US Security
Regulations”
(b) For an applicant to take the benefit of the exemption in relation to an
action or omission which adversely affects an existing
or potential employee or
employee of a contractor, it must take reasonable steps to avoid or reduce the
adverse effect. In particular,
the applicants are required, prior to taking any
action permitted by this exemption order, to:
(i) assess the reasonableness of gaining a specific approval for an employee,
prospective employee or employee of a contractor who
does not satisfy the US
Security Regulations;
(ii) provide all current and prospective employees with:
(A) express written notice that they may be adversely affected by the
company’s exemption if they are not an Australian citizen
or if they are
an Australian citizen but were born outside Australia and/or hold or have held
citizenship or nationality of another
(B) a reasonable explanation in plain English of the nature of any adverse
effects of such action to them;
(C) information about how they can apply for Australian citizenship; and
(D) information regarding their rights under the
Racial Discrimination Act
(Cth) and the
Discrimination Act 1991
(ACT), and, in particular, the
complaints procedure under those Acts and the rights of aggrieved persons to
take their complaints
to the ACT Human Rights Commission and the (Australian)
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission;
(iii) provide all employees with at least bi-annual education and training in
anti-discrimination, particularly race discrimination,
and the internal and
external procedures available to receive, investigate and resolve discrimination
complaints and grievances and,
in particular, those relating to race;
(iv) provide to the applicants’ contractors:
(A) express notice that the contractor’s employees may be adversely
affected by the exemption if they are not an Australian
citizen or if they are
an Australian citizen but were born outside Australia and/or hold or have held
citizenship or nationality
of another country;
(B) a document containing a reasonable explanation in plain English of the
nature of this exemption order that the contractor may
provide to the
contractor’s employees; and
(C) guidance to enable the contractor to conduct training in
anti-discrimination and particularly race discrimination;
(v) implement comprehensive anti-discrimination and equal opportunity
policies governing all aspects of the work and workforce, including
management,
and with particular regard to race discrimination.
(c) The applicants are required to provide a written report to the ACT Human
Rights Commission every six months from the date of this
exemption order, over
the three year period specified in the order, detailing:
(i) the steps they have taken to comply with the above conditions including
detailed information about the training and education
programs provided and
evidence of the implementation of anti-discrimination and equal opportunity
(ii) the number of persons affected by this exemption order, the nature of
the effects, and the steps taken to redress any adverse
effects; and
(iii) implementation and compliance generally with the terms of this
exemption order.
The applicants’ compliance with these orders will be a factor
considered in connection with any future renewal of these orders.
This exemption is to remain in force until three (3) years from the date
SCHEDULE OF APPLICANTS:
1. Raytheon Australia Pty Ltd;
2. Aerospace Technical Services Pty
3. Australian Maritime Surveillance Pty Ltd;
4. Aeronautical
Consulting, Training & Engineering Pty Ltd;
companies which are now or may in the future be related entities to Raytheon
Australia Pty Ltd within the meaning of the
Corporations Act 2001
and employees of any company which is otherwise an applicant.
................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT07/73
GENERAL DIVISION )
RAYTHEON AUSTRALIA
AEROSPACE TECHNICAL
SERVICES PTY LTD
AUSTRALIAN MARITIME SURVEILLANCE
AERONAUTICAL
CONSULTING TRAINING
AND ENGINEERING
RIGHTS COMMISSION
Mr M H Peedom, President
decision of the respondent is set aside.
parties are given leave to make submissions in relation to the further terms of
the decision of the Tribunal pursuant to section
44(1)(c) of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal Act 1989 in accordance with the directions of the Tribunal
dated 24 July 2008.
........................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT07/73
GENERAL DIVISION )
RAYTHEON AUSTRALIA
AEROSPACE TECHNICAL
SERVICES PTY LTD
AUSTRALIAN MARITIME SURVEILLANCE
AERONAUTICAL
CONSULTING TRAINING
AND ENGINEERING
RIGHTS COMMISSION
REASONS FOR DECISION
24 July 2008 Mr M H
Peedom, President
The decision under review
This is an application to review a decision of the ACT Human Rights
Commission made on 20 November 2007 pursuant to
section 109(1)
Discrimination Act 1991
Discrimination Act
decision was to refuse to grant the applicants an exemption from the operation
of specified provisions of the
Discrimination Act
without which exemption
certain proposed conduct of the applicants would be unlawful under that Act.
2. The background to the applicants’
application for exemption is conveniently set out as follows in a Statement of
Contentions lodged with the Tribunal on behalf of the applicants
pursuant to directions given by the Tribunal on 29 January 2008.
The accuracy of
the statement was not challenged by the respondent.
3. One of the applicants, Raytheon Australia Pty Ltd
(“Raytheon”),
is a mission systems integrator providing
integration and solutions for sea, land, air and office environments, primarily
environments. It is an industry leader in the design, manufacture,
implementation and maintenance of defence systems. In Australia,
Raytheon’s primary customer is the Commonwealth of Australia, through the
Department of Defence.
4. Raytheon has facilities located across the country and has an engineering
and technical workforce of almost 1,300 persons Australia
wide. It operates two
sites in the ACT: its head office at Brindabella Business Park where
approximately 110 individuals are currently
employed, and the Canberra Deep
Space Communications Complex
at Tidbinbilla where
more than 120 individuals are currently employed. CDSCC is operated on behalf
of the Commonwealth Scientific
and Industrial Research Organisation
and functions as part of the NASA Deep Space
5. In connection with its ordinary business
activities in Australia, Raytheon has entered into various contracts with the
Commonwealth
of Australia, as represented by the Department of Defence, and
other companies in Australia or the United States of America to provide
defence-related goods and services to be used ultimately by the Australian
Defence Forces
(“the contracts”)
6. The US Arms Export Control Act authorises the US Department of State to
control the export and import of defence articles and
defence services. These
controls are implemented through the International Traffic in Arms Regulations
which restrict the transfer of certain defence
articles, technical data and defence services
(“ITAR controlled
outside the US and to non-US persons. The Director of
Defence Trade Controls
is the individual and agency
responsible for administering the ITAR on behalf of the Department of State.
7. In order to fulfil their obligations under the contracts, it is necessary
for Raytheon to obtain from US companies, including
their corporate parent, The
Raytheon Company, and from US Government agencies, access to ITAR controlled
material. Access is obtained
through authorisation granted by the DDTC in the
form of Technical Assistance Agreements
Manufacturing Licence Agreements
and other similar
8. Section 124.8(5) of the ITAR provides that the following statement must
be included in all TAAs and MLAs:
The technical data or defense service exported from the United States in
furtherance of this agreement and any defense article which
may be produced or
manufactured from such technical data or defense service may not be transferred
to a person in a third country
a national of a third country
as specifically authorised in this agreement unless the prior written approval
of the Department of State has been obtained.
(Emphasis added).
9. Consequently the applicants are contractually bound not to transfer ITAR
controlled material to a “national of a third country”.
10. In applying the prohibition on the transfer of ITAR controlled material
to “nationals of a third country” in the
context of TAAs between US
and non-US companies, the ITAR has been further explained by DDTC in its
Guidelines for Preparing Agreements
as prohibiting transfers to both “dual
national” and “third country foreign national” employees. The
has an absolute discretion about whether or not to authorise the transfer
of ITAR controlled material to a “dual national”
country foreign national”.
Nature and scope of the exemption sought
11. The applicants’ exemption application
sought an exemption in relation to the operation of
sections 10
Discrimination Act
insofar as those sections extend to the nationality
and national origin of employees and contract workers of the applicant in the
ACT and persons who apply for employment or contract work with the applicant in
the ACT where their employment or work will require
access to ITAR controlled
material. The exemption was sought for a period of 3 years in accordance with
section 109(4)(c) of the
12. Sections 10 & 13 are contained in
Discrimination Act
They provide:
and employees
(1) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a person -
arrangements made for the purpose of deciding who should be offered employment;
deciding who should be offered employment; or
terms or conditions on which employment is offered.
(2) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an
(a) in the terms or conditions of
employment that the employer affords the employee; or
(b) by denying the employee access, or limiting the employee’s
access, to opportunities for promotion, transfer or training
or to any other
benefit associated with employment; or
(c) by dismissing the employee; or
(d) by subjecting the employee to any other detriment.
13 Contract workers
It is unlawful for a principal to discriminate
against a contract worker—
(a) in the terms or conditions on which the principal allows the contract
worker to work; or
(b) by not allowing the contract worker to work or continue to work;
(c) by denying the contract worker access, or limiting the contract
worker’s access, to any benefit associated with the relevant
(d) by subjecting the contract worker to any other
is contained in
Discrimination Act
advertising
It is unlawful for a person to advertise any
(a) that indicates an intention to do an act that is unlawful under
or this part; or
(b) that could reasonably be understood as indicating such an
Section 109
, pursuant to which the decision under review was made,
of exemptions
(1) The HRC may, on written application, exempt the applicant in writing from
the operation of a specified provision of
(2) The HRC may, on a written application
(a) by a person to whom an exemption has been
granted; and
(b) before expiry of that exemption;
further exempt the applicant, in writing, from the operation of the
provision concerned.
(3) In the exercise of a power under subsection (1) or subsection
(2), the matters to which the HRC must have regard include
the following
(a) the need to promote an acceptance of, and compliance with, this
(b) the desirability, if relevant, of certain discriminatory actions being
permitted for the purpose of redressing the effects of
discrimination.
(4) An exemption or further exemption—
(a) is a notifiable instrument; and
(b) is subject to the conditions (if any) specified in the notice;
(c) has effect according to its terms for the period not longer than
3 years specified in the notice.
Note A notifiable instrument must be notified under the
Legislation
(5) If the HRC refuses to grant an exemption or a further exemption, the
HRC must give the applicant or each applicant written notice
(6) A notice referred to in subsection (4) or subsection (5) must be in
accordance with the requirements of the code
(7) of practice in force under the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
section 25B (1).
15. The applicants stated that they sought an exemption because
the ITAR and DDTC impose restrictions which in the circumstances
individuals could result in the need to discriminate against current or
prospective employees or contract workers on the
grounds of their “dual
national” or “third country foreign national” status, that is,
nationality under the
Act. They further stated that the exemption was sought
only to the extent needed to permit the applicants to meet the specific
requirements
of the ITAR without contravening the Act.
16. The conditions proposed by the applicants are as follows:
(d) The exemption applies only in respect of actions or omissions which
are reasonably necessary for the applicants to meet the requirements
Department of State of the United States of America, the United States
Department of Commerce and the United States Federal
Aviation Authority,
contained in or referable to the International Traffic in Arms Regulations and
the Export Administration Regulations
US Security
Regulations)
, so far as those requirements apply directly or indirectly to
work carried on, or on behalf of, or at the request of, or under the
supervision of, an applicant.
(e) For an applicant to take the benefit of the exemption in relation to
an action or omission which adversely affects an existing
or potential employee
or employee of a contractor, it must take reasonable steps to avoid or reduce
the adverse effect. In particular,
the applicants are required, prior to taking
any action permitted by this exemption order, to:
(i) assess the reasonableness of gaining a specific exemption for an
employee, prospective employee or employee of a contractor who
does not satisfy
the US Security Regulations;
(ii) provide all current and prospective employees with:
(A) express notice that they may be adversely affected by the
exemption if they are not an Australian national or if they hold dual
nationality and/or citizenship;
(B) a reasonable explanation in plain English of the nature of any
adverse effects of such action to them;
(C) information about how they can apply for Australian citizenship;
(D) information regarding their rights under the
Racial Discrimination Act
(Cth) and the
Discrimination Act 1991
(ACT), and, in particular, the
complaints procedure under those Acts and the rights of aggrieved persons to
take their complaints
to the ACT Human Rights Commission and the (Australian)
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission;
(iii) provide all current employees with ongoing and regular
education and training in anti-discrimination, particularly race discrimination,
and the internal and external procedures available to receive, investigate and
resolve discrimination complaints and grievances and,
in particular, those
relating to race;
(iv) provide to the applicants’ contractors:
(A) express
notice that the contractor’s employees may be adversely affected by the
exemption if they are not an Australian
national or if they hold dual
nationality and/or citizenship;
document containing a reasonable explanation in plain English of the nature of
this exemption order that the contractor may
provide to the contractor’s
employees; and
(C) guidance
to enable the contractor to conduct training in anti-discrimination and
particularly race discrimination
(v) implement comprehensive anti-discrimination policies governing all
aspects of the work and workforce, including management, and
in particular
regard to race discrimination.
(f) The applicants are required to provide a written report to the ACT Human
Rights Commission every six months from the date of this
exemption order, over
the three year period specified in the order, detailing:
steps they have taken to comply with the above conditions;
number of persons affected by this exemption order, the nature of the effects,
and the steps taken to redress any adverse
effects; and
(iii) implementation
and compliance generally with the terms of this exemption
The applicants’ compliance with
these orders as demonstrated in its report will be a factor considered in
connection with any
future renewal of these orders.
This exemption is
to remain in force until
[3 years from date granted]
17. In addition to the terms of the proposed exemption order, submissions
were made to the respondent in connection with the exemption
application to the
effect that, if it was necessary for the applicants to rely on an exemption
granted to them to discriminate against
a current or prospective employee or
contract workers on the grounds of nationality, the applicants would:
(a) take all reasonable steps to ensure that any employee adversely affected
by the proposed exemption order remained employed by
the applicant and did not
suffer a reduction in wages, salary or opportunity for advancement;
(b) where the employee concerned was required to be moved from one project to
another, the applicants would take reasonable steps
to explain to that person
why the transfer had occurred and to avoid any hostility that might result from
the transfer; and
(c) where the employee concerned was a prospective employee who would
otherwise have been an acceptable candidate, the applicants
would make all
reasonable efforts to employ the individual in another position not requiring
access to ITAR controlled material.
The evidence
18. At the hearing of the appeal a number of documents were tendered in
evidence in support of the exemption application. The Tribunal
also had before
it the documents lodged by the respondent pursuant to section 37 of the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1989
which set out the respondent’s
reasons for decision and findings on material questions of fact together with
the evidence on
which those findings were based.
19. It is sufficient, at this stage, to refer to affidavits sworn by Mr. P B
Haseman and Mr S L Jones.
20. Mr Haseman is the Director of Legal Affairs of Raytheon and Senior
Counsel of Raytheon International Incorporated. Mr Haseman
stated that the CDSCC
was the primary focus for the NASA space communications activities within
Australia and was an integral part
of its ongoing space exploration program.
NASA relied on the facilities at the CDSCC to ensure that it could maintain
constant observation
of spacecraft as the earth rotated. He said that the vast
majority of technology and information needed by the 121 persons employed
Raytheon at the CDSCC to operate it and the NASA deep space network, was ITAR
controlled material. Without access to that material
Raytheon’s employees
would not have access to the necessary operations, support and maintenance
specifications required to
keep the site operational.
21. Mr Haseman said that Raytheon also employed 115 persons at its head
office at Brindabella Business Park. They included key management
personnel who
had responsibility for supervising and co-ordinating at the business level the
operation of all activities and programs
operated by Raytheon around Australia.
Although all of those employees did not require day-to-day access to ITAR
controlled material
their close involvement in the company’s
Australia-wide operations meant that access to it was required to make decisions
relation to advertising and the ultimate selection of positions with
Raytheon; to manage and monitor all aspects of contracts concerning
controlled material; for senior managers to make decisions based on ITAR
controlled material if required; and to run some classified
programs in the
22. Mr S L Jones, who was the Director of Legal Affairs of Raytheon and
Senior Counsel, Raytheon International Incorporated said that
the applicants had
a relationship with the Royal Australian Air Force and the Royal Australian Army
which included mission systems
integration, mission requirements planning,
logistical and maintenance support and the supply of senior systems and other
articles. Raytheon had more than 1100 employees in Australia in 2006.
The majority of its contracts required it to have direct communication
interaction with US companies and government agencies. If the applicants failed
to comply with the approval issued to it for
the use of ITAR controlled material
its authority could be revoked; it could be debarred from the use or receipt of
those materials;
and the US companies which exported the materials to Raytheon
under agreements could be prosecuted.
23. Mr Jones said that the services provided by Raytheon in Australia related
to matters central to Australia’s defence operations
and issues of
national security. If the exemption requested was not granted it may not be able
to complete its contracts. This could
compromise Australia’s defence
capabilities and, in some instances, impact on the readiness of its defence
forces. It was likely
also that the required work would be sent offshore causing
a loss of Australian jobs, a less capable industrial base in Australia,
substantially increased defence costs and delays in the completion of
significant defence projects. Support industries would also
be affected
including those which employed approximately 240 fulltime and contract personnel
in the ACT.
24. Mr Jones said that Raytheon had given detailed consideration to
alternatives to its exemption application. The only alternative
identified would
be for it to seek the consent of the relevant US authority to amend the various
agreements to include approvals
for employees in Australia who were dual
nationals and/or third country nationals to be permitted access to ITAR
controlled materials.
This was not a viable option because the submission of the
documentation for approval could not eliminate the need for Raytheon to
information related to nationality and national origin from current and
prospective employees and contract workers as well as
request affected approved
persons to execute non-disclosure agreements. The processing of each stage of
the amendments to the agreement
took approximately 3-9 months or longer
depending on the complexity of the approval sought. While changes by the US
Department of
State to some of its policies were helpful to Raytheon the
relevant US authority maintained discretion over its application and did
cover nationals of countries which were proscribed and may not cover
Raytheon’s current or future employee pool and would
not absolve it for
the retransfer of controlled material to dual nationals or third-country
nationals in the past. The delays associated
with the processing of amendments,
the uncertainty of the process and the need for segregation measures while
approvals were being
processed made the alternative course impractical.
The justification for the exemption
25. On behalf of the applicants it was submitted by
Mr J Kirk, of counsel, that the evidence of Mr. Haseman and Mr Jones
demonstrated
that there was a substantial public interest in granting the
exemption as requested under
section 109
Discrimination Act
. Firstly, it
was submitted, that a refusal to grant the exemption would adversely impact on
Australia’s defence capability
and readiness. Irrespective as to any view
that might be taken of the justification for the restrictions on access to ITAR
material, those restrictions were beyond the control of the
applicants and it was in the interest of Australia to have access to
26. Secondly, a refusal to remove the exemption would likely result in
Raytheon being unable to continue to operate the CDSCC at Tidbinbilla
consequent loss of employment opportunities for a significant number of people
employed at that facility and industries which
support it.
27. The applicants relied upon a number of decisions in other jurisdictions
which had recognised the public interests identified by
the applicants in this
case and which had granted exemption from the operation of anti-discrimination
legislation in those jurisdictions.
The following decisions were cited:
ADI Limited
(Government Gazette of the State of New South Wales dated
11 February 2005) – an exemption was granted on 28 June 2005 by the
Attorney General of New South Wales from the operation of the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1977
(NSW) to enable the applicants to meet their legal
obligations pursuant to agreements granted by the US Department of Commerce
to ITAR and Export Administration Regulations (“EAR”);
Boeing Australia Holdings Pty Ltd
(Government Gazette of the State of
New South Wales dated 17 July 2005) – a similar exemption was granted by
the New South
Wales Attorney General on 8 February 2005;
ADI Limited
[2004] VCAT 1963
(5 July 2004) – an exemption was
granted on 5 July 2004 by the Victorian Civil and Administrative Decisions
Tribunal (“VCAT”)
from the operation of the
Equal Opportunity Act
(Vic) to enable the applicants to meet obligations in relation to defence
related projects required by US laws;
Boeing Australia Holdings Pty Ltd
[2007] VCAT 532
(3 May 2007)
– an exemption was granted by the VCAT from the operation of the
provisions of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
(Vic) to enable the applicants to
meet US ITAR and EAR;
Boeing Australia Holdings Pty Ltd
[2003] QADT 21
(19 November 2003)
– an exemption was granted by the Queensland Anti-Discrimination Tribunal
from the application of provisions
Anti-Discrimination Act, 1991
enable the applicants to meet requirements of the ITAR and EAR;
ADI Limited
[2005] WASAT 259
(28 September 2005) – an exemption
was granted by the State Administrative Tribunal of Western Australia from the
of provisions of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(WA) to enable the
applicants to fulfil their obligations under defence contracts with the
Australian Government. An appeal against
the decision was dismissed by the
Supreme Court of Western Australia
[2007] WASCA 261
(28 November 2007);
Raytheon Australia Pty Ltd
[2007] VCAT 2230
(17 October 2007) –
an exemption was granted by VCAT from the application of the
Equal Opportunity
(Vic) to enable the applicants to meet the US ITAR and EAR;
Raytheon Australia Pty Ltd and Ors
[2008] SA EOT 3
(31 March 2008)
– exemption granted by the SA Equal Opportunity Tribunal from the
operation of provisions of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(SA) to enable the
applicants to discriminate against employees on the grounds of nationality to
enable defence contracts subject
to ITAR and EAR to be performed;
BAE Systems Australia Ltd
[2008] SAEOT 1
(21 January 2008) – an
exemption was granted by the Equal Opportunity Tribunal of South Australia to
enable the applicant to
discriminate on grounds of nationality in performing
obligations under defence contracts that required the applicant to have access
to security-sensitive material controlled by the US
government;
Raytheon Australia Pty Ltd and Ors
(25 January 2008) – an exemption was granted to the applicants by
the Anti-Discrimination Tribunal, Queensland from the operation
of provisions of
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
(Qld) to enable them to meet the ITAR and EAR
requirements;
ADI Limited
(No. (6) above) the State Administrative Tribunal
concluded that the public interest in granting the exemption overrode the
of the discretion to refuse to grant the application for exemption. In
doing so it observed that the likely closure of the applicants’
in Western Australia was not in the best interests of the community of that
State or for that potential to exist and that
a public interest existed in the
applicant fulfilling its contractual obligations to supply defence equipment of
the highest quality
and using the latest available technology. While the State
Administrative Tribunal considered that the applicants could reasonably
expected to continue to seek amendments to the TAAs and MLAs, such processes
were potentially lengthy and expensive and were neither
feasible nor
Boeing Australia Holdings Pty Ltd
(No.5 above) in granting the
exemption the Queensland Anti-Discrimination Tribunal accepted, inter alia, that
national security considerations
in the context of defence work in which the
applicant was involved and the impact on the national economy were matters
the public interest justified the grant of an exemption.
Boeing Australia Holdings Pty Ltd
(No.4) above) the President,
Morris, J in giving consideration as to whether it was reasonable under the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
(Vic) to grant an exemption to depart from the human
rights standards contained in that Act concerning nationality, said:
40 There is no doubt that this application throws up a dilemma. To grant
an exemption would be a departure from a human rights standard
established by Victorian legislation. Such a departure is only sought because
important aerospace technology is subject to
an American law which places
American security ahead of this human rights standard. One might ask: why should
not the Americans give
way? On the other hand, in circumstances where it is
unlikely that the Americans will give way, should we stand on principle and
forego valuable jobs and enhanced defence capability? Would this be a case of
cutting off our nose, not to spite our face, but to
please our face?
41 The submission made by the AMWU urged the tribunal to take a tough
line; in effect, to apply pressure on the United States government
to back down.
This is a tempting submission. One suspects that the ITAR is misconceived; and,
in any event, fails to achieve an appropriate
balance between human rights and
other important considerations, such as arms control and preventing terrorism.
But, then, I rather
doubt that the United States government will back down from
ITAR in the face of a decision of the Victorian Civil and Administrative
42 Sometimes you simply cannot ignore the elephant in the room.
Like it or not, the United States is the world power and controls key aerospace
technology. For reasons that are probably well intentioned
(even if misguided),
the United States prohibits the licencing of such technology if so-called
secrets are revealed to persons of
certain nationality. Companies operating in
Australia are left with the choice of acquiescing or not manufacturing certain
products. Although acquiescence involves compromising a human rights
standard, the alternative involves the potential sacrifice of
jobs, economic
benefits, defence capability and higher education advantages.
Raytheon Australia
(No.10 above) the Anti-Discrimination
Tribunal of Queensland noted that the applicants had been granted exemptions in
and other Australian States. The Tribunal considered that, subject to
the conditions proposed by the applicant, it was appropriate
and reasonable for
an exemption to be granted. In doing so it referred to the benefits to the
Australian community in being able
to access the relevant defence technology and
in its own workers having the ability to use their skills in those industries.
also satisfied that there were no other anti-discriminatory ways
reasonably open to the applicants to continue their business activities.
32. Mr C Erskine of counsel who represented the respondent accepted that
there was an important public policy objective to be furthered
by the grant of
an exemption in this case, ie, it would advance national security for Australia
to have access to the most sophisticated
defence equipment reasonably available
and it would advance the national commercial interest for that equipment to be
built or maintained
in Australia. He also accepted that the revised conditions
of an exemption proposed by the applicants were likely to be the least
restrictive option reasonably open and that the proposed exemption would not
undercut the exemptions specified in
Discrimination Act
submitted, however, that the evidence before the Tribunal failed to explain why
the applicants had apparently been able to carry
on business in the Australian
Capital Territory for a long period of time while the US restrictions applied
and whether the applicants
had contacted the relevant US authority in accordance
with guidelines it had issued that it be contacted if local laws prevented
information being sought about dual citizenship of employees and, if so, with
what result. He also drew attention to a number of
submissions made to the
respondent about the capricious manner in which the nationals of some countries
had been excluded from access
to ITAR material.
33. In responding to these submissions Mr Kirk drew the Tribunal’s
attention to, inter alia, material before it which described
a heightened
security environment developing in the US in 2003; enforcement action in the US
against General Dynamics/General Motors
in November 2004 which resulted in the
imposition of a penalty of $US 20M for the retransfer of ITAR controlled
material to dual
national and third-country foreign national employees and the
imposition of a civil penalty of $US 25M on the Raytheon company for
ITAR due to the actions partially of one of its international subsidiaries which
resulted in increased monitoring of the
Raytheon company and all its
subsidiaries by DDTC.
34. Mr Kirk also referred to the evidence of Mr Jones that inter alia,
Raytheon was in the process of advising DDTC of the inherent
conflict between
ITAR and Australian discrimination laws and its impact on operations in
Australia in addition to representations
made to the United States by a number
of countries at the highest level including Canada, Australia and the United
Kingdom and the
fact that approval had now been obtained to 2 foreign national
employees referred to in Mr Erkine’s submissions having access
controlled material and that it did not currently have any employees without
approval to access that material.
35. Mr Kirk submitted that it was unrealistic to regard race as an
unacceptable basis for the grant of an exemption in the circumstances
case. Under Australian law, the Australian Security Intelligence Organization
had excluded persons from employment on the
basis of race and that, in any event
the determination by the US of a test of allegiance was a matter for the US and
beyond the control
of the applicants.
36. Irrespective, however, as to the weight to be attached to the public
interest considerations Mr Erskine submitted that a different
statutory interpretation applied in the ACT to that of the States which
prevented the Tribunal from granting the exemption
in this case.
Legislation Act
37. Mr Erskine relied upon
section 138
Legislation Act 2001
Legislation Act
of his submission that
section 109
Discrimination Act
did not give an
unqualified discretion to exempt any conduct from the operation of the
Discrimination Act
. To do so, he submitted would be contrary to the subject
matter, scope and purpose of the
Discrimination Act
and would not further a
purposive construction of the
Discrimination Act
as required by section 138 and
38. The sections to which the submission made reference are contained in
Chapter 14 of the
Legislation Act
. The purpose of chapter 14 is said to be to
provide guidance about the interpretation of Acts and not intended as a
comprehensive
statement of the law of interpretation applying to Acts. The
chapter assumes that common law presumptions operate in conjunction
with it (see
section 137).
Sections 138
LEGISLATION ACT 2001
SECTION 138
Meaning of working out the meaning
“Working out the meaning of an Act” means –
(a) resolving an ambiguous or obscure provision of the Act; or
(b) confirming or displaying the apparent meaning of the Act; or
(c) finding the meaning of the Act when its apparent meaning leads to a
result that is manifestly absurd or is unreasonable; or
(d) finding the meaning of the Act in any other case.
LEGISLATION ACT 2001
SECTION 139
Interpretation best achieving Act’s
(1) In working out the meaning of an Act, the interpretation that would best
achieve the purpose of the Act is to be preferred to
interpretation.
(2) This section applies whether or not the Act’s purpose is expressly
stated in the Act.
Human Rights Act 2004
(1) (which is about interpreting legislation to be consistent with human rights)
is also relevant to interpreting territory laws.
Kingsley’s Chicken Pty Ltd and Queensland Investment
Corporation and Canberra Investments Pty Ltd
[2000] ACT A 9 (2 June 2006)
the Court of Appeal said, in relation to
section 139
Legislation Act
that “whatever the common law of statutory interpretation, the ACT
Legislative Assembly has made clear in the Legislation
Act 2001...that
legislative intention must be given a primary role in working out the meaning of
an Act” and that “the
section 139
Legislation Act
in our view requires this Court to prefer an interpretation that best achieves
the purpose of the legislation”.
41. The objects of the
Discrimination Act
are set out in
objects of this Act are—
(a) to eliminate, so far as possible, discrimination to which this Act
applies in the areas of work, education, access to premises,
the provision of
goods, services, facilities and accommodation and the activities of clubs;
(b) to eliminate, so far as possible, sexual harassment in those areas;
(c) to promote recognition and acceptance within the community of the
equality of men and women; and
(d) to promote recognition and acceptance within the community of the
principle of equality of opportunity for all people.
42. It is to be noted that the objectives specified in paragraphs (a) and (b)
are not expressed in absolute terms. They are directed
to the achievement of the
objectives specified “so far as possible”. Further, the
Discrimination Act
not only contains specific exceptions in
to what would
otherwise constitute discrimination, it also contains the power, in
section 109
to grant exemption from specific provisions of the
Discrimination Act
which are not constrained except for the requirement that, in the exercise of
the power, the matters referred to in
section 109(3)
be taken into account and
as to the period of time during which the exemption is able to remain in force.
43. In determining what is the purpose of the
Discrimination Act
application of
section 139
Legislation Act
, it is necessary to avoid
fixing upon the statement of objectives contained in
Discrimination Act
and to have regard to the broader operation of the Act as a
Stevens v. Kabushiki Kaisha Sony
[2005] 224 193 at
44. It is apparent that, in arriving at the decisions in each of the cases
referred to in paragraph 27 above, the view was taken that
in exercising the
discretion to grant an exemption from the operation of equal
opportunity/anti-discrimination legislation of the
relevant State, the
decision-maker was entitled to have regard to broad considerations of public
interest. Those views were expressed
following terms.
Boeing Australia Holdings Pty Ltd
(No.4 above) at paragraph 30
the VCAT President, Morris J said:
30 When a discretion is contained in a statutory instrument and the
instrument is silent as to the basis upon which the discretion
exercised, the usual approach is to acknowledge a discretion unlimited by
anything but the scope and object of the instrument
conferring it.
Clearly enough the object of the Act is to promote the right to equality of
opportunity and to eliminate discrimination. But it does
not follow that a
discretion to grant an exemption from the prohibition on discrimination can only
be exercised if this would advance
the objects of the Act. Such an approach is
anomalous if the discretion in question allows an exemption from provisions of
prohibiting discrimination. Rather it would seem that Parliament’s
intent was that an exemption may be granted by the tribunal
where, in the
circumstances, it is necessary or desirable to avoid an unreasonable
Commissioner for Equal Opportunity v ADI Limited
[2007] WASCA
(dated 28 November 2007) Martin, CJ said:
follows that when the Tribunal comes to consider an application for exemption
from the operation of the Act, it can and should
take into account the fact that
the legislature has recognised that there are some circumstances in which
discriminatory conduct
can be justified by reference to considerations which are
extraneous to the anti-discriminatory objects of the Act, and that it has
conferred upon the Tribunal the power to identify circumstances beyond those
specified in the Act, in which conduct which is otherwise
discriminatory should
nevertheless be lawful.
summary, in my opinion when exercising the discretion conferred upon it by s 135
of the Act, it is consistent with the objects,
scope and purpose of the Act, for
the Tribunal to take into account any considerations which it considers would
justify the commission
of conduct which would otherwise be unlawful under the
Act. So, provided there is a rational basis for the discriminatory conduct,
will fall to the Tribunal to determine whether the interests to be served by
permitting that conduct outweigh the detriment which
flows from discriminatory
conduct. Often the interests properly considered by the Tribunal in that context
will be public interests,
but they need not be so. As can be seen, for example,
from s 50 of the Act, private interests...have been recognised by the
legislature
as providing a sufficient justification for the permission of
conduct which would otherwise be unlawful.
47. It is clear that in all of the decisions to which reference has
been made in paragraph 27 above, each of the decision-makers has
taken the view
that the power to exempt an applicant from the operation of the relevant
anti-discrimination law pursuant to which
the exemption was sought was within
the purpose of that law and could be exercised even where the justification for
doing so was
beyond the anti-discriminatory objectives of the
Discrimination
. It is also clear that the same kinds of grounds that are relied upon for
the grant of an exemption in this case were regarded as
a sufficient
justification for exemption by the decision-maker in each of those cases.
48. In my view, the reasoning in the decisions to which I have made reference
is compelling and, in the interests of uniformity and
comity the same conclusion
should be arrived at in this case.
49. Mr Erskine submitted, however, that there were other features of relevant
ACT legislation which distinguished it from that which
applied in the States. He
referred, in particular to subsection (3) of
section 109
Discrimination
sections 28
Human Rights Act 2004
Section 109(3)
Section 109(3)
Discrimination Act
provides that:
(3) In the exercise of a power under subsection (1) or subsection (2), the
matters to which the HRC must have regard include the following
(a) the need to promote an acceptance of, and compliance with, this
(b) the desirability, if relevant, of certain discriminatory actions
being permitted for the purpose of redressing the effects of
discrimination.
51. Plainly, a requirement to “have regard to” specified matters,
although indicative of the need to accord such matters
considerable weight, does
not exclude other matters from consideration. That being so, there would be
difficulty in not allowing
for the prospect that in the balancing of all of the
considerations that were relevant to a resolution of the issue in question,
other considerations might outweigh those specified matters which the
legislation mandated be taken into account. In general,
however, it would be
expected that those considerations that were not consistent with human rights
would need to involve matters
of considerable importance to outweigh such
52. Mr Erskine gave as an example of the kind of exemption which might be
granted under section 109, despite being inconsistent with
the protection sought
to be given by the
Discrimination Act
, a transitional situation to allow
widespread discrimination to be phased out over a period of time. Given the
specification of a
commencement date less than 2 months after the notification
Discrimination Act
it seems no more likely to me that the legislature had
in mind an exemption for this kind of reason than for more broadly based
considerations
including those which had significant public interest
implications, albeit subject to appropriate controls. Save that
section 109(3)
mandates the taking into consideration the matters which it specifies, I see
section 109
which limits consideration being given to those matters
falling within the subject-matter, scope and purpose for the
Discrimination Act
as discussed above.
53. Sub paragraph section (b) of
section 109(3)
was not relied upon but, in
relation to sub paragraph (a), I observe that the need for the application to be
made arises not in consequence
of actions designed for the applicants’ own
benefit but in consequence of the requirements of the laws of another country.
Further, the fact of the exemption application before the Tribunal having been
made in a detailed and comprehensive manner, including
the proposal of
conditions which are designed to ameliorate the impact of any exemption, does
not suggest that there is any lack
of acceptance by the applicants of the Act or
any unwillingness to comply with it. Nor does the respondent’s opposition
the application show any failure of its obligation to promote an acceptance
Human Rights Act
54. The main purpose of the ACT HRA is to recognise fundamental civil and
political rights in Territory law. In particular, it ensures
that, to the
maximum extent possible, all Territory statutes and statutory instruments are
interpreted in a way that respects, protects
and promotes the human rights set
out in part 3 of the Act (see Explanatory Statement to the
Human Rights Bill
55. The civil and political rights specified in the ACT HRA include those
specified in section 8 as follows:
Recognition
and equality before the law
(1) Everyone has the right to
recognition as a person before the law.
(2) Everyone has the right to enjoy his or her human rights
distinction or discrimination of any kind.
(3) Everyone is equal before the law and is entitled to the equal
protection of the law without discrimination. In particular, everyone has
the right to equal and effective protection against discrimination
Examples of discrimination
Discrimination because of race, colour, sex, sexual orientation, language,
religion, political or other opinion, national or social
origin, property,
birth, disability or other status.
Note An example is part of the Act, is not exhaustive and may extend, but
does not limit, the meaning of the provision in which it
appears (see
Legislation Act
56. Section 28 of the ACT HRA specifies the extent to which limits may be
imposed upon human rights. When originally enacted it provided:
rights may be limited
Human rights may be subject only to
reasonable limits set by Territory laws that can be demonstrably justified in a
free and democratic
57. The purpose of section 28 when originally enacted was said in the
Explanatory Statement to be to recognize that few rights are
absolute and that
limits may be placed on rights and freedoms. The section provided a standard
against which to measure justifications
for limits on human rights and was not
intended to operate in a uniform way. Some rights such as the right not to be
subjected to
torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, were intended to
be absolute but others were not. Whether a limitation was reasonable
of a person in a special legal position would fall for determination in each
individual case. Whether a limit was reasonable
in the sense described in
section 28 depended upon whether it was proportionate to achieve a legitimate
58. Section 28 was amended with effect from 18 March 2008 to add sub section
28(2). It requires that, in determining whether a limit
is reasonable,
“all relevant factors” must be taken into account including the
(a) the nature of the right affected;
(b) the importance of the purpose of the limitation;
(c) the nature and extent of the limitation;
(d) the relationship between the limitation and its purpose;
(e) any less restrictive means reasonably available to achieve the
purpose the limitation seeks to achieve.
59. The factors specified in section 28(2) were said in the Explanatory
Statement to reflect the well accepted principle in international
comparable human rights jurisdictions of proportionality as the means of
determining how human rights may be limited.
Brown v Stott
[2001] 2 WCR 817, one of the cases identified by
the Explanatory Statement as an illustration of the proportionality concept, the
Privy Council held that a limitation on the right to a fair trial, including the
right against self-incrimination, was acceptable
if it was reasonably directed
towards a clear and proper public objective and represented no greater
qualification than what was
called for by the situation.
61. The High Court of Australia in
Lange v. Australian Broadcasting
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
at 562 formulated the test as follows:
“Some judges have expressed the test as whether the law is
reasonably appropriate and adapted to the fulfillment of a legitimate
Others have favoured different expressions, including proportionality. In the
context of the questions raised by the case
stated, there is no need to
distinguish these concepts. For ease of expression, throughout these reasons we
have used the formulation
of reasonably appropriate and adapted.”
62. The human right identified in this case, ie, equal recognition and equity
before the law, is recognized by international conventions
to which Australia is
a signatory (see Articles 2 and 5 of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination
and Article 2 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights. The nature of the right required by section 28(2)(a)
the ACT HRA is, therefore a right of fundamental importance and recognised as
such by the applicants in their conduct of these proceedings.
63. It is, in my view, arguable that in assessing the importance of the
purpose of the limitation that would be placed on that right
by the grant of the
exemption sought, as required by section 28(2)(b), the potential impact of the
limitation proposed by the exemption
sought by the applicants upon the
employment opportunities that the applicants’ operations in the ACT afford
as well as the
commercial viability of those operations may not, by themselves,
be sufficient to outweigh the harmful affects that would result
from the grant
of an exemption. It may be that those are consequences which the applicants and
the community are required to accept
as a cost of ensuring that human rights are
64. More difficult, however, is the balance to be struck against issues
affecting national defence and security. The elimination of
discrimination based
upon race and nationality may make a significant contribution to the avoidance
of conflict and the requirement
for security measures in consequence of it.
National defence and security is, however, likely to be a more complex issue and
to be addressed solely by that means. The measures adopted by the
government of Australia for the defence of the nation and for securing
security of its citizens and the need for those measures are not, of necessity,
matters about which informed findings can be
made by the Tribunal so as to
enable a balancing of those issues against the erosion of the human rights which
the exemption sought
would permit. It is to be remembered, however, that the
evidence of neither Mr Jones nor Mr Haseman was challenged in these proceedings,
save as to its sufficiency, and the Tribunal should, therefore, accept and act
65. Clearly, any significant compromising of the defence and security of the
nation is a matter of paramount importance. The fact
that the ACT is a small
component of the national community does not, in my view, enable it to ignore
issues which affect the nation
as a whole.
66. It was accepted by the respondent’s counsel, as I have already
observed, that the conditions of exemption as proposed by
the applicants were
likely to be the least restrictive option reasonably open save for the matters
which are addressed in paragraphs
32-35 above. In relation to those matters it
would, in my view, be neither prudent nor responsible for the applicants to
desist from
making an application for an exemption on the basis that the need
for it had apparently not arisen for a significant period. The
evidence before
the Tribunal shows that there is a significant potential for the
Discrimination
to be contravened without it. I note further, that in the course of the
hearing, reference was made to a complaint of discrimination
having been made by
an employee of Raytheon which was apparently referred to the Tribunal but
evidently not resolved by it.
67. It is also unrealistic, in my view, to regard diplomatic measures as
being a means by which the need for an exemption might be
avoided. The evidence
shows that attempts by the governments of countries with close association with
the United States for it to
modify its laws regarding the protection of ITAR
controlled material have not, to date, been successful. There is no basis for
that the applicants would have greater prospect of success. I do not
consider that there are less restrictive means reasonably available
the purpose which the exemption seeks to achieve.
68. Having regard to the matters specified in
section 28(2)
I consider that
the exemption would subject the human rights in issue to limits which are
demonstrably justified in a free and democratic
Human Rights Act
69. Section 30 of the ACT
HRA was amended by the Human Rights Amendment Act 2008 with effect from 18 March
2008. It now provides:
Interpretation
of laws and human rights
So far as it is possible to do so
consistently with its purpose, a Territory law must be interpreted in a way that
is compatible with
human rights.
70. The Explanatory Statement, in introducing the amendment to section 30
It clarifies the interaction between the interpretive rule and the
purposive rule such that as far as it is possible a human rights
interpretation is to be taken to all provisions in Territory laws. This means
that unless the law is intended to operate
in a way that is inconsistent with
the right in question, the interpretation that is most consistent with human
rights must prevail.
This is consistent with the Victorian approach contained in
subsection 32(1)
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
It also draws on jurisprudence from the United Kingdom such as the case of
Ghaidan v Godin-Mendoza
[2004] UKHL 30
(2004) 2 AC 557
cited recently by the ACT Supreme Court
in Kingsley’s Chicken Pty Limited v Queensland Investment Corporation and
Centre Investments Pty Limited
[2006] ACTCA 9.
71. The effect of
section 32(1)
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act 2006
(Vic) is similar to that of
. Their effect is to require the legislation to which they apply to be
interpreted consistently with human rights subject to the qualifications
the requirement only extends “so far as it is possible” and the
interpretation must be consistent with the purpose
of the legislation. In
granting Raytheon an exemption from the application of the
Equal Opportunity Act
(Vic) on 17 October 2007 (Case No.7 referred to above) the VCAT found
justification for doing so on grounds of national security,
a projected increase
in jobs and the promotion of equity between Raytheon and its competitors. It is
to be noted, however, that Her
Honour, Judge Harbison stated:
have advised the Applicants that on the next occasion that an application for
exemption is made, the provisions of the Victorian
of Human Rights
Responsibilities Act 2006
will be operative. By reason of this Act, the
Tribunal in considering any further exemption application, will be required to
the relevant provisions of the
Opportunity Act
in a way that is compatible with human rights, as those
rights are defined in the Charter. International law and the judgments of
domestic, foreign and international Courts and Tribunals relevant to a human
right may all be considered when interpreting a statutory
72. The decision of the House of Lords in
Godin-Mendoza
, also referred to in the Explanatory Statement, dealt with the
application of section 3 of the United Kingdom Human Rights Act 1998
(“the UK HRA”)
. Section 3(1) of that Act provides:
So far as it is possible to do so, primary legislation and subordinate
legislation must be read and given effect in a way which is
compatible with the
(European Convention on Human Rights).
The Convention includes a provision that guarantees that the rights specified
in it shall be received “without discrimination”.
73. In the result, in that case, the House of Lords held that legislation
which was expressed so as to give protection to a person
living with another
person “as his wife or husband” should, by the application of
section 3 of the UK HRA, be interpreted
as including 2 people living as same sex
74. Having regard to the specific reference made in the Explanatory Statement
Ghaidan’s case
, it is instructive to have regard to the analysis
of section 3 by their Lordships who constituted the majority in that case. The
following statements, in particular, were relied upon by the respondent as
demonstrating that section 30 of the ACT HRA was intended
to have far-reaching
Lord Nicholls said:
is now generally accepted that the application of section 3 does not depend upon
the presence of ambiguity in the legislation
being interpreted. Even if,
construed according to the ordinary principles of interpretation, the meaning of
the legislation admits
of no doubt, section 3 may none the less require the
legislation to be given a different meaning...
this it follows that the interpretative obligation decreed by section3 is of an
unusual and far-reaching character. Section 3
may require a court to depart from
the unambiguous meaning the legislation would otherwise bear. In the ordinary
course the interpretation
of legislation involves seeking the intention
reasonably to be attributed to Parliament in using the language in question.
3 may require the court to depart from this legislative intention, that
is, depart from the intention of the Parliament which enacted
the legislation.
The question of difficulty is how far, and in what circumstances, section 3
requires a court to depart from the
intention of the enacting Parliament. The
answer to this question depends upon the intention reasonably to be attributed
to Parliament
in enacting section 3.
this the first point to be considered is how far, when enacting section 3,
Parliament intended that the actual language of the
statute, as distinct from
the concept expressed in that language, should be determinative. Since section 3
relates to the “interpretation”
of legislation, it is natural to
focus attention initially on the language used in the legislation provision
being considered. But
once it is accepted that section 3 may require legislation
to bear a meaning which departs from the unambiguous meaning the legislation
would otherwise bear, it becomes impossible to suppose Parliament intended that
the operation of section 3 should depend critically
upon the particular form of
words adopted by the parliamentary draftsman in the statutory provision under
consideration. That would
make the application of section 3 something of a
semantic lottery. If the draftsman chose to express the concept being enacted in
one form of words, section 3 would be available to achieve
Convention-compliance. If he chose a different form of words, section
this the conclusion which seems inescapable is that the mere fact the language
under consideration is inconsistent with a Convention-compliant
meaning does not
of itself make a Convention-compliant interpretation under section 3 impossible.
Section 3 enables language to be
interpreted restrictively or expansively. But
section 3 goes further than this. It is also apt to require a court to read in
which change the meaning of *572 the enacted legislation, so as to make it
Convention-compliant. In other words, the intention of
Parliament in enacting
section 3 was that, to an extent bounded only by what is “possible”,
a court can modify the meaning,
and hence the effect, of primary and secondary
legislation.
Parliament,
however, cannot have intended that in the discharge of this extended
interpretive function the courts should adopt a meaning
inconsistent with a
fundamental feature of legislation. That would be to cross the constitutional
boundary section 3 seeks to demarcate
and preserve. Parliament had retained the
right to enact legislation in terms which are not Convention-compliant. The
meaning imported
by application of section 3 must be compatible with the
underlying thrust of the legislation being construed. Words implied must,
phrase of my noble and learned friend, Lord Rodger of Earlsferry, “go with
the grain of the legislation”. Nor
can Parliament have intended that
section 3 should require courts to make decisions for which they are not
equipped. There may be
several ways of making a provision Convention-compliant,
and the choice may involve issues calling for legislative deliberation.
Lord Steyn said:
is necessary to state what section 3(1), and in particular the word
“possible”, does not mean. First, section 3(1)
applies even if there
is no ambiguity in the language in the sense of it being capable of bearing two
possible meanings.
The word “possible” in section 3(1) is
used in a different and much stronger sense. Secondly, section 3(1) imposes a
and more radical obligation than to adopt a purposive interpretation in
the light of the ECHR. Thirdly, the draftsman of the Act
had before him the
model of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act which imposes a requirement that the
interpretation to be adopted
must be reasonable. Parliament specifically
rejected the legislative model of requiring a reasonable interpretation.
*557 A study of the case law listed in the appendix to this
judgement reveals that there has sometimes been a tendency to approach
interpretative task under
section 3(1)
in too literal and technical a
way. In practice there has been too much emphasis on linguistic features. If the
core remedial purpose
of section 3(1) is not to be undermined a broader approach
is required. That is, of course, not to gainsay the obvious proposition
inherent in the use of the word “possible” in section 3(1) is the
idea that there is a Rubicon which courts may
not cross. If it is not possible,
within the meaning of section 3, to read or give effect to legislation in a way
which is compatible
with Convention rights, the only alternative is to exercise,
where appropriate, the power to make a declaration of incompatibility.
such cases should not be too difficult to identify. An obvious example is
(Anderson) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2002] EWCA Crim 747
[2003] 1 AC 837
House held that the Home Secretary was not competent under article 6 of the ECHR
to decide on the tariff to be served by mandatory
life sentence prisoners. The
House found a section 3(1) interpretation not “possible” and made a
declaration under section
4. Interpretation could not provide a substitute
is another obvious example. As Lord Rodger of
Earlsferry observed “in relation to the validity of marriage, Parliament
gender as fixed and immutable”:
[2003] UKHL 21
[2003] 2 AC 467
, 490, para
83. Section 3(1) of the 1998 Act could not be used.
At [122] Lord Rodger said:
...Similarly, the key for what it is possible for the courts to imply
into legislation without crossing the border from interpretation
to amendment
does not lie in the number of words that have to be read in. The key lies in a
careful consideration of the essential
principles and scope of the legislation
being interpreted. If the insertion of one word contradicts those principles or
goes beyond
the scope of the legislation, it amounts to impermissible amendment.
On the other hand, if the implication of a dozen words leaves
the essential
principles and scope of the legislation intact but allows it to be read in a way
which is compatible with the convention
rights, the implication is a legitimate
exercise of the powers conferred by section 3(1). Of course, the greater the
extent of the
proposed implication, the greater the need to make sure that the
court is not going beyond the scheme of the legislation and embarking
amendment. Nevertheless, what matters is not the number of words but their
effect. For this reason, in the Community law context,
judges have rightly been
concerned with the effect of any proposed implication, but have been relaxed
75. In Mr Erskine’s submission, in the absence of words of limitation
on the exercise of the discretion conferred by section
109, the discretion could
be exercised inconsistently with the human rights contained in the ACT HRA. It
was possible, he submitted,
for it to be re-interpreted in a manner that
required the discretion to only be exercised in a way that was compliant with
rights. He relied upon section 30 of the ACT HRA and to the explanation
given by the House of Lords in
Ghaidan v. Godin Mendoza
as to the effect
of section 3 of the UK HRA in support of his submission.
76. On behalf of the applicants it was submitted that section 30 did not
prevent the respondent from granting the exemption that may
be inconsistent with
purposes either of the
Discrimination Act
or the ACT HRA.
77. While the Explanatory Statement informs that the jurisprudence in
Ghaidan v. Godin Mendoza
is drawn upon in the drafting of section 30, the
fact that it has not adopted the same language as section 3 of the UK HRA cannot
be ignored. In particular, section 3 is not subject to the qualification
contained in section 30 that any interpretation of the legislation
to which it
is applied is to be “consistently with its purpose”. That is, it
seems to me, a matter of some significance
having regard to the fact that
section 3 of the UK HRA was clearly under active consideration in the drafting
of section 30 and the
Legislative Assembly chose to adopt a formula that
contained a qualification not included in the equivalent United Kingdom
78. The consequence of the difference in formulation is that, whereas section
3 of the UK HRA enables a court to modify the meaning
of the legislation to
which it is being applied bounded “only by what is possible” (to use
the language of Lords Nicholls),
there is an additional requirement imposed in
the interpretation of legislation to which section 30 of the ACT HRA is being
ie, the interpretation must be consistent with the purpose of the
legislation. The difference between the two provisions is also
made clear by the
statement of Lord Steyn that “section 3(1) imposes a stronger and more
radical obligation than to adopt a
purposive interpretation in the light of the
(convention)”. The reference to “purpose” in section 30 makes
connection to
section 139
Legislation Act
with a consequential
requirement to determine whether a human rights compliant interpretation would
be consistent with the intention
of the legislation. The absence of the
purposive qualification in
of the UK HRA, in my view, has more readily
enabled the far-reaching consequence that the intention of the Parliament which
the legislation in question could be departed from so as to achieve a
human rights compliant outcome.
79. That is not to say that the House of Lords construed
HRA as without qualification designed to avoid the intrusion by a court into the
role preserved to the legislature of enacting
legislation. It expressed the
qualification, however, in terms that the meaning of the legislation under
consideration imported by
the application of
“must be compatible
with the underlying thrust of the legislation being construed” (per Lord
Nicholls); or “The
key lies in a careful consideration of the essential
principles and scope of the legislation being interpreted” (per Lord
or that words implied in legislation to give effect to
‘go with the grain of the legislation’ (per Lord Rodger). The
adoption of such imprecise concepts is not, in my
view, justified in the
application of section 30 of the ACT HRA. The constraint expressly to be applied
to section 30 is that any
human rights compliant interpretation is to be made so
far as it is possible to do so consistently with the purpose of the legislation
to which it is being applied.
80. I have, in relation to the application of
section 139
Legislation
arrived at the conclusion that, in addition to the objects of the
Discrimination Act
specified in
, it is not its purpose to exclude all
forms of discrimination and that in relation to the forms of discrimination to
which it applies
it confers a broadly-based discretion to exempt persons from
the application of its provision. To restrict the operation of
section 109
Discrimination Act
in the manner proposed by the respondent would be to
undermine the purpose which I have found to exist.
81. I conclude that it is not possible, consistently with the purpose of the
Discrimination Act
, to interpret it in a way that excludes from consideration
the justification relied upon in this case for the grant of an exemption
that the applicants have demonstrated the justification for it.
82. The correct of preferable decision in this case is, therefore, to set
aside the decision under review.
Further Directions
83. At the conclusion of the hearing the parties requested that the terms of
any decision of the Tribunal be the subject of further
submissions. I have given
directions to enable them to do so and will consider them before determining
what further decision should
be made as required by section 44(1)(c) of the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1989.
PUBLICATION DETAILS
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by Member's
______________________________________________________________________
RAYTHEON AUSTRALIA PTY LTD; AEROSPACE TECHNICAL SERVICES
PTY LTD; AUSTRALIAN MARITIME SURVEILLANCE PTY LTD; AERONAUTICAL CONSULTING
TRAINING AND ENGINEERING
RESPONDENT:
ACT HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
PARTY JOINED:
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
ERSKINE AND
PARTY JOINED:
SOLICITORS: APPLICANT:
ALLENS ARTHUR ROBINSON
RESPONDENT:
PARTY JOINED:
OTHER: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
ACT HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
PARTY JOINED:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
MR M H PEEDOM, PRESIDENT
DATE/S OF HEARING:
11 & 12 JUNE 2008
DATE OF DECISION:
_______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (228 KB)
Signed PDF/A format