R v Mindelis [2025] ACTSC 482 (29 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
R v Mindelis
[2025] ACTSC 482
Hearing Date:
14 October 2025, 29 October 2025
Decision Date:
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – Burglary – Theft –
Enter airside area without permission – Take motor without authority
– Endanger safety of Commonwealth aerodrome –
Damage property
– Drive unlicenced –
principles –
Legislation Cited:
Aviation Transport Security Regulations 2005
Crimes (Aviation) Act 1991
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT) ss 308, 311(1), 403(1)
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Mental Health Act 2015
Road Transport (Driver Licensing) Act 1999
Cases Cited:
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37
Ngata v The Queen
[2020] ACTCA 18
Verdins v The Queen
[2007] VSCA 102
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (Crown)
Mikhaylo Mindelis (Offender)
Representation:
L Fomiatti (Crown)
R Brandon-Baker (Offender)
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (Crown)
ACT Legal Aid (Offender)
File Number:
SCC 108 of 2025
SCC 109 of 2025
Introduction
offender Mikhaylo Mindelis is to be sentenced for the following offences:
(a) CC2023/11182: Burglary – intent to steal, contrary to s 311(1) of the
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT). The offence carries a maximum penalty of
imprisonment of 14 years and/or 1400 penalty units.
(b) CC2025/2491: Theft, contrary to s 308 of the
Criminal Code
offence carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment of 10 years and/or 1000
penalty units.
(c) CC2023/11986: Enter airside area without permission, contrary to
Aviation Transport Security Regulations 2005
(Cth). The offence
carries a maximum penalty of 50 penalty units.
(d) CC2023/11987: Take motor without authority, contrary to s 318(1) of the
Criminal Code
. The offence carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment of 5
years and/or 500 penalty units.
(e) CC2023/11985: Endanger safety of Commonwealth aerodrome, contrary to
Crimes (Aviation) Act
(Cth). The offence carries a
maximum penalty of imprisonment of 14 years and/or 840 penalty units.
(f) CC2025/1871: Damage property, contrary to s 403(1) the
Criminal Code
The offence carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment of 10 years and/or 1000
penalty units.
(g) CC2025/2493: Drive unlicenced, contrary to
Road Transport
(Driver Licensing) Act 1999
(ACT). The offence carries a maximum penalty of
20 penalty units.
(h) CC2025/2492: Damage property, contrary to s 403(1) of the
. The offence carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment of 10 years
and/or 1000 penalty units.
offender pleaded guilty to CC2023/11182, CC2025/2491, CC2023/11987,
CC2023/11985, CC2025/1871, CC2025/2492 in the Magistrates
Court on 28 April
2025. On that occasion CC2023/11986 and CC2025/2493 were transferred to this
Court as back-up or related offences.
Agreed facts
the evening of 28 October 2023, Mikhaylo Mindelis (offender) burgled Provincial
Plants and Landscapes at Pialligo, ACT, stealing
a number of items.
the early morning of 29 October 2023, the offender entered the airside area of
Canberra Airport without permission by climbing
over the perimeter fence. After
entering the airport, he stole a van used by Virgin Australia and drove it
within the airport, including
across the runway, endangering the safety of the
airport and its users. He drove the van through the Canberra Airport perimeter
on three occasions, causing damage to both the fence and the van. After
exiting the airport, he drove the van to Harrison, ACT, in
circumstances where
his licence was expired.
AT PROVINCIAL PLANTS AND LANDSCAPES, 28 OCTOBER 2023
Plants and Landscapes is the trading name of Provincial Investment Holdings Pty
Burglary (CC2023/11182)
around 7.50pm on 28 October 2023, the offender attended the location of
Provincial Plants and Landscapes at 364 Fairbairn Ave,
Pialligo in the
Australian Capital Territory (Provincial Plants). The business was closed at the
time and no one was present. The
offender did not have permission to enter the
back fence of Provincial Plants was damaged prior to the offender's arrival and
the offender entered through this damaged fence.
He then entered the Provincial
Plants office and commenced searching for items to steal. He continued searching
the premises until
around 8.30pm.
Theft (CC2025/2491)
7.50pm and 8.30pm on 28 October 2023, the offender collected the following items
from the Provincial Plants office:
(a) Two smart phones owned by Provincial lnvestment Holdings Pty Ltd;
(b) Keys to a Mazda BT-50 owned by Provincial Investment Holdings Pty Ltd;
(c) $300 cash owned by Provincial Investment Holdings Pty Ltd;
(d) A pair of gumboots owned by Provincial Investment Holdings Pty Ltd; and
(e) A black hoodie owned by Molly Devine.
around 8.30pm, the offender departed Provincial Plants with the items, intending
to permanently deprive their owners of them.
the time he left the premises, the offender intended to return later that night
to steal the Mazda BT-50 to which the keys he had
stolen belonged. The offender
did not in fact return.
AT CANBERRA AIRPORT, 29 OCTOBER 2023
Airport, which is operated by Capital Airport Group, is a major Australian
airport and a core regulated airport pursuant
Airports Act 1996
Canberra Airport is utilised by commercial airlines including Qantas, Qantas
Link, Virgin Airlines, Fiji Airlines, Rex, Jetstar,
Link and Pelican Airways.
Significant numbers of charter and privately owned aircraft also fly in and out
of the airport.
Australian Air Force 34 Squadron, which provides air transport for the Prime
Minister, Governor General and other dignitaries,
is based at Fairbairn and
flies in and out of Canberra Airport. A large number of other Australian
military aircraft also use the
Airport is a 24-hour airport. While the terminal ordinarily operates from 5am to
midnight only, the airport remains operational
at other times. Aircraft may use
the airport outside terminal opening hours for various reasons, including
diversions from another
airport, medical emergencies, or Australian Defence
Force operational reasons.
airside area of Canberra Airport (the runway, taxiways and surrounding area) is
enclosed by a cyclone wire perimeter fence, approximately
3 metres high, topped
with three strings of barbed wire. There are signs attached to the perimeter
fence at regular intervals which
clearly state that trespassing is prohibited
and that it is an offence to enter without authorisation.
Airport has specific rules regulating driving inside the airport. To be allowed
to drive within the airport, a person must
hold an Aviation Security
Identification Card or be an authorised person (such as a police officer). In
addition, the person also
requires an Approved Driving Authority (ADA) issued by
Canberra Airport. There are a number of categories of ADAs, being 1, 2, 2A,
and 4. To be issued an ADA, the person is required to pass a written exam,
complete supervised driving hours and complete a driving
assessment, both day
highest level of ADA, requiring the most training, is category 4, which is
required to drive across the runway or taxiways. A
holder of a category 4 ADA
crossing the runway or a taxiway is required to be in continual contact with the
air traffic control operator
and can only cross when the operator gives
vehicles being driven in the airport at night are required to have their
headlights and taillights illuminated and an emergency
amber beacon light
Unauthorised entry into airside area of
airport (CC2023/11986)
a time between 2.31am and 4.00am on 29 October 2023, the offender climbed over
the Canberra Airport perimeter fence adjacent to
Car Park One at Brindabella
Business Park, entering the Canberra Airport airside area. In the course of
doing so, he broke the three
strings of barbed wire which top the fence. Signs
prohibiting unauthorised access were affixed to the fence close to where the
climbed over it.
the time the offender entered the airside area, he was in possession of a piece
of timber approximately 115 centimetres long and
9 centimetres wide. He
continued to brandish this timber while on foot in the airside area.
offender did not have permission to enter the airside area.
Taking of van (CC2023/11987)
4.00am on 29 October 2023, while in the airside area of Canberra Airport, the
offender approached an unattended white Hyundai iLoad
TQ-V van with Virgin
branding and ACT registration YJl-70C owned by Fleet Plus Pty Ltd and leased to
Virgin Australia (the van) parked
near the terminal building. As required by
airport rules, the van was unlocked and the keys were in it.
offender accessed the van, loaded the piece of timber he was carrying into it
and drove away, intending to drive the van out of
the airport.
offender did not have permission to drive or take the van.
Endangering safety of Canberra Airport
(CC2023/11985)
taking the van at about 4.00am, the offender initially drove it alongside the
terminal building. He then changed direction and
drove across the taxiway and
runway before arriving at Gate 47, on the other side of the airport near
Fairbairn, at around 4.10am.
Finding the gate locked, the offender drove the van
through the airport perimeter fence, exiting the airport.
offender then drove the van around Fairbairn. Unable to find a road out of
Fairbairn, the offender drove the van through the airport
perimeter fence a
second time, at a different location, re-entering the airport at around
re-entering the airport, the offender again drove the van across the airport,
arriving at the area adjacent to Fairbairn Avenue,
Pialligo. He then drove the
van up a grassed hill, through the perimeter fence and out onto Fairbairn
Avenue, Pialligo, exiting the
airport for a second time at around 4.30am.
total, the offender drove the van inside the airport for around 20 minutes.
offender did not hold an ADA and had received no training in safe driving of a
motor vehicle in the airport. By driving inside
the airport without having been
trained in how to do so safely, the offender endangered airport infrastructure
including landing
lights, airport markers, windsocks, weather instrumentation,
communication relays and runway signs. Damage to any of these would
endangered the safety of passengers and crew of aircraft using the airport.
headlights of the van were off for some of the period the offender was driving
the van inside the airport. The amber beacon was
off for the entire period the
offender was driving the van inside the airport. By driving inside the airport
at night without the
headlights or amber beacon light illuminated, the offender
risked colliding with a person, vehicle or structure. In addition, by
van less visible, the offender created a risk that another vehicle or aircraft
would collide with the van. In these ways,
the offender endangered the safety of
the airport and staff of the airport and also endangered the safety of
passengers and crew
of aircraft which may have been using the airport.
offender was at no time in contact with the air traffic control operator. By
driving across the taxiway and runway without approval
from the air traffic
control operator, the offender endangered the safety of passengers and crew of
aircraft which may have been
using the taxiway or runway. A collision between an
aircraft and the van carried the risk of serious injury or death to the offender
as well as the passengers and crew of the aircraft.
only authorised persons have access to the airside airport is an important way
in which the safety of users of the airport
is ensured. When the offender
entered the airport on foot, he broke the three strings of barbed wire which top
the perimeter fence.
Without the barbed wire, the fence would be significantly
easier for an unauthorised person to scale.
addition, on each of the three occasions the offender drove the van through the
perimeter fence, the offender damaged the fence
by detaching the wire mesh from
the retaining wire at the base of the fence and bending the wire mesh. This
damage meant that any
person would easily be able to gain access to the airside
area of the airport through the damaged sections of fence.
making easier access to the airside area by unauthorised persons, the offender
caused a risk to the safety of any person who might
enter without authorisation
and to other users of the airport. This risk remained until police began
guarding the damaged sections
of fence hours after the incident.
offender was aware of the substantial risks involved in damaging the perimeter
fence and driving the van in the airport in the
manner he did, and there was
nothing in the circumstances to justify the offender taking these
Damage property - Canberra Airport
perimeter fencing (CC225/1871)
a result of his unauthorised entry into the airport and driving of the van
through the fence on multiple occasions, the offender
caused damage to the
Canberra Airport perimeter fence, owned by Capital Airport Group.
offender first caused damage to the Canberra Airport perimeter fence by climbing
over it, breaking the three strings of barbed
wire which topped the fence. The
offender then caused further damage to the fence by deliberately driving the van
through it on three
occasions. On each occasion the wire mesh broken off from
bottom retaining wire or the retaining wire was snapped, and the wire mesh
bent out of shape, meaning the wire mesh was no longer securely connected to the
frame of the fence.
total cost for repairs to the perimeter fence was $10,411.50.
Drive unlicenced (CC2025/2493)
exiting the airport the first time in the van, the offender drove on roads in
Fairbairn between approximately 4.10am and 4.20am.
his departure in the van from Canberra Airport the second time at approximately
4.30am, the offender drove away from the
airport. He passed a police vehicle
near the War Memorial but had no interaction with it. The offender then drove
the van to Harrison,
where he parked it on the street at around 5.15am.
offender did not hold a valid licence at this time. The offender had previously
held a provisional Victorian licence; however,
this had expired. The offender
had never held a licence in any other jurisdiction.
Damage property- Van (CC2025/2492)
his actions driving the van between 4.00am and approximately 5.15am on 29
October 2023, the offender directly caused significant
damage to the van. This
included by driving it through the Canberra Airport perimeter fence on three
occasions, leaving broken off
portions of the van at each location.
van was recovered by police on 31 October 2023 from the location where the
offender parked it in Harrison. At this point the van
was badly damaged,
including damage to the side panels, front bumper, headlights, grille, bonnet,
windscreen, roof, undercarriage
and driver's seat and floor.
a result of the damage caused by the offender, the van was written off by the
insurer. The market value of the van at the time
was $23,200.
Australia was paid out an amount of $21,200 under its insurance policy over the
arriving in Harrison at around 5.15am on 29 October 2023, the offender locked
the van, hid the keys, and proceeded away on foot.
13 November 2023, the offender voluntarily presented himself to city police
station, where he participated in a record of interview
and made full
admissions.
The sentencing task
offender is to be sentenced for Commonwealth offences (CC2023/11986 and
CC2023/11985) (‘the Commonwealth offences’)
and Territory offences
(CC2023/11182, CC2025/2491, CC2023/11987, CC2025/1871, CC2025/2493, CC2025/
2492) (‘the ACT offences’).
Accordingly, the offender must be dealt
with in accordance with
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) for the
Commonwealth offences and the sentence imposed must be of appropriate severity
in all the circumstances. The offender
must also be dealt with according to the
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
(ACT) for the ACT offences which sets out
the purposes of sentencing at
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes (Sentencing)
I turn to consider the following matters.
and circumstances of the offending
penalty which applies to an offence is an indication of the seriousness of it.
Some of these offences attract substantial periods
of imprisonment which
reflects the gravity of the conduct engaged in by the offender and the risk to
safety he presented. Identifying
the features of an offence informs an
assessment of its objective seriousness. A consideration of where the offence
sits on the spectrum
of offending conduct is an important consideration.
The Commonwealth offences
conduct which made out the offence of ‘entry without permission to an
airside area’ (CC2023/11986) involved the offender
entering onto the
runway and the taxiway in circumstances where his presence was entirely
unauthorised. The offender went on to commit
further offences.
conduct relied upon for the offence of ‘endangering safety Commonwealth
aerodrome’ (CC2023/11985) was the act of driving
within the airport
precinct including across the runway and taxiway without authorisation and in
circumstances where there were no
safety measures in place to take account of
his presence in those areas, such as monitoring by air traffic control or beacon
The conduct involved a high degree of risk given the airport was
operating at the time. This was an example of the offence at the
mid-range of
the offending spectrum.
The ACT offences
prosecution accepted that each of the ACT offences were “typical”
examples of the offence.
burglary offence (CC2023/ 11182) was committed at a commercial premises, no
person was present at the time of the offence, there
was no indication of
planning or pre-meditation, and no significant damage or vandalism was caused by
the offender. The prosecution
conceded that this was not an especially serious
example of the offence.
theft offence (CC2025/2491) saw the offender take keys to a vehicle, two items
of clothing, two smart phones and three hundred
dollars cash. The total value of
the items was unknown. The theft of the phones and the car keys would have
caused inconvenience
to the corporate owner.
take motor vehicle without consent offence (CC2023/11987) was an opportunistic
act that similarly would have caused inconvenience.
The damage caused to the
vehicle is the subject of a separate charge. The vehicle was used by the
offender to commit further offences.
damage property offence (CC2023/1871) involved damage to the perimeter fence of
the airport and was substantial requiting repairs
to the value of $10,411.50.
Until the fence could be repaired it was necessary for the area to be secured by
police attendance. The
damage property offence (CC2023/2492) saw the vehicle
totally written off by the insurer. The vehicle was valued at $23,200. Each
offence involved substantial damage and resulted in significant inconvenience.
offender drove the vehicle whilst he was unlicenced (CC2025/2493). The maximum
penalty for the offence is 20 penalty units. The
offender’s driving of the
vehicle facilitated the commission of further offences.
Procedural history and time in custody
is useful to briefly set out the procedural history of these matters. After the
commission of the offences now for sentence the
offender was granted bail in the
ACT Magistrates Court on 14 November 2023.
22 November 2023 he committed a further offence in the ACT and on the same day,
further offences in New South Wales (NSW). He was
apprehended in NSW on that day
and was subsequently imprisoned in NSW for 20 months. Upon becoming eligible for
parole on 21 October
2024 the offender was extradited from NSW and brought to
the ACT where an order was made to determine whether he required immediate
treatment or care because of mental impairment pursuant to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) and the offender was taken to The Canberra
Hospital. The offender was refused bail after he was returned to the ACT
Magistrates
Court upon the completion of the mental impairment assessment.
offender has been in continuous custody since 22 November 2023. He was convicted
and sentenced in the ACT Magistrates Court on
1 August 2025 to “the rising
of the Court” for the offence of take motor vehicle without consent
committed on 22 November
2023 which accounts for one day of the period he has
been in custody in the ACT for these offences. Accordingly, the sentence I
will be backdated to commence on 22 October 2024.
pleas and assistance to authorities
offender entered pleas of guilty to the Commonwealth and the ACT offences in the
Magistrates Court at the earliest opportunity.
The pleas had significant
utilitarian value and were of benefit to the court and the community. I accept
that the pleas reflect the
offender’s remorse, his willingness to accept
responsibility and facilitate justice. It is appropriate that the sentence I
impose on the offender be reduced by 25 per cent in recognition of the
utilitarian value.
Crown conceded that the offender should also be afforded an additional reduction
in recognition of his substantial co-operation
and assistance to law enforcement
authorities which included handing himself in to investigators and making full
admissions in a
lengthy police interview: s 16A (2)(h)
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
. Accordingly, I consider it appropriate
to reduce the sentence imposed by a further 5 per cent.
Criminal history
to the commission of the offences in October 2023 the offender did not have any
criminal history in the ACT. His criminal history
in NSW is limited to a driving
offence in 2017 and the offences he committed on 22 November 2023. A criminal
history from Victoria
reflects three family violence related offences arising
from an incident in 2022 which the offender disclosed to the PSR author.
Subjective circumstances
Pre-sentence report (PSR)
pre-sentence report contained the following information.
offender was born in Ukraine and moved to Australia with his family when he was
four years old. He has three siblings from his
parent’s relationship and
two half-siblings from his father’s previous relationship. His parents
separated when he was
approximately five to six years old and the offender
reported that his father spent much of his childhood incarcerated. He reported
that his father was violent toward his mother. [Redacted].
offender told the report author that his older sister had a severe disability
and was cared for by his mother. His mother would
take her frustrations out on
the offender by physically and verbally abusing him. He stated that his mother
would display preferential
treatment towards his siblings. The offender’s
father died in 2007 and he reported having limited contact with him prior to
death. He maintains a relationship with his mother but claimed his siblings
still receive preferential treatment.
offender has a six-year-old son, although has not had much contact with him. He
commenced a relationship with the mother of his
son when he was 25 and she was
18. She became pregnant shortly after the relationship began. [Redacted]. He
disclosed to the report
author that he was abusive towards his partner
throughout their two-year relationship. He expressed a desire to formally obtain
with his son. [Redacted]. He told the report author it was his intention
to remain single.
to his remand the offender was residing in Ainslie Village with the support of
the St Vincent De Paul Society. He has been accepted
into the Justice Housing
Program but reported wanting to return to Melbourne to be closer to his family.
He stated that he planned
to reside with his mother for a period before
returning to a former residence he shared with a housemate. His brother was
and confirmed that the offender was welcome to reside with his mother
on the basis that he abided by the household rules.
offender completed year 8 at school. He was expelled in year 9 from two schools
for truancy, anti-social behaviour and consuming
alcohol on school grounds. He
reported working as a bricklayer and kitchen hand. His longest period of
employment was for 18 months
in the fast-food industry as a teenager. He
reported that his cannabis use would impact his motivation to continue
employment. He
is currently employed as a kitchen hand at the Alexander
Maconchie Centre (AMC), which the report author described as a trusted work
to his incarceration the offender was the recipient of jobseeker payments. He
reported long-term financial difficulties and
disclosed a debt of $9000 that he
has accrued from traffic fines.
offender first consumed alcohol and began using cannabis when he was 14 years
old and by age 20 his cannabis use became problematic
and reportedly affected
all aspects of his life. He told the report author that he commenced using
methamphetamine at 25 and quickly
became addicted. He reported that a
methamphetamine induced psychosis underpinned his offending conduct and that he
would be willing
to cease use of all illicit substances. He returned a negative
urinalysis result in May 2025. The offender has not commenced any
drug treatment
programs but stated he would be willing to engage in any program he was required
to complete.
offender reported suffering from PTSD associated with childhood trauma. He saw a
psychologist for much of his schooling. He sought
treatment from a psychologist
for a six-month period when he was in a relationship with the mother of his
child. While incarcerated
in NSW the offender was diagnosed with schizophrenia
and is receiving monthly injections. A letter from Canberra Health Services
dated 6 June 2025 confirmed this diagnosis.
offender accepted the statement of facts and acknowledged that his offending was
serious. He attributed his offending conduct
to his poor mental health and drug
impairment.
author of the report assessed the offender at being at a high risk of
re-offending and required a high level of supervision. The
report author noted
the offender’s unaddressed drug and alcohol issues, traumatic childhood
and mental health diagnosis. The
author considered that the offender did
demonstrate insight into his offending, but indicated a desire to cease mental
health medications
in the future.
Psychologist report of Ms
North recorded the offender’s difficult childhood including his exposure
to family violence and [redacted]. Ms North set
out the offender’s history
of self-harming ideation arising from his childhood trauma which had effectively
resulted in a ‘prisoner
at risk’ categorisation in January and
October 2024. As outlined above Ms North recorded the offender’s history
substance and alcohol abuse.
North accepted that whilst the level of the offender’s drug use in the
lead up to the offending was not entirely clear his
history of substance use
contributed to a decline in his mental health. She concluded that the offender
was experiencing active symptoms
of psychosis at the time of the offending
including paranoia and persecutory delusions that he was going to be killed and
needed to escape from people who were following him. Upon realising the
wrongfulness of his conduct the offender presented himself
North concluded:
Of relevance, my assessment and review of collateral medical records revealed Mr
Mindelis had been experiencing symptoms of psychosis
at the time of his index
offences (October 2023) and he was subsequently diagnosed with schizophrenia
when in custody. It was my
opinion his symptoms had been exacerbated by his use
of methamphetamines in the months preceding the offences, however as Mr Mindelis
continued to experience paranoia and persecutory delusions for months subsequent
to entering custody (and in the absence of drug
use) it was my opinion he
presented with a genuine psychotic illness as opposed to a substance induced
North noted that the offender was recorded as displaying minimal insight into
his mental health issues while incarcerated in NSW
and tended to present as
guarded and suspicious. The offender was placed on a psychiatric treatment order
(PTO) after he was transferred
to the AMC on 23 October 2024. The offender
described his mood as having gradually improved since that time though he
the need for antipsychotic medication citing adverse effects such as
weight gain and low energy, stating “I am not psychotic”.
suggested that observations made of the offender that he continued to be
“guarded” and “suspicious”
with mental health
professionals in the ACT could also be explained by the difficulties he reported
experiencing with antipsychotic
medication such as making him tired and causing
him difficulty with processing information.
North recorded that in her assessment of him the offender was reluctant to
answer questions despite being informed by her of the
purpose of her assessment.
She considered that his presentation to her was consistent with ongoing
paranoia. As the assessment progressed,
the offender became more co-operative.
Ms North concluded that despite limited insight into his mental health condition
the offender was “motivated to engage
with mental health services in the
community upon his release from custody and stated he would comply with his
treatment recommendations
should he be discharged”.
North confirmed that offender’s diagnosis of schizophrenia and stimulant
use disorder (amphetamine type substance, in sustained
remission in a controlled
environment). Ms North was unable to make a clear assessment as to whether the
offender would satisfy the
criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
North recommended that the offender engage in ongoing assessment and treatment
for his mental illness including:
(a) Engaging with a psychiatrist;
(b) continuing to take his prescribe medications and complying with any other
treatments recommended by psychiatrists;
(c) engaging in psychoeducation on the nature of his diagnosis;
(d) exploring further a potential diagnosis of PTSD;
(e) engaging with a case worker upon release from custody;
(f) applying for a psychiatric treatment order; and
(g) engaging in substance abuse treatment.
Responsibility, remorse and rehabilitation
Bugmy and Verdins considerations
the offender’s responsibility, moral culpability or
‘blameworthiness’ for the offending conduct requires
consideration of his subjective circumstances. Where his criminal conduct might
be explained or was underpinned by factors
beyond his control, his culpability
may be moderated.
offender experienced a disadvantaged childhood which included [redacted] and
early exposure to violence as well as drug and alcohol
use. The offender’s
disadvantaged childhood experience must be given “full weight”
though may not have the same
(mitigatory) relevance for all purposes of
sentencing:
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571; [2013] HCA 37. Whilst I
accept that a strict causal connection between a disadvantaged childhood and
conduct is not necessary to justify a reduction in moral culpability,
in this instance the offender’s childhood experience
explains his
offending conduct to a limited degree. His use of illicit substances may have
arisen because of his exposure to drug
use at an early age and the use of such
substances has some correlation with the deterioration (by exacerbating his
symptoms) of
his mental health. It can be accepted that the offender’s
use of illicit substances is not the cause of his mental health
condition, the
symptomology of which persisted in the absence of drug use and when he was under
medical supervision and treatment.
The operation of the offender’s mental
health condition is of greater significance to a consideration of his moral
culpability.
North recorded the paranoia and delusion experienced by the offender at the time
of the offending and concluded that the offender’s
diagnosis of
schizophrenia contributed to his offending conduct including by impairing
“his judgment and decision-making capability
at the time of the offences
in addition to reducing his impulse control”. The prosecution did not
contest Ms North’s
conclusions with respect to the influence of his of
schizophrenia diagnosis at the time of the offending conduct nor that the
was not diagnosed with schizophrenia until after his remand in custody
in NSW in November 2023.
am satisfied that there was direct or ‘real’ connection between the
offender’s mental impairment and his offending
conduct. There was no
contest that the principles enunciated in
Verdins v The
[2007] VSCA 102
; 16 VR 269 were enlivened. As the Court of
Appeal acknowledged in
Ngata v The Queen
[2020] ACTCA 18
recognised that a person suffering a mental
impairment is entitled to have that taken into account as a relevant sentencing
consideration,
even though it falls short of amounting to a defence or allowing
access to specific sentencing orders relying on the presence of
impairment”.
connection between the offending and the offender’s mental condition
substantially reduces his moral culpability such that
general deterrence,
punishment and denunciation should be moderated to a considerable degree. The
prosecution resisted significant
moderation of general deterrence with respect
to the Commonwealth offences because the potential for the offending to have
in grave consequences “necessitate the public (whether mentally
ill or not) being deterred”. I accept that general deterrence
entirely extinguished as a sentencing consideration but in my view the
offender’s mental health condition was a feature
of his offending conduct
to such an extent that considerable moderation of general deterrence for each
offence is warranted.
is a factor that influences a consideration of an offender’s prospect of
rehabilitation. I have previously observed
that a genuinely remorseful
offender is more likely to have insight into their conduct and consequently some
desire for reform. Rehabilitation,
if it can be achieved, is the best way
to ensure community safety and is in the offender’s and the
community’s interest.
his letter to the Court the offender unequivocally expressed remorse for the
conduct he engaged in consistent with observations
recorded in the PSR and the
psychological report. Those expressions are also consistent with the full
admissions he made to investigating
police shortly after the commission of the
offences and with his early pleas of guilty.
offender’s mental health has stabilised considerably in the almost two
years that he has now been in custody. His apprehension
effects of anti-psychotic medication is reflective of limited insight into the
seriousness of his mental health
condition and its contribution to his offending
behaviour. This is a particular concern in light of the extent to which I am
his mental health condition contributed to the commission of the
offender’s limited insight is also a concern in circumstances where the
use of illicit substances precipitated a deterioration
in his mental health
condition. A failure to entirely grasp the seriousness of his condition in turn
effects his appreciation of
the need for him to remain vigilant with medication
and the potential for illicit substance use to adversely affect his capacity
manage his symptoms. These are considerations which influence an assessment of
his prospect for rehabilitation, the need for specific
deterrence and the need
to protect the community.
offender has been entirely compliant with the medication regime prescribed for
him while he has been in custody at the AMC and
he has consistently affirmed his
willingness to abide by court orders including with respect to treatment and
mental health care
and drug rehabilitation for as long as he is required. His
claim to have maintained abstinence from illicit substance use whilst
is supported by the stability in the presentation of his mental health condition
and the results of urinalysis.
offender’s categorisation by the author of the PSR as being a “high
risk” of reoffending appeared closely connected
to his attitude to
managing his mental health condition and his expression of reluctance to cease
cannabis use entirely. I am satisfied
that if the offender were to remain
compliant and receptive to mental health treatment his risk of reoffending would
dramatically
improve. I note here that even though the offender has identified
drug and alcohol use as a problem for much of his adult life, he
does not have a
significant criminal history. To the extent that those issues have persisted
they have not resulted in the offender’s
consistent engagement in the
criminal justice system. This supports my view that with appropriate management
and support in the community
the offender’s risk can be substantially
reduced and he can fulfill his real potential for rehabilitation.
Sentencing practice
was not provided with any comparable outcomes by either party. Apart from the
most serious Commonwealth offence the prosecution
accepted that the offences
were all “typical” examples. With respect to that serious
Commonwealth offence the prosecutor
submitted that any comparable outcomes were
of limited assistance given the unique circumstances of this matter.
Determination
Notwithstanding
the finding I have made with respect to the offender’s moral culpability
and the moderating effect on general
deterrence, punishment and denunciation,
specific deterrence is a purpose which must carry significant weight. The
relationship between
the offender’s drug use and exacerbation of his
symptoms cannot be ignored. Accordingly, the offender must be deterred from
use in circumstances where he now has a certain diagnosis of schizophrenia.
Relatedly, protection of the community and rehabilitation
must also carry
significant weight. The period the offender has spent in custody since November
2023 is his first experience of a
custodial environment. I am satisfied that
this has had some deterrent effect upon the offender consistent with the
willingness and
motivation he has expressed to comply with court orders upon his
for the offender sensibly conceded that the only appropriate outcome for the
offending was a period of imprisonment:
Crimes Sentencing Act
Crimes Act 1914
. The Crown appropriately conceded that the
offending was a single course of criminal conduct engaged in by the offender,
the consequence
of which was legal and factual overlap between the offences and
a warrant for considerable concurrency. Of course, I must determine
appropriate sentence for each offence and then consider issues of concurrency or
accumulation. In coming to consider the just
and appropriate outcome in light of
the overall criminality of the conduct and the principle of totality I take into
account that
the offender has been in custody since November 2023.
20 October 2025 the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal (ACAT) made a PTO for
the offender. The order has effect for 6 months
from that day unless revoked.
The PTO dictates that the offender “must comply with any determination
made by the Chief Psychiatrist
or delegate under the
Mental Health Act
(ACT).” The making of the PTO is underpinned by a finding that
the offender “has a mental illness that seriously impairs
temporarily or permanently) his mental functioning in areas including thought
and perception which is characterised by the
presence of symptoms including
delusions and hallucinations”.
making of the order, as well as the material before me, supports the conclusion
that there is a risk that upon his release from
custody the offender will
disengage from treatment for his mental illness. His time in custody has proved
the success of consistent
treatment which has resulted in stabilisation of his
symptoms. I agree with the Crown submission that the sentence imposed must
that risk and provide for ongoing treatment and monitoring; this is in
the interest of the offender and the community.
the Crown did not oppose a sentencing outcome that would see the offender
released from custody at the time he is sentenced.
In my view such an outcome
fulfills the purposes of sentencing and takes into account the considerable
period the offender has now
spent in custody. The offender has no ties to the
ACT and consequently no social or family network that could support him. It is
unsurprising then that it is his wish to return to live in Victoria where he
does have some family support. The Crown conceded that
the offender has no
capacity to pay a fine.
effect upon the ACAT PTO of his relocation interstate is not entirely clear. It
is unnecessary to resolve for the purposes of
the finalisation of the sentence.
I am satisfied that the conditions imposed upon the offender arising from the
sentence I impose
should require him to comply with any order made to support
treatment of his mental illness and to comply with any directions given
by a probation officer with respect to his mental illness. This will be
sufficient to ensure that the offender is closely
monitored to support
compliance with conditions intended to support his mental wellbeing and to
protect the community, whether he
is in the ACT or in Victoria.
parties agreed that the offender would benefit from a straightforward regime of
supervision to support his successful transition
to the community. The approach
which would give effect to clarity in my view is one which would see some of the
ACT offences dealt
with by the imposition of a partially suspended sentence on
condition that the offender be of good behaviour. The effect of the outcome
the Commonwealth offence is that the offender will be required to submit to a
supervision regime on probation for a substantial
period upon his release. Some
of the sentences imposed on the ACT offences will have expired at the time of
sentencing by virtue
of backdating to take account of pre-sentence custody.
course, I bear in mind the provisions which govern commencement dates for
Commonwealth offences and the interaction of sentences
imposed on Commonwealth
offences and ACT offences:
Crimes Act 1914
starting point for the charge of burglary (CC2023/11182) is 20 months of
imprisonment reduced to 1 year and 2 months of imprisonment
for the plea of
starting point for the charge of theft (CC2025/ 2491) is 12 months of
imprisonment reduced to 8 months and 11 days of imprisonment
for the plea of
starting point for the charge of damage property (CC2025/1871) is 12 months of
imprisonment reduced to 8 months and 11 days for
the plea of guilty.
starting point for the charge of damage property (CC2025/2492) is 12 months of
imprisonment reduced to 8 months and 11 days of
imprisonment for the plea of
starting point for the charge of take motor vehicle without consent
(CC2023/11987) is 8 months of imprisonment reduced to 5 months
and 18 days of
imprisonment for the plea of guilty.
starting point for the charge of endanger safety of Commonwealth aerodrome
(CC2023/11985) is 3 years of imprisonment reduced to
2 years, 1 month and 5 days
for the plea of guilty.
sentence will be structured to permit the offender’s release today. The
offender will be required to accept a regime of
supervision designed to support
close management of his mental illness in the community and to ensure that there
are consequences
for any non-compliance. After hearing from his counsel, I am
satisfied that there are arrangements in place to assist the offender
immediate support in the community including with respect to accommodation and
reporting to probation so that supervision
can commence and his desire to return
to Victoria can be considered.
make the following orders:
(a) On the charge of burglary (CC2023/11182), the offender is convicted and
sentenced to 1 year and 2 months of imprisonment, commencing
on 22 October 2024
and ending on 21 December 2025. The sentence is to be suspended today, pursuant
Crimes Sentencing Act
, on condition that the offender enter
into an undertaking to be of good behaviour until 25 October 2027.
(b) On the charge of theft (CC2025/ 2491), the offender is convicted and
sentenced to 8 months and 11 days of imprisonment, commencing
on 22 October 2024
and ending on 2 July 2025.
(c) On the charge of damage property (CC2025/1871), the offender is convicted
and sentenced to 8 months and 11 days of imprisonment,
commencing on 22 October
2024 and ending on 2 July 2025.
(d) On the charge of damage property (CC2025/2492), the offender is convicted
and sentenced to 8 months and 11 days of imprisonment,
commencing on 22 October
2024 and ending on 2 July 2025.
(e) On the charge take motor vehicle without consent (CC2023/11987), the
offender is convicted and sentenced to 5 months and 18 days
of imprisonment,
commencing on 22 October 2024 and ending on 8 April 2025.
(f) On the charge of drive unlicenced (CC2025/2493), the offender is convicted
and required to enter into an undertaking to be of
good behaviour for a period
of 7 days from today.
(g) On the charge of endanger safety of Commonwealth aerodrome (CC2023/11985),
the offender is convicted and sentenced to 2 years,
1 month and 5 days of
imprisonment, commencing on 21 September 2025 and ending on 25 October 2027 with
a recognizance release order
pursuant to
, permitting his release today with security of $250, without surety,
and on the condition that he be of good behaviour until 25 October
comply with the following conditions:
(i) He is to be subject to the supervision of a probation officer appointed in
accordance with the order;
(ii) He must obey all reasonable directions of the probation officer;
(iii) He must not travel interstate or overseas without the written permission
of the probation officer;
(iv) He must undertake psychiatric treatment and drug and alcohol treatment as
the probation officer reasonably directs; and
(v) He must comply with any forensic mental health order or any psychiatric
treatment order in force.
(h) On the charge of enter airside without permission (CC2023/11986), the
offender is convicted and without passing sentence, pursuant
Crimes Act 1914
released on recognizance with security of $250,
without surety and on the condition that he be of good behaviour until 29
(i) The total period of imprisonment imposed is 3 years. In accordance with
these orders, the offender is to be released today, 29
October 2025.
I certify that the preceding One-Hundred and Ten [110] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Sentence of her Honour
Associate: N Dwyer
Date: 30.10.2025
RTF format (311 KB)
Signed PDF/A format