BB and ACT Health Directorate [2020] ACTOFOI 27 (16 December 2020)
and ACT Health Directorate
ACTOFOI 27 (16 December 2020)
and reasons for
decision of Senior Assistant Ombudsman Louise Macleod
Application
AFOI-RR/20/10051
[2020] ACTOFOI 27
ACT Health Directorate
Information Act 2016
(ACT) – deciding access – whether
disclosure of information is contrary to the public interest – promote
open discussion
of public affairs and enhance government’s accountability
– advance the fair treatment of individuals in accordance with
their dealings with the government – individual’s right to
am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman for the purposes of
Freedom of Information Act 2016
s 82(2)(c) of the FOI Act, I
the decision of the ACT Health Directorate
) dated 20 October
of Ombudsman review
22 September 2020, the applicant applied to Health for access to information
relating to the assessment panel for the Mental Health
and Wellbeing Innovation
names of the two other assessors and their affiliations
record of the grant assessment paperwork – merit ranking and scores of the
successful grant submissions
20 October 2020, Health had identified seven documents within the scope of the
application. Health decided to give full access
to two documents and partial
access to five documents.
making its decision Health relied on Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(ii) of the FOI Act.
Relevantly, Health refused access to information
that it decided could
reasonably be expected to prejudice an individual’s right to privacy under
Human Rights Act 2004
(Human Rights Act). Some
other information was redacted because it was out of scope and the applicant
does not contend these redactions.
26 October 2020, the applicant applied for an Ombudsman review of Health’s
decision under s 73 of the FOI Act.
provided the parties with my preliminary views in a draft consideration on 23
November 2020.
applicant accepted the views I expressed in my draft consideration and the
reasons I gave on 24 November 2020.
responded to my draft consideration on 7 December 2020 repeating its objections
to the disclosure of the information at issue.
Information
information at issue in this review is information Health decided to redact from
documents on the basis that it could reasonably
be expected to prejudice an
individual’s right to privacy under the
Human Rights Act
. Specifically,
the information includes the names of panel members and the sections of the
Directorate they are employed in.
issue to be decided by me is whether the information at issue is contrary to the
public interest information.
deciding this matter, I had regard
original access application
decision notice
applicant’s application for Ombudsman review
submissions
unredacted copy of the information at issue
FOI Act, in particular Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(ii), (vii) and (viii) and s
2.2(a)(ii), and
Human Rights
FOI Act gives every person an enforceable right of access to government
information, subject to any provisions of the Act providing
a basis on which
access can be
to the public interest information is defined in s 16 of the FOI Act
information—
is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under schedule 1;
disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest under
the test set out in section 17
public interest test provided for in s 17 sets out a process for balancing
public interest factors favouring disclosure and nondisclosure
respectively.
This balancing test must be used to determine whether disclosure would be
contrary to the public interest.
FOI Act permits refusal of access to information where the information sought is
contrary to the public interest
information.
a record contains some information that is contrary to the public interest, but
information that it is in the public interest
to disclose too, the contrary to
the public interest information should be deleted, where
practicable.
onus of establishing information should not be disclosed rests with the party
seeking to prevent
disclosure.
1 of the FOI Act sets out categories of information taken to be contrary to the
public interest to disclose.
2 of the FOI Act sets out public interest factors to be balanced when conducting
the s 17 test to determine the public
contentions of the parties
decision notice
information that has been redacted is related to the assessment panel’s
personal details and external organisations’
assessment information. This
includes grant application information of organisations that were and were not
recommended for funding,
assessors’ scoring and funding figures. On
balance, I determined the information identified is contrary to the public
and I have decided not to disclose this information.
the application for Ombudsman review, the applicant
redacting the names of the grant assessor’s (sic) my concern about
conflict of interest (sic) remains unresolved.
its response to my draft consideration, Health
one of the factors that weighed heavily in its decision not to release the
identity of panel members, is its duty of care towards
its staff. ACTHD still
considers this factor to be of specific relevance in this situation. Concern for
staff welfare is paramount
in ACTHD’s consideration and ACTHD must take
measures to protect staff from experiencing stress and anxiety in anticipating
uncertainty in this circumstance. ACTHD did not outline the specific details or
circumstances in its response to you due to confidentiality.
Additionally,
I would like to note that the role of the panel members in the grants process
was not to make any decision in relation
to the grant funding, it was to provide
input and advice for the delegate’s consideration. The decision making
rested with
the delegate who was independent of the panel.
discuss these submissions in greater detail in my considerations.
Considerations
Information
taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under Schedule
party to this Ombudsman review suggested the information sought contains
information that is taken to be contrary to the public
interest to disclose
under Schedule 1 of the FOI Act. Therefore, for the information at issue to be
contrary to the public interest
information disclosure, it must, on balance, be
contrary to the public interest under the test set out in s 17 of the FOI
interest test
determine whether disclosure is contrary to the public interest, the FOI Act
prescribes the following five
any factor favouring disclosure that applies in relation to the information (a
relevant factor favouring disclosure), including
any factor mentioned in
schedule 2, section 2.1;
any factor favouring nondisclosure that applies in relation to the information
(a relevant factor favouring nondisclosure),
including any factor mentioned in
schedule 2, section 2.1;
any relevant factor or factors favouring disclosure against any relevant factor
or factors favouring nondisclosure;
whether, on balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the
public interest;
on balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public
interest, allow access to the information...
do not consider any irrelevant factors I am prohibited from considering arise in
favouring disclosure
2, s 2.1 of the FOI Act contains a non-exhaustive list of public interest
factors favouring disclosure.
the factors favouring disclosure listed in Schedule 2, s 2.1 of the FOI Act,
Health submits that one factor was relevant to the
information at issue, which I
consider below.
open discussion of public affairs and enhance the government’s
accountability.
submits this factor favouring disclosure, under Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(ii) of the
FOI Act, applied to the information at issue.
reviewed the information at issue. I am satisfied this factor is relevant, as
the transparency of a competitive grants process and
the criteria applied to
applicants for grants of tax payer money enhances government accountability. I
give this factor considerable
the fair treatment of individuals in accordance with the law in their dealings
with the government
Health did not identity this factor in its decision, I consider the disclosure
of the information at issue could advance the
fair treatment of individuals in
their dealings with the government, which is a factor favouring disclosure under
Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(vii)
of the FOI Act.
consider it is reasonable to expect the disclosure of information about the
decision-maker assessing applications for public grants
made through competitive
processes would improve the transparency of government decisions, noting this
could reveal any possible
conflicts of interest that may exist.
this reason, I consider disclosing the names of the panel members assessing
grant applications, could reasonably be expected to
promote this public interest
factor and I afford it moderate weight in this review.
Pro-disclosure
Additionally,
the FOI Act has an express pro-disclosure bias which reflects the importance of
access to government information for
the proper working of representative
This is promoted in the objects of the FOI
these reasons, my view is the information at issue could reasonably be expected
to promote the objects of the FOI Act and two
public interest factors.
favouring nondisclosure
factor favouring non-disclosure is relevant to the information at issue.
individual’s right to privacy
its decision letter, Health identified this factor favouring non-disclosure,
under Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(ii) of the FOI Act, as
having significant weight. The
Human Rights Act
does not provide a general right to privacy. It protects the
right not to have one’s privacy interfered with unlawfully or
arbitrarily.
means that in making my decision, I am required not simply to determine whether
the information is ‘personal information’,
but to consider whether
it could reasonably be expected to prejudice the right to privacy in a way that
is inconsistent with the
Human Rights Act
Taggart and Queensland Police
the Queensland Information Commissioner observed that disclosing names and
‘day-to-day work duties’ of public servants
could not reasonably be
expected to prejudice an individual’s right to privacy. In this case, the
involvement of the individuals
on the panel was not reflective of their
day-to-day duties but it was still in their capacities as public employees, in a
workplace, deciding on what was to be done with public money in a
competitive grants process. In essence, they were not acting as
private citizens
in a private place but as public servants when they made their recommendations.
In the present case, I note Health’s
concern that the panel members will
have their privacy interfered with and I address this in more detail at [45].
Chief Executive Officer, Services
Australia and Warren
the Administrative Appeals Tribunal considered that disclosure of the names of
Services Australia employees could constitute an unreasonable
disclosure of
information concerning the employees’ personal affairs.
extent to which Warren’s case can assist my consideration in this matter
is moderate. In that case, the employees whose
names were permitted redaction
were not those ultimately responsible for
decision-making.
The panel members in this case share that characteristic because their role was
to make recommendations about which applications
should receive funding to an
independent delegate.
the other hand, Warren’s case can be distinguished from this matter. While
the panel members were not the ultimate decision
makers, they were staff members
appointed for their expertise to provide input and advice to the delegate, which
must plausibly have
influenced the final decision with respect to at least some
of the applications.
Warren’s case, the AAT also accepted it was reasonable to expect that
Services Australia staff would be subject to personal
criticism and harassment
by members of the public, given evidence before the Tribunal of the high level
of public scrutiny to the
‘Robot Debt’ program. The scrutiny in this
case and the number of affected parties is not comparable and this bears on
objective probability of a person’s privacy being subjected to
interference.
Section 72 of the ACT FOI Act states that a person seeking to prevent disclosure
of government information has the onus of establishing
that the information is
contrary to the public interest. This means Health must establish that any
prejudice to individual privacy
that can reasonably be expected, must outweigh
the applicable public interest factors favouring disclosure.
In its submissions, Health claims that its decision was correct because it
relied on evidence of a panel member’s previous
experience suffering
intrusion of privacy after acting on another panel. I accept the conduct Health
described constitutes interference
with an individual’s right to privacy.
Moreover, I regret the relevant individual suffered that experience.
the other hand, the phrase ‘reasonably be expected’ is an objective
test, considered in
Cockroft and
Attorney-General’s Department and Australian Iron and Steel Pty
In that case, Bowen CJ and Bowen J stated
the words ‘could reasonably be expected to prejudice... were intended to
receive their ordinary meaning. That is to say,
they require a judgment to be
made by the decision-maker as to whether it is reasonable, as distinct from
something that is irrational,
absurd or ridiculous... It is undesirable to
attempt any paraphrase of these words.
means that I am required to make an objective assessment of whether prejudice to
the right to privacy can reasonably be expected.
In doing so, the Act requires
me to distinguish between the legitimate concerns the individual may hold and
the objective question
of whether any interference with their right to privacy
in the manner described by Health could reasonably be expected. In my view,
past experience of the panel member and the other evidence does not support me
to reasonably expect that disclosure of either
panel member’s name will
lead to them having their privacy interfered with in this case. Given my view
that, on the evidence,
it is unreasonable to expect this interference to occur,
my decision is not to afford this factor any weight.
the factors
the factors I identified as relevant, I must now balance them to determine the
public interest.
decision is two public interest factors favouring disclosure and one public
interest factor favouring nondisclosure are applicable.
the identities of the individual public servants was of material importance to
the public interest. I gave considerable weight to
the promotion of open
discussion of public affairs and enhancement of government accountability. I
also gave moderate weight to the
advancement of fair treatment for an individual
in accordance with the law in their dealings with the government.
the other side, I gave no weight to any reasonable expectation that an
individual’s right to privacy could be prejudiced.
my decision that the public interest factor favouring nondisclosure was wrongly
applied by Health, the onus imposed by s 72
of the FOI Act has not been
discharged.
these reasons, I
Health’s decision of 20 September 2020 to refuse access to the information
at issue under s 35(1)(c) of the FOI Act. I
my decision, under s
82(2)(c) of the FOI Act, that Health should give the applicant access
names of the panel members; and
information
redacted in documents 2 and 7 which identify the sections of the Directorate the
panel members are employed in.
Senior Assistant
16 December
Section 7 of the FOI Act.
Section 35(1)(c) of the FOI
Section 50 of the FOI Act.
Section 72 of the FOI Act.
Section 17(1) of the FOI Act.
Section 17(2) of the FOI Act.
Section 17 of the FOI
Section 6(b) of the FOI Act.
[2015] QICmr 16
[2020] AATA
[2020] AATA 4557
Cockroft and Attorney-General’s
Department and Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd
[1986] FCA 35
(1986) 64 ALR 97
[2020] AATA 4557
RTF format (859 KB)
Signed PDF/A format