Calvary Health Care ACT Ltd v Australian Capital Territory [2023] ACTSCFC 1 (23 June 2023)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Calvary Health Care ACT Ltd v Australian Capital Territory
[2023] ACTSCFC 1
Hearing Date:
Reasons Date:
McCallum CJ, Mossop and Baker JJ
Catchwords:
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
– Acquisition of property –
legislative power of the Legislative Assembly under the
Australian Capital
Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
(Cth) does not include power to acquire
property other than on just terms – interpretation of
Infrastructure Enabling Act 2023
(ACT) which compulsorily acquires a
hospital and its assets – statute containing provision requiring just
terms to be provided
to persons whose interests are acquired under the Act
– whether stated obligation to provide just terms is enforceable –
whether obligation extends to all acquisitions of property under Act –
whether other terms of statute imposing obligations
on person whose property is
to be acquired render the acquisitions not on just terms – Act not beyond
legislative power of
the Legislative Assembly
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION
– Acquisition of property – provision requiring just terms to be
provided for acquisition of property – whether
enforceable or merely
exhortatory or aspirational – provision to be interpreted to give effect
to purpose of legislation and
maintain its validity
JURISISDICTION OF COURTS
– Statutory obligations –
statutory obligation to provide just terms for acquisition of property –
whether provision
enforceable – obligation enforceable in superior court
of general jurisdiction
Legislation Cited:
Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
Health Act 1993
Infrastructure Enabling Act 2023
, 29, 30, Sch 1, Sch
Health Infrastructure Enabling Regulation 2023
Records (Privacy and Access) Act 1997
Information Privacy
Lands Acquisition Act 1994
Legislation Act 2001
Limitation Act
Migration Act 1958
Territory National Emergency Response Act 2007
and Development Act 2007
Public Unleased Land Act
Supreme Court Act 1933
Cases Cited:
Anthony Hordern & Sons Ltd v Amalgamated Clothing And Allied Trades
Union of Australia
[1932] HCA 9
(1932) 47 CLR 1
Bank of New South Wales v The
Commonwealth
[1948] HCA 7
(1948) 76 CLR 1
Board v Board
[1919] AC 956
Cowell v Rosehill Racecourse Co Ltd
(1937) 56 CLR 605
v Jododex Australia Pty Ltd
[1972] HCA 61
(1972) 127 CLR 421
Georgiadis v Australian
and Overseas Telecommunications Corporation
[1994] HCA 6
(1994) 179 CLR 297
Brothers Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1946] HCA 11
(1946) 72 CLR 269
International SA v Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 43
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2013] HCA 18
249 CLR 332
Pools & Staff Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 9
179 CLR 155
Plaintiff M70/2011 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
244 CLR 144
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
[1998] HCA 28
194 CLR 355
R v Toohey; Ex parte Meneling
Station Pty Ltd
[1982] HCA 69
(1982) 158 CLR 327
Re Totalisator Administration Board
of Queensland
[1989] 1 Qd R 215
Residual Assco Group Ltd v
[2000] HCA 33
202 CLR 629
Royal Insurance Co Ltd v Mylius
[1926] HCA 49
Saeed v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2010] HCA 23
241 CLR 252
Smith Kline & French
Laboratories (Aust) Ltd v Secretary, Department of Community Services and
(1990) 22 FCR 73
Sunbird Plaza Pty Ltd v Maloney
166 CLR 245
United States v Hutcheson
[1941] USSC 38
v New South Wales
[2011] HCA 24
243 CLR 181
Wurridjal v The Commonwealth
[2009] HCA 2
237 CLR 309
Texts Cited
J D Heydon,
Heydon on Contract
(Lawbook Co, 2019)
Calvary Health Care ACT Limited (Plaintiff)
Australian Capital Territory (Defendant)
Representation:
D Williams SC with B Kaplan and C Langford (Plaintiff)
P Garrison SC with H Younan SC and M Sherman (Defendant)
Thomson Geer (Plaintiff)
ACT Government Solicitor (Defendant)
File Number:
SC 225 of 2023
Introduction
1. These proceedings involve a challenge to the validity of the
Health Infrastructure Enabling Act 2023
(ACT) (the Act). The Calvary Hospital
has been operated by the plaintiff, Calvary Health Care ACT Limited, as a public
hospital on
a Crown lease in Bruce for many years. The purpose of the Act is to
acquire part of the leased land on which Calvary Hospital is
situated in order
to allow the defendant, the Australian Capital Territory, to build a new public
hospital. The Act seeks to do so
in a manner which allows the Calvary Hospital
to be taken over and run as a public hospital by the defendant. The Act would
the effect of acquiring the land on which the Calvary Hospital operates as
well as the assets of the hospital. It would terminate
an agreement between
Calvary and the Territory relating to the operation of the hospital as a public
hospital. Excluded from the
acquisition is that part of the relevant lease on
which private facilities operated by Calvary have been built.
validity of the Act was challenged by Calvary on the ground that the Act, or
parts of it, were beyond the power of the Legislative
Assembly to enact. That
was said to be because notwithstanding the grant of power to the Legislative
Assembly to make laws for the
peace, order and good government of the Territory
Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988
(Cth), provisions of the Act fall within the scope of s 23(1)(a) of the
Self-Government Act which provides:
excluded from power to make laws
(1) Subject to this section, the Assembly has no power to make laws with respect
(a) the acquisition of property otherwise than on just terms;
Procedural history
3. The Bill for the Act was presented to the Legislative
Assembly on 11 May 2023. It was debated on 31 May 2023 and passed on that
It was notified in the Legislation Register and commenced on 2 June 2023.
Regulations for the purposes of the Act, the
Health Infrastructure Enabling
Regulation 2023
(ACT) (the Regulations) were notified and came into effect on
the same day.
4. On 31 May 2023, the same day the Bill was being debated in
the Assembly, Calvary commenced proceedings by Originating Application
declaration that the Act and the Regulations were both invalid and interlocutory
orders preventing the Defendant from exercising
any right under the Act or
Regulations until the proceedings could be finally heard. This application came
before McCallum CJ on
1 June 2023, after the Act had been passed but before it
commenced. Her Honour did not grant an interlocutory injunction on that
but instead listed the matter for final hearing before herself on 7 June 2023.
Subsequently, without opposition from the
parties, her Honour made an order
Supreme Court Act 1933
(ACT) that the jurisdiction of
the court be exercised by a Full Court.
5. The proceedings were heard on 7
June 2023 by the court as presently constituted. At the commencement of the
hearing Calvary filed,
by leave, an Amended Originating Application dated 7 June
2023. The court indicated that it would address, in the first instance,
validity of the Act and defer for later consideration the validity of the
Regulations. Neither party opposed the adoption of
that course. It was a course
which was adopted because if the Act was invalid then it was not necessary to
consider the Regulations.
On the other hand, if the Act was valid it would have
the effect of acquiring property on 3 July 2023 and it was appropriate, if
possible, to determine the validity of that process in advance of that date. If
the Act was valid then the validity of the Regulations,
which did not affect the
acquisition on 3 July 2023, could be considered on a less urgent basis.
6. On 9 June 2023 Mossop J pronounced the orders of the court (set out at
the conclusion of these reasons) which dismissed Calvary’s
challenge to
the validity of the Act and reserved the court’s reasons. The challenge to
the validity of the Regulations was
not, at that point, determined. These are
the court’s reasons for dismissing the challenge to the validity of the
Overview of the Act
7. The Act has six parts. The long title of the Act is
“An Act enabling the acquisition on just terms of land and other property
for a public hospital, and for other purposes”.
8. Part 1 is entitled
“Preliminary”. Significantly, it includes an express statement of
the purposes of the Act. Section
5 provides:
The purposes of this Act are to—
(a) enable the Territory to acquire the public hospital land for the
construction of a public hospital; and
(b) enable the transition of the operation of the public hospital to the
Territory, including by terminating the network agreements;
(c) provide for the safe and orderly transition of the operation of the public
hospital to the Territory, including by—
(i) enabling the Territory to acquire the public hospital assets; and
(ii) providing for the transition of employment of public hospital employees to
the Territory; and
(i) providing for the novation and assignment of public hospital contracts to
the Territory; and
(d) ensure the continued operation of, and maintenance of service delivery
standards at, the public hospital during and after the
transition; and
(e) ensure the Territory can, after the transition, effectively manage its
obligations and liabilities in relation to the operation
of the public hospital,
including liabilities arising in relation to the operation of the public
hospital before the transition;
(f) ensure that interests acquired under this Act are acquired on just terms.
9. Section 6 excludes the application of certain other
Territory laws. Most significantly, it excludes the operation of the
Acquisition Act 1994
has the most significant provisions
relating to acquisition of property.
identifies the “acquisition
day” as 3 July 2023 but provides that the Executive may, before 3 July
2023, give notice
that the acquisition day is an earlier or later
provides for the acquisition of Calvary’s interest
in the “public hospital land”. Through a number of definitions
the Dictionary the expression “public hospital land” is defined as
that part of Block 1
Division of Bruce which is not “private
hospital land”. “Private hospital land” is defined by
reference to
the plan shown in Schedule 1 to the Act. In substance it shows an
area within Calvary’s existing lease which contains a private
hospital and
clinic which is not to be acquired by the Territory. Section 8 provides that
Calvary’s interest in the public
hospital land vests in the Territory on
the acquisition day (s 8(1)(a)) and is freed from any trust, restriction,
dedication, reservation,
obligation, charge, encumbrance, lien, contract,
licence, rate or any other interest (s 8(1)(b)). An interest in land
extinguished or diminished” by s 8(1)(b) “is
taken to have been acquired by the Territory under this Act” (s
12. Section 9 provides, in similar terms, for the acquisition of the
“public hospital assets”. “[P]ublic hospital
an expression defined in the Dictionary. It includes a variety of assets of
include the “public hospital
stock” being the stock in trade and inventory of the public hospital,
motor vehicles used
for the public hospital and any asset purchased for the
public hospital or a public health service before the acquisition
13. Section 10 provides that the Territory “must provide just
terms to a person from whom an interest is acquired under this
s 10(1). “[I]nterest, in the public hospital land or a public
hospital asset” is defined broadly in the Dictionary
to the Act. In
addition to “the legal or equitable estate or interest in the public
hospital land or a public hospital asset”
it includes “any other
right ... , charge, power or privilege over, or in connection with, the public
hospital land or a public
hospital asset or an interest in the public hospital
land or a public hospital asset”.
14. The definition of
“interest” in the Act is limited to interests “in the public
hospital land or a public hospital
asset”. In the event that other forms
of property are acquired, the more general definition of
“[i]nterest” in
Legislation Act 2001
(ACT) will apply. It
provides as follows:
in relation to land or other property, means—
(a) a legal or equitable estate in the land or other property; or
(b) a right, power or privilege over, or in relation to, the land or other
Section 10(2)
identifies some specific matters for which
“reasonable compensation” must be paid. Matters included in the
“compensation” are set out in
Section 10(3)
provides a regulation-making power which includes power to
make regulations about how just terms for an interest acquired under the
provided, how claims for compensation are dealt with and how any dispute about
working out compensation is resolved. The
scope and proper interpretation of
is discussed in more detail below.
16. Part 3 of the Act is
entitled “Acquisition and transition of public hospital operations”.
It comprises ss 11-13. Section
11 gives a power exercisable before the
acquisition day to an “authorised person” to enter on the hospital
land and exercise
various powers, which may be generally described as
investigation and information-gathering powers, in anticipation of the
acquisition
of the hospital: s 11(1). An obligation is imposed upon Calvary
to give the authorised person reasonable assistance, including access
areas of the public hospital, and show the authorised person where records,
equipment or other assets are kept: s 11(2)-(3).
17. Section 12 empowers
the director-general to request documents or other information from Calvary
relevant to the operation of the public
hospital: s 12(1). The provision is not limited to the period prior to the
acquisition day.
Calvary has an obligation to comply with a request for
information and provide it in any stated format or way:
18. Section 13 imposes obligations on both Calvary and the
Territory to act in good faith, cooperate and do all other things reasonably
necessary to ensure the safe and orderly transition of the operation of the
public hospital to the Territory and the continued operation
of and maintenance
of service delivery standards at the public hospital: s 13(1). Section
13(2) imposes obligations on Calvary to
do various things relating to the
transfer of the operation of the public hospital to the Territory. These include
cooperating with
the Territory to develop “a transition plan” for
the transfer of the operation of the public hospital, provide all reasonable
assistance to enable the Territory to obtain all licences and authorisations
required by law to operate the public hospital and provide
reasonable access to
any records management information technology systems used for public patient
health records, employee and payroll
records, financial and other operations
management records. There is an equivalent obligation on the Territory to
cooperate with
Calvary to develop the transition plan and ensure that any
disruption to Calvary’s operation of facilities on the private hospital
land is minimised. The obligations in s 13 are not confined to the period
prior to acquisition day.
19. Part 4 of the Act is entitled “What
happens on or after acquisition day”. It contains ss 14‑19.
Section 14 provides
that on the acquisition day a number of things happen. The
first is that the Crown lease for the hospital is amended as provided
s 19: s 14(1)(a). The operation of s 19 is described below. The
second is that the “network agreements” are terminated:
s 14(1)(b). The Dictionary defines “network agreement” as
including four categories of agreement. They include:
agreement between the Territory and Calvary dated 7 December 2011;
(b) the “Bruce Health Care Precinct Deed” between the Territory and
Calvary dated on or about 7 December 2011;
(c) the New Public Hospital Agreement, which is an agreement contemplated by the
agreement in (a) that may come into operation as
a result of a dispute between
Calvary and the Territory; and
(d) any other agreement prescribed by regulation but not an agreement excluded
by regulation.
20. The third is that obligations are placed on Calvary to
vacate the hospital land and do various other specified things in order
achieve the transition of the operation of the public hospital to the Territory
and the continued operation and maintenance of
service delivery standards at the
public hospital: s 14(1)(c).
21. Section 14(2) provides a
regulation-making power which includes a power to make regulations relating to
the offer of employment
by the Territory to public hospital employees and
regulations relating to the novation or assignment of “public hospital
or “other arrangements” in relation to such
22. Section 15 provides for the granting of reciprocal licences by
the Territory and Calvary to enter the public hospital land and
the private
hospital land respectively for the purposes of the Act and the continued
operation of the public hospital and facilities
on the private hospital
23. Section 16 provides a power to the Territory to grant to Calvary a
licence to operate the public hospital on and from the acquisition
ensure the continued operation of, and maintenance of service delivery standards
at, the public hospital” while
matters required to be done under Pt 4 are
done: s 16(1). The terms of that agreement are as agreed between the
Territory and Calvary:
24. Section 17 provides a power to the
director-general to obtain access to certain information held by Calvary after
the acquisition
day. The categories of information relate to:
current or future investigations or proceedings in relation to the operation of
the public hospital before the acquisition
day: s 17(a)(i);
(b) the employment of public hospital employees before the acquisition day
including in relation to their rights and entitlements;
(c) any other thing prescribed by regulation: s 17(1)(a)(ii).
25. There is also a power to request Calvary do anything
reasonably required to store and retain information in those categories:
s 17(1)(b). Calvary is obliged to comply with such a request:
26. Sections 18 and 19 relate to amendment of the Crown lease.
Section 18 requires the Territory to prepare a draft deposited plan
substantially in accordance with the plan at Sch 1 of the Act or otherwise
as agreed in writing between the Territory and Calvary.
Schedule 1 describes the
“Private Precinct Area” which includes the Calvary Clinic and the
Calvary Private Hospital.
It is this area which is to be retained as part of the
Crown lease held by Calvary. Section 19 statutorily amends the Crown lease
Block 1 Section 1 Division of Bruce so that it only applies to the area
identified on the plan prepared under s 18.
27. Part 5 of the Act is
headed “Miscellaneous”. As its heading suggests, it contains
provisions dealing with a variety
of different matters.
28. Section 20
provides that certain acts relating to the preparation and presentation of the
Bill for the Act do not constitute a
repudiation or breach of a “network
agreement”: s 20(1). It prevents Calvary from bringing any claim
against the Territory
for repudiation or breach of a network agreement but does
not limit any right of a person to compensation for an acquisition under
s 10: s 20(2)-(3).
29. Section 21 provides that if Calvary cannot
comply with a requirement of the Act then a “related corporation” of
nominated in writing by the Territory must comply with that requirement
or ensure another related corporation does so. “[R]elated
corporation” is defined in the Dictionary as meaning “a related body
corporate, associate or related entity under the
Corporations
30. Section 22 provides that the transfer of information in a
public patient health record or personal information about a public
employee does not constitute a breach of the
Health Records (Privacy and Access)
(ACT) or the
Information Privacy Act 2014
provides that references in the Act to the “director-general” means
the director-general for the purposes of the
Health Act 1993
(ACT) and provides
a power of delegation.
provides a power to the Supreme Court
to stay proceedings of a security holder which holds security over property
acquired under
the Act or property not acquired under the Act. It also allows
the court to enjoin the security holder from commencing or continuing
proceedings.
provides a power to the Magistrates Court to make
orders enforcing compliance with
provides that a payment made by or on behalf of the Territory to a person
under the Act is a good and valid discharge and the Territory
is not bound to
see the application of any money paid or to the performance of any
provides that the Planning and Land Authority
(established under the
Planning and Development Act 2007
(ACT)) may execute any
instrument or other document for and on behalf of the Territory relating to an
acquisition of land under the
is a regulation-making
power in general terms.
repeals an instrument relating to the
road transport legislation.
contains some consequential amendments to
other legislation.
38. Schedule 1 to the Act is the plan showing the
“Private precinct area” for the purposes of ss 18-19. Schedule
some uncommenced amendments.
Relationship between the Act and Regulations
39. Calvary contended that its primary challenge was to the
validity of the Regulations but that those regulations cannot be divorced
the provisions in the Act. It submitted that the Act and the Regulations needed
to be considered together and that if the scheme
in the Act and the Regulations
for the acquisition of Calvary’s business was not on just terms then the
legislation as a whole
was invalid.
40. Such an approach did not pay
appropriate regard to the distinction between the Act and the Regulations.
Clearly, if the Act was
invalid as a whole then the Regulations, being
subordinate laws made pursuant to the Act, would also be invalid. However, the
is not necessarily the case. It would be possible for the Regulations
to be invalid either in whole or in part, yet the Act not equivalently
It would only be if the drafting of the Act was such that it was dependent for
its validity upon the validity of the Regulations
that the position contended
for by Calvary would apply. As will become apparent, the Act is not drafted in a
way which makes its
validity contingent upon the validity of the Regulations.
Therefore, it is possible to consider the Act separately from the
Regulations.
41. As a consequence, it was possible to adopt the approach that
was taken at the hearing of the proceedings to address the validity
separately from the validity of the Regulations.
42. The Amended Originating Application seeks declarations that
the Act and Regulations are both invalid. As indicated above, the
court first
considered the validity of the Act. In the event that the Act as a whole was not
invalid then the Amended Originating
Application contended that ss 11, 12, 13,
14(1)(c),14(2), 15, 17, 20 and 25 of the Act were invalid. It is convenient to
the challenged provisions of the Act individually before considering
the challenge to the validity of the Act as a whole. However,
in order to assess
the merits of the challenge to the validity of the various provisions of the
Act, it is necessary first to address
Calvary’s submissions in relation to
the operation of s 10 of the Act.
Interpretation of s 10
Is s 10(1) merely aspirational?
43. Fundamental to the submissions made by Calvary was the
proposition that s 10 of the Act was an “aspirational” rather
than enforceable provision. Section 10 provides:
Acquisition
must be on just terms
(1) The Territory must provide just terms to a person from whom an interest is
acquired under this Act.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), just terms for the acquisition includes
reasonable compensation for the following:
(a) the acquisition of Calvary’s interest in the public hospital land;
(b) any security right or other interest in land taken to have been acquired
under section 8(2);
(c) the acquisition of the public hospital assets;
(d) any security right or other interest in a public hospital asset taken to
have been acquired under section 9(2);
(e) things arising as a consequence of an acquisition mentioned in paragraphs
(a) to (d) including the following:
(ii) the termination of the network agreements under section 14(1);
(iii) the termination of any public hospital contract or other contract because
of the operation of this Act;
(iv) any redundancy or similar payment payable by Calvary to a public hospital
employee because of the operation of this Act;
(v) anything else prescribed by regulation.
(3) A regulation may provide for the following matters:
(a) how just terms for an interest acquired under this Act are provided;
(b) how compensation is worked out;
(c) how claims for compensation are made and dealt with;
(d) a time limit within which a claim for compensation may be made;
(e) information or other things required from a person claiming compensation
that is needed to assess their claim and work out any
compensation;
(f) how any dispute about working out compensation is resolved;
(g) how compensation is paid;
(h) any other matter relevant to providing just terms to a person from whom an
interest is acquired under this Act.
(4) A claim for compensation is not maintainable if brought after the end of a
time limit made for subsection (3)(d), and the
does not apply to the claim.
(5) In this section:
compensation
, for an acquisition of an interest under this Act,
includes the following:
(a) monetary payment;
(b) the transfer or assumption of a loss, liability or expense;
(c) the grant of a right, entitlement or benefit;
(d) any other beneficial term.
44. Calvary asserted that s 10(1) is an aspirational
provision which is merely “declaratory and/or directive”. Calvary
submitted that, rather than looking to the terms of s 10(1), it is
necessary to look at the balance of the Act and Regulations in
ascertain whether in fact just terms are provided. It submitted that the
provision was of a similar nature to
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) which provided that “in applying ... Division [5 of
, the [Administrative Appeals] Tribunal must act in a way that is fair and
just”. Calvary relies upon the description of this
provision by Gageler J
in Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2013] HCA 18
249 CLR 332
as being aspirational or exhortatory.
45. Calvary’s reliance on
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li does not assist. It reflects a
different conclusion
reached in a different statutory context. It does not
provide a sound basis upon which to interpret the Act.
46. The Act as a
whole, and a central provision such as s 10(1), must be interpreted with
two fundamental principles in mind.
47. The first is the direction in
Legislation Act
that an interpretation which best gives effect
to the purpose of the legislation is to be preferred to any other
interpretation.
48. The second, which is aligned with the first, is the
presumption that the legislature intended to enact legislation that is valid.
Thus, if there is a choice between reading a statutory provision in a way that
will invalidate it and reading it in a way that will
not invalidate it, a court
must always choose the latter reading when it is reasonably open: Residual Assco
Group Ltd v Spalvins
[2000] HCA 33
202 CLR 629
; Wainohu v New South
[2011] HCA 24
243 CLR 181
. In the former case a six-judge
majority of the High Court adopted the colourful language of Frankfurter J in
United States v Hutcheson
[1941] USSC 38
(1941) at 235 when he said that
legislation “must not be read in a spirit of mutilating narrowness”.
That is undoubtedly
the case here.
49. When interpreting
starting point must be the text of the statute. The first and most obvious
feature of the statute is the imperative terms of
Territory must ...” That language is indicative of an actual
obligation rather than a mere aspiration or exhortation.
The second feature of
the text is that if the language of
was interpreted as being merely
aspirational and not enforceable then it would add nothing to the terms of
which states that a purpose of the Act is to ensure just terms are
provided for any acquisition. To interpret the text of
in a manner
that was merely an unenforceable repetition of the goal stated in
would be inconsistent with the principle that a court should strive to give a
provision of a statute some effect and prefer a construction
that avoids a
provision being mere surplusage: Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
[1998] HCA 28
194 CLR 355
; Saeed v Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship
[2010] HCA 23
241 CLR 252
; Plaintiff M70/2011 v
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2011] HCA 32
244 CLR 144
50. The existence in
of an actual obligation is reinforced
by five aspects of the context in which that imperative language
51. The first aspect of the context is the express statement of the
purpose of the Act in
to “ensure that interests acquired
under this Act are acquired on just terms”. The Act would only achieve
that purpose
if the Act itself “ensures” the payment of just terms.
It would not “ensure” the payment of just terms if
s 10(1) was
merely aspirational and the payment of just terms made dependent upon the making
by the Executive of regulations.
Section 139
Legislation Act
the adoption of an interpretation which “ensures” acquisition of
property on just terms consistent with the express
purpose stated in
over an interpretation which does not “ensure” such an
52. The second aspect of the context in which
is the terms of
It provides that just terms includes reasonable
compensation for various specified matters. The proper interpretation of the
will be discussed further below. However, for present purposes, it is
is not a merely aspirational provision and, as its opening
words (“Without limiting subsection (1) ...) make clear, it is
There is no basis upon which to read
merely aspirational and unenforceable provision, when it appears in the context
which provides specifically for the content of the just terms
requirement.
53. The third aspect of the context which is of significance, is
the fact that the making of regulations by the Executive is discretionary
than mandatory. That is indicated by the use of the word “may” in
Legislation Act
indicates represents a
discretionary power. The fact that the regulation-making power is discretionary
tends very strongly against
an interpretation of
aspirational and leaving to the Regulations whether or not there is an
enforceable obligation to provide just terms. Such
an interpretation would make
the validity of the legislation contingent upon action by the Executive —
the making of regulations
— which may or may not be taken. It is
unnecessary to determine whether such an approach could ever be permissible
having regard
to the terms of s 23(1)(a) of the Self‑Government Act.
It is sufficient to note that it would be an unusual course to adopt,
one which the Legislative Assembly should readily be understood to have
54. The fourth aspect of the legislative context of s 10(1)
which indicates that it is not merely aspirational are the terms of the
regulation-making power in s 10(3). Section 10(3)(a) and (b) refer to
“how just terms for an interest acquired under this Act
provided” and “how compensation is worked out”. The use of the
word “how” indicates that these
paragraphs refer to the mechanics by
which an entitlement is to be implemented rather than the source of the
entitlement itself.
That is consistent with s 10(1) being a source of
actual obligation rather than a statement of aspiration not giving rise to any
legal right.
55. The fifth and final aspect of the legislative context of
s 10(1) is found in s 20. That is the provision which precludes claims
by Calvary for breach or repudiation of a network agreement arising from the
steps taken in order to introduce the Bill that became
Section 20(3) provides that the prohibition on such claims “does not
limit any right a person may have to compensation
for an acquisition under s 10
(Acquisition must be on just terms).” Although it is s 10(2) which
makes specific reference to
compensation for termination of the network
agreements, the reference in s 20(3) to a “right a person may
be a reference to the terms of s 10(1) which, in terms,
imposes an obligation on the Territory. To read s 10(1) as merely
aspirational
would be inconsistent with the description of the section later in
the Act as giving rise to a “right”.
56. Calvary submitted that
in order for a provision to effectively provide just terms it was necessary that
it be coupled with a right
to determination by a court of that reasonable
compensation or alternatively an “historic shipwreck” clause such as
Lands Acquisition Act
Territory National Emergency Response Act 2007
(Cth), which confer jurisdiction
on the High Court and the Supreme Court to determine compensation or make such
order as is necessary
to ensure that the acquisition is on just terms, as
discussed in Wurridjal v Commonwealth
[2009] HCA 2
237 CLR 309
[462]. Although such provisions have been found to be effective in protecting
Commonwealth legislation from invalidity, no
reason was advanced in support of
the proposition that such clauses provided the “outer limits” of
clauses which might
be effective. The obligation upon the court is to interpret
the statute actually enacted by the Legislative Assembly rather than
to adopt statutory formulations used previously.
57. It is true that
does not expressly provide a mechanism for its enforcement. The
scheme of the Act is to address issues of process in the Regulations,
particular those made under
and (f) which provide for “how
claims for compensation are made and dealt with” and “how any
dispute about working
out compensation is resolved”. If those regulations
provide a mechanism consistent with
then the requirement for an
enforceable entitlement to just terms is met. However, subject to any valid
statutory limitation, it
would be open to a person whose interest is acquired
under the Act to commence proceedings in the Supreme Court to enforce the
entitlement
The Supreme Court is a superior court of general
constitutionally
entrenched by s 48A of the Self‑Government Act. It
is a fundamental principle that, if there is a statutory right that exists
no alternative mechanism provided by the statute for the enforcement of that
right, then it may be enforced in a superior court
of general jurisdiction. That
principle was stated by the House of Lords in Board v Board
[1919] AC 956
962-963 as follows:
[a] right exists, the presumption is that there is a Court which can enforce it,
for if no other mode of enforcing it is prescribed,
that alone is sufficient to
give jurisdiction to the King’s Courts of justice. In order to oust
in the absence of a special law excluding it
altogether, to plead that jurisdiction exists in some other Court.
Royal Insurance Co Ltd v Mylius
[1926] HCA 49
(1926) 38 CLR 477
per Isaacs J;
Re Totaliser Administration Board of Queensland
(1988) 1 Qd
at 217-218.
58. Notwithstanding that the Act does contemplate the making of
regulations as to the matters specified in s 10(3)(c) and (f), the
existence of a discretionary power to make regulations is not sufficient to
indicate an intention to exclude the general jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court.
Such an exclusion could only occur as a result of “clear words”:
Forster v Jododex Aust Pty Ltd
[1972] HCA 61
(1972) 127 CLR 421
at 435-436 per Gibbs J (with
other judges agreeing at 427, 448 and 450). Indeed, it may be that, in view of s
48A of the Self-Government
Act, even clear words would not suffice to exclude
the general jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
59. As a result, the
operation of s 10(1) is not contingent upon the validity of the Regulations
providing for the manner in which
the obligation in the subsection may be
enforced. The fact that s 10(1) does not, in terms, give jurisdiction to
the Supreme Court
to enforce the obligation in the subsection, does not preclude
the enforcement of that obligation or the interpretation of s 10(1)
imposing an enforceable obligation.
The relationship between ss 10(1) and 10(2)
60. The second principal contention of Calvary was that
s 10(2) gives rise to an implication which confines the scope of
Having regard to the opening words of s 10(2) (“Without
limiting subsection (1)”) the case for drawing such an implication
difficult one to make out. The contention of Calvary was that it is only in
relation to the subject matters addressed in s 10(2)
that the requirement
for “reasonable compensation” applies. The concept of
“compensation” in the expression
“reasonable
compensation” picks up the definition in s 10(5). Calvary draws a
distinction between “reasonable compensation”
as referred to in
s 10(2) and the requirement for “just terms” referred to in
s 10(1). The contention appeared to be
that having provided a broad
definition of compensation which is picked up in s 10(2), the subject
matters addressed in s 10(2) are
the only subject matters in relation to
which the broad approach to “compensation” may be adopted, limiting
the capacity
of s 10(1) to provide equivalent compensation in relation to
any subject matter going beyond those specified in s 10(2). Calvary
forward the principle articulated in Anthony Hordern & Sons Ltd v
Amalgamated Clothing & Allied Trades Union of Australia
[1932] HCA 9
(1932) 47 CLR 1
in support of such an interpretation:
the Legislature explicitly gives a power by a particular provision which
prescribes the mode in which it shall be exercised and
the conditions and
restrictions which must be observed, it excludes the operation of general
expressions in the same instrument which
might otherwise have been relied upon
for the same power.
61. The reasoning in Anthony Hordern may be applicable where it can be
inferred that the legislature, by prescribing a more specific
power governed by
conditions, did not intend the general power to be applied in a manner which
avoided those conditions. It is a
principle intended to give effect to the
intention of the legislature worked out by reference to the language of the
relevant provisions.
62. In the present case, the language of the legislature
could not be clearer. The use of the words “Without limiting subsection
(1)” are the clearest possible indication that the legislature did not
intend an interpretation such as that contended for
by Calvary. It would not be
appropriate to interpret the section contrary to the clearly expressed language
of the legislature. There
is no room for the application of the principle
articulated in Anthony Hordern. If the express language used by the
legislature was
not clear enough, the principles referred to earlier, that the
legislation should be interpreted with a preference to an interpretation
best achieves the purpose of the Act and maintains its validity if such an
interpretation is reasonably available, also compel
the same answer. To
interpret s 10(2) so as to impliedly limit s 10(1) would, unless
s 10(2) accommodated every acquisition of property
achieved by the Act,
render the section as a whole invalid. Such an interpretation would be plainly
contrary to the purpose of the
legislature and contrary to the principle that
legislation should be interpreted so as to maintain its validity.
interpretation put forward by Calvary seeks to place the emphasis in
s 10(2) on the words in the chapeau “includes reasonable
compensation” as if those words were intended to either extend what might
otherwise be considered to be just terms or limit
the range of subject matters
where just terms involved the payment of monetary compensation. If that was the
case, paras 10(2)(a)
to (e) could be seen as defining the limited range of
subject matters for which the entitlement to “reasonable
compensation”
might apply. However, the emphasis in s 10(2) is not on
expanding the concept of “just terms” or confining the circumstances
in which monetary compensation is payable. Rather the emphasis of the subsection
should be understood to be on the different subject
matters set out in paras
(a)-(e). Those subject matters are intended to identify subject matters which
are stated to have been acquired
(paras (a), (c)), subject matters which are
“taken to have been acquired” by operation of s 8(2) and 9(2)
(paras (b),
(d)) and matters in relation to which no acquisition occurred or is
taken to have occurred but which are “things arising as
a consequence of
an acquisition” mentioned in the other paragraphs (para (e)). A
non-exhaustive list of such matters is provided
in subparas (e)(i)‑(iv).
The listing of these subject matters is designed to make clear, without being
exhaustive, particular
subject matters in relation to which reasonable
compensation is payable. The content of those paragraphs makes it clear that the
emphasis in s 10(2) should be placed upon the subject matters rather than
on some notion that “reasonable compensation”
extends beyond what
would be required by just terms or is intended to confine the circumstances in
which monetary compensation is
64. This interpretation of
s 10(2) is also reinforced by the definition of “compensation”
in s 10(5). On Calvary’s
interpretation, this definition could be of
significance because it represents an expansion of the obligation in
s 10(1). However,
the breadth of the definition is not such as to
differentiate the content of just terms from “reasonable
compensation”
as defined. Rather, each of the matters in paras (a)-(d) of
the definition of “compensation” may, in an appropriate case,
relevant to the giving of just terms. As a consequence, the breadth of the
definition is not a factor which would result in s
10(2) being interpreted
so that the emphasis was on the concept of “reasonable compensation”
as distinct from the various
subject matters referred to in the paras of
65. Having addressed Calvary’s contentions in relation to
the interpretation of s 10, it is possible to now turn to Calvary’s
contentions as to the validity of individual provisions of the Act.
Challenge to s 11
66. Calvary contended that s 11 involves the acquisition
of the plaintiff’s exclusive right of possession or its right of quiet
enjoyment in the hospital land prior to the acquisition day without paying any
compensation or other just terms. Section 11 provides:
may enter hospital land
(1) An authorised person may, at any reasonable time before the acquisition day
and with reasonable written notice, do any of the
following things:
(a) enter on the hospital land with any person, vehicle or thing for the purpose
of carrying out any necessary or desirable survey,
review or other investigation
related to the proposed construction by the Territory of a public hospital on
the hospital land;
(b) make surveys, take levels, dig or bore into the hospital land, examine the
soil and do any other thing reasonably necessary for
the purpose mentioned in
paragraph (a);
(c) enter on the hospital land to do anything necessary for section 18
(Territory must prepare draft deposited plan) or section 19
(Amendment of
the Crown lease etc);
(d) enter any operational or service delivery part of the public hospital to do
anything reasonably necessary for a purpose of this
Act, including any of the
(i) undertake
an inspection or stocktake of public hospital assets;
(ii) assess the
Territory’s requirements for maintaining and operating facilities and
public hospital assets after the acquisition
(iii) assess
the Territory’s requirements for complying with all licences and
authorisations required by law to operate the
public hospital after the
acquisition day;
(iv) assess the
Territory’s requirements for operating, and maintaining service delivery
standards at, the public hospital
after the acquisition day;
(e) enter on the hospital land to do any other thing reasonably necessary to
prepare for or give effect to a purpose of this Act
or to otherwise exercise a
function under this Act;
(f) any other thing prescribed by regulation.
(2) If requested by an authorised person, Calvary must give the authorised
person any assistance reasonably necessary for the authorised
person to exercise
a function under subsection (1).
(3) Without limiting subsection (2), Calvary must:
(a) give an authorised person access to secured areas in the public hospital;
(b) show an authorised person where records, equipment and other assets in
relation to the public hospital are kept on the hospital
(4) In entering the hospital land under this section, the Territory must
minimise any interference with Calvary’s use of the
land to the extent
reasonably practicable.
(5) In this section:
authorised person
means a person authorised in writing by the
director-general to exercise a function under this section.
67. Section 11 applies in the period prior to the acquisition
day. It gives the Territory a limited right of entry onto the premises
variety of things involving the gathering of information likely to be useful to
it for the purposes of the transition to
the operation of the public hospital
under its ownership and management. It imposes an obligation upon Calvary to
give any assistance
reasonably necessary for this to occur. There is an
obligation on the Territory to minimise any interference with Calvary’s
use of the land to the extent that is reasonably practicable.
provision undoubtedly interferes with Calvary’s right of exclusive
possession. It is therefore an interference with
its proprietary rights.
However, an interference with a proprietary right does not necessarily involve
an acquisition of that right.
Here, a right of entry is created that is for
limited purposes and for a limited time. The Act does not purport to create in
Territory a proprietary interest in the land. Accepting that the boundary
between an interference with a proprietary right and its
acquisition is often
difficult to identify: JT International v Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 43
per Gummow J, the mere fact that the Territory can be characterised as
having obtained some benefit from the exercise of the right
of entry does not
necessarily convert an interference with a proprietary right into an acquisition
of that right. If that was the
case, then a variety of statutory powers of entry
would be rendered invalid. Calvary’s submission was that it was the
of the entry, namely, investigations in anticipation of acquisition of
property, that rendered the power of entry itself an acquisition
of property but
did not cite any authority in support of that proposition.
69. Even if the
granting of the right of entry under s 11, or its exercise, amounted to an
acquisition of property by the Territory,
which may be doubted, then that would
amount to the acquisition of an “interest” within the meaning of
s 10(1). As indicated
earlier in these reasons “interest, in the
public hospital land” is broadly defined: see [13]-[
] above. The acquisition of that
“interest” would attract the obligation on the part of the Territory
to provide just
terms under s 10(1). Therefore, even though the entry may
have taken place prior to the acquisition of the public hospital land effected
by s 8, the entry would amount to a separate acquisition for which just
terms would need to be provided.
70. Therefore, Calvary’s challenge to
s 11 fails.
Challenge to s 12
71. Calvary contended that s 12 provides for the
acquisition of its confidential information without providing any compensation
other just terms. Section 12 provides:
to provide information
(1) For a purpose of this Act, the director-general may request Calvary provide
documents or other information about any of the following:
(a) public patient health records;
(b) stock in trade and inventory of the public hospital;
(c) fixed and non-fixed assets of the public hospital including asset
maintenance records and condition reports;
(d) trade debts and other receivables owed in relation to the public
(e) suppliers of goods and services in relation to the public hospital;
(f) subleases, underleases, licences, easements, rights of way and any other
occupancy rights or arrangements in relation to the
public hospital land;
(g) accounting and financial records in relation to the operation of the public
(h) public hospital employees including employment records and payroll
information;
(i) public hospital contracts;
(j) any trust funds for the public hospital including details about the specific
purpose for which the funds are held or the trusts
established;
(k) any existing or pending investigation, proceeding (whether civil or
criminal) or remedy in relation to a right, privilege or
liability under a law
applying in the ACT in relation to the public hospital;
(l) details about any existing security over the hospital land, public hospital
assets or other property in relation to the public
hospital including—
(i) contact
details of the securityholder; and
(ii) the total
amount of debt secured by the security and details of any other security
instrument which secures that debt;
(m) details of any other personal property security interest in relation to the
public hospital or the arrangements to which they
relate, including contact
details of the security interest holder;
(n) intellectual property relating to the operation of the public hospital,
including any intellectual property created under a network
(o) public hospital administration records, including any reports, audited
materials, regulatory matters, maintenance and operational
(p) any other matter relevant to a purpose of this Act;
(q) anything else prescribed by regulation.
(2) A request—
(a) must be in writing; and
(b) must state a reasonable period within which the information is to be
provided; and
(c) may state a reasonable format or way in which the information is to be
(3) Calvary must—
(a) comply with the request within the stated period; and
(b) provide the information in any stated format or way.
(4) For a purpose of this Act, the director-general may give any information,
including a public patient health record, provided
to them by Calvary under this
section to a Territory employee or contractor.
72. Section 12 is an information request provision which
operates both before and after the acquisition day. Section 17 is an information
request provision which operates only after the acquisition day.
73. Section
12 must be assessed in light of the termination of the network agreements by
operation of s 14(1)(b) and the obligation
under cl 36.9 of the agreement
dated 7 December 2011 (which is one of the terminated network agreements) that:
On the expiration or earlier
termination of this Agreement, Calvary must deliver to the Territory Contract
Material, Territory Material
and Health Records (other than copies of material
that the Territory has authorised Calvary to retain).
74. Health Records are defined in cl 1.1 as follows:
Health Records means health records (as defined in the
Health Records (Privacy and Access) Act 1997
(ACT) created, written or
otherwise brought into existence as part of, or for the purposes of the
provision of public health services
under this Agreement.
75. Calvary’s submissions were pitched at a high level of generality.
No particular factual matters were referred to in order
to establish the
confidential nature of the information other than that “[t]he matters
described are by their nature confidential”
and a reference to the
decision of Gummow J in Smith Klein & French Laboratories (Aust) Ltd v
Secretary, Department of Community
Services and Health
(1990) 22 FCR 73
120-122. No submissions were directed to the provisions of the network agreement
dated 7 December 2011 which permitted the Territory
to have access to, inspect
and take copies of Calvary’s financial records (cls 14.4,
76. Even if it is assumed for present purposes that the factual and
legal basis was established for documents or information in the
referred to in ss 12(1)(a)‑(q) to constitute property of Calvary, and
that the provision of such documents or information
to the Territory amounted to
an acquisition of that property, that would not be enough to establish
invalidity. That is because any
such acquisition of property would be caught by
the obligation in s 10(1) to provide just terms to
77. Calvary’s challenge to s 12 fails.
Challenge to s 13
78. Calvary contended that s 13 provides for the
acquisition of the plaintiff’s exclusive right of possession or right of
enjoyment of the hospital land without providing any compensation or other
just terms. Section 13 provides:
and Territory must cooperate to ensure safe and orderly transition
(1) Calvary and the Territory must act in good faith, cooperate and do all other
things reasonably necessary to ensure—
(a) the safe and orderly transition of the operation of the public hospital to
the Territory; and
(b) the continued operation of, and maintenance of service delivery standards
at, the public hospital.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), Calvary must—
(a) appoint a senior executive to—
operation of the public hospital to the Territory;
(ii) coordinate
Calvary’s role in the transition of the operation of the public hospital
to the Territory; and
(b) cooperate with the Territory to develop a transition plan for the transfer
of the operation of the public hospital and ensure
its employees, officers and
contractors comply with the plan; and
(c) provide all reasonable assistance to enable the Territory to obtain all
licences and authorisations required by law to operate
the public hospital;
(d) provide reasonable access to any records management information technology
systems used for public patient health records, employee
and payroll records,
financial records and other operations management records; and
(e) ensure its employees and officers provide all reasonable assistance to the
Territory to assist in the transition of the operation
of the public hospital to
the Territory and ensure there is sufficient staffing to do so; and
(f) ensure all maintenance and repair of public hospital facilities and public
hospital assets continues until the acquisition day;
(g) comply with all requirements under this Act as soon as is reasonably
practicable; and
(h) provide reasonable assistance to the Territory to enable the Territory to
comply with its obligations under this Act; and
(i) not do anything that hinders, obstructs or delays the transition of the
operation of the public hospital to the Territory; and
(j) promptly notify the Territory of any matter of which it is aware may hinder,
obstruct or delay the transition of the operation
of the public hospital to the
Territory; and
(k) do anything else prescribed by regulation.
(3) Without limiting subsection (1), the Territory must—
(a) appoint a senior executive to—
operation of the public hospital to the Territory;
(ii) coordinate
the Territory’s role in the transition of the operation of the public
hospital to the Territory; and
(b) cooperate with Calvary to develop a transition plan for the transfer of the
operation of the public hospital and ensure its employees
and contractors comply
with the plan; and
(c) ensure that any disruption to Calvary’s operation of facilities on the
private hospital land caused by the transition of
the operation of the public
hospital to the Territory is minimised to the extent reasonably practicable;
(d) comply with all requirements under this Act as soon as is reasonably
practicable; and
(e) provide reasonable assistance to Calvary to enable Calvary to comply with
its obligations under this Act; and
(f) not do anything that hinders, obstructs or delays Calvary in complying with
its obligations under this Act; and
(g) on request by Calvary, provide Calvary with any reasonable assistance to
enable Calvary to comply with its obligations under
this Act; and
(h) promptly notify Calvary of any matter of which it is aware may hinder,
obstruct or delay the transition of the operation of the
public hospital to the
Territory; and
(i) do anything else prescribed by regulation.
79. Section 13 is a provision requiring Calvary and the
Territory to cooperate so as to achieve the overall purpose of the Act. It
applies both before and after the acquisition date. It involves the imposition
of a legal obligation to act in a particular way.
It does not acquire property.
However, having regard to the fact that the obligations imposed are integrally
related to the preparation
for and implementation of the acquisition of the
public hospital land and the public hospital assets, just terms for those
acquisitions
require that, if there is a loss to Calvary arising from the
operation of this section, Calvary be compensated for that loss. It
may be that
there is, in fact, no loss of significance to Calvary so far as its staff are
involved in activities prior to the acquisition
date, because it is the
Territory that pays for the operation of the hospital in any event. However,
activities post acquisition
which are not otherwise funded by the Territory
would be encompassed within the requirement for just terms.
80. Calvary’s challenge to the validity of s 13 fails.
Challenge to s 14(2)
81. Calvary contended that ss 14(2)(a) and (c) provide for the
acquisition of the Calvary’s interests in employment agreements
public hospital employees without providing any compensation or other just
terms. The challenged provisions of s 14 are as follows:
of public hospital—generally
(2) A regulation may provide for the following matters:
(a) the offer of employment by the Territory to public hospital employees and
employment by the Territory of those employees and
related matters;
(c) for public hospital contracts—
novation or assignment of the contracts to the Territory; and
arrangements in relation to the contracts, including renegotiation by the
Territory of existing contractual arrangements
with other parties to the
82. As will be apparent from the terms of s 14(2) set out
above, it is a provision which empowers the making of certain regulations.
content and effect of those regulations, as distinct from their subject matter,
is not prescribed by the terms of the statute.
83. So far as s 14(2)(a)
is concerned, the statute empowers the making of regulations about the offer of
employment by the Territory
to public hospital employees and employment by the
Territory of those employees. It appears that the Territory may wish to offer
new contracts to employees of Calvary involved in the operation of the public
hospital whose contracts of employment will be either
terminated in anticipation
of the acquisition of the hospital by the Territory or frustrated by that
acquisition. There is nothing
regulation an acquisition of any of Calvary’s property. It simply permits
a regulation
hospital. Section 23(1)(a) of the Self-Government Act could not, therefore,
provide a basis upon which this provision would be invalid.
84. Section
14(2)(c) empowers the making of regulations about the novation or assignment of
“public hospital contracts”
to the Territory or other arrangements
in relation to such contracts. The term “public hospital contract”
in the Dictionary as follows:
hospital contract
(a) means a contract (not including a network agreement) to which Calvary or a
related corporation is a party necessary for or ancillary
to the operation of
the public hospital or a public health service; and
(b) includes a contract (not including a network agreement) prescribed by
regulation.
85. By empowering, in general terms, the making of regulations
covering novation, assignment or any other arrangements in relation
contracts, the Act does not acquire any property from Calvary or any other
identifiable person. Calvary did not establish
that its rights under any such
contracts necessarily amounted to “property” for the purposes of
s 23(1)(a) or that novation,
assignment or other arrangements in relation
to such contracts necessarily would amount to an “acquisition” for
the purposes
of that subsection. It is possible that regulations made under this
empowering provision may go beyond interference with contractual
rights and may
involve an acquisition of property. If that was the case then the obligation in
subs 10(1)-(2) to provide just terms
would be engaged in relation to the
person from whom the interest was acquired. Alternatively, if Calvary suffers
losses arising
from contracts relating to the operation of the public hospital
as a result of the acquisition of the public hospital land and the
hospital assets then those losses would be compensable under ss 10(1) and
86. Calvary’s challenges to ss 14(2)(a) and (c) both
Challenge to s 15(1)(b)
87. Calvary contended that s 15(1)(b) provides for the
acquisition of the plaintiff’s exclusive right of possession or right
quiet enjoyment in the private hospital land without providing any compensation
or other just terms.
88. Section 15 provides for reciprocal licences to be
granted by the Territory and Calvary to enter onto each other’s land for
the purposes of the Act in order to ensure the operation of their facilities.
The section is as follows:
to hospital land on and after acquisition day
(1) On the acquisition day—
(a) the Territory grants Calvary a licence to enter on the public hospital land
and do all things reasonably necessary—
(i) to allow
Calvary to comply with its obligations under this Act; and
(ii) to do any
other thing reasonably required to ensure the continued operation of facilities
on the private hospital land; and
(iii) for any
other reason prescribed by regulation; and
(b) Calvary grants the Territory a licence to enter on the private hospital
(i) to allow
the Territory to comply with its obligations under this Act; and
anything mentioned in section 11; and
(iii) to do any
other thing reasonably required to ensure—
(A) the safe and orderly transition of the operation of the public hospital
to the Territory; and
(B) the continued operation of, and maintenance of service delivery standards
at, the public hospital; and
(iv) for any
other reason prescribed by regulation.
Public Unleased
Land Act 2013
does not apply to the grant of a licence by the Territory
under this section except that the licence is taken to be a licence for
(4) (Offence—use public unleased land without permit).
(3) In entering land under a licence granted under this section, the
Territory and Calvary, must minimise any interference with the
party’s use of the land to the extent reasonably practicable.
(4) This section expires on the day declared by the Minister.
(5) A declaration under subsection (4) is a notifiable instrument.
89. In contrast to
which is in the form of a
statutory right of entry,
uses the language of the grant of a licence.
There is nothing in the explanatory material to explain the reason for the
difference.
While a licence may in some circumstances be granted in combination
with a proprietary interest in the land, the grant of a mere
licence does not
create an interest in property: Cowell v Rosehill Racecourse Co Ltd (1937) 56
CLR 605; R v Toohey; Ex parte Meneling
Station Pty Ltd
[1982] HCA 69
(1982) 158 CLR 327.
the statutory licence granted by
is a mere licence as it is not
granted in combination with a proprietary interest in land.
90. In the event
that the grant of a licence by
does involve the acquisition of
an “interest” within the meaning of
, then Calvary would
be entitled to just terms for that acquisition:
Even if the grant
of the licence did not involve the acquisition of an “interest”
within the meaning of
, the granting of a licence is a matter
arising “as a consequence of” the acquisition by the Territory of
the public hospital
land and hence, to the extent that any loss to Calvary
arises as a result of its exercise, Calvary is entitled to reasonable
compensation
s 10(2)(e).
91. Calvary’s challenge to
Challenge to
92. Calvary contended that
provides for the
acquisition of the plaintiff’s confidential information without providing
any compensation or other just terms.
access to records relating to public hospital
(1) The director-general may at any time after the acquisition day request that
(a) provide documents and other information reasonably required by the Territory
in relation to the following:
(i) any past, current or future investigation, proceeding (whether civil or
criminal) or remedy in relation to a right, privilege
or liability under a law
applying in the ACT in relation to the operation of the public hospital before
the acquisition day;
(ii) the employment of public hospital employees before the acquisition day
including in relation to their rights and entitlements;
(iii) any other thing prescribed by regulation; and
(b) do anything reasonably required in relation to the storage and retention of
information mentioned in paragraph (a) including
storing the information in a
stated electronic form.
Nothing in this section limits any obligation Calvary or a
related corporation would otherwise have under a territory privacy law
(2) A request—
(a) must be in writing; and
(b) must state a reasonable period within which the request must be complied
(c) may state a reasonable format or way in which the information is to be
provided, stored or retained.
(3) Calvary must—
(a) comply with the request within the stated period; and
(b) provide, store or retain the information in any stated format or way.
is considerably more confined than
Subject to other matters being prescribed by regulation pursuant to
s 17(1)(a)(iii)
, it covers past, current or future investigations,
proceedings or remedies relating to the operation of the public hospital and
information
acquisition day, including in relation to their rights and entitlements.
position in relation to
is similar to that in relation to
94. Even assuming the factual and legal basis necessary in order
for the information to be property and assuming that by the provision
documents or that information to the director-general it is thereby acquired by
the Territory, that would not be enough
to establish the invalidity of
That is because it would be caught by the obligation in
to provide just terms to a person from whom an interest is acquired under the
Act or the obligation under
95. Calvary’s
challenge to
Challenge to
96. Calvary contended that
provides for the
acquisition of its legal rights in respect of repudiation or breach of a network
agreement (including the Calvary
Network Agreement between Calvary and the
Territory dated 7 December 2011), including its rights to loss of bargain
damages without
providing for any full compensation or other just
97. Section 20 ensures that certain matters do not amount to
repudiation or breach of any network agreement:
repudiation etc of network agreements
(1) None of the following constitutes a repudiation or breach of a network
(a) the development or preparation of the Bill for this Act, or government or
Cabinet consideration of policy carried out in developing
or preparing the
(b) the presentation of the Bill in, and agreement to the Bill by, the
Legislative Assembly, or any processes associated with the
passage of the Bill
through the Legislative Assembly;
(c) the making, notification or commencement of this Act;
(d) any act done in accordance with this Act;
(e) anything done by the Territory to give Calvary notice (whether in writing or
orally) of the Territory’s intention to do
a thing mentioned in paragraphs
(a) to (d);
(f) any other communication between the Territory and Calvary before the
commencement of this Act about a matter mentioned in paragraphs
(a) to (e).
(2) Calvary or a related corporation may not bring any claim against the
Territory for repudiation or breach of a network agreement,
and is not entitled
to any compensation or remedy for repudiation or breach of a network agreement,
because of an event or matter
mentioned in subsection (1).
(3) Subsection (2) does not limit any right a person may have to compensation
for an acquisition under section 10 (Acquisition must
be on just terms).
98. Section 20 exists in the context of s 14 which, by
statute, terminates the network agreements on the acquisition day. That is
act of the legislature, not of the executive government of the
99. The purpose of s 20 appears to be to ensure that all
claims for compensation are dealt with through a single mechanism, that is,
provision of just terms for the acquisition of property. That is because
s 10(2)(e) makes it clear that reasonable compensation
must be paid for the
“termination of the network agreements under section 14(1)”. Thus,
the legislation makes it clear
that the intention is to provide compensation for
the loss of the network agreements even though it limits the processes by which
that can occur.
100. Calvary claims that the matters referred to in
s 20 amount to a “repudiatory breach” of contract which would
it to claim loss of bargain damages. It appeared to contend that the
extinguishment of Calvary’s right to bring a claim for
damages amounts to
an acquisition of those rights and that s 20(3) does not provide just
101. This argument assumed that the steps referred to in
s 20(1)(a)-(f) could amount to a repudiation or breach of a network
The submissions of Calvary referred to a “repudiatory
breach” although the submissions did not clearly articulate why,
circumstances where the network agreements were terminated by the legislature,
the earlier actions in formulating the Bill and
presenting that to the
legislature for consideration could amount to a repudiation or breach of a
network agreement. The highest
that it might be put was these matters involved
the taking of steps in order to terminate the agreements by statute — a
termination
which by reason of the statute would necessarily be lawful.
102. In the course of oral submissions, counsel for Calvary submitted that
the matters in s 20(1) amounted to “an anticipatory
that’s capable of being characterised as a repudiation”. However
anticipatory breach is a concept which applies
before the time for performance
is due, if the promisor indicates that when performance is due the promisor will
not be ready, willing
or able to perform: see J D Heydon, Heydon on
Contract (Lawbook Co, 2019) at [24.250]-[24.310]. Such a breach is only complete
the repudiation is accepted: Heydon at [24.300]. Accepting that the concept
of anticipatory breach could apply in circumstances of
long-term agreements
which required ongoing acts of performance, nothing was pointed to that
indicated that, so long as the network
agreements remained on foot, the
Territory was not ready, willing or able to perform them. Further, the
submissions did not point
to any facts which would indicate that any
anticipatory breach of the network agreements had been accepted by Calvary as a
repudiation
of those agreements prior to their termination by s 14(1)(b).
Without such an acceptance there was no completed breach and no cause
had vested.
103. However, it is unnecessary to pursue these issues further.
Even if it be assumed that a cause of action accrued by reason of
one or other
of the matters referred to in s 20(1)(a)‑(f), and that vested cause
of action was nullified by reason of s 20(2),
so as to amount, by parity of
reasoning with Georgiadis v Australian and Overseas Telecommunications
Corporation
[1994] HCA 6
(1994) 179 CLR 297
, to an acquisition of property, s 20(3)
makes it clear that there remains the entitlement to compensation for an
acquisition under
s 10. Section 10(2)(e) expressly provides that reasonable
compensation is payable for “the termination of the network agreements
under section 14 (1).” Calvary’s submissions did not explain how any
contractual right that it might have had as a result
of the matters referred to
in s 20(1)(a)-(f) would achieve for it a more favourable outcome than is
provided for expressly in s 10(2)(e).
Plainly enough, Calvary has lost the
benefit of the network agreements. It is expressly entitled to reasonable
compensation for that
104. Even if the issue had not been dealt with
expressly, to the extent that what was acquired were money-making assets, just
under s 10(1) for the acquisition of the public hospital land and
public hospital assets would, in any event, have required for the
loss of the
benefit of the network agreements to be factored in as part of the process of
assessing the value of those assets.
105. Calvary’s challenge to the
validity of s 20 fails.
Challenge to s 25
106. Calvary contended that s 25 was invalid to the extent
that any or all of ss 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 or 17 of the Act were invalid.
25 provides:
order to enforce exercise of powers
(1) This section applies if—
(a) a person hinders or obstructs or intends to hinder or obstruct an authorised
person in the exercise of a function under section
(b) Calvary does not comply with a requirement under—
(i) section 11
(Territory may enter hospital land); or
(ii) section 12
(Calvary to provide information); or
(iii) section
13 (Calvary and Territory must cooperate to ensure safe and orderly transition
(iv) section 14
(Operation of public hospital—generally); or
(v) section 17
(3) (Continued access to records relating to public hospital).
(2) The Magistrates Court may, on application by the director-general, make an
(a) authorising a police officer or other stated person to provide assistance or
use force as is reasonably necessary to allow an
authorised person to exercise
their power under section 11; or
(b) requiring Calvary, or a related corporation nominated under section 21 (2),
to comply with a requirement mentioned in subsection
(3) The director-general must give a copy of an application under subsection (2)
to Calvary or the related corporation.
(4) Calvary or the related corporation is entitled to appear and be heard on the
hearing of the application.
(5) In this section:
authorised person
see section 11 (5).
107. Section 25 applies in two distinct circumstances:
(a) a person hinders or obstructs or intends to hinder
or obstruct an authorised person in the exercise of a function under s 11 (s
25(1)(a)); or
(b) the plaintiff does not comply with a requirement under ss 11, 12, 13, 14, 15
or 17 (ss 25(1)(b)(i), (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v)).
108. The Amended Originating Application recognised that
Calvary’s challenge to the validity of s 25 was consequential upon
its challenge to the provisions which s 25 allows to be enforced. Having
regard to the fact that the challenges to the validity of
those other statutory
provisions have failed, the challenge to s 25 must also fail.
The Act as a whole
109. Having addressed Calvary’s contentions in relation
to individual provisions it is necessary to address its arguments about
as a whole. These were identified in its Amended Originating Application as
Act as a whole does not provide for acquisition of the property of the Plaintiff
on just terms, in that:
provides for the acquisition of the whole of the assets, undertaking and
business of the Plaintiff without providing full compensation;
provides for other burdensome terms on which the acquisition occurs which are
6(1)(c) removes the protections that would otherwise be available to the
Plaintiff, including the protections under the
Lands Acquisition Act 1994
those circumstances, the acquisition of the whole of the assets, undertaking and
business of the Plaintiff is beyond the power
of the Legislative Assembly of the
Australian Capital Territory (Legislative Assembly) under, and inconsistent
section 23(1)(a)
Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government)
(Cth) (Self‑Government Act).
110. These grounds must be assessed in light of the proper
interpretation of s 10, set out above, and the rejection of each of the
specific challenges to provisions of the Act. The contentions in paras a, b and
c need to be addressed only to the extent to which
they go beyond the challenges
to specific provisions. Paragraph d does not need to be separately addressed as
it appears to simply
state a conclusion arising from the other
paragraphs.
Whole of business
111. Calvary submitted that “[a] business is also
property for which just terms must be provided”. Its submissions
characterised
the “business in operating the Calvary Public
Hospital” as being additional to the acquisition of the public hospital
land and public hospital assets. It submitted that Bank of New South Wales v
Commonwealth
[1948] HCA 7
(1948) 76 CLR 1
provided an example of the acquisition of a
business for which just terms were required to be provided.
reference to “business” is not useful. That an acquisition might
include all of the property of a business operating
as a going concern does not
convert the “business” into an item of property. There are a series
of items of property
which make up that business and it is that for which just
terms must be provided. If the acquisition of that property has consequences
beyond the market value of those items then just terms requires compensation for
that loss. To talk separately about the acquisition
“business” as distinct from using it as a shorthand method of
describing an aggregation of particular items of
property and rights is not
113. In the present case, the assets which are expressly acquired
pursuant to the provisions of the Act inevitably put an end to the
operation by
Calvary of a public hospital in the Territory. In that sense, the acquisition
under the Act puts an end to its “business”.
To the extent to which
the acquisition of the assets of the “business” removes an
income‑earning potential going
beyond the value of the assets then the
loss of that income‑earning potential must be compensated for under the
requirement
to provide just terms. Attempting to characterise the acquisition of
the “business” as being an acquisition of property
additional to the
property expressly acquired by the provisions of the Act does not, in this case,
alter the content of the requirement
for just terms or affect the validity of
Other burdensome terms
114. Calvary also claimed that ss 11, 12, 13, 14(1)(c), 14(2),
15 and 17 confer powers on the Territory and impose obligations on
the plaintiff
that amount to burdensome terms upon which its property is acquired and, as a
result, the acquisition of its property
is not on just terms and beyond power of
the Legislative Assembly.
115. This contention would be of significance in
circumstances where the rights interfered with by these provisions were found
to be proprietary rights or not to involve acquisitions. The plaintiff
contended that these terms operate and render the acquisitions
of property
effected by ss 8 and 9 to be other than on just terms.
116. The merit of the
submissions made by Calvary must be determined in the context of the obligation
to provide just terms under
s 10(1) and, in particular, the obligation in
s 10(2)(e) to provide reasonable compensation for “things arising as
a consequence
[of one of the acquisitions referred to in
117. Calvary’s contention was that the
obligations under ss 11, 12 13, 14 and 17 are all burdensome obligations
which may be
enforced by the Magistrates Court. On the hypothesis that none of
these matters involve an acquisition of property for which compensation
payable, the contention was that they render the acquisitions which do occur of
public hospital land and public hospital assets
118. Three points can
be made about this submission. First, insofar as the obligations in ss 11,
12, 13, 14 and 17 do not themselves
involve acquisitions then there is no
obligation to provide just terms. To that extent the Act imposes burdens upon
Calvary but in
a way which is within the scope of s 22 of the
Self-Government Act but outside the scope of the prohibition in s 23(1)(a).
that the burdens are outside the scope of s 23(1)(a), they are not
prohibited.
119. Second, insofar as Calvary suffers loss as a result of the
burdens imposed upon it by obligations associated with the implementation
acquisitions under ss 8 and 9, then it is entitled to be compensated as
part of the just terms provided by s 10(1). That is
made clear by the terms
of s 10(2)(e) which allows compensation for “things arising as a
consequence of” the acquisitions
referred to in the earlier paragraphs of
s 10(2). The obligations imposed upon Calvary which arise as a result of
the need to ensure
a smooth transition of the public hospital operations from
Calvary to the Territory are burdens which Calvary would not have been
to bear if the acquisition had not occurred and hence fall within the expression
“things arising as a consequence
of” the acquisition. A possible
argument against this is that the burdens in s 11 only exist prior to the
acquisition day and
the obligations in ss 12 and 13 exist both before and
after the acquisition day. It might be argued that insofar as the sections
operate prior to the acquisition occurring then they could not be within the
scope of compensation payable under s 10(2)(e). That
would be, so the
argument goes, because those earlier obligations cannot be characterised as
being “as a consequence of”
acquisitions which only occur
afterwards. Assuming, for the sake of argument, that to be correct, then the
obligation in s 10(1)
requires just terms for the acquisition of the
interests undoubtedly acquired under the Act by ss 8 and 9 and, if that
requires further
payment to compensate Calvary for the inconvenience, effort or
other loss incurred as a result of the operation of s 11, 12 and 13
to the acquisition day, then such an amount must be paid. There is no doubt that
a payment of money may be an appropriate form
of compensation for such
obligations. Whether any such payment is required would have to be assessed in
light of the actual burdens
imposed and the fact that Calvary’s operations
up until the acquisition date are funded by the Territory.
120. Third,
Calvary is a corporation. Obligations imposed upon it pre or post acquisition
are obligations which it may perform through
its servants or agents. If the
corporation does not wish to perform the obligations directly through its
servants, it may take steps
to contract them out. The cost of doing so is an
expense for which money is an appropriate form of compensation.
Removal of protections under the
Lands Acquisition Act 1994
121. The final part of Calvary’s submissions concerned
the disapplication of the
Lands Acquisition Act 1994
(ACT) to the Act. That
disapplication is made clear by
, which provides that the
Acquisition Act
does not apply in relation to anything done under the Act.
Calvary submitted that, in assessing whether just terms are provided,
legitimate to have regard to an Act such as the
Lands Acquisition Act
comparator, citing Grace Brothers Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1946] HCA 11
(1946) 72 CLR 269
291. In that passage Dixon J said:
will therefore be of some help, when the justice of the terms provided by the
Commonwealth legislation is in question, to see how
other British and
legislatures have regarded the same matter.
122. Calvary submitted that procedural protections that would have been
given under the
Lands Acquisition Act
do not exist in the Act and that there are
different provisions for compensation. So far as the first of these complaints
is concerned,
Calvary referred to the process set out in
Acquisition Act
which includes a pre-acquisition declaration:
availability of a process for reconsideration of the declaration:
provision of reasons for confirming, revoking or varying the declaration:
and the fact that a confirmation or variation of a pre-acquisition
declaration is a disallowable instrument. It referred to the fact
decision of the Executive to reject a claim for compensation is reviewable in
the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal (ACAT):
It also referred to the potential for the target of the acquisition to remain in
occupation of the land for a period of six months
or a longer period if there is
123. The comparison with the
Lands Acquisition Act
not a useful one. While it can be seen that a number of provisions in the
Acquisition Act
provided models for provisions in the present Act, the
Acquisition Act
is a law designed for general application to the acquisition of
land. It is an empowering provision which lets the executive government
steps to acquire land with only limited potential for review by the legislature.
In common with many other decisions of the
executive government which affect
citizens, there is an entitlement to review in the ACAT.
124. The present
legislation is of a substantially different nature. It seeks to acquire both the
land and the assets of a major public
hospital. It seeks to do so while
maintaining the hospital operations during the period of the acquisition. It is
legislation which
is site‑specific, so that the application of the
legislation to the land and other assets of Calvary have been specifically
approved by the legislature. Having regard to the different nature of the
acquisition, it is not surprising that there are different
statutory provisions
in place. The fact that a legislative choice has been made to adopt the
provisions in fact adopted as distinct
from other provisions that might have
been adopted does not demonstrate a lack of just terms. It is true that other
acquisition legislation
might provide a comparator, but its value as a
comparator is limited by the extent to which the circumstances addressed are
and the fact that the ultimate question is not whether something
different could have been enacted but rather whether just terms
are provided.
The terms of the
Lands Acquisition Act
do not demonstrate or provide any
adequate foundation for a conclusion that the Act falls within the scope of
s 23(1)(a).
Conclusion on challenge to whole Act
125. The additional matters which go beyond the challenges to
the individual provisions do not demonstrate that the Act as a whole
126. None of the grounds put forward by Calvary demonstrated
either that the Act as a whole or any of its provisions were laws which,
reason of s 23(1)(a) of the Self-Government Act, the Legislative Assembly
had no power to make. It was therefore unnecessary to
consider the question of
severance pursuant to
Legislation Act
127. Insofar as
Calvary’s proceedings involved a challenge to the validity of the Act,
those proceedings were required to be
128. It is for these reasons that on 9 June 2023 the Court made
the following orders:
application for a declaration that the
Health Infrastructure Enabling Act
(ACT) is invalid and of no effect is dismissed.
application for a declaration that
sections 11
Health Infrastructure Enabling Act 2023
(ACT) is invalid
and of no effect is dismissed.
application for interlocutory orders preventing the defendant from exercising
powers granted under the
Health Infrastructure Enabling Act 2023
undertaking given by the Territory on 7 June 2023 and extended on 8 June 2023 is
discharged.
reasons of the court are reserved.
questions of costs are reserved.
balance of the proceedings is adjourned for directions on 16 June 2023 at 9.30am
I certify that the preceding one hundred and twenty‑eight [128]
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment
Date: 26 June 2023
RTF format (445 KB)
Signed PDF/A format