Police v Margaret Smith (a pseudonym) [2025] ACTMC 7 (18 March 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Police v Margaret Smith (a pseudonym)
[2025] ACTMC 7
Hearing Dates:
29 October 2024, 04 February 2025
Decision Date:
Magistrate Burt
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– application of s. 17
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
(ACT) – participation in Galambany circle sentencing –
disadvantaged upbringing- role as carer – mental health
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Liquor Act 2010
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Working with Vulnerable People (Background Checking) Act 2011
Cases Cited:
R v De Simoni
(1981) 147 CLR 383
[2005] HCA 25; 228 CLR 357
[2013] HCA 31
DPP v Moala (No 3)
[2023] ACTSC 306
Owen Patterson v Wendy
[2021] ACTMC 16
Harlovich v Sebbens
[2024] ACTSC
DPP v Chatfield
[2024] ACTSC 329
DPP v Brooks
DPP v Fenton
[2022] VCC 2309
Veen v The Queen (No
[1988] 164 CLR 465
[2022] ACTCA 59
Dalgliesh (a pseudonym)
[2017] HCA 41
262 CLR 428
[2023] ACTSC 154
MT v The Queen
[2021] ACTCA 26
17 ACTLR 22
[2017] ACTCA 9
12 ACTLR 103
Cotter v Corvisy
[2008] ACTSC 64
R v Carpenter
[2022] ACTSC 6
DPP v Monaghan
[2024] ACTSC 183
[2006] NSWCCA 381
; 167 A Crim R
[2017] NSWCCA 208
v Winchester
(1992) 58 A Crim R 345
(1995) 56 FCR 465
; 46 NSWLR 346
Bugmy v The Queen (2013)
249 CLR 571
Hoskins v R
[2021] NSWCCA 169
[2019] NSWCCA 133
[2024] NSWCCA 29
Lloyd v The Queen
[2022] NSWCCA 18
Talukder v Dunbar (2009)
[2009] ACTSC 42
194 A Crim R 545
[2020] NSWCCA 209
[2017] NSWCCA 116
[1999] 46 NSWLR 346
[2016] NSWCCA 126
DPP (Cth) v De La Rosa
(2010) 79 NSWLR 1
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA 102
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
(2011) 244 CLR 120
[2002] NSWCCA 255
Skelton v R
[2015] NSWCCA 320
[2021] ACTSC 160
[2021] NSWCCA 258
Balthazaar v The Queen
[2012] ACTCA 26
Vuolo v Fall
[2023] ACTCA 33
[2017] ACTSC 190
R v Ingrassia
(1997) 41 NSWLR 447
Proud v Sladic
[2014] ACTCA 26
Armstrong v Saddler
[2024] ACTSC 263
Bennett v Daley
[2021] ACTSC 159
291 A Crim R 495
DPP v Moala (No 3)
[2023] ACTSC 306
Fares v DPP (No 2)
[2025] ACTCA 2
Hogan v Hinch
[2011] HCA 4
243 CLR 506
The Police (Informant)
Margaret Smith (a pseudonym) (Defendant)
Representation:
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Crown)
Aboriginal Legal Service ACT/NSW (Defendant)
File Numbers:
CC 6556 of 2024, CC 3606 of 2024, CC 3607 of 2024
MAGISTRATE BURT:
Introduction
Smith (a pseudonym) is to be sentenced for offending that occurred on 24 March
2024. She has pleaded guilty to:
(a) Assaulting the complainant, contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT), carrying a maximum penalty of 2 years imprisonment, on conviction (CAN
2024/3605).
(b) Remaining in, or re-entering the vicinity of premises, contrary to
Liquor Act 2010
(ACT), carrying a
maximum penalty of 20 penalty units (CAN 2024/3606).
(c) Destroying or damaging property (other than by means of fire or explosive)
which belonged to someone else, where she intended
to destroy or cause damage or
was reckless as to whether she destroyed or caused damage, to the property,
contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT), carrying a maximum
penalty of 50 penalty units or imprisonment for 2 years, or both (CAN
2024/6556).
The offending
24 March 2024, Ms Smith attended a business described as ‘Langtrees Show
Girls’ (Langtrees). The day before, on 23
March 2024, Ms Smith had
commenced ‘trial’ employment as a sex worker at Langtrees. After
commencing this trial, Ms Smith
had left the premises for a time and returned
around 2:30am. It was a short time after this that the offending occurred.
complainant was working as a receptionist at Langtrees that night. She observed
Ms Smith return to the premises, go into the bar
area, and get ‘in the
face’ of a male patron. Ms Smith followed this man to the bathroom and
started yelling at him.
the reception area, a group congregated around Ms Smith. The group included a
female manager at Langtrees. The manager positioned
herself between Ms Smith and
the male patron. Ms Smith continued yelling, both at the male patron and the
intervening manger.
complainant also joined the group. Ms Smith continued arguing. The complainant
raised her hand and pushed Ms Smith in the neck
area to move her back.
Smith then proceeded to swing punches at the complainant and the complainant
moved backwards to avoid being punched. Ms Smith continued
to yell at the male
patron and turned towards the complainant.
Smith then grabbed the back of the complainant’s hair as she tried to duck
behind the manager. Whilst behind the manager,
Ms Smith continued throwing
punches with her closed right hand. Ms Smith’s right hand connected with
the left side of the complainant’s
face three to five times. Ms Smith
pulled the complainant’s hair so that her natural hair and hair extensions
came away from
her scalp (CAN 2024/3605).
this incident, the complainant and the manager asked for Ms Smith to leave the
premises. She did not do so (CAN 2024/3606).
Police attended Langtrees and Ms Smith was searched and subsequently conveyed
and lodged at the ‘ACT Watch House.’
At 4:00am, Ms Smith attempted
to strangle herself by placing her bra around her throat. The Police removed her
bra, and a short time
later, Ms Smith attempted to strangled herself with her
shirt. The Police then removed her clothing.
after, Ms Smith chewed the blue mattress in her cell and ripped the mattress
cover. This caused permanent damage to Commonwealth
property and rendered the
mattress unusable (CAN 2024/6556).
Assessment of
CCTV footage tendered in court contains other acts of Ms Smith in relation to
various people. I disregard any acts which may constitute
different offences,
consistent with the principle expressed in
(1981) 147 CLR 383
per Gibbs CJ at 387.
maximum penalties for each offence are comparatively low. The maximum sentence
prescribed by the legislature serves as an indication
of the relative
seriousness of the offence:
Markarian v R
[2005] HCA 25; 228 CLR 357 at [31];
[2013] HCA 31
248 CLR 483
assessing the seriousness of these offence, it is not necessary to express a
finding of objective seriousness ‘as a point
on a hypothetical
DPP v Moala (No 3)
[2023] ACTSC
per CJ McCallum.
appraising the seriousness of the common assault charge, I note there had been
some prior application of force by the victim to
the neck of Ms Smith, albeit to
push her away in circumstances where there was perceived aggression. I note the
punches do not immediately
follow. There were multiple blows. They appear
forceful and are to a vulnerable part of the body, being the head. The force
by Ms Smith was sufficient to cause hair to be pulled out of her head and a
temporary redness. The assault occurred at the victim’s
workplace, which
is a place in which she is entitled to feel, and ought to have been, safe.
Langtrees was a licenced premises. Most
of the incident described above is
recorded occurs over approximately three minutes, cumulating in the few seconds
of the strikes
described above at paragraph 10.
charge relating to remaining at the premises is made more serious given that Ms
Smith was asked to leave in the context of her
becoming heightened and
assaulting another person. The maximum penalty, however, is a fine and as such
it is regarded by the legislature
as a less serious offence than the other two
is difficult to consider the charge of damaging the Commonwealth’s
mattress without considering the two previous attempts
at suicide recorded in
the prosecution summary. I am not aware of the value of the mattress. The
prosecution conceded, properly in
my view, that this offence was at the lower
end of seriousness.
Galambany Circle
matter proceeding in the Galambany Circle Sentencing Court. In
Owen Patterson
v Wendy Brookman
[2021] ACTMC 16
, SM Hopkins set out the process for that
Court. At paragraph [10] of that decision, SM Hopkins recognised the importance
of the enthusiastic
and authentic involvement of an offender with the Elders
Panel in the circle.
Harlovich v Sebbens
[2024] ACTSC 153
at Loukas-Karlsson J said [12]:
The Galambany Court is a Circle Sentencing Court. The Court aims to provide a
restorative sentencing process for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people
who have pleaded guilty to an offence. In Ngunnawal language, Galambany means
“we all, including you.”
The Galambany Court depends on the
commitment and wisdom of First Nations elders. Court proceedings take place in a
circle. In that
circle, words are spoken and listened to by all. Thus, the
process differs from a conventional court proceeding. Nevertheless, the
applied to offenders who are sentenced in Circle Sentencing Court is the same
law applied in the conventional Sentencing Court.
are important similarities between the process of the Galambany circle
sentencing Court and the pilot program for sentencing
of Aboriginal people in
the Supreme Court, particularly with regard to the centrality of the
conversation between Elders and an offender.
DPP v Chatfield
, Taylor J explained the operation of the Supreme Court pilot,
later stating that the sentencing conversation between Elders and an
offender is
‘at the heart of this process’ can require a participant to
‘directly engage with the Elders Panel’
responsibility’ for their conduct: see also p 4 of
DPP v Brooks
2025] ACTSC 45.
authority from outside this jurisdiction, it is also useful to consider the
judgment of
DPP v Fenton [
2022] VCC 2309
(‘Fenton’) where
Johns J refers to a person’s participation in the circle sentencing
conversation. Johns J acknowledged
that participation in the circle allows a
judicial officer to observe and take account of engagement with the elders,
together with
responses, both verbal and non-verbal of the participant. In that
case, speaking directly to that offender, he said:
The sentencing conversation provides a strong vantage point to assess your
responses to challenges from Elders. It provides a vantage
point to assess your
insight and remorse and assess whether these expressions and responses are
genuine and how deeply they are held.
Genuine participation in the sentencing
conversation has a mitigatory effect.
Johns J recognised in Fenton, participating in the circle sentencing process can
involve conversations with the elders which deal
with difficult topics such as
personal trauma. It can involve being challenged by the Elders Panel and
responding to those challenges
in the courtroom setting. The Circle can be a
challenging environment for a participant because of these features.
Practice Direction for the Galambany Court (No 2/2024) states that the
Elders’ hearing panel may recommend an appropriate
sentence and
‘must consider culturally inclusive aspects.’ In
Harlovich v
[2024] ACTSC 153
, Loukas-Karlsson J observes that the Elders are not
an offender’s ‘advocate’ and, at [97], describing the Elders
as a ‘crucial link between the court, the local Aboriginal community and
the [offender].’ This is particularly important
because of the lived
experience and connection with the local Aboriginal community, which can bring
insights to the sentencing conversation.
accordance with the established practice in the Galambany Circle, this decision
was explained orally, addressing Ms Smith in the
‘second person.’
Participation in Galambany Circle
Smith participated in the Circle sentencing process and described the reason for
the offending as being because the women ‘had
already sold me without my
consent.’ She explained that the male patron had said ‘[t]his
one’s mine’ and
that she did not want to go with him, and was being
pressured and the workers did not do anything about it. She explained that she
had left the venue but had returned to collect her ‘stuff’ and had
asked for her money from when she had worked there
before. Ms Smith said,
‘I had confronted them about already having... sold me to that person and
the way that he treated me
whilst I was working there.’ She stated that
‘that was the first time I had worked.’ Ms Smith said she told the
police that ‘they had sold me to that man and because I wouldn’t
sleep with him.’
explained that she saw this as self-defence (although this is not raised by her
or her lawyer as a defence). She explained that
when the victim touched her,
this was ‘the trigger’ and ‘then [she] blanked
Smith explained her motivation in participating in sex work was ‘because
of my past history of sexual assault. It was something
that I came aware of that
there’s other ways of dealing with it by going to therapy and I was
exploring ways of overcoming
Smith provided some detail in the circle about her family responsibilities
looking after her two biological children, and an additional
14-year-old child
she voluntarily cares for. In the Galambany circle sentencing hearing on 4
February 2025, Ms Smith explained the
significance of her having a 14-year-old
child in her care. She said:
She self-placed with me and...our lives are pretty much identical. And I support
her in recognising how to get support and help and
her rights. So, it would have
a very big impact on her in a way where she may have to be moved. And she has
came forward with her
own experiences to me where I took her to the police and
stuff like that where it wasn’t brought to their attention beforehand.
Smith explained she had previously been a witness in Court and that after this
she was provided with therapy in relation to her
past trauma, which she has been
engaged with. A letter was provided from Anne Walker, an accredited mental
health support worker,
which attests that Ms Smith has been engaging with her
(for 3 of 8 approved sessions), as funded by ACT Victim Support Program. This
a voluntary process where she has identified goals around ‘healing from
past trauma’ and ‘improving her function
and wellbeing both
individually and as a parent.’ Ms Walker notes there has been a focus on
court proceeds and her ‘understanding
her trauma triggers that impact her
responses to others.’
Ms Smith participated well in the Circle conversation, despite initially
providing some closed responses. She was in a
position where she had to traverse
difficult topics about her personal circumstances, including the topic of her
participation in
work at Langtrees, her own mental health and her history of
abuse. During the Galambany circle sentencing process, Ms Smith explained
perspective on the offending behaviour and she recalled her emotional triggers
on the night.
General sentencing principles
exercise of the Court’s function in sentencing offenders is governed by
statute and relevant case law principles.
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT) provides
that the Court must consider certain matters, if relevant and known. Further,
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT) sets out the
objectives of sentencing and provides;
(1) court may impose a sentence on an
1 or more of the following purposes:
(a) to ensure that the
adequately punished for the offence in a way that is just and appropriate;
(b) to prevent crime by deterring Ms Smith and other people from committing the
same or similar offences;
(c) to protect the community from Ms Smith;
(d) to promote the rehabilitation of Ms Smith;
(e) to make Ms Smith accountable for his or her actions;
(f) to denounce the conduct of Ms Smith;
(g) to recognise the harm done to the victim of the crime and the community.
purposes of sentencing have been acknowledged as various, overlapping and
competing. They include the protection of society, general
and specific
deterrence, denunciation, reform and rehabilitation:
Veen v The Queen (No 2)
[1988] 164 CLR 465
[2022] ACTCA 59
sentencing, the court must apply the principle of ‘individualised
Director of Public Prosecutions v
Dalgliesh (a pseudonym)
[2017] HCA 41
262 CLR 428
[2023] ACTSC 154
MT v The Queen
[2021] ACTCA 26
17 ACTLR 22
Prosecution submission regarding the appropriate
matter proceeded over two ‘one hour’ sentence fixtures. On 29
October 2024, the prosecutor made detailed and helpful
submissions and properly
expressed that this sentencing exercise ‘highlights the ever-present
tensions in sentencing between
rehabilitation and punishment.’ The
prosecutor drew my attention to factors which would weigh against the exercise
of the court’s
discretion pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing)
(ACT). In particular, he noted that this was a ‘deplorable
act of sudden force of violence which involved not one but multiple
strikes. The
violence was in public and in a licenced premise. The recognition of harm to the
victim may not be properly achieved
without the stigma of a conviction.’
The prosecutor further observed that any impact on the future employment
prospects of
Ms Smith was speculative. The prosecutor observed that there was an
extenuating factor in that the male patron was apparently treating
Ms Smith with
indignity and that it appeared Ms Smith was in a mental health crisis. The
prosecutor ultimately indicated that it
was ‘neutral’ on the
question of whether it is open for this court to sentence Ms Smith for the
charge of common assault
without recording a conviction. There was then a
discussion about obtaining a more detailed report which dealt with the relevance
of Ms Smith’s mental health in sentencing.
discussion with the Elders and on application by Ms Smith’s lawyer, I
adjourned the matter to ensure that appropriate
material was before the court in
relation to mental health, so that the court was not speculating about the
impact of Ms Smith’s
mental health at the time of the incident, and the
relevance of Ms Smith’s mental health overall in sentencing.
matter returned on 4 February 2025. I note that no transcript was ordered of the
earlier sentencing submissions, so the prosecutor
did not have the benefit of
seeing the submissions of the prosecution at the earlier hearing. The prosecutor
submitted that his position
was that the court ought not to sentence pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT) because of the objective seriousness of the common assault and the
need for specific deterrence. Each prosecutor owes their
own duty to this Court,
and diligently assisted the Court throughout the matter. However, ultimately the
Court is not assisted by
a consistent position from the prosecution.
Plea of guilty
Smith entered early pleas and is entitled to a ‘full discount’. I
must have regard to that matter, in determining the
appropriate penalty:
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT). This has a utilitarian benefit as no court time is allocated to a hearing
and the witnesses are spared the stress and expense
of attending court to give
R v Toumo’ua
[2017] ACTCA 9
12 ACTLR 103
. I note that the prosecution case was certainly not a weak
one, but no submission was made to me that it was overwhelming. I note
footage depicts the incident.
Criminal history of Ms
prosecution tendered the criminal history of Ms Smith. Ms Smith has limited
history. As a 12-year-old child, she was charged with
assault’. I have heard nothing about this offending, and in my view, it
has limited relevance given it occurred
a significant time ago and given her age
at the time. Her adult criminal history is also limited. In the ACT, she was
for a minor theft matter on 16 March 2023 and the charge was
criminal history of a person cannot be used to impose a sentence which is
ultimately disproportionate with the crime, but its
existence, or otherwise, is
relevant to how much leniency a Court can afford an offender:
Cotter v Corvisy
[2008] ACTSC 64
[2022] ACTSC 6.
Smith has, in effect, been before this Court for a period of four months.
Although this was not a ‘deferral,’ the proceeding
has been before
the Court for some period and Ms Smith has not re-offended.
Impact on the victim
prosecution tendered a ‘victim impact statement’ pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
by the complainant, dated 25 June 2024. The statement explains the harm caused
to the complainant by Ms Smith.
complainant details various impacts on her because of the incident. Although the
entire statement will not be extracted here,
the complainant explains that she
had previously found her workplace a safe environment. She explains that she was
unexpectedly met
by physical violence and has found herself wary of other
service providers since the incident. As at 25 June 2024, she was still
to mentally recover. The complainant observes that she did not deserve to be
assaulted by Ms Smith. Further, she has suffered
financially as she has had bald
patches left behind because of the assault and has had to buy hair products and
new hair extensions.
This has correlated with a negative impact on her
self-esteem and confidence. She explains that, as of 25 June 2024, in all her
shifts, she has thought of the assault and it has impacted her
passion and love for her job.
effect of a crime on the victim is a matter which this court must consider in
sentencing pursuant to
and (f) of the
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Smith’s actions have had an ongoing negative impact on the complainant,
aside from the pain and impact on the day.
Background of Ms
Smith: PSR report
to the pre-sentence report of ACT Corrective Services dated 24 October 2024
(‘PSR Report’) Ms Smith is an Aboriginal
woman from the Yuin nation
with strong connection to country. The PSR report was undertaken while Ms Smith
was in the Adult Mental
Health Unity (‘AMHU’) as a result of being
self-admitted due to suicidal intent in the context of paranoid delusions.
PSR records that Ms Smith was the second of two children from her parent’s
union. She also has three younger half-siblings.
I do not have information about
the circumstances of her parent’s childhoods. Ms Smith described a chaotic
childhood in which
she was sexually abused and the victim of domestic violence
by age five. Her father was abusive and violent and was incarcerated
most of her
Smith’s mother appears to have a substance abuse disorder. She was herself
the victim of sexual offending and family violence.
Ms Smith and her older
sister were the primary carers of her younger half-siblings due to her
mother’s inability to care for
the children. Ms Smith attended numerous
primary schools and left school in year seven. She has been diagnosed with
Smith started using alcohol at age thirteen and began heavily binge drinking
which escalated to daily drinking by age fifteen.
She reduced this drinking
during pregnancy. Ms Smith describes herself as an alcoholic.
Smith has had three significant relationships. Ms Smith reported that in each of
these relationships she was adversely affected
by family violence directed at
Smith stated to the PSR author that she was enrolled to study
and that she intended to
apply to the Australian Defence Force Academy (‘ADFA’). She has
previously worked, albeit in
relatively short-term roles.
terms of her attitude to the offences ‘she expressed remorse for attending
the vicinity and acknowledged in hindsight, it
was triggered by her past trauma.
She did not express concern for the victim and stated she was concerned about
the impact of a sentence
on her future enrolment in the army and ability to care
for her children.’
Background of Ms Smith: Report of
Vanessa Edwige
this matter was adjourned, Ms Smith obtained a psychological report dated 28
January 2025. The author of this report was registered
psychologist Vanessa
addition to the information provided in the PSR, Ms Edwige’s report
provides a detailed history of Ms Smith’s upbringing.
She explains that Ms
Smith is a ‘Yuin Watiwati woman though ancestral birthrights of her mother
and father.’ The report
details that Ms Smith was ‘sexually abused
by her father when she was four years old.’ She described having
flashbacks.
report details some periods of stability in her childhood, but after the age of
seven, a childhood in which Ms Smith was moved
around primarily due to her
mother’s substance abuse and violence in the various household she was
moved between. The report
records that Ms Smith was deprived of basic
necessities as a child and exposed to violence from her mother’s partners
and others.
She describes growing up between her grandmother, aunt and mother as
well as removal by child protection authorities and time spent
in foster care.
In one nine-month-long foster care placement, Ms Smith and her sister were
mistreated, and they were returned to
the care of her grandmother.
Smith started drinking alcohol at thirteen in the company of older family
members. Between thirteen and sixteen, she spent time
between refuges and living
with a man who had been a client of her mother’s when her mother herself
was undertaking street
Edwige records that Ms Smith started her first serious relationship at age
sixteen, this man being the father of her two daughters.
This relationship was
characterised by physical abuse. That partner was incarcerated for family
violence against her. During this
relationship, Ms Smith had to seek medical
attention because of an assault where she was kicked to the head and split her
She left this partner when he was in jail.
Smith’s next long relationship was characterised by ‘psychological
violence and emotional manipulation.’ This
partner was diagnosed with
schizophrenia. During most of the period of their relationship, this partner was
incarcerated. Ms Smith
gave evidence in Court proceedings against this partner,
and his other associates. She describes her life as being threatened and
to move houses three times due to fears for her safety.
to Ms Edwige, Ms Smith started using marijuana at age twelve, before ceasing at
age thirteen and starting drinking. She
stopped drinking at age twenty-six.
to Ms Edwige, in 2020/2021, Ms Smith had surgery after cutting her throat. She
had a psychotic episode in 2020/2021. The
report states that in March 2024
(around the time of the offending) she was ‘then hospitalised for
approximately three weeks.’
In September 2024, in the same month when she was originally due to be in court
for these charges to be sentenced, she tried to douse
herself in petrol in the
context of a psychotic episode. Ms Edwige reports that both her sisters are
diagnosed with schizophrenia.
Smith has been engaged in therapy for two years and has accessed counselling
though Victim Support. She was, at the time of this
report, taking sertraline.
Edwige’s report draws on literature about trauma contained in the Bugmy
Bar Book, particularly in terms of the impact of
trauma on a person’s
development and sense of identity. It further refers to the impact of a parent
with a substance abuse
issue on a person, including a greater risk of adverse
developmental outcomes. The report also extracts portions of the Bugmy Bar
which relates to the poorer outcomes for children who are placed in out of home
care environments, and who do not complete their
schooling. Ms Edwige also
extracts parts of the Bugmy Bar Book, which include that ‘[a]buse and
neglect have lifelong and intergenerational
consequences.’
Edwige states:
It is evident from [Ms Smith’s] childhood and adolescent history that she
has experienced significant adverse childhood experiences.
She was exposed to
disadvantage that in my opinion has had a significant impact on her social and
emotional wellbeing and continues
to do so. [Ms Smith] presents with childhood
history of disadvantage that in my opinion has resulted in complex developmental
[Ms Smith’s] psychological state and how she views herself in the
world has been deeply affected by these adverse childhood
and adolescent
experiences.
Smith discussed the index offending with Ms Edwige. She stated that the male
patron was ‘talking down to her.’ She
stated that she had not taken
her medication for a month. She said that when the complainant ‘put her
hand on my neck it triggered
me and I blanked out. I felt like it was all of
them against me’. Ms Smith further stated that she was expressing paranoia
and that she ‘regret[s] doing what I did putting my hands on her. I wish I
walked away.’ I note that Ms Smith did not
provide as detailed an
explanation as to the catalyst to the conflict to Ms Edwidge. In the Circle, she
provided greater detail in
respect of the male patron’s behaviour towards
her, or her perception that the reception staff were unsupportive of her.
Edwige administered the ‘Adverse Childhood Experiences
Questionnaire’ (ACE-Q) and further opines that:
[Ms Smith] has a significant childhood and adolescent trauma history which has
impacted on her ability to self-regulate...[and] which
have had a significant
effect on her mental and social wellbeing.... [Ms Smith] presents as a woman
that has experienced significant
adversities throughout her life... She was
exposed to significant trauma in the context of her relationships. [She]
continues to
present with recurrent and intrusive memories of the traumas she
experienced as a child adolescent and adult... She continues to
physical reactions to distressing memories in the form of increased
anxiety...[She] meets the diagnostic criteria ...for
Complex Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder.’
Edwige further opines that Ms Smith meets the criteria in the DSM 5 for Brief
Psychotic Disorder and states Ms Smith was suffering
both diagnoses ‘at
the time of the offence and is suffering from mental health impairments that
were clinically significant.’
Ms Edwige explains that people suffering
Brief Psychotic Disorder ‘typically experience emotional turmoil or
overwhelming confusion.
They have rapid shifts...their level of impairment may
be severe including exercising poor judgment, cognitive impairment, and acting
on the basis of delusion. There is an increased risk of suicidal behaviour
during the acute episode.’ She explains that ‘these
significantly impacted on [Ms Smith’s] emotional regulation, decision
making and judgment.’ I note there is
little contemporaneous material
available about Ms Smith’s mental health at the time, and I rely on Ms
Edwige’s expertise
in reaching that conclusion.
Edwige states that ‘at the time of the offences [Ms Smith] presented with
significant mental health disorders...and these
disorders impacted on her
ability to make sound judgments and fully appreciate at the time the
wrongfulness of the act.’ She
notes that Ms Smith has ‘a significant
trauma history that can continue to emerge under extreme stress’ but that
appropriate
treatment could reduce any risks associated with that emergence.
relation to appropriate treatment, Ms Edwige opines that:
[Ms Smith] requires...significant support to address her trauma and have
opportunities to work therapeutically to enhance her social
and emotional
wellbeing in an environment that is safe and conducive to therapeutic change.
She requires opportunities to reconnect
with her culture and engage in healing
practice to enhance wellbeing.
Edwige’s report details specific proposed plans for Ms Smith’s
conditions stating that ‘[Ms Smith’s] prospects
of rehabilitation
are positive through accessing intensive therapeutic work that focuses on skill
development in the areas of self-regulation,
coping skills, resilience building
and self-esteem.’ Ms Edwige notes that Ms Smith expressed ‘a genuine
interest in continued
support’, noting such support would be likely to be
required for a lengthy period of time.
Forensic Mental Health
Services report
brief ‘Mental Health Assessment Report’ was prepared for the court
by Lillian Pham, clinical psychologist. This report
refers to a diagnosis of a
‘major depressive’ disorder. It refers to a ‘history of crisis
health services.’ In Ms Pham’s opinion, Ms
Smith ‘presented with good insight and judgement regarding her mental
health and treatment needs.’ Ms Smith told Ms Pham that she has been
diagnosed with mental health issues from age twelve. Ms
Smith had ceased
antipsychotic medication and ‘denied any relapse in symptoms.’ Ms
Pham described Ms Smith as having
‘two previous hospital
admissions...which appear better explained by a complex trauma than a psychotic
illness, with no recorded
history of perceptual disturbance or paranoia outside
periods of acute distress.’
remorse can be a ‘major factor’ influencing prospects for
rehabilitation: DPP and Monaghan
[2024] ACTSC 183
; 167 A Crim R 159 at
[2017] NSWCCA 208
the Court said that ‘an offender...may anticipate a lesser sentence
than a co-offender who has not been found to be remorseful.’
The strength
of the case is relevant, in that if a plea may result from the recognition of
the inevitable:
R v Winchester
(1992) 58 A
Crim R 345.
In this case, it appears there was a strong case, but I accept that
her plea of guilty is an indication of genuine remorse and acceptance
responsibility.
Smith expressed a degree of remorse about her involvement in both the PSR and to
Vanessa Edwige. She did not demonstrate appropriate
empathy for the victim but
identified that she wished she had walked away. In my view, she has shown some
remorse. In my view, this
remorse is relevant to her prospects of rehabilitation
and causes me to view those prospects more positively than I would otherwise.
note she has also been a cooperative participant in the court process.
Deprived background
accept that the principles from
Bugmy v The
(2013) 249 CLR 571 are enlivened in this matter. In
(2013) 249 CLR 571, Gageler J at [56] said that ‘the
weight to be afforded to the effects of social deprivation in an
youth and background is in each case for individual
assessment.’ His Honour explains at [40] that the moral culpability of
person raised in circumstances surrounded by alcohol abuse and violence may be
lesser, and therefore the sentence mitigated. At
[42]-[43] Gageler J continues;
The effects of profound deprivation do not diminish over time and should be
given full weight. A background of that kind can leave
a mark on a person
throughout life and compromise their capacity to mature and learn from
experience...an offender’s childhood
exposure to extreme violence and
alcohol abuse may explain Ms Smith’s recourse to violence when frustrated
such that Ms Smith’s
moral culpability for the inability to control that
impulse may be sustainably reduced.
last remark of Gaegler J is apposite in this case, although Ms Smith’s
mother’s substance issue appears to have been
heroin, rather than alcohol.
Nonetheless, Ms Smith’s childhood was significantly impacted by her
mother’s heroin addiction,
and this was combined with family violence in
the homes Ms Smith resided in. These factors, in my view, have had a similar
as described in
Bugmy v The Queen
(2013) 249 CLR 571, (see
also the Bugmy Bar Book).
course, where an offender’s history has contributed to a lack of impulse
control, in sentencing, the need for community protection,
as a sentencing
consideration, may be increased (see Bugmy at [44] and [45]).
application of the ‘Bugmy principles’ is not discretionary:
Hoskins v R
[2021] NSWCCA 169
per Brereton JA
[2019] NSWCCA 133
In Hoskins, Brereton JA observed:
The principle is that social disadvantage may reduce an offender's moral
culpability, especially where the offending is in the nature
impulsive or learned responses to situations, arising from the
circumstances of social disadvantage.
this case, much of what is known about the defendant’s background is
self-reported (either to the court or the psychologist),
but it is not
contradicted and can, in my view, be relied on in Court:
Lloyd v The Queen
[2022] NSWCCA 18
Talukder v Dunbar
[2009] ACTSC 42
(2009) 194 A Crim R 545
v Pendelton
[2015] ACTSC 205
there was some debate about the necessity of establishing a link between
childhood deprivation and the impact on the moral
culpability of a person in a
particular instance of criminal offending, in
[2020] NSWCCA 209
Bell P (as his Honour then was) stated:
...the absence of such a link does not mean that the Court does not give full
weight to a childhood of profound deprivation if that
is established on the
Lloyd v The Queen
at [27], McCallum J (as
her Honour then was) (Hamill and Cavanagh JJ agreeing) stated:
The prevailing view appears to be that it is not necessary to establish the
existence of a causal connection with the offending before
having regard to
appropriate cases, the application of ‘Bugmy principles’ has
moderated deterrence in favour of rehabilitation:
[2017] NSWCCA 116.
my view, the moral culpability of Ms Smith was substantially reduced by her
disadvantaged background and exposure to domestic violence
against her mother,
aunty and herself as a teenager. This offending was impulsive, in the sense
described in Hoskins, albeit not
momentary. Ms Smith had, to some degree, put
herself in a situation where there was the potential for strong emotional
given her history of abuse and the nature of work providing sexual
services, especially where she had decided to drink alcohol. However,
circumstances where there is no indication of prior resort to violence in an
such an emotional circumstance, her conduct should
be properly understood given
her history of trauma. In my view, and based on the careful analysis of Ms
Edwige, her moral culpability
was significantly reduced by virtue of her
disadvantaged upbringing.
Alcohol use
Smith acknowledged that she had been drinking on the
In cases where a person
became addicted to a drug at a young age where it is unlikely that the addiction
was a matter of choice but
was attributable to another event that Ms Smith was
not primarily responsible for, then than addiction may be taken into account
a subjective factor that mitigates sentence:
[1999] 46 NSWLR 346 per
Wood CJ at [273] with whom Spigelman CJ agreed
at [201], see also
Douglas v The Queen
(1995) 56 FCR 465.
It is clear from authority that this will not always be a mitigating factor and
is a matter for assessment in the circumstances of
a particular case:
[2016] NSWCCA 126
Smith’s account in this case is that she had not been an alcoholic for a
period of years, and generally abstained from alcohol,
but in the context of
‘trial’ employment, she consumed alcohol. Her use of alcohol, at
least historically, was, in my
assessment, in the context of social
disadvantage, poverty and occurred against a history of abuse and neglect.
However, this is
not the typical case where an offender commits a crime when
they are in the throes of a substance addiction which commenced at a
Ms Smith had not been an alcoholic for some years. She did consume alcohol, but
this was not a habitual pattern at the
time and it appeared unusual for her to
be drinking.
Applicability of Verdins
an offender has ‘a mental illness, intellectual handicap or other mental
problems’ this may be taken into account in
sentencing:
DPP (Cth) v De
(2010) 79 NSWLR 1 at [177];
R v Verdins
[2007] VSCA
A person’s mental condition can affect the weight to be given to
general deterrence, retribution and denunciation as well as
person’s moral culpability:
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
244 CLR 120
[2002] NSWCCA
(1999) 46 NSWLR 346 at 354. A
person’s moral culpability will be reduced particularly if their mental
condition contributes
to the commission of the offence in a material way:
Skelton v R
[2015] NSWCCA 320
[2007] VSCA 102
(‘Verdins’) sets out a
non-exhaustive list of ways in which an offender’s impaired mental
functioning may reduce
their moral culpability. The case has been adopted in the
[2021] ACTSC 160
(although see also
v De La Rosa
(2010) 79 NSWLR 1 at [177]). These Verdins principles have
been summarised as follows:
The condition may reduce the moral culpability of the offending conduct, as
distinct from Ms Smith’s legal responsibility.
Where that is so, the
condition affects the punishment that is just in all the circumstances; and
denunciation is less likely to
be a relevant sentencing objective.
The condition may have a bearing on the kind of sentence that is imposed and the
conditions in which it should be served.
Whether general deterrence should be moderated or eliminated as a sentencing
consideration depends upon the nature and severity of
the symptoms exhibited by
Ms Smith, and the effect of the condition on the mental capacity of Ms Smith,
whether at the time of the
offending or at the date of sentence or both.
Whether specific deterrence should be moderated or eliminated as a sentencing
consideration likewise depends upon the nature and
severity of the symptoms of
the condition as exhibited by Ms Smith, and the effect of the condition on the
mental capacity of Ms
Smith, whether at the time of the offending or at the date
of the sentence or both.
The existence of the condition at the date of sentencing (or its foreseeable
recurrence) may mean that a given sentence will weigh
more heavily on Ms Smith
than it would on a person in normal health.
Where there is a serious risk of imprisonment having a significant adverse
effect on Ms Smith’s mental health, this will be
a factor tending to
mitigate punishment.
DPP (Cth) v De La Rosa
(2010) 79 NSWLR 1 at [178], McClellan CJ
... the mental health problems of an offender need not amount to a serious
psychiatric illness before they will be relevant to the
sentencing process. The
circumstances may indicate that when an offender has a mental disorder of modest
severity it may nevertheless
be appropriate to moderate the need for general or
specific deterrence.
principles have application to every case where there is a relevant mental
condition, but there is some discretion in their
evaluation in the context of a
particular case:
[2021] NSWCCA 258
court must have some proper information before it to consider the application of
these principles in a particular case. In Verdins,
the Court said, at [8]:
There may be differences of expert opinion and diagnosis in relation to the
offender. It may be that no specific condition can be
identified.
matters is what the evidence shows
the mental impairment experienced by the offender at the relevant time [emphasis
this case, the report of Ms Edwidge addresses some of these criteria, in
particular Ms Edwige’s opinion that Ms Smith’s
moral culpability was
reduced in that her judgment was impaired and that she could not fully
appreciate the wrongfulness of her actions.
The conclusions of Mr Edwige are
relevant also, to the requirement for the sentence to provide avenues for
supervised therapeutic
requirements.
my view, based on the mental condition of Ms Smith, which is necessarily
entangled to some degree with her disadvantaged upbringing,
the need for general
and specific deterrence is significantly moderated. She is not a good candidate
to send a message to the community
as the factors which contributed to her
offending are substantially rooted in her mental health issues and disadvantaged
Consideration of a non-conviction
disposition
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT) provides that the court may,
after an offender is found guilty of an offence either dismiss the charge or
make a good behaviour
order without convicting the person.
Section 17(3)
(3) In deciding whether to make a non-conviction order for Ms Smith, the court
must consider the following:
(a) Ms Smith's character, antecedents, age, health and mental condition;
(b) the seriousness of the offence;
(c) any extenuating circumstances in which the offence was committed.
court may also consider anything else the court considers relevant.
conviction is the ordinary consequence of a finding of guilt:
Balthazaar v
[2012] ACTCA 26
. The recording of a conviction is a
‘formal and solemn act’ to mark disapproval of Ms Smith’s
wrongdoing by society
and the court:
Vuolo v Fall
[2023] ACTCA 33.
consider the exercise of the discretion not to record a conviction, Mossop J has
observed that the offence need not be a trivial
[2017] ACTSC
R v Ingrassia
(1997) 41 NSWLR 447
at [449], the Court
The legal and social consequences of being convicted of an offence often extend
beyond any penalty imposed by a Court. As Windeye
J said in Cobiac v Liddy
[1969] HCA 26
(1969) 119 CLR 257
at 269 “a capacity in special
circumstances to avoid the rigidity of inexorable law is of the very essence of
Proud v Sladic
[2014] ACTCA 26
, the Court (Murrell CJ, Ross J and
Walmsley AJ) considered the operation of
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
(ACT) including where an offence is one where the sentence must, given
the nature of an offence, give weight to general deterrence.
The Court said (at
‘Extenuating circumstances’ have been said to mean circumstances
which ‘excuse in some appreciable degree the commission
of the offences or
lessen the appellant’s guilt.’
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT) confers a wide discretion:
Armstrong v Saddler
[2024] ACTSC 263.
But as Baker J stated in that case,
‘whilst a good behaviour order may achieve a measure of punishment,
deterrence, and denunciation,
it remains the case that the ability of a sentence
to achieve those purposes will be eroded to some extent if a conviction is not
ordered’ [at 53].
the court to consider proceeding to sentence without recording a conviction,
‘cogent and compelling circumstances’
are required:
[2023] ACTCA 33
considering sentencing a person pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing)
(ACT), the Court must not treat
as a ‘first
offenders’ provision in that a lack of prior criminal history is not
itself a sufficient basis to deal with
an offender;
Bennett v Daley
[2021] ACTSC 159
291 A Crim R 495
[2023] ACTSC 154
Impact of a conviction on family
submission on Ms Smith’s behalf is that the recording of a conviction may
adversely affect her ability to be a kinship carer
for a 14-year-old girl in her
care (who she cares for together with her two biological children). That child
has been in Ms Smith’s
care for approximately 12 months.
Smith has provided a letter of support from Cyndy Newman, Case Manager, Gugan
Gulwan Youth Aboriginal Corporation. It states that
the family has been working
with that organisation since 13 May 2024. The letter records that Ms Smith
‘and her children have
been engaged in building positive relationships and
personal goals.’ It states that ‘[i]f the outcome of the court
should be a conviction, this would be detrimental on the
children’s wellbeing and safety.’ While it assists the court
understand the connection between Ms Smith and that organisation, it is not
clear why the author opines that a conviction would
be detrimental. It is trite
to say that sentencing is a matter for the court.
Smith also provided a letter from Jiayue Yuan, Case Manager, Barnardos
Australia. Jiayue Yuan is a Kinship Case manager and records
that Ms Smith is
the primary carer for a child in the ‘Out-of-Home’ care system. It
records that Ms Smith is currently
undergoing a carer assessment process. Jiayue
Yuan states that stability and suitability are key considerations when placing a
and that ‘the outcome of [Ms Smith’s] court matter may have an
impact on her ability to continue providing care for this
Hardship to family at law
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT) provides that the
Court must consider, if relevant and known:
(o) the probable effect
that any sentence or order under consideration would have on any of the offender's
family or dependants...;
(r) whether the recording of a conviction or the imposition of a particular
penalty would be likely to cause particular hardship
to the offender
DPP v Moala (No 3)
[2023] ACTSC 306
McCallum CJ referred to
a history of case law in the ACT and concluded that hardship to third parties
does not have to be exceptional
before it is taken into account in sentencing;
Fares v DPP (No 2)
[2025] ACTCA 2
McCallum CJ, Baker and Taylor
this case, Ms Smith submits that any conviction in this matter may have an
impact on her role as a kinship carer to the 14-year-old
in her care. The
letters provided link a conviction in this matter with an impact on the safety
and wellbeing of children.
is said that Ms Smith is currently involved in a carer assessment process. There
is little specific detail provided about that
process to this court. The carer
assessment process may involve an application for registration under the
‘Working with Vulnerable
People’ (‘WWVP’) scheme. The
issue of a WWVP is governed by a statutory regime designed to protect children
vulnerable people. Section 24 of the Working with Vulnerable People
(Background Checking) Act 2011 (ACT) defines criminal history
as including
‘any conviction of or finding of guilt against a person for a relevant
offence.’ The scheme casts a wider
net than merely catching matters where
a conviction is recorded and can require a risk assessment by the relevant
commissioner. Further,
the Working with Vulnerable People (Background Checking)
Act 2011 (ACT) draws a distinction between kinship care activities, and
Ultimately,
the ramifications of recording a conviction on her assessment for suitability as
a kinship carer are far from clear. This
court would be speculating to
anticipate any particular outcome and cannot be satisfied that the
‘probable effect’ of
recording a conviction would be a detrimental
effect on the child in her care, or there are any particular hardships the Court
to take into account.
Ultimately,
this court must consider the appropriate penalty for the criminal charges. It
cannot speculate about the impact of such
a conviction in other arenas. As Baker
J stated in
Armstrong v Saddler
[2024] ACTSC 263
should not be employed so as to circumvent the operation of legislative
provisions designed to protect the community,
such as provisions which preclude
persons with convictions for offences from holding positions of authority in a
corporation or working
with vulnerable
Elders’ recommendation
Elders’ hearing panel reached a consensus view was that Ms Smith would
benefit from some treatment in relation to her history
of abuse and her mental
health. The Elders were concerned that Ms Smith had made decisions which had
resulted in her being in an
environment she ultimately found psychologically
unsafe. The Elders considered the healing work that Ms Smith was currently
with, and the role she played as a kinship carer to a teenager. Their
view was that she could, if properly supported, play an important
assisting the young people in her care, but that Ms Smith should remain involved
with culturally appropriate services, like
Gugan Gulwan to ensure that each
member of the family is supported. This would also provide a service where she
was supported so
that her history and mental health issues did not surface in
times of stress, though this was also likely to involve specialist support
mental health. The Elders were not of the view that Ms Smith ought to be
sentenced by recording a conviction but that for a lengthy
period she should be
supervised to maintain therapeutic services.
considerations
decision about sentence must be proportionate to the objective seriousness of
the offence:
[2019] ACTCA 25
; 279 A Crim R at [37] as cited in
R v Lindsay
[2020] ACTCA 25
. The seriousness of this offence,
and the impact on the victim, provides cause for close consideration about
whether the recording
of a good behaviour order can properly achieve the
sentencing purposes in this case. This was not a momentary lapse of judgment,
nor was the impact on the victim trivial. In fact, it has been ongoing.
good behaviour order can, to some degree, achieve the sentencing purposes of
deterrence, denunciation and punishment:
Armstrong v Saddler
[2024] ACTSC
per Baker J at [42]. In addition, a good behaviour order can assist in
achieving the rehabilitation of an offender.
Rehabilitation
is an important sentencing consideration in a case like this, where there is
limited criminal history and where there
have been significant issue of
disadvantage and deprivation in Ms Smith’s history which have a bearing on
her moral culpability.
As the Courts have acknowledged in
Hogan v Hinch
[2011] HCA 4
243 CLR 506
Rehabilitation, if it can be achieved, is likely to be the most durable
guarantor of community protection and is clearly in the public
have had regard to Ms Edwige’s opinion, and the relatively limited
history, and in my view, if certain supports are in place
for Ms Smith, her
prospects of rehabilitation are good. She is a person who has not recorded as
having any prior acts of violence
as an adult. She has a work history and cares
for three teenagers. She has taken a 14-year-old girl into her care voluntarily
this indicates a desire to contribute to the community and assist others.
She appears to be otherwise law abiding, having given evidence
previous partner in Court and encouraging the teenager she is now caring for to
report historic abuse to the Police. These
factors, especially given her
disadvantaged upbringing and its effect on her, are significant in assessing her
character and prosects
of rehabilitation.
Ultimately,
and after anxious consideration, in my view the combination the matters
considered in this decision, especially the reduction
in Ms Smith’s moral
culpability due to principles about the impact of her disadvantaged upbringing
and Ms Smith’s mental
health, are cogent and compelling reasons which
justify this Court proceeding to sentence without recording a conviction. I had
regard to the extenuating circumstances surrounding the offence given her
motivation of attending at Langtrees and history of sexual
and family violence
Smith’s conduct was a serious example of a common assault, with
unfortunate and unacceptable consequences for the victim.
Notwithstanding these
factors, to properly reflect the matters in mitigation and to achieve the
sentencing purposes, in my view,
it is not necessary to record a conviction.
the above reasons, the following orders are made:
(1) In relation to the assault charge (CAN 2024/3605), Court will sentence,
without recording a conviction, pursuant to s 17
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
to a good behaviour order for a period of two years with
conditions that:
to be subject on probation to the
supervision
Director-General of Corrective Services or delegate and obey all reasonable
directions of that person for a period of twelve
months, or such lesser period
as deemed appropriate by the supervising officer;
(b) she is to
to the Corrective Services Court Duty officer
immediately
(c) she is to
such educational, vocational, psychological,
psychiatric or other assessments, programs or counselling as directed,
particularly in
relation to / such as trauma, safe relationships and mental
(2) In relation to the charge of remaining in or re-entering the vicinity of
premises, (CAN 2024/3606), Ms Smith is placed on a non-conviction
good behaviour
order, pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT), for a period
of 12 months, without any additional conditions.
(3) In relation to the charge relating to destroying or damaging property (CAN
2024/6556), Ms Smith is placed on a non-conviction
good behaviour order,
pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT), for a period of 12
months, without any additional conditions.
I certify that the preceding 110 numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Sentence of her Honour Magistrate Burt
Associate: Evangeline Maguire
Date: 3 April 2025
Transcript 29/10/2024 p 8 lines
Transcript 29/10/2024 p
Transcript 4/2/2025 p 5 line
See also Transcript
of 29/10/2024 at line 36-41
This was not corroborated by the Brief Mental Health Report and is acknowledged
as an error. Ms Edwige provided confirmation that
this did not affect her
conclusions, and no party has sought to illicit evidence from
Transcript of 29/10/2024 p
RTF format (344 KB)
Signed PDF/A format