Allred v DPP [2025] ACTCA 25 (18 July 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
Allred v DPP
[2025] ACTCA 25
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
McCallum CJ, Mossop and Loukas-Karlsson JJ
The appeal is dismissed.
Catchwords:
– CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal from sentence in Drug and
Alcohol Sentencing List (DASL) – where appellant with long history
use and offending sentenced to a Treatment Order in the DASL – where
appellant unwilling or unable to comply with the
Treatment Order – where
Treatment Order cancelled and original sentence imposed – whether
sentencing judge considered
relevant considerations – whether sentence
manifestly excessive – appeal dismissed
– CRIMINAL LAW – Appeal from sentence in Drug and
Alcohol Sentencing List (DASL) – where Treatment Order cancelled
original sentence imposed – whether assertion that the sentence imposed is
manifestly excessive is an appeal against the
original sentence –
imposition involves only a limited exercise of judicial power
– INTERPRETATION – Drafting – interaction
between general sentencing provisions and the imposition provisions in
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT) – where drafting
“odd” and “curious” – issue unnecessary to decide
in this appeal
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Cases Cited:
Barron v Laverty
[2019] ACTSC 198
346 FLR 442
Bugmy v The
[2013] HCA 37; 249 CLR 571
DPP v Allred (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC
DPP v Allred
[2023] ACTSC 184
DPP v Stewart (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 163
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[2017] ACTCA 19
R v Cook (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 27
v Dowling (No 3)
[2021] ACTSC 210
The Queen v Meyboom
[2012] ACTCA 48
Jackson Allred (Appellant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
Representation:
J Maher (Appellant)
M Howe (Respondent)
Hugo Law Group (Appellant)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
File Number:
ACTCA 27 of 2024
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: ACT Supreme Court
Before: Christensen AJ
Date of Decision: 30 July 2024
Case Title: DPP v Allred (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 243
Introduction
is an appeal against a decision by Christensen AJ (the sentencing judge) in
DPP v Allred (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 243
Allred (No 2)
) to impose a
sentence that had been the subject of a drug and alcohol treatment order
(Treatment Order) made by Refshauge AJ.
27 July 2022, the appellant committed offences by driving a stolen car
whilst disqualified from driving. The appellant pleaded
28 February 2023 to two offences arising from that incident:
(a) dishonestly drive motor vehicle without consent (CAN 750/2023); and
(b) drive while disqualified (as a repeat offender) (CAN 2106/2023).
14 August 2022, the appellant committed further offences by driving a
car dangerously, at high speed, through a lengthy police
pursuit, while still
disqualified from driving. The appellant was arrested and held in custody the
following day. The appellant pleaded
guilty on 9 February 2023 to
three offences arising from the incident in August:
(a) aggravated dangerous driving (as a repeat offender) involving circumstances
of aggravation of failing to stop for police and
driving with a prescribed drug
in his oral fluid (SC CAN 3/2023);
(b) drive motor vehicle at police (CAN 7995/2022); and
(c) drive while disqualified (CAN 7990/2022).
appellant was on parole and bail for previous offending at the time of both
incidents. Two days after the incident in August,
the appellant’s parole
was revoked and the appellant was ordered to serve the balance of his sentence
of imprisonment for previous
offending in full‑time custody.
appellant was referred to the Drug and Alcohol Sentencing List (DASL) following
his pleas of guilty to the July and August offences.
The appellant was assessed
by ACT Corrective Services as likely to have a severe substance disorder. That
assessment described, and
the appellant confirmed, that he was using drugs at
the time of both incidents which substantially contributed to his offending.
appellant, who was aged 30 at the time he was sentenced by Refshauge AJ,
had a long history of heroin and methamphetamine use
and served his first
sentence of imprisonment at the age of 18. The appellant had made previous
attempts at rehabilitation, including
Solaris program while in custody from September to October 2022. All
previous attempts
at rehabilitation had been unsuccessful.
17 July 2023, the appellant was sentenced by Refshauge AJ to an
overall sentence of three years and 10 months’ imprisonment,
commencing on
16 January 2023 and ending on 15 November 2026, subject to a
Treatment Order from 17 July 2023 to 15 November 2026.
sentence commencement date took into account 182 days of pre-sentence custody.
The sentence remarks of Refshauge AJ are set out
DPP v Allred
[2023] ACTSC 184
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
(ACT) (Sentencing Act),
the custodial part of the appellant’s Treatment Order was suspended, with
the appellant released from
custody in order to engage with the treatment
program and supervision parts of the Treatment Order. The appellant was
the standard conditions of a Treatment Order, including an
undertaking not to return a positive drug test and to undertake treatment
relation to his drug dependency.
appellant almost immediately failed to comply with the Treatment Order, and
received his first sanction within 10 days of the
Treatment Order being
imposed after admitting to substance use and missing a scheduled case management
appointment. The appellant
was found to have used illicit substances on multiple
occasions while under the Treatment Order, and was sanctioned multiple
for “disrespectful behaviour, non-engagement, and being late to
appointments”:
Allred (No 2)
at [16]. As a result, the
appellant’s Treatment Order was provisionally cancelled on four occasions,
during which he was returned
to custody. The sentencing judge identified four
occasions upon which the Treatment Order was provisionally cancelled, resulting
in a total of 42 days in custody.
highlighted by the appellant in his submissions, prior to the final period of
provisional cancellation, he was admitted into the
Canberra Recovery Services
residential rehabilitation program on 13 March 2024 for three days,
and then again on 25 March 2024. On
31 May 2024, the appellant was
discharged from the program for suspected use of gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB)
while participating in
the program. The appellant denied using GHB while in the
program. On 4 June 2024, the appellant was subsequently held in
after being observed to be under the influence of a prescription
medication. The Director then applied for the cancellation of the
appellant’s Treatment Order.
18 June 2024, the sentencing judge cancelled the appellant’s
Treatment Order pursuant to s 80ZE(1) of the Sentencing Act.
The transcript
of proceedings on 18 June 2024 shows that the Treatment Order was
cancelled as the sentencing judge was satisfied
(a) the appellant would not be able to comply with the condition of the
Treatment Order to participate in a residential rehabilitation
program because
such a program was no longer an option for the appellant;
(b) the appellant was unwilling or unlikely to comply with that condition of the
Treatment Order, considering both the most recent
discharge from the residential
rehabilitation program and the appellant’s “engagement or lack
thereof” with the
treatment program as a whole; and
(c) the continuation of the treatment and supervision part of the Treatment
Order was not likely to achieve the objects of the order,
considering the
rehabilitation programs available and the conduct of the appellant throughout
the term of the Treatment Order.
appellant was held in custody for a further 42 days following the
cancellation of his Treatment Order, from 18 June 2024 to 29
Decision under
cancelled the appellant’s Treatment Order, the sentencing judge was
required to determine whether it was appropriate
to impose the sentence of
imprisonment suspended under the custodial part of the appellant’s
Treatment Order, or resentence
the appellant, pursuant to s 80ZE(2) of the
Sentencing Act. Submissions from the appellant and the Director on the question
of imposition
or resentence were heard on 1 July 2024.
that hearing, the appellant submitted that the case was appropriate for
resentencing. His submissions emphasised that:
(a) he had not faced any fresh charges while on the Treatment Order; and
(b) he had had periods of positive engagement with the Treatment Order.
30 July 2024, the sentencing judge made orders imposing the appellant’s
suspended sentence under the custodial part of the
Treatment Order, with a
non-parole period of two years, one month and 10 days, commencing
on 7 November 2023 and ending on 16 December
non-parole period was 55 percent of the overall term of imprisonment of
three years and 10 months.
sentencing judge found (at [23]-[26]) it was not appropriate to resentence the
appellant for reasons which included that:
(a) the absence of reoffending was not determinative, nor significantly
informative, as any reoffending would instead enliven considerations
80ZD of the Sentencing Act;
(b) the periods of positive engagement were counteracted by the
appellant’s overall high degree of non-compliance; and
(c) despite being given further opportunities to engage with the Treatment Order
and being reminded of his obligations, the appellant
did not engage in a way
that demonstrated a sustained commitment to rehabilitation and, consequently,
the promises to engage with
rehabilitation advanced in submissions before the
sentencing judge were “empty promises in the circumstances”.
appellant now seeks that the orders of the sentencing judge to impose the
suspended sentence be set aside, and that the appellant
be resentenced. The
appellant relies on the following grounds:
(a) Ground 1
: The sentencing judge erred by imposing the suspended part
of the Treatment Order without having sufficient regard to the appellant’s
lack of reoffending since the Treatment Order was made and the appellant’s
periods of compliance with rehabilitation.
(b) Ground 2
: The sentencing judge erred in the way the sentences were
accumulated, in circumstances where the appellant stood for sentence in
of conduct on two occasions which were close in time, and involved a course of
conduct with common features and criminality.
(c) Ground 3
: The total effective sentence imposed was manifestly
relation to Ground 2, particulars were given identifying that the
appellant’s contention was that the sentencing judge erred
in making the
sentence for driving at police (CAN 7995/2022) wholly cumulative upon the
sentence for aggravated dangerous driving
(SC CAN 3/2023) when those
offences were part of the same course of conduct.
submissions, the parties agreed that Ground 2 itself was effectively a
particular of Ground 3. Whether Ground 3 is made out depends
on whether this
court agrees with the appellant’s submissions on Ground 2. The two grounds
will therefore be dealt with together.
Ground 1: Failure to take
account of material considerations
Appellant’s
submissions
appellant’s first ground of appeal complains of the sentencing judge not
“having sufficient regard to” the appellant’s
offending since the Treatment Order was made and the appellant’s periods
of compliance with rehabilitation. Counsel
for the appellant accepted in oral
submissions that a
House v The King
House v The King
55 CLR 499)
would only arise if there was a failure to take a material
consideration into account. Notwithstanding that the sentencing judge
express reference to both the lack of offending and the appellant’s
periods of compliance, the appellant submitted:
(a) the absence of reoffending was equally if not more significant when
considering whether to impose a sentence or resentence an
offender under
s 80ZE than it was when considering the similar question under
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
(ACT) (Sentence
Administration Act);
(b) the significance of the absence of reoffending in the approximately 11
months since the making of the Treatment Order had to
be assessed against his
very long-term history of illicit drug use and offending;
(c) the imposition of the suspended sentence, which required the service of at
least one year and 10 months in full-time custody
before the appellant became
eligible for release on parole, was “a disproportionate response to the
breaching conduct”
and failed to reflect the absence of reoffending;
(d) similarly, although the sentencing judge made specific reference to the
appellant’s periods of compliance with the Treatment
Order, these were
“effectively disregarded” and hence not taken into account as a
material consideration.
Consideration
his concurring judgment in
Bugmy v The Queen
[2013] HCA 37; 249 CLR 571 at [51], Gageler J described that, where a
House v The King
error is asserted, it is necessary to establish that the
sentence under appeal either (1) turned on one or more specific errors of
principle or fact, or (2) in the totality of the circumstances was unreasonable
or plainly unjust. The Crown appeal to the Court
of Criminal Appeal in that case
had included grounds asserting that the sentencing judge had failed to
“properly” determine
or acknowledge particular facts. Of those
grounds, Gageler J said (at [53]): “They would be capable of
invoking the first category
of appellate intervention only if the asserted
impropriety rose to the level of a failure to take those considerations into
Another ground of appeal was framed by reference to the
“weight” the sentencing judge had placed on the offender’s
subjective circumstances. Of that, Gageler J said: “It was incapable
of establishing an error in the first category of appellate
intervention. It
pointed at most to a circumstance which, taken with other circumstances, might
be indicative of error in the second
too here. Insofar as Ground 1 asserts a failure to have “sufficient
regard to” the lack of reoffending and periods
of compliance, that is a
challenge to the weight given to particular factual matters. It is incapable of
establishing a specific
error in the first category of
House v The King
errors described in
. However, the appellant pressed this ground of
appeal as though it involved a claim that, notwithstanding the sentencing
references to the lack of reoffending and periods of compliance,
her Honour had in fact failed to take those matters into account.
counsel for the appellant properly accepted during the course of his oral
submissions, to succeed on such a ground was a “tall
circumstances where the sentencing judge had made express reference to both such
factual issues. However, it was
not, at least theoretically, impossible to
succeed. It could be the case that particular factual circumstances might be of
such significance
in the context of a particular statutory scheme that, if they
were established, a particular discretionary outcome would necessarily
In such circumstances, it might be possible to find that, even though a
decision‑maker had made reference to the circumstances
in question, the
outcome indicated that those circumstances had not in fact been considered.
that theoretical possibility is a long way from the present case. The sentencing
judge made multiple references to the lack
of reoffending and the extent of
compliance both when reciting the factual circumstances and as part of her
consideration of what
(a) In her reasons at [6], the sentencing judge reproduced part of the decision
R v Cook (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 27
which referred to the necessity to consider “the extent to which there was
compliance with the treatment and supervision part
of the order”.
(b) At [8], the sentencing judge referred to the Director’s submissions
that “there were periods of positive engagement”
with the Treatment
(c) At [10]-[11], the sentencing judge referred to the submissions on behalf of
the appellant that:
(i) he had complied with the requirements to attend court;
(ii) he had not reoffended while subject to the Treatment Order; and
(iii) he had positively engaged with the Treatment Order for a period and spent
time in residential rehabilitation.
the heading “Compliance with Treatment Order”, the sentencing judge
reviewed what she described as the “disappointing”
compliance with
the Treatment Order. In addition to reviewing all of the different ways in which
the appellant had failed to comply
with the treatment order, she referred at
[17]-[21] to “occasions for optimism”, which included the
(a) achieving his longest period of sobriety since he was a child;
(b) graduating from the Canberra Recovery Hub day program;
(c) engaging positively in aspects of family and home life and prosocial
activities;
(d) engaging with mechanisms to address causes of underlying trauma; and
(e) having “solid engagement” with aspects of the Canberra Recovery
Services residential rehabilitation program, which
he almost completed.
the heading “Consideration”, in which the sentencing judge indicated
that it was not appropriate in the circumstances
to resentence, she made
specific reference to:
(a) there being no reoffending, but said that fact was “not determinative,
nor significantly informative” having regard
to s 80ZD (which
addresses orders that can be made where an offender is convicted or found guilty
of an offence punishable by imprisonment
committed while a Treatment Order is in
force); and
(b) the fact that there “was a period of, and occasions of, positive
engagement”.
is very clear that the sentencing judge gave substantive consideration to both
the lack of reoffending and the periods of compliance
with rehabilitation. The
findings of the sentencing judge as to the lack of reoffending and the periods
of compliance with rehabilitation
were not, in the circumstances of the case and
the statutory context in which the decision was made, such as to compel the
that it was appropriate to resentence the appellant rather than
impose the sentence. Even in the context of a statutory regime addressing
sentencing option very clearly focused upon the rehabilitation of drug
offenders, it was well open to the sentencing judge to determine,
notwithstanding the absence of reoffending and the limited periods of compliance
with rehabilitation, that imposition of the suspended
sentence rather than
resentence was appropriate. The sentencing judge made specific reference
(a) the fact that relapses were associated with unaddressed trauma which it was
necessary for the appellant to address for him to
progress in rehabilitation and
achieve freedom from drug dependency: at [24];
(b) the overall “high degree of non-compliance despite numerous
opportunities being given”: at [25]; and
(c) the numerous warnings given as to the consequence of non-compliance: at
sentencing judge concluded that, despite further opportunities and reminders of
his obligations, the appellant “did not
engage with the Treatment Order in
a way demonstrative of sustained commitments to rehabilitation”: at [26].
In those circumstances,
imposition of the sentence already determined was
clearly an alternative available to the sentencing judge in the proper exercise
of her discretion.
if the ground of appeal is understood as asserting a failure to take into
account material considerations, as distinct from a
complaint about the weight
which those considerations were given, this ground of appeal must be
Grounds 2 and 3:
Accumulation and manifest excess
Appellant’s
submissions
appellant addressed Grounds 2 and 3 together as the asserted error in relation
to the way the sentences were accumulated, with
Ground 2 being, in
substance, a particular of the assertion that the total sentence was manifestly
excessive. That involved recognition,
consistently with the decision in
Queen v Meyboom
[2012] ACTCA 48
, that an apparent failure to apply
concurrency and accumulation principles was not necessarily erroneous unless the
total sentence
was manifestly inadequate or excessive.
for the appellant recognised that these grounds of appeal may be considered to
be a challenge to the original sentencing decision
of Refshauge AJ because it
was that decision which determined the length of the individual sentences and
the degree of concurrency
or accumulation between them. Having regard to the
absence of any appeal against the decision of Refshauge AJ, counsel for the
appeared to submit that the terms of s 80ZE(3) were sufficient to
indicate that necessarily involved in a decision under s 80ZE(2)
a sentence that had been suspended pursuant to a Treatment Order was an exercise
of judicial power which could be challenged
on the basis that it resulted in a
sentence which was manifestly excessive. He did this by pointing to
s 80ZE(3), which referred
to the power of the court to determine whether
the offender is to serve “all or part” of the previous sentence and
capacity of the court to reduce the sentence by any period served in custody
under the treatment and supervision part of the Treatment
Order. It was
therefore submitted, at least impliedly, that it was open to challenge the
imposition of the sentence by the sentencing
judge on the ground that the
original sentence was manifestly excessive and not moderated by any order made
by the sentencing judge
at the time of its imposition.
appellant submitted that, although Refshauge AJ had referred (
at [105]-[109]) to the relevant principles applicable to the fixing of sentences
for multiple offences and the totality principle,
in the circumstances, his
Honour had failed to apply those principles. Counsel submitted that the driving
at police and aggravated
dangerous driving formed part of a single course of
conduct and that the offences were factually intertwined and had common features
of criminality. Despite that, the sentence of 15 months for aggravated
dangerous driving was made wholly cumulative upon the sentence
of 13 months
for driving at police.
submissions pointed to the limited degree of concurrency involved in the overall
sentence imposed: nine months of concurrency
in an overall sentence of
46 months. The appellant submitted that the degree of accumulation and lack
of concurrency meant that the
way in which the sentences were structured
resulted in a manifestly excessive head sentence.
Consideration
first issue that is necessary to determine is whether or not it is open to
challenge the sentencing judge’s imposition of
the sentence on the grounds
of manifest excess in circumstances where there was, and is, no appeal in
relation to the decision of
Refshauge AJ.
Barron v Laverty
[2019] ACTSC 198
, Murrell CJ explained that, when proceeding to impose a suspended
sentence under s 110(2)(a) of the Sentence Administration Act,
the sentence
to be imposed is the sentence that was a product of the original exercise of
judicial power and there is no fresh exercise
of judicial power at the point of
imposition. The imposition merely gives effect to the suspended sentence of
imprisonment that was
earlier imposed and, as a consequence, there is no scope
to alter the original sentence.
counsel for the appellant pointed out that there is a difference between the
language of s 110 of the Sentence Administration
Act and the language in
s 80ZE. Section 110 merely empowers the court to “impose the
suspended sentence”. In contrast,
although s 80ZE maintains the basic
distinction between imposing the suspended part of the sentence and
resentencing, the section
is more complex, relevantly providing:
(2) If the court decides to cancel a treatment order under subsection (1) the
court must make an order cancelling the treatment
order and, taking into account
the extent to which the offender has complied with the treatment and supervision
part of the order,
(a) impose the sentence of imprisonment that was suspended under the custodial
part of the treatment order; or
(b) if the court considers it appropriate in the circumstances—resentence
the offender for each offence in relation to which
the treatment order was made
and in any way in which the court could deal with the offender if it had
convicted the offender of each
offence at the time of resentencing, other than
by making an order under section 12A (Drug and alcohol treatment orders).
(3) If the court orders the imposition of a sentence of imprisonment under this
section, the court—
(a) must order whether the offender is to serve all or part of the sentence by
full-time detention at a correctional centre; and
(b) may reduce the sentence by any period served in custody under the treatment
and supervision part of the treatment order, taking
into account the extent to
which the offender complied with that part of the order.
Subsection (3)
has been identified by judges administering the drug and alcohol sentencing list
as “odd” in
R v Dowling (No 3)
[2021] ACTSC 210
and “curious” in
DPP v Stewart (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 163
. The particular features of relevance here are that subs (3)(a)
provides that the court must order whether the offender is to serve
or part” of the sentence imposed in full-time detention, and that
subs (3)(b) empowers the court to reduce the sentence
having regard to time
spent in custody. It is these features that were the subject of comment by
Refshauge AJ in
, who pointed to the fact that a non-parole
period could be set under s 65 of the Sentencing Act: at [47].
as Christensen AJ pointed out in
, subs (3) appears to
be designed to work with ss 80W(3) and (4), which expressly empower the
setting of a non‑parole period
if the sentence is longer than 30 days,
notwithstanding that s 65 of the Sentencing Act would otherwise require the
sentence to be
one year or longer: at [34].
agree with the earlier characterisation of the provisions as “odd”
or “curious”. There are mixed indications
within the provisions of
the Act relating to Treatment Orders, and within s 80ZE in particular, as
to whether the legislature was
attempting to integrate the process of imposition
of sentences derived from cancelling Treatment Orders with generally applicable
sentencing provisions relating to non-parole periods and backdating, or to
provide a self-contained regime in the imposition provisions
(ss 80ZB, 80ZD
and 80ZE) to address such issues.
the purposes of this case, it is only necessary to address the meaning of these
provisions in a limited respect. It is sufficient,
in order to reject the
appellant’s contention, to conclude that the reference to “all or
part” of the sentence
in s 80ZD(3)(a) does not require or permit a
substantive reconsideration of the earlier determined sentence that was
suspended pursuant
to the Treatment Order. Rather, it is a more confined
exercise relating to the imposition of a non-parole period or its equivalent.
That conclusion may be reached because there are insufficient indications that
the legislature intended a reconsideration of the
earlier sentence and because
of the fact that to interpret the paragraph to allow a substantive
reconsideration of the earlier sentence
would be inconsistent with the
fundamental distinction between imposition in subs (2)(a) and resentence in
subs (2)(b).
end result of this is that imposition of the sentence involves only a limited
exercise of judicial power. It involves:
(a) determining a non-parole period; and
(b) determining whether to reduce the sentence by any period served in custody
under the treatment and supervision part of the Treatment
does not involve a wholesale redetermination of the appropriateness of the
sentence that was previously determined and partially
suspended under the
Treatment Order. To the extent to which any complaint about the sentence imposed
by Refshauge AJ might have been
relevant to the decision as to whether to
impose or resentence, no such submission was made to the sentencing judge and
failure to consider the issue would not indicate any
House v The
those reasons, if the appellant was to challenge the sentence imposed by
Refshauge AJ on
House v The King
grounds, he needed to have sought
leave to appeal out of time against that decision. Although there were some
suggestions during
the course of the appeal that he might, counsel for the
appellant did not clearly do so.
he sought that leave, we would have declined it on the ground that the challenge
would not have succeeded. That is for the following
(a) The appellant accepted that the issue that he raises in Ground 2 about
accumulation of sentences may only succeed if he established
that the total
sentence imposed was manifestly excessive. As a consequence, Ground 2 would
be treated as a particular of Ground 3.
(b) There is no single correct approach to the structuring of multiple
sentences, and there are a variety of acceptable ways in which
to implement the
totality principle in a particular sentencing exercise:
Le Clair v The Queen
[2017] ACTCA 19
(the Court).
(c) It may be accepted that, given the commonality of some of the conduct in
question, there would ordinarily be a degree of concurrency
between the sentence
on the charge of driving at police and the sentence on the charge of aggravated
dangerous driving. However,
that of itself does not establish error.
(d) There is no complaint that the individual sentences imposed were manifestly
(e) The offending involving the aggravated dangerous driving charge was
particularly serious. It was described by Refshauge AJ as
follows (at
[15]‑[25], [27]):
On 14 August 2022, police responded to a call at about 11.40 am from a citizen
who had seen an Audi motor vehicle being driven erratically
on Heagney Crescent,
Chisholm, ACT. The citizen described the driving as follows: ‘[the
driver], he's all over the road. He's
passed out and went onto my side of the
road, his window’s all smashed, his boot's open, he's driving like an
The citizen followed the vehicle, keeping on the phone with police. At about
11.52 am, police in a marked police vehicle saw the
Audi vehicle and commenced
pursuing it.
Police attempted on two occasions to deploy tyre-deflation devices, but Mr
Allred evaded them.
Police, now in two cars, followed Mr Allred who was driving the Audi through a
number of streets. At one stage, police activated
their emergency lights and
sirens. The pursuit was recorded on the dashcam fitted to the police motor
vehicle, and, as noted above
(at [6]), a portion of it was played in Court. The
commentary showed that, between periods of dangerous driving, Mr Allred did
appropriately and within the speed limit and that the traffic was moderate
or low at various points in time.
He did, however, cross to the incorrect side of the road at times and drove in
excess of the speed limit, crossing solid road marking
lines. At one stage, as
the Audi motor vehicle approached an area where police were standing in full
police uniform, Mr Allred drove
the motor vehicle onto the median strip to evade
them. As a police officer ran to intercept him and pick up the tyre-deflation
and redeploy it in the direction of the Audi motor vehicle, Mr Allred
drove in his direction and recklessly drove towards him, though
swerving at the
last minute to avoid colliding with him. This was the basis of the charge of
driving at police and being reckless
Mr Allred then drove away and drove onto the incorrect side of the Monaro
Highway, which had then a line of heavy traffic. Police
decided it was too
dangerous to continue the pursuit and discontinued it.
This caused police to direct traffic from where the Audi motor vehicle was being
driven while it was driving erratically between
the south-bound lanes.
Later, at the intersection of Monaro Highway and Tralee Street, Hume, ACT,
police resumed the pursuit, re-activating their vehicles’
emergency lights
and sirens. Again, Mr Allred drove the Audi motor vehicle across the median
strip into oncoming traffic, but did
not stop as the lights and sirens were
directing him to do.
The police officer then drove at the Audi motor vehicle, causing Mr Allred to
cross the median strip and return to the correct side
of the road. Police
followed the Audi motor vehicle, but it later turned into Bugden Avenue, Fadden,
ACT, and the police lost sight
Later again, police on patrol saw the motor vehicle in Castleton Crescent,
Gowrie, ACT, but it was driven onto the footpath on the
green belt near the
playing fields, and police again lost sight of it.
Later, police found the Audi motor vehicle to be bogged in the green belt at
Gowrie. Mr Allred got out of the motor vehicle and walked
away along the
footpath on the green belt, followed by police. Mr Allred said that he had a
firearm and threatened to shoot himself.
Mr Allred was taken to hospital by ambulance, and a sample of his blood was
taken. It was analysed by the ACT Government Analytical
Laboratory and was shown
to contain methamphetamine.
(f) The Director points correctly to the following features of the offending and
the appellant’s subjective circumstances:
(i) the prolonged duration of the incident;
(ii) the excessive speed and multiple breaches of road rules involved;
(iii) the impact on other drivers who were forced to take evasive action to
avoid colliding with the appellant;
(iv) the presence of methamphetamine in the appellant’s blood;
(v) the appellant being on conditional liberty, namely both parole and bail,
during the incident; and
(vi) the appellant’s significant criminal history, particularly for
dangerous driving.
(g) While the driving at police charge formed a part of the dangerous driving,
it was a temporally limited and discrete part of the
much longer offending.
(h) The maximum sentence of imprisonment available for the charge of driving at
police was 15 years. The maximum sentence of imprisonment
available for
aggravated dangerous driving was five years. The aggregate of the two sentences
imposed by Refshauge AJ was a sentence
of 28 months’ imprisonment.
(i) The appellant had a long history of illicit drug use, particularly
methamphetamine and heroin.
(j) He also had a significant criminal record described by Refshauge AJ as
“a long history of criminal offending” (see
[82]-[83]).
(k) When the overall conduct, comprising the aggravated dangerous driving and
the driving at police, is considered together, it could
not be concluded that an
aggregate sentence of 28 months’ imprisonment in the subjective
circumstances of the appellant was
manifestly excessive. Nor, having regard to
the other offending for which he was sentenced, could the overall sentence of
three years
and 10 months be considered to be manifestly excessive.
44․ As a consequence, had an application for leave to appeal out of
time been made in relation to the sentence imposed by Refshauge
would have refused that leave.
Error as to the length of
the sentence imposed
error, not the subject of a ground of appeal, that was identified by the
appellant in the approach taken by the sentencing judge
was that, instead of
imposing only that part of the sentence that had been suspended under the
Treatment Order (three years and four
months), her Honour imposed the
whole of the sentence (three years and 10 months). This error gave
rise to no adverse consequences
so far as the appellant was concerned because
her Honour backdated the sentence so as to take into account the fact that the
six‑month period had already been served. In fact, as the
Director pointed out, the imposition of the whole of the sentence
beneficial consequence for the appellant in that it shortened the non-parole
period to which he was subject under the imposed
sentence. In order to explain
why this was the case, it is necessary to go into the detail of the sentence
that was imposed and the
sentence that would have been imposed had the starting
point been to impose three years and four months.
total sentence imposed was three years and 10 months’ imprisonment,
commencing on 7 November 2023 and ending on
6 September
2027. The non‑parole period was 55 percent of
the total term of imprisonment, being two years, one month and 10 days. That
the effect that the non-parole period ended on 16 December 2025.
is apparent that the duration of the non-parole period was arrived at by the
application of the percentage to the sentence imposed,
as distinct from the
selection of a period of years and months and the calculation of the percentage
being derived from that.
the total sentence imposed been only the portion of the sentence that was
suspended under the Treatment Order, three years and
four months, then
55 percent of that would have been a period of 22 months, or one year and
10 months. The sentence would have started
on 7 May 2024, six months
later than the sentence actually imposed, and ended on
6 September 2027, the same date as the sentence
actually imposed. It
would mean that the non‑parole period of 22 months would start on
7 May 2024 and end on 6 March 2026,
substantially later than
under the sentence actually imposed.
the error as to which part of the sentence was to be imposed were remedied, the
Director did not submit that the non-parole period
should be amended in the
manner that would be required if a consequential amendment was made to the
non-parole period so as to reflect
the sentencing judge’s intention that
the appellant serve 55 percent of the sentence imposed in full‑time
position is, therefore, that the sentence imposed appears to be contrary to the
requirements of the statute, but:
(a) that error is not the subject of a ground of appeal;
(b) it has not given rise to any practical consequence adverse to the appellant,
but instead has given him a benefit; and
(c) if the error was to be corrected, the Director does not contend that any
alteration should be made to the non-parole period adverse
to the appellant.
for the appellant submitted, in relation to the length of the sentence imposed
or the non-parole period, that “if the
court considered there was merit in
either of those grounds as far as the specific error[s] ... asserted are
concerned”, then
the appellant sought leave to include them in the notice
of appeal. He would then contend that this court should find the errors
established and resentence the appellant. That was an unsatisfactory position to
adopt because it did not involve any unequivocal
application for leave to amend
the notice of appeal that could be responded to by the Director and determined
by the court. We would
refuse leave to amend the notice of appeal to include the
assertion of error relating to the term of the sentence imposed or the
non-parole period because the establishment of those grounds of appeal would not
impugn the decision to impose the sentence and only
the concession by the
Director would protect the appellant from an increase in the length of his
non-parole period.
refusal of leave to amend the notice of appeal means that it is not necessary to
address additional issues about the operation
of subs (3)(b) that were not
the subject of argument. Those are issues which arise out of the
“odd” and “curious”
language of s 80ZE(3). The
first issue would be how periods of custody during the existence of the
Treatment Order should be dealt
with. The sentencing judge dealt with them
through backdating. That would certainly be consistent with the usual approach
63 of the Sentencing Act to addressing time spent in custody.
However, s 80ZE(3)(b) refers to the sentence being reduced rather than
backdated. How this provision is intended to operate in relation to the
generally‑applicable power to backdate a sentence in
s 63 is, as
pointed out above at [38], not clear. If only reduction as distinct from
backdating is permitted, then that would raise
a further issue, namely, whether
what is being imposed is a single period of suspended imprisonment as a result
of the Treatment
Order, as distinct from the multiple individual sentences for
the various offences. While the sentencing judge proceeded on the basis
was the latter, if that was the case then the process of reducing the sentence
to take into account pre‑sentence custody
would become difficult as it is
not clear which of those sentences would be reduced. On the other hand, if what
was being imposed
was a single period of imprisonment, then reduction of that
period would be relatively straightforward. However, for the reasons
these issues do not need to be addressed in this case.
order of the Court is:
(1) The appeal is dismissed.
I certify that the preceding fifty-three [53] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Court.
RTF format (277 KB)
Signed PDF/A format