Police v Alfaro [2025] ACTMC 15 (16 September 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Police v Alfaro
[2025] ACTMC 15
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Magistrate Temby
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW –
SENTENCING –
judgment and
punishment – negligent driving occasioning death – heavy
Legislation Cited:
Road Transport (Safety and Traffic
Management) Act 1999
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Cases Cited:
Barbaro v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 288
DPP v Spong
[2018] ACTCA 37
[2016] ACTSC 200
Omari v Moore
[2013] ACTSC 9
Present v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 25
R v Hamdan (No 3)
[2022] ACTSC 326
R v Creighton
(Unreported, Supreme Court of the Australian Capital
Territory, 28 October 2010)
R v Chancellor
[2019] ACTSC 191
R v Livas (No 2)
[2020] ACTSC 116
[2008] ACTSC 115
The Police v Hutchison
(Unreported, Magistrates Court of the
Australian Capital Territory, 4 August 2022)
The Queen v Kilic
[2016] HCA 48
Wilkins v Hague
[2011] ACTSC 189
Erin Gillies (Informant)
John Alfaro (Defendant)
Representation:
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Tim Sharman Solicitors (Defendant)
File Number:
CC 4238 of 2025
MAGISTRATE TEMBY:
11 March 2025 the Defendant, Mr John Alfaro, was the driver of a Transport
Canberra public bus undertaking a route in Nicholls.
Nearing 8am he was in a
queue of vehicles on Gold Creek Road between the northbound and southbound lanes
of the Barton Highway. The
traffic in the southbound lanes was heavy but flowing
Alfaro was waiting to cross the southbound lanes of the Barton Highway into Gold
Creek. There was both a stop sign and stop line
at the intersection of Gold
Creek Road and the Barton Highway.
Mr Alfaro was the second vehicle in the queue, he waited at least two minutes
and 48 seconds to proceed. While waiting, Mr Alfaro
looked to his left (in the
direction of oncoming traffic from the southbound lanes of the Barton Highway)
several times. However,
in the 10 seconds prior to him moving forward to cross
over the Barton Highway he did not. He looked down and rubbed his eyes.
the car in front of him had left the stop line on Gold Creek Road to cross the
southbound lanes of the Barton Highway, Mr
Alfaro followed two seconds
afterwards. He looked left as he accelerated towards the stop line, but he did
not stop at the stop line
to make sure that there were no oncoming vehicles. As
he crossed the stop line he stopped looking left and looked straight ahead.
Alfaro accepts that he did not undertake a sufficient check to ensure that there
were no vehicles close by and that he did not
stop at the stop line as he was
legally required to do. The consequence of those failures was tragic.
Uqasha Imran was riding her motorcycle southbound on the Barton Highway at the
time, travelling near the posted speed limit of
80 km/hr. She was approximately
40 metres away when Mr Alfaro crossed the stop line and there was no way for her
to avoid colliding
with the bus. It completely blocked the southbound lanes by
the time Ms Imran reached the bus about 1.5 seconds later.
to whom police spoke, both passengers on the bus and other motorists, were of
the view that it was clearly not possible
for Mr Alfaro to safely cross the road
given how close Ms Imran was. Mr Alfaro did not see Ms Imran’s
Imran collided with the bus just behind the front left wheel arch. She was
thrown into the side of the bus before landing on the
road. Ms Imran was taken
to hospital in a critical condition, but she did not survive her injuries. She
passed away three days later,
on 14 March 2025, as a result of a traumatic brain
Alfaro was charged with, and pleaded guilty to, negligent driving occasioning
death. That offence carries a maximum penalty of
200 PU ($32,000) and/or
imprisonment for two years
Road Transport (Safety and Traffic
Management) Act 1999
am required to sentence Mr Alfaro for his conduct. In doing so, I must judge Mr
not merely according to the awfulness of the tragic results of
his actions, but in accordance with the law and principles of
’ (R v Creighton (Unreported, Supreme Court of the Australian
Capital Territory, 28 October 2010, Refshauge J) (
Objective seriousness
General principles
driving for the purposes of
Road Transport (Safety and Traffic
Management) Act 1999
involves a departure from the standard of care to be
expected of the ordinary prudent driver in the circumstances (
DPP v Spong
[2018] ACTCA 37
Wilkins v Hague
[2011] ACTSC 189
[2008] ACTSC 115
objective seriousness of Mr Alfaro’s conduct thus requires an evaluation
of the degree to which he departed from the proper
standard of driving. In
undertaking that evaluation, the court must have regard to all the
circumstances, including the nature, condition
and use of the road where the
offence occurred and the volume of traffic on (or that might reasonably be
expected to have been on)
[2008] ACTSC 115
Omari v Moore
[2013] ACTSC 9).
in evaluating the degree to which Mr Alfaro departed from the proper standard of
driving, his conduct is not to be compared
with the worst example of driving,
but with the worst kind of negligent driving captured by
Transport (Safety and Traffic Management) Act 1999
). There is a separate offence, of culpable driving (relevantly
defined to mean driving in a way that fails, to a gross degree, to
observe the
standard of care which a reasonable person would have observed in all the
circumstances) which captures driving of the
worst kind. It carries a much
higher maximum penalty, of 14 years’ imprisonment, if the driving causes
the death of another
Crimes Act 1900
Mr Alfaro’s negligence caused the death of another human being, that is an
element of every offence under
Road Transport (Safety and
Traffic Management) Act 1999
and it is not a distinguishing feature on
Omari v Moore
[2013] ACTSC 9
[2016] ACTSC
Assessment of objective serious of Mr Alfaro’s
Alfaro’s offending conduct was objectively serious insofar as an offence
Road Transport (Safety and Traffic Management) Act 1999
is concerned. The parties agreed that it was not the most serious example of
negligent driving but there was nevertheless a substantial
departure from the
standard of care Mr Alfaro was required to exercise in the circumstances. His
driving involved a high degree of
negligence.
factors that contribute towards the objective seriousness of Mr Alfaro’s
conduct are as follows:
(a) Mr Alfaro was tasked with crossing an arterial road. There was heavy, albeit
well-flowing, traffic, and Mr Alfaro was on notice
as to the need to keep a
proper lookout for oncoming vehicles before crossing the road.
(b) This was not a case in which Mr Alfaro simply misjudged his capacity to
drive the bus across the road before oncoming traffic
reached him but instead
involved a disregard for a fundamental road safety obligation. Mr Alfaro failed
to comply with his legal
obligation to stop at the stop line and check for
oncoming traffic before proceeding.
(c) The need to stop at the stop line and check for oncoming traffic was, beyond
the legal requirement, a very important practical
step that Mr Alfaro needed to
take because he was driving a bus. A bus is not a vehicle that can easily
accelerate to avoid a collision
and it is a long vehicle that other motorists
cannot easily drive around. In Ms Imran’s case, there was no way for her
colliding with the bus because it occupied both of the southbound lanes
of the Barton Highway at the time she collided with it. Further,
as Mr Alfaro
knew, the a-pillar and doorframes at the front-left of the bus partially
obstruct the driver’s view. Mr Alfaro
explained to police how he had to
manoeuvre his body when he needed to look through the front doors to check for
(d) Relatedly, Mr Alfaro was a professional bus driver. As a driver of a heavy
vehicle, Mr Alfaro bore considerable responsibility
with respect to the safety
of other road users, given the vulnerability of other road users to any want of
care on Mr Alfaro’s
part (R v Livas (No 2)
[2020] ACTSC 116).
respect, there was a heavy onus on him, not only to drive safely but also to
drive in accordance with road rules (Present
v The Queen
[2011] NSWCCA 25
(e) The risk that Mr Alfaro posed to users of the southbound lanes of the Barton
Highway, and to Ms Imran in particular, as a result
of his failure to stop at
the stop line and check for oncoming traffic, was compounded by the fact that he
failed to pay any attention
to oncoming traffic in the 10 seconds before he
started driving the bus towards the stop line and across the road. While Mr
did look in the direction of oncoming traffic as he accelerated, the
period for which he did so was short and clearly inadequate
having regard to the
circumstances that I have set out in the preceding sub-paragraphs.
(f) Finally, had Mr Alfaro stopped at the stop line and performed a proper check
for oncoming vehicles, he would have seen Ms Imran
who, in any event, would
likely have passed by Mr Alfaro by the time he started to drive the bus forward
again, given that she was
only 1.5 seconds away when Mr Alfaro crossed the stop
line. That is, Mr Alfaro’s negligence was the sole cause of Ms
Victim impact statements
Imran’s parents read victim impact statements on behalf of Ms Imran and
themselves. Their pain was palpable. Mrs Imran needed
to be consoled when
reading her statement and could not finish it herself.
22 years of age, Ms Imran had a promising future. She had started her career,
following her father’s footsteps in the financial
services industry. She
was involved in a taekwondo club, both as a participant and a teacher. She
dreamed of getting married and
travelling.
promise that her future held will, of course, never be realised.
Imran’s passing has also left an irreplaceable hole in the lives of her
family and friends. Her mother spoke of the ache
that she has endured, and of
the loss of companionship and support that she has felt, since the incident. She
also referred to the
pain and loss that Ms Imran’s siblings have
experienced. She said that they had lost their mentor, friend and anchor. She
how Ms Imran’s colleagues and students at her taekwondo club miss
her leadership and presence.
Imran’s father said that his heart ‘
has been squished and the
life has been sucked out of
’ him since the incident. He spoke of all
the moments and activities in a day that remind him of Ms Imran and how hard it
for him to get through each day. He said that Ms Imran’s siblings
have progressed in their lives but the joy isn’t the
’. He said that their happiness has been dampened by the loss of
their sister. He similarly described how the joy he used to
Imran’s friends has been replaced with sorrow.
Imran’s father was proud to say, however, that even in death she
contributed to her community, with her organ donations saving
Subjective circumstances
Alfaro is a 53 year old man who was born in the Philippines. He is married with
two children, aged 19 and 20. Mr Alfaro and his
family moved to Australia in
2008 and he acquired Australian citizenship in 2012.
a character reference that Mr Alfaro’s wife wrote, she described Mr Alfaro
as a very hard working and responsible man, and
an ideal husband and father. She
said that she and Mr Alfaro moved to Australia for a better future for their
Alfaro’s brother-in-law similarly described Mr Alfaro as a person of
integrity, compassion and responsibility, who cares
for people. There is no
dispute that Mr Alfaro is a person of good character.
the majority of his working career in the Philippines, Mr Alfaro worked for the
local government’s legislative assembly.
On immigrating to Australia, Mr
Alfaro worked as a cleaner and occasional truck driver for 11 years. He gained
employment as a Transport
Canberra bus driver in 2020. Subsequent to the
incident the subject of these proceedings, he has been transferred to another
government role, still working full time.
Alfaro enjoys a stable financial situation. He supports his family in Australia
as well as financially supporting his mother in
Philippines.
Barbaro v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 288
, the court said, at [39],
If there is evidence of remorse, and if that remorse is
genuine, it is a very important element in the exercise of the sentencing
discretion. Remorse of this kind enhances prospects of rehabilitation and
reduces the need for specific deterrence ...
is no doubt that Mr Alfaro is remorseful.
Alfaro’s immediate reaction following the incident was distress. Following
the incident he has felt sadness, sorrow and depression,
primarily reflecting on
the impact of the incident on Ms Imran’s family. Throughout his interview
with the authors of the Court
Duty Report, Mr Alfaro spoke about Ms Imran and
her family and verbalised remorse and empathy for them.
Alfaro’s wife wrote a letter to the court that described the distress her
family has felt as a result of the incident. She
wrote that Mr Alfaro said that
there were no words to describe his sadness, profound sympathy and sorrow for Ms
Imran’s family.
She said that Ms Imran would always be in her
family’s prayers.
Criminal history
Alfaro has no criminal history.
absence of prior criminal convictions is a mitigating factor on sentence. It is
clear from the absence of any antecedents and
from Mr Alfaro’s otherwise
good character that the present offence is an uncharacteristic aberration and
that he is entitled
to leniency in the sentence that I
Plea of guilty
Alfaro entered a plea of guilty at the earliest opportunity.
have allowed a 25% discount on Mr Alfaro’s sentence for the utilitarian
value of Mr Alfaro’s early plea of guilty.
Comparable cases
R v Chancellor
[2019] ACTSC 191
, Mossop J observed that the cases his
Honour had considered did not disclose any coherent pattern of significance for
the offender before him for a negligent driving occasioning death
offence. In my view, no discernible sentencing pattern has emerged
in the cases
that have been decided since
R v Chancellor
only consistent position taken by the courts, both before and after
, is that these are not the kinds of cases where the purposes of
sentencing necessarily require an offender with a strong subjective
serve any sentence of imprisonment by full-time custody. Each of the sentences
of imprisonment that have been imposed in
the cases I considered were suspended
or, in one case, was to be served by an Intensive Corrections Order.
acknowledging that there is no particular sentencing practice, the Prosecution
drew my attention to a number of sentencing decisions
by way of comparison to
the present case. I have considered those cases below.
doing so, I note, as the High Court observed in
The Queen v Kilic
, at [22], that while examination of cases in which sentences have been
determined for the same offence ‘
may provide a relevant
“yardstick” by which a sentencing court can attempt to achieve
consistency in sentencing and in
the application of relevant sentencing
’, the requirement to have regard to sentences imposed in
those cases ‘
does not mean that the range of sentences imposed in the
past fixes the boundaries within which future sentences must be passed; rather
the range of sentences imposed in the past may inform a “broad
understanding of the range of sentences that would ensure consistency
sentencing and a uniform application of principle”
’. Consistency
does not mean numerical equivalence but the consistent application of relevant
legal principles.
R v Chancellor
[2019] ACTSC 191
R v Chancellor
, a police officer (Mr Chancellor) entered an intersection
at speed, against a red light, without activating the car siren and collided
with a vehicle within the intersection. He steered his vehicle to try to avoid
the crash but was unable to do so.
J found that the offending involved a high degree of negligence. While Mr
Chanceller, as a police officer who was responding
to a ‘Priority 1’
dispatch, was lawfully permitted to be driving in excess of the speed limit and
to travel through an
intersection against a red light, he was nevertheless
required to take reasonable care for the safety of other road users. His Honour
found that Mr Chancellor had failed to do so by:
(a) entering the intersection at speed when the light was red, when he should
have slowed or stopped;
(b) failing to use the car siren as well as its emergency lights; and
(c) failing to observe (or have sufficient regard for) the presence of the other
vehicle entering the intersection.
Honour noted, at [54], that the fact that the death of the victim ‘
caused by an experienced police officer who had received specialised driver
training and was entrusted with providing safety and
security to the
’ was a matter which was of considerable concern to the public,
as well as the victim’s family.
Honour determined that the appropriate penalty was a suspended sentence of
imprisonment of five months, which was reduced by around
Chancellor’s plea of guilty. Mr Chancellor had strong subjective factors,
being a person of exceptionally good character
who was acting in good faith in
the course of his duties and who had suffered extra-curial consequences, namely
disciplinary proceedings
which resulted in his resignation and an end to his
career as a police officer.
R v Hamdan (No 3)
[2022] ACTSC
, the offender (Mr Hamdan) was a P-plate driver who was driving
late at night. He had too many passengers in the car according to
the conditions
of his licence. Elkhaim J found that Mr Hamdan had probably exceeded the 50
km/hr speed limit but, even if he had
not, he had driven too fast for the wet
conditions in which he was driving.
Hamdan lost control of the vehicle and crashed into a tree. One of his
passengers was killed while another suffered grievous bodily
harm. Elkhaim J
found that the objective seriousness of the offending was above medium.
Hamdan had a strong subjective case. He was only 20 years of age, of good
character, had good prospects of rehabilitation, and
suffered serious injuries
as a result of the collision (a brain injury, reduced vision in his left eye,
cognitive dysfunction, and
major depression). He was also remorseful.
Nevertheless,
his Honour determined that a sentence of imprisonment of 20 months, close to the
maximum penalty, was appropriate. This
was reduced to 18 months for Mr
Hamdan’s plea of guilty. It was to be served by an Intensive Corrections
The Police v Hutchison
(Unreported, Magistrates
Court of the Australian Capital Territory, 4 August 2022)
The Police v Hutchison
, the defendant (Ms Hutchison) killed a pedestrian
at a raised pedestrian crossing. Quite why the collision occurred is not clear
from the statement of facts, except that Ms Hutchison must have failed to keep a
proper lookout.
the incident occurred after sunset and daylight was fading, there was a
streetlight illuminating the crossing and there were
two large pedestrian
crossing signs. Despite this, Ms Hutchison said that she did not see the
some significance, perhaps, were the facts that the verges to the side of the
road were dark and there was a lot of glare from
oncoming headlights, including
reflection from the wet road. This may have impacted Ms Hutchison’s
capacity to see the victim.
is also possible that speed was a contributing factor. Ms Hutchison was
travelling over the speed limit (64 km/hr in a 50 km/hr
zone) five seconds
before the crossing, and at 32 km/hr at the point of impact.
Hutchison was 59 years old and had no criminal history. Magistrate Cook imposed
a suspended sentence of imprisonment of 8 ¾
months, which was reduced by
20% for the defendant’s plea of guilty.
is important to recognise the significant harm caused to Ms Imran and her
family. To borrow from the words of Refshauge J in
R v Creighton
sentence I can impose will resolve the tragedy that Ms Imran’s family have
experienced. However, the harm they have suffered
is something I have considered
in determining an appropriate sentence in this case.
deterrence is also important. As Refshauge J observed in
R v Creighton
the driving of a motor vehicle is such an every day event that it is
often forgotten how serious are the consequences of a failure
to take due care
in that task
’. Drivers, particularly drivers of heavy vehicles, must
understand the importance of taking care for the safety of other road
of the serious consequences if they fail to do so (both in terms of the risk of
injury or death to other road users and
in terms of possible punishment for
their conduct).
Alfaro must also be made accountable for his actions and his conduct
Mr Alfaro’s good character, absence of a criminal history and clear
remorse for his conduct, specific deterrence is not
a significant sentencing
consideration. Nor is there any suggestion that Mr Alfaro is in need of
rehabilitation.
Ultimately,
I must ensure that the Defendant is adequately punished in a way that is just
and appropriate.
Prosecution submitted that a sentence of imprisonment is appropriate in this
case. Mr Alfaro did not argue against that proposition,
and I agree with it. In
my view, having regard to the objective seriousness of Mr Alfaro’s conduct
and the purposes of sentencing
that must be satisfied, no penalty other than a
term of imprisonment would be appropriate.
all the circumstances, the appropriate penalty is a term of imprisonment of 12
months, which is reduced by 25% to 9 months to account
for Mr Alfaro’s
guilty plea.
regard to the significant remorse expressed by Mr Alfaro, his subjective
circumstances, and the absence of any criminal history,
I do not consider that
the purposes of sentencing I have identified require that Mr Alfaro immediately
serve his term of imprisonment
by full time custody. However, I do consider that
Mr Alfaro should contribute to the community through the performance of
service work during the period that his sentence is suspended.
Accordingly,
the sentence of imprisonment will be wholly suspended on Mr Alfaro entering into
a 24 month Good Behaviour Order which
contains a community service condition,
requiring Mr Alfaro to complete 140 hours of community service
make the following orders:
(a) On the charge of negligent driving occasioning death, being charge number
CC2025/4238, the Defendant is convicted.
(b) The Defendant is sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 9 months, commencing
on 16 September 2025 and concluding on 15 June 2026.
(c) The sentence of imprisonment is to be suspended upon the Defendant entering
into a Good Behaviour Order for a period of 24 months.
He is required to sign an
undertaking to comply with his good behaviour obligations under the
(Sentence Administration) Act 2005
for that period with the following
additional conditions:
Defendant will be on probation, subject to the supervision of the
Director-General of Corrective Services (or delegate) and must
reasonable directions of that person during the period of the Good Behaviour
Order, or such lesser period as determined
to be appropriate by the supervising
Defendant is to report to the Corrective Services Court Duty officer
immediately.
Defendant is to perform community service work for a period of 140 hours within
24 months from the date of this order.
I certify that the preceding sixty-two [62] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Decision of his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Evangeline Maguire
Date: 16/09/2025
RTF format (279 KB)
Signed PDF/A format