Law Society (ACT) v Bangura [2024] ACTSCFC 1 (30 October 2024)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Law Society (ACT) v Bangura
[2024] ACTSCFC 1
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Mossop J, McWilliam J & Ainslie-Wallace AJ
(1) Amadu Bangura is struck off the Roll of Legal Practitioners in the
Australian Capital Territory.
(2) The Respondent is to pay the Applicant’s costs of the
application.
Catchwords:
LEGAL PRACTITIONERS
– APPLICATION FOR REMOVAL FROM THE ROLL
OF LEGAL PRACTITIONERS
– Criminality – whether
practitioner is a fit and proper person to practise law – where criminal
conduct related
to willingness to engage in dishonesty over sustained period
– where any insight belated – where practitioner’s
circumstances not causative of dishonesty – defect of character
established – unfitness indefinite –
practitioner’s name
removed from Roll
of Legal Practitioners
Legislation Cited:
Legal Profession Act 2006
Cases Cited:
A Solicitor v Council of the Law Society of New South Wales
216 CLR 253
A-G (Qld) v Legal Services Commissioner; Legal Services
Bangura v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2020] NSWCA
Commissioner v Shand
[2018] QCA 66
Childs v Walton
Council of Law Society v Zhukovska
[2020] NSWCA
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Bandarage
[2019] ACTSCFC
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v
[2020] ACTSCFC 1
Law Society of New South Wales v Bannister
[1993] NSWCA 157
Law Society v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185
Practitioner v Council of the Law Society of the ACT
[2015] ACTCA
Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee v Palumbo
[2005] WASCA 129
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
Prothonotary of Supreme Court of New South Wales v Da Rocha
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v
[2018] NSWCA 230
[1893] UKLawRpKQB 130
[1893] 2 QB 439
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Hoyle
[2020] ACTSCFC 3
The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales v Kearns
[2011] NSWCA 394
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of NSW
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
(Applicant)
Amadu Bangura (Respondent)
Representation:
D Moujalli (Applicant)
A Martin (Respondent)
Thomson Geer (Applicant)
Martin Lawyers (Respondent)
File Number:
SC 468 of 2023
The Application
Council of the Law Society of the ACT (the
) seeks an order that
the name of Amadu Bangura (the
) be removed from the Roll of
Legal Practitioners (the
) in the Australian Capital Territory on the
basis that the Respondent is not a fit and proper person to be a legal
practitioner of
the Supreme Court.
The Court’s power
proceeding invokes the Court’s inherent and protective powers in relation
to legal practitioners. A person may
be admitted as a lawyer if the Supreme
Court is satisfied that the person is “fit and proper” and on that
satisfaction,
the person becomes an officer of the Supreme Court (
Profession Act 2006
). Although there is no express
statutory power to remove or suspend a practitioner, the power is preserved to
the Supreme Court
through its inherent jurisdiction “in relation to the
control and discipline” of the legal profession. This includes
incidental power of suspension from practice or removal of a person’s name
from the Roll in a proper case:
Ziems v The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
The issue for determination
action of the Applicant and the Court’s role is protective of the public
and of the reputation of the profession.
It does so by the maintenance of its
high standards and maintaining public confidence in the legal profession:
Council of the Law Society of the Australian
Capital Territory v Giles
[2020] ACTSCFC 1
at [115]. The protective role extends beyond ensuring that the public
is protected from further defaults by the particular practitioner
but acts as an
example and deterrent to other practitioners against similar conduct:
Law Society of New South Wales v Bannister
[1993] NSWCA 157
) at 7-8. Personal misconduct, or
conduct not in the course of practising the profession, may be sufficient to
warrant a finding
that a person is not fit and proper:
A Solicitor v Council of the
Law Society of New South Wales
[2004] HCA 1
216 CLR 253
the principal question for this court is whether the Respondent is presently a
fit and proper person to be a lawyer
of the Supreme Court upon whose roll the
practitioner’s name presently appears:
[1893] UKLawRpKQB 130
[1893] 2 QB 439
at 448 Lopes LJ said
of this task:
To my mind the question which the Court in cases like this ought always to put
to itself is this, is the Court, having regard to
the circumstances brought
before it, any longer justified in holding out the solicitor in question as a
fit and proper person to
be entrusted with the important duties and grave
responsibilities which belong to a solicitor? That appears to me to be the
which the Court always has to answer when a matter of this kind comes
reasons that follow, we have determined that the Respondent is not a fit and
proper person and that his name should be
removed from the Roll.
Applicable principles
legal principles relevant to this matter were not in dispute and have been set
out in this jurisdiction in cases such
at [115]-[123]
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v
[2019] ACTSCFC 1
[142]-[149].
question of fitness to practise is the same whether the Court is acting in its
inherent jurisdiction, or following a
recommendation made by the ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal, pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2006
at [16], citing
A Solicitor
at [15]. It is a question to be decided
at the time of hearing, rather than when the misconduct was engaged in:
making its assessment, the Court considers the whole circumstances. Not every
finding of misconduct (personal or professional)
justifies, or requires, a
conclusion that removal from the Roll is the appropriate order:
A Solicitor
at [15]. Of significance to the present case, the mere fact of a criminal
conviction is not necessarily an answer to the question
of whether a person is
fit and proper, but as was said in
(at 288 per Fullagar J, 298 per
Kitto J), the circumstances on which the conviction is based may reveal defects
of character which
are incompatible with membership of the legal profession.
9․ Relevantly
here, in relation to conduct occurring outside the practice of law, such conduct
may indicate a present unfitness
to practice where the practitioner’s
behaviour would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful and dishonourable by
the profession of good repute and competency:
The Council of the Law Society of the Australian
Capital Territory v Hoyle
[2020] ACTSCFC 3
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales v Thomson
[2018] NSWCA 230
that regard, the present case is fundamentally concerned with the
practitioner’s honesty. The authorities make
clear the importance of
honesty and integrity to the practice of law. In
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
52 NSWLR 279
), the NSW Court of Appeal
explained the public interest in ensuring those who practise as lawyers are held
to the highest standards
of integrity; not only with their clients’
confidences, and the reliance their professional colleagues place on their word,
but because the judiciary must have confidence in those who appear before it.
Spigelman CJ (with whom Mason P and Handley JA agreed)
stated at [19]-[20]
(emphasis added):
and integrity are important in many spheres of conduct. However, in some spheres
significant public interests are involved
in the conduct of particular persons
and the state regulates and restricts those who are entitled to engage in those
activities and
acquire the privileges associated with a particular status. The
legal profession has long required the highest standards of integrity.
are four interrelated interests involved.
must feel secure
in confiding their secrets and entrusting their most personal affairs to
Fellow practitioners must be able to depend implicitly
and the behaviour
of their colleagues
The judiciary
must have confidence in those who appear before the courts.
must have confidence in the legal profession
by reason of the central role
the profession plays in the administration of justice. Many aspects of the
administration of justice
depend on the trust by the judiciary and/or the public
in the performance of professional obligations by professional
above extract was cited with approval in this jurisdiction in
Legal Practitioner v Council of the Law Society
[2015] ACTCA 20
a conviction for an offence involving dishonesty has been commonly found to
render a practitioner unfit for the high
degree of trust and confidence which
the courts, members of the profession, clients and the public are entitled to
place in a person
endorsed by the court as a fit and proper person for admission
to the profession: see for example,
Practitioners Complaints Committee v Palumbo
[2005] WASCA 129
The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v Kearns
A-G (Qld) v Legal Services
Commissioner; Legal Services Commissioner v Shand
[2018] QCA 66
of considering the whole circumstances also includes considering the subjective
circumstances of the practitioner that
may have operated on the conduct, and
which may still be informative at the time the decision about fitness comes to
be made. The
caution to be applied is that while a practitioner’s
circumstances may be unfortunate and evoke sympathy, they should not detract
from the core purpose of public protection:
at [116] and the
authority there-cited.
order for the involuntary removal of the name of a practitioner from the Roll is
made only because the probability is
that the solicitor is permanently unfit to
practise, or at least unfit for a period of indefinite duration:
Council of Law Society v Zhukovska
[2020] NSWCA 163
Applicant bears the onus of establishing (in the sense of actual persuasion)
that the solicitor is likely to be unfit
to practise for the indefinite future:
at [100], [115]. However, where the practitioner has
manifested a serious character flaw that would justify removal, it is for the
practitioner to affirmatively satisfy the court that the unfitness was, or is,
of limited duration: see
at [149] and the authorities
there-cited. In that way, the evidential onus shifts.
16․ Whether
the practitioner has expressed true contrition may be a significant factor in
determining the appropriate relief
in the circumstances. The significance was
described in
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of
New South Wales v Da Rocha
[2013] NSWCA 151
(per Ward JA at [34], approving
Childs v Walton
[1990] NSWCA 41
per Samuels
JA) as being that where the protection of the community is the paramount
interest, any contrition that is accepted as
honest may indicate that no
occasion for protection exists. However, while a practitioner’s expressed
intention not to reoffend
is relevant, it carries little weight unless
accompanied by an understanding of the wrongfulness of the conduct which is the
of concern:
Law Society v Walsh
[1997] NSWCA 185
case turns upon a close consideration of its own facts:
A Solicitor
[37]. Where the application is made relying on the Court’s inherent
facts set out below were not contested and are the factual findings on which the
Court proceeds to make its assessment.
Respondent was admitted as a lawyer on 14 December 2012. He remains on the Roll
although is no longer practising.
Following his admission, he worked in a
solicitor’s practice from 20 August 2014 until 10 March 2016. The
Respondent worked
at various other firms before starting a practice on his own
in 2018. He was also registered as a migration agent. That registration
cancelled on 18 September 2018 for a period of 5 years and has not since been
conduct which led to this action was not done in the course of the Respondent
engaging in legal practice but, rather,
arises from an event which occurred in
his private life.
March 2015, the Respondent was involved in what seemed to be a minor motor car
accident. At the scene the driver
of the other car involved gave the Respondent
$2,000 to cover the damage to his car.
May 2015, lawyers acting on the Respondent’s instructions lodged an
insurance claim for damages for personal
injuries to the Respondent arising from
the accident. The Respondent claimed that he was suffering from pain in his
right hip and
back, severe headaches, shock, anxiety, depression, and fear and
phobia about cars. He said he was self-employed but because of
his injuries,
was unable to return to work. He claimed he had pain as well as a restriction of
movement in his right hip. He claimed
$700,000 in damages.
23․ Following
the lodging of the claim, the Respondent attended a number of doctors to assess
his injuries and in those appointments,
maintained his claim to injury and
further claimed he could not sit for more than 20 minutes at a time due to the
turns out, nothing could have been further from the truth.
June 2017, the Respondent was arrested and charged with attempting dishonestly
to obtain a financial advantage. He
pleaded not guilty. The hearing took place
in the NSW Local Court and occupied some 10 hearing days.
Respondent was convicted and sentenced to two years’ imprisonment with a
non-parole period of nine months.
Respondent appealed both conviction and sentence to the District Court of NSW,
maintaining his innocence of the charge.
The hearing took place over two days
and on the third day Judge Payne dismissed the appeal and found the Respondent
guilty of the
charge. Her Honour resentenced the Respondent to one year and
nine months imprisonment to be served as an intensive corrections
order together
with 240 hours of community service.
March 2020, the Respondent commenced proceedings in the Court of Appeal of the
Supreme Court of NSW seeking to have
the sentence imposed by Judge Payne
quashed. The summons was heard on 7 July 2020 and dismissed with costs:
Bangura v Director of Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2020] NSWCA 138.
Criminality and duration of the conduct
Respondent’s denial of his criminality resulted in the use of at least 14
days of court time. In the Local Court
the presiding Magistrate said that his
evidence was, at times, “just plain dishonest”. She made findings
that the Respondent
had made false representations to the doctors who examined
him for the purposes of preparing reports and to assessors from the insurance
company about his inability to work. In this regard, the presiding Magistrate
said that the Respondent’s counsel challenged
those doctors on the
accuracy of their notes taken during the assessment, with the Respondent
claiming he had no recollection of
what occurred. She expressed significant
disquiet as to the basis on which the Respondent instructed his counsel to make
those challenges.
District Court of NSW, the Respondent again maintained his innocence and denied
any false statements or exaggeration
of his condition. In the course of the
judgment dismissing the Respondent’s appeal, Judge Payne set out the
contents of a
number of the Respondent’s telephone calls with his
solicitor, which the police had intercepted and the contents of which had
played in the Local Court. When the Respondent was told by his solicitor that
the insurance company was assessing his claims
that he could not work and that
the records of the Law Society of New South Wales (
NSW Law Society
showed him working at a particular firm, the Respondent denied the fact. The
Respondent said to his solicitor:
... the requirement is I still need to maintain my practising certificate. That
is not to say I'm presently working with them. That's
31․ Immediately
after the conversation with his solicitor, the Respondent called the firm by
whom he was shown to be employed
and said to the person who answered the phone
there that if someone called wanting to know whether he worked there, they were
say, “I will have to get back to you on this one, I’m not
Payne said, referring to this conversation, that it illustrated that the
Respondent well knew that he was working
and when he told doctors and other
people that he was not, he was dishonest.
July 2020, following the dismissal of the Respondent’s summons seeking
review by the NSW Court of Appeal, the
Respondent wrote to the NSW Law Society
notifying it of the Supreme Court decision and saying that while he remained
“dissatisfied”
with the outcome, he respected the decision.
Respondent obtained legal representation to make submissions to the NSW Law
Society that, notwithstanding the conviction,
he remained a fit and proper
person. In those submissions, it was said that while the Respondent agreed he
instructed a solicitor
to make the claim of damages on his behalf, he merely
signed the claim form. The submissions also raised separate unrelated criminal
proceedings against the solicitor who made the claim on the Respondent’s
behalf in what appears to be a clear attempt to distance
the Respondent from the
making of the fraudulent claim. Other parts of the submission leave no doubt
that at that point, the Respondent
was far from admitting to all of his
criminality.
Respondent did not say in his evidence why on 7 July 2020 he respected the
decision of the Supreme Court. In the circumstances
of this case, it is a
reasonable inference that it was because all of the avenues by which he could
continue falsely to claim his
innocence had been exhausted. The language of
Shellar JA (Gleeson CJ and Handley JA agreeing) in
apt, in that the Court cannot be satisfied that the practitioner’s
“candour and contrition are any more than
a virtue borne of present
necessity and the inevitability of close scrutiny”.
comprehensive submissions for the Applicant set out a litany of lies told by the
Respondent to various people and authorities
in pursuit of this extensive
dishonesty. What is recorded above is a summary.
The Respondent’s personal circumstances
Respondent was born in Sierra Leone in West Africa. In the course of defending
his family home from rebels during the
civil war, his father and two other
relatives were murdered. The Respondent fled to Australia via a refugee camp in
Guinea before
being brought to Australia on a Humanitarian Visa in 2004.
Respondent learned English and attended school, completing his Higher School
Certificate in 2007. He attended university
and received a Bachelor of Arts/Law
in 2012. He completed a graduate diploma in late 2012. In 2014, he commenced a
Master of Laws,
which he completed in 2015.
admitted as a practitioner of the Supreme Court of the ACT in December 2012. In
2014, he was registered as a Migration
Agent. In 2018, he commenced his own
firm and practised in migration, criminal and family law.
relation to his claim for damages and what followed, the Respondent said (at
[35] of his affidavit sworn on 27 May 2024
for the purpose of these
proceedings):
What followed on from here however, was a series of serious and disgraceful
mistakes committed by myself in which I now say that
the only explanation and
motivation I had for engaging into such acts was as a result of my untreated
serious mental health condition
at the time.
Respondent said that he knew the accident caused minimal injuries to him and
said that he made false claims of pain
and other injuries.
42․ Pausing
here, the statement that the Respondent’s dishonesty resulted from an
“untreated” mental health
condition does not give an entirely
accurate account. The report from Dr Ahmed, the Respondent’s treating
psychologist, shows
that she commenced treating him in February 2012 and had
diagnosed the Respondent with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, anxiety and
depression. He had been receiving treatment for those conditions from 2014,
although she noted that between 16 March 2012 and 19
November 2014 and between
25 February 2015 and 11 July 2017 he was not attending for therapy or taking his
medication.
43․ However,
relevantly to his dishonest conduct, he attended for treatment and resumed
taking his medication from July 2017
until at least September 2020 (being the
relevant period over which the charge was brought, heard, determined, appealed
and ultimately
dismissed).
44․ Certainly
then, at the time of the initial dishonest conduct the Respondent was not
attending therapy nor was he taking
his medication, but while the court cases
were on foot, right up until their ultimate conclusion, he was having regular
attendances
on his therapist and taking his prescribed medication.
Ahmed said:
It is my opinion the Mr Bangura’s was suffering from of Major Depressive
Disorder, Generalised Anxiety Disorder and Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder which
was untreated at the time of his offending behaviour. Part of his psychological
symptoms is sleep disturbances,
interrupted sleep, problems with memory and
concentration, spells of terror and panic, uncertainty low self esteem and
which has a negative impact on affective decision making. I
believe, the lapse in treatment, and Mr. Bangura not taking his medication,
affected his behaviour at the time of the offending and made it difficult for
him to assess the correct course of action in the situation
he was in which
contributed towards his offending behaviour.
added that the Respondent was aware that a future lapse in treatment can result
in negative consequences, and he will
attend regular medical and psychological
not doubt Dr Ahmed’s clinical assessment, nor her opinion as to how the
Respondent’s mental health symptoms
might affect him. However, even
accepting that it might have had an impact on his initial decision to make a
dishonest claim, it
does not explain away, in the face of regular therapy and
medication, the Respondent’s continued dishonesty throughout that
In short, Dr Ahmed’s report does not establish a causal connection between
the Respondent’s mental health issues
and his criminal conduct, or to put
the matter bluntly, that his mental health conditions would cause him to
evidence to the Court, the Respondent said that he has continued to receive
treatment for his mental health condition
in Sierra Leone where he is presently
living. He said he is seeing his family doctor and a nurse practitioner once
per month for
cognitive behaviour therapy and medication. Dr Jabba, the
Respondent’s treating doctor noted that he has seen some “remarkable
improvement” in the Respondent’s reported symptoms and he has
reduced the dosage of his medications. Ms Koroma, the
nurse practitioner, said
that the Respondent is engaged in their Intensive Outpatient Anxiety and Stress
Management Program which
requires attendance three days each week for one hour.
She noted there had been great progress in the Respondent’s
it is obviously in the Respondent’s interests to continue to receive
treatment for his mental health conditions,
given that we have found a lack of
causal connection between his conditions and his criminal offending, it is
difficult to give this
matter significant weight.
Respondent says that while living in Sierra Leone he is living in his family
compound and his accommodation and other
needs are met. He said that he assists
the community, working at a homeless shelter and teaching English to children.
elderly people with their shopping.
Respondent’s affidavit he refers to his work at university and later in
supporting and assisting his colleagues
and citizens of West Africa for which
some of his referees praise him.
number of character references were before the Court and we accept that they
demonstrate that he is valued and held in
high regard by the community. A number
of them commented that his offending appears to be out of character. We accept
the submission
of counsel for the Applicant that, at least in relation to the
references from lawyers, it is not altogether clear that the Respondent
them not only that he was charged with attempt to obtain a financial advantage
by deception, but that his conduct also involved
repeatedly lying to courts over
a period of five years, an obviously important point. Nonetheless, his
professional colleagues speak
well of the Respondent.
Respondent agrees that at the time his practising certificate was cancelled in
NSW in December 2020, he was not a fit
and proper person but argued that, in the
time since then, he has changed and is presently fit and proper.
54․ Counsel
for the Respondent, Mr Martin, in his helpful, perceptive and balanced
submissions, accepted the extent and gravity
of the Respondent’s conduct
and accepted that the Respondent’s conduct was deplorable.
Martin submitted that the Respondent’s conduct in not seeking a renewal of
his practising certificate in NSW shows
an acceptance of his conduct.
Martin’s submissions focussed on the future, and he observed that the
Respondent was still young, 37 years old,
and that in the time that has passed
since his dishonest conduct, his character has reformed to the extent that, with
professional
supervision, he could practise in a limited fashion. It was
submitted that the Respondent has developed insight into his conduct,
he conceded that it only developed or commenced to develop in 2020.
Martin submitted that there is still work to be done by the Respondent in terms
of his mental health before he could
resume the practice of law, and it was
submitted that he needs a couple of years of therapy to assist him fully with
his rehabilitation.
He submitted that if he was suspended from practice for two
years it would foster that process. In that time, it was said, the Respondent
would return to live in Australia where his ex-wife and children are living and
engage in a rigorous treatment regime such as was
suggested by Dr Ahmed.
sanction under consideration in this case is the most serious protective order
this Court may make. Unless the Court
is satisfied that the reason for
unfitness is permanent, or at least of indefinite duration, other protective
orders will usually
be appropriate. A practising certificate might be capable
of being suspended or conditioned; the exclusion from admission to the
profession itself is absolute.
Respondent’s conduct here was neither isolated, nor of short duration. It
went on for years. The offence itself
was one of dishonesty and, combined with
what followed, may be likened to an attempt to pervert the course of justice.
It demonstrates
a defect in character incompatible with membership of the legal
profession, for the reasons expressed in
(see above at [10]).
who do not conduct themselves according to these high standards must expect
severe sanctions. However, the Court
is not punishing the practitioner for the
conduct comprised in the offence itself, or its aftermath. We have already
the concern of such a proceeding is to protect the public and the
maintenance of the highest standards of the legal profession.
the Respondent coupled personal dishonesty in the offence itself with a course
of conduct that displayed further dishonesty
in the course of the appeal and the
further application seeking review which he pursued. In that respect, he has
shown scant regard
for the system of justice, of which he was a part, which
relies in great measure on being able to trust the word of lawyers who appear
accept that the Respondent has expressed contrition and remorse, but, as his
counsel said, it only came about belatedly
in 2020. We also accept that in the
time since 2020, he has been working within his community and assisting those
who need help.
63․ However,
the dishonesty with the compounding lies to professionals and to the court,
which commenced in pursuit of monetary
gain, was prolonged and persistent. Even
at a time when his sentence had been reduced to a sentence that was to be served
than by fulltime custody, the Respondent continued to assert his innocence
and sought the conviction be quashed in the Court of Appeal.
His attempt to
suborn the person at the solicitor’s office where he worked to lie on his
behalf only makes his conduct all
the more egregious.
of the view that the defect in character is of a kind that brings the Respondent
within the realm of indefinite unfitness,
such that nothing short of removing
his name from the Roll of Legal Practitioners in the ACT is sufficient to
fulfill the protective
role of the Court. Although we accept the
Respondent’s submission that it is open to the Court to suspend the
practitioner
from practice, it is worthy to note the comments of Dixon CJ in
at 286 (with similar comments made by McTiernan J at 287), to the
effect that even in cases where that course was available, it is
probably better
in most cases to allow the practitioner to re-apply at a subsequent time and
offer positive evidence of the grounds
upon which he then claims to be
re-admitted.
will order the Respondent’s name be removed from the Roll. Mindful of his
relative youth and relative inexperience
as a lawyer, it is important to record
that this outcome does not prevent the Respondent from seeking employment as a
under the supervision of a solicitor (subject to any relevant
statutory approvals) to better place him to re-apply to be admitted
to the legal
profession, sometime in the future.
Applicant sought the costs of the application. It need hardly be said that
orders for costs are discretionary and the
purpose of such an order is
compensatory. In this case, there is no reason to depart from the ordinary
consequence that costs follow
the above reasons, the Court makes the following orders:
(1) Amadu Bangura is struck off the Roll of Legal Practitioners in the
Australian Capital Territory.
(2) The Respondent is to pay the Applicant’s costs of the application.
I certify that the preceding sixty-seven [67] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Court.
RTF format (242 KB)
Signed PDF/A format