The Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Davey [2019] ACTSCFC 2 (16 August 2019)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
The Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v
[2019] ACTSCFC 2
Hearing Date:
Elkaim J, Charlesworth J, Crowe AJ
Catchwords:
LEGAL PRACTITIONERS
– Complaints and discipline –
dishonest conduct – application to remove practitioner from the roll of
practitioners
following ACAT recommendation – whether defendant is a fit
and proper person
– practitioner’s name removed from local
Legislation Cited:
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) r 3614
Evidence Act 2011
Legal Profession Act 2006
Cases Cited:
Council of the Law Society of the
ACT v Bandarage
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v The Legal Practitioner
[2018] ACTSC 45
Craig v The State of South Australia
Law Society of the ACT v
[2017] ACTSCFC 4
Law Society of the ACT v Stubbs
[2017] ACTSCFC 3
Profession Complaints Committee v Bower
[2019] WASC 281
Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589
Practitioner
D3 v ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal
[2017] ACTCA
Practitioner D3 v ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal and Law
Society of the Australian Capital Territory
[2016] ACTSC 61
Council of the New South Wales Bar Association v Sahade
[2007] NSWCA
The Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Davey (No 2)
[2019] ACTSC 216
The Queen v Gray; Ex parte Marsh
[1985] HCA 67
(1985) 157 CLR
The Queen v Metal Trades Employers' Association; Ex parte Amalgamated
Engineering Union, Australian Section
[1951] HCA 3
(1951) 82 CLR 208
The Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
(Plaintiff)
John Davey (Defendant)
Representation:
N Beaumont SC (Plaintiff)
In Person (Defendant)
McInnes Wilson Lawyers (Plaintiff)
Herm Legal & Migration Services (Defendant)
File Number:
SC 366 of 2018
1. The defendant was admitted as a solicitor of the Supreme
Court of South Australia on 5 September 1994. He was admitted as a solicitor
the Supreme Court of Victoria on 31 May 1995. Through mutual recognition, he was
admitted as a barrister and solicitor of the
Supreme Court of the Australian
Capital Territory on 1 May 2002.
2. From 17 April 2008 to 17 August 2009, the
defendant held a restricted practising certificate. On 18 August 2009, he was
with an unrestricted practising certificate. He held this certificate
until 30 June 2012 when he moved to Melbourne.
3. On 19 July 2018 the ACT
Civil & Administrative Tribunal (ACAT) recommended that the name of the
defendant be removed from the
local roll pursuant to
s 425(3)(a)
Profession Act 2006
(ACT) (the LPA).
4. The recommendation having been made,
and the consequent order having been filed in the Supreme Court, the plaintiff
now seeks an
order pursuant to
of the LPA that the defendant’s
name be removed from the roll of people admitted to the legal profession
maintained by the
Supreme Court pursuant to
of the LPA. The
plaintiff’s proceedings were commenced with the filing of an originating
application on 8 August 2018.
5. The plaintiff relied on two affidavits of Mr
Robert Reis sworn on 7 August 2018 and 22 July 2019 respectively. The defendant
to the second affidavit for two reasons; firstly, he said that he
required Mr Reis for cross-examination, but he was not available,
and secondly,
he relied upon
Evidence Act 2011
(ACT) to the extent that the
affidavits annexed material containing previous judgments relating to the
defendant. The first point,
concerning cross-examination, was dealt with in The
Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Davey (No 2)
[2019] ACTSC 216.
The second point does not arise because the judgments were not included to prove
any fact, rather they were to place the defendant’s
actions into context
and to provide evidence of court proceedings he had instituted.
defendant relied on an affidavit of Ms Bertha Franklin, affirmed on 11 August
7. The matter is a little unusual in that the defendant consented to
the orders made in ACAT, and in particular to the recommendation
removed from the roll, but now that the matter has arrived in the Supreme Court,
he does not wish this to happen.
8. The defendant is not able to challenge
the findings made in ACAT. As stated in cases such as the Council of the Law
the ACT v Bandarage
[2019] ACTSCFC 1 (Bandarage)
exercising its statutory function under s 431(3), the Full Court must apply the
Tribunal’s findings of fact, including any
findings as to the
practitioner’s state of mind or motive in relation to relevant conduct,
and any findings that the conduct
was unprofessional conduct or professional
misconduct:
Law Society of the ACT v
(2017) 12 ACTLR 184
[83]–[84]. The Court cannot make findings inconsistent with those made by
the Tribunal.
9. This Court however, must make up its own mind about the
defendant’s fitness to practice. Again as stated in Bandarage at
This Court must decide for
itself whether the practitioner is fit to practise. The Court is not bound by a
Tribunal recommendation
that a practitioner’s name be removed from the
roll; it must make its own determination of whether the relevant conduct
removal of the practitioner’s name from the roll:
10. The decision in this case arises directly from the
defendant’s own concessions and admissions.
11. The consent orders, at
page 29 of Ex RAR-1, state:
consent, pursuant to
ACT Civil and Administrative Act 2008
Legal Profession Act 2006
The tribunal being satisfied that the below orders are appropriate for the
Tribunal to make and within its powers:
that it is satisfied that the Respondent is guilty of professional misconduct in
each of the respects set out in the admissions
and further particulars signed by
the Respondents, copies of which are attached hereto (Exhibits 1 & 2);
that the name of the Respondent be removed from the roll of legal practitioners
Australian Capital Territory (pursuant to
s 425(3)(a)
of the LPA);
Australia (pursuant to
s 425(4)(a)
of the LPA); and
(pursuant to
s 425(4)(a)
of the LPA).
Recommends,
pursuant to
s 425(4)(b)
, the cancellation of the Respondent’s practicing
certificate in Victoria;
pursuant to
of the LPA, that the Respondent pay the Applicant’s
costs of proceedings as agreed or assessed;
that the Further Application for Disciplinary Action (Corrected) filed by the
Applicant be otherwise dismissed;
the parties liberty to apply, in the event that costs are not agreed and it
becomes necessary to seek further orders to the
means by which the costs are to
be assessed.
12. The attached exhibits, notably both signed by the
defendant, state the following:
[The Defendant] accepts that he sought to mislead the AAT in relation to
evidence of his occupation of the premises in the proceedings
before Senior
Member Hatch.
He accepts that he failed to disclose those circumstances to the society in his
responses to the Law Society’s investigation
of the Commissioner’s
He accepts that he breached his undertaking to inform the Law Society of the
outcome of the Supreme Court appeal.
He accepts that his conduct in relation to the conduct of the proceedings before
the AAT and the Law Society’s complaint against
him is professional
He accepts that the appropriate sanction in these circumstances is that the
tribunal should make an order recommending that his name
be removed from the
Roll of Legal practitioners.
He apologises for his conduct and for his lack of insight in relation to the
nature, seriousness and consequence of his conduct.
[Defendant] called his sister to give evidence in the AAT proceedings before
Senior Member Hatch in relation to his occupation
of the premises from August
2004 in circumstances where he knew:
and his sister had been estranged for many years and that his first contact with
her was on 11 January 2005 after he had rented
the premises;
sister had no personal knowledge of the facts in respect to which he sought to
elicit evidence;
evidence his sister gave in relation to his occupation of the premises from
August 2004, including that she attended the premises
in August 2004 and helped
him set up his wardrobes and set up the house as a home was untrue. [C.F.
Affidavit of Robert Reis sworn
on 18 July 2013 Ex RAR – 1 page 9 para. 12
of the reasons for decision of Senior Member Hatch].
his evidence to the AAT the [Defendant] did not give truthful evidence in
relation to his claim to have commenced to occupy the
premises from April 2004
and subsequently that he lived there full time from August 2004.
[Defendant] filed an application in the Supreme Court for leave to appeal
against the decision of Senior Member Hatch on grounds
that included a claim
that the Tribunal had wrongly found that his sister “was wrong about where
the [Defendant] was living
or was not telling the truth.” [Ex RAR –
1 p 20 at para. (g)].
[Defendant] swore an affidavit in the Supreme Court in support of his
application for leave to appeal in which he falsely stated:
Paragraph 16, that “from approximately February 2004... the Vendor
permitted me pre-settlement access to the property...
During this time I
attended to some preliminary painting and decorating at the property and spent
some nights at the property. The
frequency of my stays at the property increased
around August 2004.”
paragraph 18, that “I reiterate my evidence... That I was living full-time
in the property from about August 2004”
[Ex RAR – 1 pp 31,
[Defendant] provided material to the Law Society in response to the complaint by
the Commissioner for the ACT revenue that included
the above-mentioned documents
and assertions and at various times during the Law Society’s investigation
purported to rely
on the veracity of the material when he knew it to be
response to the Law Society’s request on 31 July 2012 for the [Defendant]
to indicate any other factors supporting his contention
that he occupied the
apartment as his principle place of residence the [Defendant] directed the Law
Society “to the evidence
that was give that the tribunal by myself and a
number of other witnesses”
when he knew that some of that evidence was
untrue” [Ex RAR-1 pp 60.63]
13. The approach to be taken in an application of this sort was
set out in detail in Bandarage, from [137]:
General Principles to be
applied in deciding a statutory application for removal
Section 431(3) of the
gives the Court statutory discretion to remove
the name of a local lawyer from the local roll if the Tribunal has recommended
the practitioner’s name should be removed. Under s 425(3) of the
, if the Tribunal finds a practitioner guilty of unprofessional
misconduct or professional misconduct, the Tribunal may recommend
practitioner’s name be removed.
As stated above at [134] and below at [147], the Court is not bound by the
Tribunal’s recommendation of removal and is required
to form its own
independent assessment of whether, given the conduct that has been proven, the
practitioner is a fit and proper person
to practise law:
Ziems v Prothonotary
of the Supreme Court
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
Although it is not our task to determine whether the practitioner’s
conduct amounted to unprofessional conduct or professional
misconduct within the
meaning of the
, it is instructive to consider the range of conduct
that may be so classified.
, unsatisfactory professional conduct is defined in s 386 as
In this Act:
unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an
Australian legal practitioner happening in connection with the practice of law
that falls short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal
practitioner.
Professional misconduct is defined in s 387 of the
as follows:
(1) In this Act:
professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, if
the conduct involves a substantial or consistent
failure to reach or maintain a
reasonable standard of competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner whether happening in connection
with the practice of law or happening otherwise
than in connection with the
practice of law that would, if established, justify a finding that the
practitioner is not a fit and
proper person to engage in legal practice.
As these definitions are inclusive, recourse may be had to the common law, both
for the purpose of understanding the type of conduct
that may amount to
unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct and for the
purpose of understanding what it means
to be “not a fit and proper
person” to practise law.
The personal attributes of a practitioner are integral to an assessment of
whether the person is a fit and proper person to practise
law. When discussing
the importance of honesty and integrity to the practice of law, in
Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
52 NSWLR 279
) at [20], Spigelman CJ said:
There are four interrelated interests involved. Clients must feel secure in
confiding their secrets and entrusting their most personal
affairs to lawyers.
Fellow practitioners must be able to depend implicitly on the word and behaviour
of their colleagues. The judiciary
must have confidence in those who appear
before the courts. The public must have confidence in the legal profession by
the central role the profession plays in the administration of
justice. Many aspects of the administration of justice depend on
the trust by
the judiciary and/or the public in the performance of professional obligations
by professional people.
A willingness to engage in dishonest conduct often compels a finding of
unfitness to practise:
The Council of the New South Wales Bar Association v
[2007] NSWCA 145
) at [58]. Even if it does not
rise above recklessness or neglect, persistent misconduct will ordinarily
justify a finding of unfitness
to practise:
Law Society of South Australia v
[1999] SASC 83.
A penalty of suspension is usually inappropriate if
there is a finding of unfitness of practice:
Attorney-General v Bax
[1999] 2 Qd R 9
, 22 (Pincus JA).
Insight into previous wrongdoing is another personal attribute that is important
to an assessment of whether a person is a fit and
proper person to practise law.
A legal practitioner’s failure to appreciate the gravity of misconduct may
be indicative of
unfitness to practise:
Southern Law Society v Westbrook
[1910] HCA 31
(1910) 10 CLR 609
, 626 (Isaacs J);
New South Wales Bar Association v
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
Re Maidment
(1992) 23 ATR 629
Law Society of New South Wales v Foreman
[1994] NSWCA 69
(1994) 34 NSWLR 408
472 (Giles AJA).
At common law, professional misconduct includes conduct in the pursuit of
professional activities that is reasonably regarded by
professional colleagues
of good repute and competency as disgraceful or dishonourable:
[54]. In the context of professional disciplinary proceedings, reference may be
made to “good fame” in the sense of
good reputation. Reputation is
relevant to the purposes of disciplinary powers, which include “to
maintain public confidence
in the integrity and honesty of the
profession”:
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v
[2019] NSWCA 33
) at [12] (Basten and Meagher
JJA) and [49] (Brereton JA).
A finding of professional misconduct does not, of
itself, demand an order removing a practitioner’s name from the roll:
Solicitor v Council of Law Society (NSW)
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
Removal from the roll is reserved for the most serious cases of wrong conduct,
where the character and conduct of the practitioner
is assessed to be
inconsistent with the privileges of further practice; suspension may be adequate
in those cases where a legal practitioner
has fallen below proper standards, but
not to the extent that would indicate that the practitioner lacks the necessary
of a person entrusted with the responsibilities of legal practice:
Barristers’ Board v Darveniza
[2000] QCA 253.
In general, removal is appropriate only where the underlying reason for
disqualification is permanent, or at least of indefinite
at [25]–[27];
at [33]. In
[34], Basten and Meagher JJA indicated that, where a practitioner has manifested
a serious character flaw that would justify removal,
it is for the practitioner
to affirmatively satisfy the court that the unfitness was, or is, of limited
14. Based only on the signed admissions made by the defendant,
the following is apparent:
(a) The defendant tried to mislead the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal.
(b) The defendant failed to honestly provide information to the Law
Society’s investigation of a complaint.
(c) The defendant breached an undertaking made to the Law Society.
(d) The defendant called his sister to give evidence in Administrative Appeal
Tribunal proceedings which he knew was false. In fact,
he organised for her to
give the false evidence.
(e) The defendant himself gave false evidence to the Tribunal.
(f) The defendant filed an application in the Supreme Court based on a premise
that he knew to be false. This involved him seeking
leave to appeal on the basis
that his sister’s evidence had not been accepted.
(g) The defendant swore an affidavit in which he made false statements.
(h) The defendant made representations to the Law Society based on material that
he knew to be false.
15. It is clear from the above stated general principles that
only the “most serious cases of wrong conduct” will result
removal from the roll. The conduct set out in the previous paragraph fits well
into this description. A legal practitioner engaging
in conduct of this type
could not be trusted by clients and could not be trusted by fellow
practitioners. They would describe his
behaviour as “disgraceful or
dishonourable” (The Council of the New South Wales Bar Association v
[2007] NSWCA 145 (Sahade)
). Later in Sahade, at [58] the New
South Wales Court of Appeal said:
However, willingness to engage
in deceptive or dishonest behaviour will generally be a matter of central
relevance. Such a characteristic
may be revealed by conduct in the practice of
law or in conduct unrelated to the practice of law. Whatever the context of the
the element of character thus revealed is likely to be relevant
although if based on conduct in the practice of law, that context
will usually
give rise to heightened concern.
16. The defendant’s behaviour traversed both his work as
a solicitor (albeit acting on his own behalf) and his endeavours outside
law. This passage from the Law Society of the ACT v Stubbs
[2017] ACTSCFC 3
[33], is also apt to this case:
Honesty and integrity are
essential characteristics in a legal practitioner because clients must feel
secure when entrusting their
personal affairs to legal practitioners, fellow
practitioners must be able to depend on their colleagues, the judiciary must
confidence in legal practitioners, and the public must have confidence in
the profession as a whole:
New South Wales Bar Association v Cummins
[2001] NSWCA 284
52 NSWLR 279
Legal Profession
Complaints Committee v in de Braekt
[2013] WASC 124
17. When a solicitor is admitted, he or she states to the court
that he or she will:
well and honestly conduct
myself in the practice of law as a lawyer of the Supreme Court of the
Australian Capital Territory
according to the best of my knowledge and ability.
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) r 3614)
18. This oath or affirmation acknowledges to the Court that he
or she will henceforth be an officer of the Court, dealing with the
according to the highest standards of integrity. The defendant here blatantly
breached this obligation in the interests of
self-gain. A solicitor of the
Supreme Court swearing a false affidavit in the Supreme Court is conducting
himself at the highest
levels of dishonesty.
19. As stated in Law Society of
the ACT v Powrie
[2017] ACTSCFC 4
12 ACTLR 184
consider the finding by the ACAT that the practitioner knowingly misled the
Magistrates Court in his application for an adjournment
of the proceedings
before that Court to be the most serious finding (Ground 2A). In
Solicitors Regulation Authority
[2014] EWHC 2974 (Admin)
[2015] PNLR 2
Lord Thomas CJ said, at [111]:
[M]isleading the court is regarded by the court and must be regarded by any
disciplinary tribunal as one of the most serious offences
that an advocate or
litigator can commit. It is not simply a breach of a rule of a game, but a
fundamental affront to a rule designed
to safeguard the fairness and justice of
proceedings. Such conduct will normally attract an exemplary and deterrent
sentence. That
is in part because our system for the administration of justice
relies so heavily upon the integrity of the profession and the full
discharge of
the profession’s duties and in part because the privilege of conducting
litigation or appearing in court is granted
on terms that the rules are observed
not merely in their letter but in their spirit. Indeed, the reputation of the
system of the
administration of justice... and the standing of the profession
depends particularly upon the discharge of the duties owed to the
20. The defendant was asked, during the hearing, whether there
were any matters which he wished to place before the Court before it
final orders. The written submissions he relied upon do not raise any subjective
factors. Almost to the contrary, notwithstanding
a heading of “On the
question of insight and remorse” the defendant expresses no remorse.
Rather he seems to be saying
that he has done a service to the law by his
numerous challenges to the jurisdiction of ACAT and associated judgments of this
Indeed, the agitation for his
personal common and statutory rights and the contribution that (he) has made to
the development of jurisprudence
(at great personal cost) ought properly be seen
as a discharge of his duties to the Court not to permit or lead Courts into
It is only through litigants testing the limits of statutory remit and
executive action that any jurisprudence is developed.
21. In response to the question asked in the hearing, the
defendant said that he was sorry for his conduct and that he was ashamed
He said he now had some insight into his conduct and he would like to redeem
himself. These sentiments are accepted by the
Court but they do not raise enough
of a circumstance that could be seen to allow for a mitigation of the
Court’s conclusion.
22. The Court is very mindful that subjective
circumstances may be taken into account and, perhaps more importantly, that the
decision should not include “any notion of punishing the
practitioner” (Legal Profession Complaints Committee v Bower
[2019] WASC
, at [38] (Bower)). The “protection of the public and the maintenance
of the reputation and standards of the legal profession”
mitigatory element that arises from the subjective features (Bower at
23. It is also worth noting that the subjective factors were only
raised at effectively the last moment in response to a question
from the Court.
They did not form any part of a detailed statement by the defendant. His efforts
over the years since his admissions
in ACAT have been more taken up with his
efforts to impugn the jurisdiction of ACAT rather than any expression of regret
24. The references that are attached to the affidavit of
Ms Franklin, while certainly evidencing good deeds performed by the defendant,
must be treated with some caution. With one exception, they do not acknowledge,
or display any knowledge of, the defendant’s
wrongdoings. The one
reference that perhaps suggests some knowledge is from Ms Patricia Thompson. She
can attest to his good character, and he has been candid with me concerning his
issue before the Tribunal. I can state that despite
this moment of weakness,
John Davey is a person of moral strength. I have known him to do substantial
legal representation cases
pro bono with vulnerable populations and behave with
integrity in my dealings with him. I ask that this be factored into the
considerations
regarding his one moment of weakness at a very vulnerable time
25. Ms Thompson’s suggestion that there was but a
“moment of weakness” is to be compared with the fact that the
misconduct occurred between July 2008 and July 2012.
defendant’s attempts to avoid the consequences of his admitted conduct
also do not reflect well on him. His forays to
the Federal Court and his last
minute application to avoid what must be described as the inevitable result of
his misdeeds also do
not assist him.
27. It will be clear from all of the
above that it is the opinion of this Court that the defendant is not fit to
practice and that
his name must be removed from the local roll.
28. The last
minute application just referred to, is an application in proceedings dated 11
August 2019, in which the defendant sought
the following orders:
an Order in the nature of Certiorari issue against the decision of Plaintiff on
June 2013 quashing the decision to commence an Application
in ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal in proceedings OR 20/2013.
(2) That an Order in the nature of Certiorari issue against the ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal quashing the decision of Presidential
Member Stefaniak
May 2014 and the Orders of Burns, J in
Practitioner D3 v
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal and Law Society of the Australian Capital
[2016] ACTSC 61
of this Supreme Court.
(3) Declare that each of the actions of the Plaintiff to commence the Appeal in
the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal in proceedings
OR 20 of 2013 before
Presidential Member Stefaniak and to oppose the Appeal before his Honour Justice
Burns (mentioned in Order 2)
was commenced without the authority of the
(4) Order that the Plaintiff by its officers servants and agents is restrained
from taking further steps in the proceedings commenced
in the Tribunal in
reliance upon the decision in Order 1.
29. The plaintiff submitted that the Court should not deal with
the application because it was not an interlocutory application and
should have
been filed as an originating application. This may be strictly correct,
according to the Court Procedure Rules 2006 (ACT),
but it is an argument which
would be easily overcome by an order dispensing with compliance with the
30. Much more important is the fact that the application is not
relevant and is probably an abuse of process. This is because the
issues raised in it have been dealt with previously, including in the decisions
of Penfold and Burns JJ.; see Council
of the Law Society of the ACT v The Legal
Practitioner D3
[2018] ACTSC 45
and Practitioner D3 v ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal and Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
[2016] ACTSC 61
Further the defendant, after considerable delay, made an attempt
to appeal the decision of Burns J but that attempt was unsuccessful
(Practitioner D3 v ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal
[2017] ACTCA 62).
attempt now to raise defects in the decision making trail that led, in
particular, to the decision of Burns J must be met by
the propositions
(1) The argument as to the alleged defect has been determined against
the defendant once and for all by the decision of a superior
(2) Insofar as the defendant seeks to raise other arguable defects, they
are matters which should have been raised in the proceedings
before Burns J.
Indeed, they are so closely related to the argument which the defendant did
ventilate before His Honour that it was
unreasonable for the defendant not to
raise them at that time. Moreover, to raise them now would create the
possibility of inconsistent
judgments. In that context the defendant is in our
view estopped pursuant to the principles discussed in Port of Melbourne
v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589
per Gibbs CJ, Mason and Aickin JJ
at 602‑603.
31. Another reason for the defendant’s application
being, essentially, hopeless, is that it seeks orders in the nature of
pertaining to the decision of Burns J. This Court could not make any
such order; see Craig v The State of South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
(1995) 184 CLR 163
referring to The Queen v Metal Trades Employers' Association; Ex parte
Amalgamated Engineering Union, Australian Section
[1951] HCA 3
(1951) 82 CLR 208
Queen v Gray; Ex parte Marsh
[1985] HCA 67
(1985) 157 CLR 351
and also Deane J at p
32. It is probably not necessary to do so, but if the
defendant’s application dated 11 August 2019 needs to be dealt with
it is dismissed.
33. Finally, even if there had been some merit in
the defendant’s application, the same final conclusion would have been
to this Court pursuant to its inherent jurisdiction. Section 462 of
the LPA reserves the powers of the Supreme Court.
34. The inherent powers of
the Court include the capacity to regulate and control the conduct of local
lawyers. This is made clear
in Bandarage, from [17]. As there explained, the
test remains the same, the difference being that the Court must make its own
findings. This is achieved here because the admissions made by the
defendant are before the Court. They alone would justify the exercise
Court’s inherent powers to remove the defendant from the roll.
possibility was put to the defendant who, properly and fairly, conceded that the
course was open to the Court and that there
was nothing more of substance that
he would have put to the Court than the matters he had already raised. He did
make the point that
if the Court proceeded by way of its inherent jurisdiction
then his liability to pay the plaintiffs costs of the proceedings might
36. Lest there be any doubt, the orders made by the Court are in
response to the plaintiff’s proceedings. The reference to the
Court’s inherent jurisdiction is to emphasise that even if there had been
some impediment in the plaintiff’s proceedings,
then the order to remove
the defendant from the local roll would have been made in any
37. Accordingly, the Full Court makes the following orders:
consent, the name of the plaintiff is amended to The Council of the Law Society
of the Australian Capital Territory.
(ii) The defendant’s application in proceedings dated 11 August 2019 is
(iii) Pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2006
defendant’s name, John Patrick Davey, be removed from the roll of people
admitted to the legal profession maintained by
the Supreme Court pursuant to
Legal Profession Act 2006
(iv) The defendant is to pay the plaintiff’s costs of the
proceedings.
I certify that the preceding thirty seven [37] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for judgment of their Honours Justice
Elkaim, Justice
Charlesworth and Acting Justice Crowe.
RTF format (220 KB)
Signed PDF/A format