Inquest into the Death of Herman Henrich Holtz [2023] ACTCD 6 (29 March 2023)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Inquest into the Death of Herman Henrich
[2023] ACTCD 6
Decision Date:
Coroner Archer
See [9], [41]-[46], [48].
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– cause and manner of death – industrial
accident involving unsafe operation of crane on a work site - breaches of
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(ACT) – lengthy delay in criminal
proceedings – consequential delay in coronial proceedings –
administration of
Legislation Cited:
Cases Cited:
Texts Cited:
Coroner’s Act 1977
(ACT) sections
Coroners Act 2008
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1990
Work Health and
Safety Act 2011
sections 19
[2020] ACTSC 91
Bradley Cummins v Multiplex Constructions Pty Ltd
[2021] ACTIC
Bradley Cummins v RAR Cranes Pty Ltd
[2022] ACTIC 1
Commonwealth of Australia v Helicopter Resources Pty Ltd
[2020] HCA 16
Gharaie, Lingard and Cooke, ‘Causes of Fatal Accidents Involving
Cranes in the Australian Construction Industry’ (2015)
Construction Economics and Building
Inquiry into Compliance with Work Health and Safety Requirements in
the ACT’s Construction Industry,
Getting Home Safely,
November 2012)
Lingard, Harley, Zhang, and Ryan, ‘Work Health and Safety Culture
in the ACT Construction Industry’ (2017) Centre for Construction
Work Health and Safety Research
WorkSafe ACT,
Annual Report 2021-2022,
(Report, September
Service charter of WorkSafe ACT Family Liaison Officer,
WorkSafe ACT website
File Number(s):
CD 191 of 2016
CORONER ARCHER
Introduction and Summary
Herman Holtz died on 4 August 2016 of catastrophic injuries sustained in an
industrial accident. He was crushed by a crane on a
building site at the
University of Canberra that had overturned because of its unsafe use. Mr Holtz
was 62 years old at the time
of his death.
Holtz’s death and the circumstances surrounding it were the subject of
criminal proceedings involving a number of individuals
and corporate entities.
Those proceedings were commenced in the ACT Magistrates Court on 18 April 2018
and were resolved by way of
pleas of guilty entered in the Supreme Court (by Mr
Michael Watts, the driver of the crane), and in the Magistrates Court by
Constructions Pty Ltd (“Multiplex”), the company that
controlled the construction site, and RAR Cranes Pty Ltd (“RAR
Cranes”), the company that owned the crane. Mr Watts’ proceedings
were finalised on 20 April 2020. The Multiplex proceedings
concluded on 21
November 2021. The proceedings involving RAR Cranes were finalised on 25 March
2022. The view had been taken that
the resumption of the coronial inquest was
not possible until the criminal proceedings had been resolved.
matters of public safety that arise from the inquest into Mr Holtz’s death
have been canvassed in the criminal proceedings
and will not be the subject of
recommendations arising from the inquest.
are matters concerning the administration of justice that are connected to the
inquest upon which I make comment.
Holtz’s death was formally reported to the coroner, as it fell within the
terms of section 13(1)(g) of the
Coroner’s Act 1977
(“the Act”), being a death that was a result of an accident. The
coroner was required to hold an inquest into the
manner and cause of Mr
Holtz’s death and make the findings required by section 52 of the Act.
That section of the Act relevantly
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find,
if possible—
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the person has
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
(i) state whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection
with the inquest or inquiry; and
(ii) if a matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the matter;
(b) may comment on any matter about the administration of
justice connected with the inquest or inquiry.
ability of a coroner to complete an inquest into a death, in respect of which
the Court has jurisdiction under section 13 of the
Act, is affected by the
operation of sections 58 and 58A of the Act. The effect of those provisions is
discussed below. In short,
the provisions place constraints around the ability
of coroners to resolve coronial proceedings whilst indictable criminal
proceedings
dealing with the causing of the relevant death are being litigated
in the courts.
The Hearing and Evidence
hearing was not conducted in this case. I had available to me the following
initial police report prepared by AFP coronial investigators;
complete brief of evidence prepared by WorkSafe ACT in respect of the criminal
proceedings;
reasons for sentence of Her Honour Chief Justice Murrell in the matter of
[2020] ACTSC 91
dated 20 April
reasons for sentence of Chief Industrial Magistrate Walker in the matter of
Bradley Cummins v Multiplex Constructions Pty Ltd
[2021] ACTIC 1
dated 12 November 2021;
reasons for sentence of Chief Industrial Magistrate Walker in the matter of
Bradley Cummins v RAR Cranes Pty Ltd
ACTIC 1 dated 25 March 2022;
autopsy report prepared by Professor Ellis on 29 August 2016; and
communications
from the family outlining their experiences after Mr Holtz’s death.
on this material, for the purposes of section 34A (1) of the Act, I formed the
view that the manner and cause of Mr Holtz’s
death are sufficiently
disclosed and that a hearing was unnecessary. On 22 August 2022, I communicated
that view to Mr Holtz’s
family in writing, as is required by section 34A
of the Act. In a meeting conducted with the family on 29 November 2022, they
their agreement with that approach.
Formal Findings as
to the Manner and Cause of Death – Section 52(1) of the Act
Ellis, a forensic pathologist, conducted an examination of Mr Holtz’s body
on 8 August 2016. Consistent with his opinion
as to the cause of death, I
Herman Henrich Holtz died on 4 August 2016 at approximately
1821 hours at the University of Canberra Hospital building site at the
Aikman Drive and Ginninderra Drive Belconnen in the Australian Capital Territory
as a result of severe crush injuries.
The Events Leading to the Death of Mr Holtz
the relevant indictable proceedings are concluded, the terms of section 58A(2)
of the Act place potential limitations around
the ability of a coroner to make
findings as to facts surrounding the death that are inconsistent with the
judgment of the Court
that finally determined the criminal case against the
person who may have contributed to the cause of the death being investigated
the coroner. Here, the most serious indictable proceedings were brought against
Mr Watts. To avoid any suggestion of an infraction
of that provision, I adopted
the findings of fact made by Chief Justice Murrell, in relation to the
sentencing of Mr Watts. I am
otherwise satisfied that they represent a
comprehensive survey of the circumstances surrounding Mr Holtz’s
Construction of the University of Canberra
12. In 2016, the University of Canberra Hospital was in the
early stages of construction. Multiplex Constructions Pty Ltd (Multiplex)
the principal contractor for the construction. For work health and safety
purposes, it conducted the business or undertaking
at the construction site and
had primary responsibility under the WHS Act.
13. Multiplex contracted
with RAR for the provision of mobile crane services at the construction site.
RAR was also an entity conducting
a business or undertaking with primary
responsibility under the WHS Act.
14. The crane that was involved in the offence was a 2016 Terex
MAC-25 non-slewing “pick and carry” crane. It was the
crane owned by RAR. It operated differently from other similar types of
15. The lifting capacity of the crane was determined by the operator,
who had to consider the boom length, radius and articulation
required for a
lift. Usually, the operator’s decision would be guided by the load mover
indicator (LMI) system on the crane.
16. The LMI system on the crane was
important because it calculated the crane’s carrying capacity from moment
to moment, taking
account of the many variables that influenced carrying
capacity. The LMI system provided the crane operator with real-time dashboard
information, including load/overload, percentage of rated capacity, load radius,
boom angle, boom length, and additional lifting
capacity. The display showed the
crane’s “rated capacity”, i.e. the maximum load that the crane
could safely carry
based on its current configurations. The LMI system also
showed the terrain and the forward and side tilt of the crane. However,
display only showed the percentage of rated capacity up to 110 per cent. If the
load exceeded 110 per cent of rated capacity,
the display continued to show 110
17. Once the LMI system showed that the crane was overloaded for
its configurations, a cut out was immediately activated, as were
audible alarms, operating internally and externally. To increase the overloaded
state of the crane, the operator had to
manually override the safety
18. The crane could operate in a “superlift mode” or
“301 mode”. This mode increased the crane’s lifting
from 10 tonnes to as much as 25 tonnes, depending on the crane’s
configurations at the relevant time.
19. For the crane to operate in
“superlift mode”, the operator had to install a second counterweight
at the rear of the
crane. The counterweight needed to face a particular
direction so that the crane’s sensors would register that the
counterweight
had been fitted, and the LMI system would assess the crane’s
load capacity by reference to the “superlift mode”.
the crane’s cabin, there was an operator manual and lifting chart showing
the crane’s lifting capacity in various
modes, including the
“superlift mode”. The operator manual clearly stated that the
operator should not operate the crane
until they had read and understood the
manual. The manual explained the safety system, stating that all safety messages
obeyed “to avoid possible injury or death”.
construction site, there was a generator with a marked gross weight of 10.3
tonnes. It was to be used by Multiplex to provide
temporary power. It was fitted
with lifting points and pull plates.
Events prior to 4 August 2016
22. Mathew Holt, an RAR employee, operated the crane to perform
lifts at the construction site on two occasions. Before operating
the crane on
the construction site, Mr Holt received the mandatory site induction. On 7 June
2016, he used the crane to move the
generator from the front gate of the site.
On 18 July 2016, he used the crane to move the generator to a new
23. Mr Holt told RAR that he did not believe that it was safe to
use the crane to move the generator. This information was not conveyed
offender. Had the offender been provided with this information, he would have
refused to use the crane to undertake the lift.
The agreed statement of facts
indicates that RAR should have conveyed Mr Holt’s opinion to the
24. On 2 and 4 August 2016, Mr Holt was on holiday.
August 2016, the offender was directed to work as the driver/operator of the
crane. Mr Paul Kelly was assigned as his dogman.
The offender performed one job
with the crane but did not use the “superlift” mode.
26. Mr Holt
had been given training in how to use the crane, including how to operate the
crane in “superlift” mode. However,
RAR did not provide the offender
with information, training or instruction about how to safely operate the crane,
how to use the
“superlift” mode, or how to fit the associated
counterweight. He was provided with general induction information.
Several weeks before 4 August 2016, Multiplex decided that the generator should
be moved to a new position about 50 metres away,
from where it could provide
temporary power to the tower crane.
28. On 4 August 2016, Multiplex decided that the generator
should be moved to its new position as the tower crane was to be used the
following day. There was some urgency about repositioning the generator.
Between 2:00 and 2:30 PM, Multiplex directed RAR to move the generator that day.
Multiplex managers and a RAR representative inspected
the site to determine how
it would be moved. RAR proposed using a 200-tonne slewing crane or a tilt tray
truck. Multiplex rejected
the proposal as the cost and logistics of using that
equipment were not something that Multiplex was “eager to be part
The offender did not participate in the discussion and was not told
30. RAR and Multiplex walked the travel route and concluded that
the crane would be suitable for the job. Neither Multiplex nor RAR
undertook the
requisite risk assessment concerning the means and route by which the generator
would be moved.
31. That day, commencing at 6:35 AM, the offender and Mr
Kelly completed four jobs using the crane, all of which were conducted within
the safety limits of the crane. None involved using the “superlift
32. Mr Kelly and the offender were then told by Mr Newton of RAR
that there was a further job to be done.
33. At about 4 PM, they returned to
the RAR yard and were told by Mr Newton that they were to use the crane to move
a generator for
Multiplex, and that the job had to be completed that day so that
the tower crane could be used the following morning. Mr Newton conveyed
impression that the job was important to RAR.
34. RAR directed the offender
and Mr Kelly to take the “superlift” counterweight and “D
35. At about 4:52 PM, the offender and Mr Kelly arrived at
the construction site. The offender drove the crane; Mr Kelly drove a small
truck containing the “superlift” counterweight.
36. When they
arrived, they were met by four Multiplex employees: Andrew Drummond (senior site
supervisor), Munro Jones (health and
safety representative for the site work
group), Herman Holtz (tower crane operator), and Timothy Brown (tower crane
37. Mr Drummond was advised that, as the offender had not previously
attended the construction site, he required the mandatory safety
induction. The
offender himself requested a site induction. However, none was
undertaken.
38. All present agreed that the “D shackles” were
inappropriate as they were too heavy and did not fit the lifting points.
The offender told Mr Drummond that RAR had a 200-tonne slewing crane which would
be more appropriate for the job (the same suggestion
that had been made earlier
in the day by another RAR employee), but was told that it was “not an
option” and the crane
had to be used for the job and was suitable, having
previously been used to move the generator.
40. As stated above, at no stage
was the offender told that Mr Holt had expressed a different view regarding the
suitability of the
crane; had he known of Mr Holt’s view, it would have
been decisive in persuading him that he should not proceed with the lift.
As the offender was concerned about doing the job and felt that Multiplex was
pressuring him to proceed, he called Mr Newton for
the purpose of seeking
guidance, but Mr Newton did not answer the telephone.
42. The offender felt
compelled to proceed because both RAR and Multiplex wanted the job done and he
was worried about his job security.
43. However, after discussing the matter
with Mr Kelly and Multiplex workers, the offender felt more comfortable with the
present agreed that the lift would be a difficult one, but it could
44. The offender knew that the generator weighed about 10 tonnes (it
was 10.3 tonnes) and that the crane had a lifting capacity of
10 tonnes. In
addition to the weight of the generator, the weight of the lifting equipment was
weight to 11.5 tonnes. The offender knew
that the crane’s lifting capacity would be increased if the
“superlift”
counterweight was fitted; if so, it would operate in the
“301 mode” rather than the basic “201 mode”.
offender was told that he could not move the generator by the shortest route (a
straight-line distance of about 50 metres)
because of in-ground plumbing. The
travel distance would be about 600 metres.
46. The offender considered that
the only way in which the generator could be moved was by picking it up with the
boom extended and
then bringing it close to the crane. All present agreed with
this course. Due to the associated configuration of the crane, the load
commencement of the lift would exceed the safe lifting capacity of the crane as
described in the lifting chart for the “301
47. Had the
offender checked the lifting chart for the “301 mode”, he would have
realised that the load exceeded the available
lifting capacity, given the
necessary configuration of the crane at the commencement of the lift.
Prior to commencing the lift, the offender should have undertaken a risk
assessment of the lift, but he did not do so because
the light was fading, and
the generator needed to be moved that day. A risk assessment would have involved
driving the unladen crane
along the travel path to assess the terrain and any
risks along the path, including the slope of the path which, at one point,
an unavoidable side slope of 6.59° and other terrain angles of up
to 10.27°. The manufacturer warning stated that the crane
must not operate
on a slope greater than 5°.
49. The offender and Mr Kelly connected the
counterweights to the crane. However, the “superlift” counterweight
in the incorrect direction vis-à-vis the crane. This meant
that its sensor could not be detected by the crane’s computer,
computer would make calculations as though the counterweight was not fitted; it
would not recognise that the crane could
operate in “301 mode”, and
the figures shown on the LMI display for overload and rated capacity of the
crane would be
inaccurate.
50. Neither the offender nor Mr Kelly knew that
these problems would flow if the counterweight was fitted incorrectly, although
process for fitting the counterweight was described in the operator’s
manual. The offender looked at the manual but did not
locate the relevant
51. Once the offender realised that the crane’s computer was
not recognising the “superlift” counterweight and the
mode”, he tried to call Mr Newton at RAR but again his call went
unanswered.
52. The offender then rechecked the load charts in the
crane’s cabin and decided that the crane could readily perform the
53. The offender believed that the computer was not recognising the
“superlift mode” because of a computer malfunction.
He informed
several people, including Mr Kelly and the deceased, that the crane thought it
was in “201 mode” but that
it was, in fact, in “301
54. The offender, Mr Kelly, Mr Holtz and Mr Brown rigged the
generator using the dragging lugs of the generator rather than the lifting
points. This meant that the load was not rigged in a way that minimised the load
height; the height and length of the boom were greater
than was required to lift
the load. Further, the chains were longer than necessary because they were
attached to the dragging lugs
rather than the lifting points of the generator,
changing the generator’s centre of gravity and inducing a tilt of
The safer lifting configuration would have reduced the swing of the
load and the total slung load height.
Moving the generator
55. At about 5:53 PM, the lifting operation commenced.
Initially, the offender had to extend the boom of the crane to pick up the
generator. He knew that the crane may be overloaded
but that the overloading
would cease once the boom was brought in. This was the first occasion that the
crane operated in excess
of its rated capacity.
57. The crane alarm sounded
several times and the computer indicated that the crane was overloaded. However,
the offender surmised
correctly that the computer system was displaying
incorrect information as it had not registered the “superlift”
counterweight.
Consequently, he overrode the safety mechanism when the alarm
58. For approximately five minutes after commencing the lift, the
offender operated the crane with the safety alarms operating because
system did not register that the “superlift” counterweight was
fitted. In fact, the crane was not overloaded.
59. At one stage in the first
five minutes, the offender reversed the crane up a slope that, at its steepest,
60. The offender carried the load as low as he thought that
the conditions allowed. However, between 5:59 and 6:01 PM, the load was
at an excessive height. Contrary to the safety recommendations of the
manufacturer and the Crane Industry Council of Australia,
the offender operated
the crane while the base of the generator was more than two metres above
61. By about 6 PM, it was dark. According to Mr Brown, it was so dark
that “he could not see where he was walking”. Ordinarily,
of lighting towers would be used to illuminate such an area, but no such
lighting was provided. To provide additional lighting,
Mr Drummond improvised by
reversing his vehicle in front of the crane with the spotlights and headlights
illuminating the ground
in front of the crane.
62. Despite the poor
visibility, the offender continued with the lift.
63. The route south sloped
downwards from right to left. At the base of the slope, there was a body of
standing water. The left wheels
of the crane were on the edge of the water, on
soft ground of uncertain surface stability. The internal and external visual and
alarms were activated because of the side slope. Between 6:10 PM and
6:11 PM, the offender drove the crane at a side tilt of more
than 5° for
one minute and 29 seconds, with a tilt of 10° at 6:10:50 PM.
offender made a right turn and continued forward in a westerly direction to an
area where the track narrowed and there were
dirt piles on either side. Mr Brown
was walking in front of the crane, steadying the load by hand as the load swung.
He heard the
offender comment that the back wheels were coming off the ground
and saw for himself that the back wheels were indeed coming off
65. The offender continued to drive the crane before stopping and
then reversing up an incline on a track that ran north/south.
offender reversed the crane, Mr Kelly, Mr Jones, Mr Brown and Mr Holtz were
positioned at each corner of the generator
to assist by manually stabilising it.
A “controlled lift” such as this is a recognised practice in the
construction industry.
At this point, the higher end of the generator was almost
1.8 metres above the ground.
67. At about 6:21 PM, the crane approached a
narrow section of the path. The offender stopped and reconfigured the crane so
would fit. He lowered and telescoped out the boom, then rotated the
generator to carry it lengthways, parallel with the crane. The
lowering of the
boom increased the radius from 2.87 metres to 4.44 metres, overloading the crane
so that it was operating at 102.2
per cent of its rated capacity. The alarms
were operating but the offender repeatedly overrode the safety system. This was
occasion on which the crane operated in excess of its rated
68. The offender drove up the slight incline of the rough and
uneven path.
69. At approximately 6:24 PM, the offender repositioned the load
so that the generator was across the front of the crane. He continued
up a slight incline and commenced a U-turn. As he was turning, the right wheels
of the crane hit a dirt mount on the edge
of the travel path, causing the crane
to tilt to its left at 10.10° for about one minute. Again, the alarms were
70. From this tilt, the offender drove the crane forward, towards
its destination.
71. At about 6:38 PM, the offender manoeuvred the crane by
lowering and extending the boom. He used the override function for 13 seconds
while the boom was extended to the point where the crane was overloaded to 104.6
per cent of its rated capacity.
72. The offender again extended the boom to
rotate the generator. The boom was extended from 8.55 metres to 9.81 metres, and
articulation
was increased from 11.3° to 30.5°. Because the heavier
end of the generator was further from the crane, the crane and load
destabilised. At this stage, the higher end of the generator base was over 2
metres from the ground.
73. At 6:41 PM, the offender operated the crane at
130.5 per cent of its rated capacity. The crane tipped to its right
while carrying
the generator. As it tipped, the gravitational force of the
generator pulled the crane from the tip of the boom, accelerating the
fell to the ground, where four persons were in the immediate vicinity.
The tip of the boom impacted Mr Holtz, crushing him between the boom and the
ground, and killing him instantly.
agreed facts tendered in the sentencing of Multiplex and RAR Cranes were
expressed in similar terms and formed the basis of the
Chief Industrial
Magistrate’s sentences in both proceedings.
The Criminal
Proceedings
criminal proceedings began on 18 April 2018, with information laid in respect of
Mr Watts, Multiplex, RAR Cranes, and a number
of other defendants. Those other
defendants included the ‘dogman’, who was assisting the crane driver
at the time of
the accident, as well as the site’s supervisor and safety
officer, both of whom were employed by Multiplex. Multiplex Constructions’
chief executive officer and RAR Cranes’ managing director were also
charged, as was the site manager on the day, who was also
employed by Multiplex.
The matters first came before the Court on 17 May 2018.
proceedings involving Mr Watts were eventually committed to the Supreme Court
for trial on 28 February 2019. The offences included
the offence of
manslaughter.
12 February 2020, Mr Watts pleaded guilty to an offence under
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
(ACT) (“the WHS Act”)
alleging that he exposed Mr Holtz to the risk of death or serious injury. The
offence carried a
penalty of $300,000, five years’ imprisonment, or both.
He had promised to give evidence against Multiplex and the other defendants
at that stage, were still subject to charge). Sentencing proceedings were
conducted on 16 April 2020 before Her Honour Murrell
CJ. On 20 April 2020, Her
Honour convicted Mr Watts and sentenced him to 12 months’ imprisonment,
which was wholly suspended
upon Mr Watts entering a good behaviour order for 12
offence of manslaughter was not proceeded with and a notice declining to proceed
was filed by the ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
(“DPP”) on 4
May 2021, twelve months after the sentence proceedings were completed.
is noted that Mr Watts has since passed away.
14 October 2021, Multiplex pleaded guilty to a charge of failing to comply with
a health and safety duty, a category 2 offence,
pursuant to section 32 of the
WHS Act. The maximum penalty for a body corporate was a fine of $1,500,000.
Multiplex was convicted
and fined $150,000.
14 October 2021, RAR Cranes pleaded guilty to the same offence of failing to
comply with a health and safety duty, pursuant to
section 32 of the WHS Act. RAR
Cranes was convicted and fined $300,000.
proceedings against Multiplex and RAR Cranes had been scheduled to take place on
18 October 2021, in a joint hearing, with a number
of the co-offenders to who I
have referred. A decision was taken by the DPP to discontinue the proceedings
against those co-offenders.
observed that the culpability of the individuals and the corporate entities was
differentiated by the differing charges that were
brought in each instance. The
entering of pleas of guilty to those charges did not, in the case of the
corporate entities, involve
an admission on their part that the regulatory
breaches were causatively related to Mr Holtz’s death.
Findings in Respect of Matters of Public Safety
Background – Safety in the Construction Industry in the ACT
use of cranes on construction sites is acknowledged to be a high-risk activity
and crane accidents contribute significantly to
the rate of construction site
deaths around Australia at rates greater than other mobile plants: Gharaie,
Lingard and Cooke, ‘Causes
of Fatal Accidents Involving Cranes in the
Australian Construction Industry’ (2015) 15(2)
Construction Economics and Building
2012, the then Attorney General for the ACT commissioned an inquiry into the
application of work health and safety laws in the
ACT’s construction
industry. The findings of that inquiry (the
Getting Home Safely Report
) were that the
ACT’s serious injury rate for the construction industry was 31% higher
than the national average. It found that
the ACT construction industry’s
long-term injury performance was 50% worse than most other jurisdictions and
double the national
average: Inquiry into Compliance with Work Health and Safety
Requirements in the ACT’s Construction Industry,
Getting Home Safely,
(Report, November 2012).
2017, the year after Mr Holtz’s death, researchers at Royal Institute of
Technology were commissioned to examine whether
the safety culture on
Canberra’s building sites had improved since the inquiry of 2012. The
study was principally focus-group
based. The findings were, relevantly, that the
construction industry culture was becoming more supportive of safety culture.
significant issues remained, particularly in respect of the management
of subcontractors by principal contractors: Lingard, Harley,
Zhang, and Ryan,
‘Work Health and Safety Culture in the ACT Construction Industry’
(2017) Centre for Construction Work
Health and Safety Research.
Work Australia data shows the Australian average frequency rate for serious
claims for the construction industry decreased by
4% between 2014–15 and
2018–19. During the same period, the ACT recorded a 9% decrease in its
frequency rate. However,
the overall safety performance of the sector is, when
compared with other jurisdictions, quite poor. As WorkSafe ACT noted in its
2021-2022 Annual Report (page 25), “the construction industry continues to
miss the mark in the provision of safe and healthy
working environments for its
Safety Issues - Mr
Holtz’s death
general outcomes in the construction industry reflect the specific safety
culture failings that were apparent in respect of
Mr Holtz’s death.
tragic and unnecessary death of Mr Holtz was caused by the failure of an
individual and identified corporate entities to comply
with their statutory
obligations to ensure that the workplace was safe. Decisions were made to use a
crane that was not suited to
the task at hand. Mr Watts was not adequately
trained in the use of the equipment, the workplace was unfamiliar to him, and
was too heavy for the crane. The crane itself gave warnings as to that
fact but those warnings were overridden. Warnings had been
given to RAR Cranes
by another employee about the need to find a safer way to move the generator.
Multiplex, through its employees,
was supposed to sign documentation
representing that the use of the crane to perform this task was safe. It failed
to do so. As the
Chief Industrial Magistrate found in the RAR Cranes matter, the
“likelihood of the crane being operated improperly was apparent
circumstances. The vulnerability of workers at the scene was obvious. The risk
of death or serious injury as a result of a
machine being operated improperly
was entirely foreseeable” (
Bradley Cummins v RAR Cranes Pty Ltd
[2022] ACTIC 1 at [44]).
brief of evidence prepared in respect of the criminal proceedings did not
disclose the safety issues arising from Mr Holtz’s
death, other than the
obvious failings that were detailed by Chief Justice Murrell in her sentencing
remarks, and that were particularised
in the charges that were brought.
make no recommendations in respect of the public safety issues that arise from
the inquest into Mr Holtz’s death. The safety
regime that was in place at
the time, if complied with, would have meant that the accident would, in all
likelihood, not have happened.
Matters Concerning the
Administration of Justice
Holtz family have raised concerns with the Court about how the prosecution
process unfolded.
(i) Lack of Information
The family expressed the view that insufficient information was
given to them about the prosecution process.
(ii) The Dropping of Cases and Changing of Charges
The family feel that the number of people originally charged, and the charges
that they initially faced, better reflected issues of
culpability in respect of
Mr Holtz’s death. They strongly disagreed with the downgrading of charges
and the dropping of cases
in respect of some of the people originally
(iii) Inability to read Victim Impact Statements
In the proceedings involving Multiplex, the family complained that they were
not allowed to read their victim impact statements.
(iv) Leaving Mr Holtz’s body in situ for too Long
The family felt that their loved one’s body was left under the crane
for too long and should have been removed earlier by investigators.
The family could not understand why the criminal process took so long.
family feel that, in respect of Mr Holtz’s death, justice has not been
concerning the bringing and maintaining of prosecutions under the WHS Act is, at
the moment, entirely a matter for the DPP,
who acts independently under the
Director of Public Prosecutions Act 1990
(ACT) in respect of these
issues: see
of that Act. Witness and family liaison issues that
arise in the context of criminal proceedings are managed by the AFP, the DPP,
and the Office of the Work Health and Safety Commissioner.
ability of family members to read victim impact statements is affected by the
Crimes (Sentencing)
(ACT), which potentiality limits the use of the victim impact
statement process to cases carrying a prison sentence longer than one
(unless otherwise prescribed by regulation).
Coroner’s Court, by the publication of these reasons, draws these matters
of concern to the attention of the DPP, WorkSafe
ACT, the Chief Industrial
Magistrate, and the Attorney-General.
Court has received advice from the Work Health and Safety Commissioner that she
has met with the Holtz family to discuss their
concerns. A family liaison
officer position has also been created in the Office of the Work Health and Safe
Commissioner, which should
facilitate better communication between that Office
and families who are caught up in prosecution processes in which the
Commissioner
is involved: see
Service Charter of WorkSafe ACT Family Liaison
r, WorkSafe ACT website.
is also noted that a recent review of the responsibility for conducting the
prosecution of ACT Work Health and Safety offences
has been undertaken and its
recommendations are with Government. Decisions around that issue are a matter
for Government and I make
no comment in respect of them.
do address two of the issues that the Holtz family have raised as matters that
fall within the terms of the Act. By virtue of section
52(4) of the Act, I am
given discretion to comment on any matter about the administration of justice
connected with the inquest.
Further, section 3BA (2) of the Act relevantly
(2) As far as practicable, the objects of this Act must be
carried out in a way that—
(a) for an inquest into a person’s death—recognises the
(I) the family and friends of the deceased person have an interest in having
all reasonable questions about the circumstances of the
person’s death
am satisfied that two of the matters raised by the family fall within the power
of the Court to make comment or to provide an answer
to the questions asked.
The positioning of Mr Holtz’s body after death
Holtz’s body remained under the crane until 00:30 on 5 August 2016. I
fully understand and acknowledge the distress that
reality has caused the
fact that Mr Holtz had died instantly of his injuries was quickly assessed. The
work site and the overturned crane had to be made
safe on the advice of suitably
qualified people. A crime scene had to be established and investigators with
relevant expertise had
to be identified and brought to the site. Once there,
they were tasked with capturing detail about the circumstances of Mr
death, including measurements and photography. A forensic medical
officer was not able to exercise safe access to the body for some
attended at 23.47). Machinery had to be organised to allow the crane to be moved
off Mr Holtz without further desecrating
Holtz’s body remained draped throughout the investigation.
investigation of death is complex and must be undertaken with care. Here, and as
always, a balance must be struck between the
dictates of the coronial (and
likely criminal) investigation, issues of safety, and the need to ensure that
the body of the deceased
is treated with respect and dignity. I am satisfied
that occurred here.
observe the reality that the investigation of Mr Holtz’s death, the
criminal proceedings that flowed from that investigation
and the coronial
proceedings, have taken six and a half years to complete. The criminal
proceedings were not completed until March
2022, approximately five years and
seven months from his death and nearly four years after proceedings commenced.
The reasons for
the Court delay are complex and relate to:
number of defendants originally charged;
charges originally faced by Mr Watts had to be dealt with in the Supreme
Watts indicated an intention to give evidence against other defendants and the
hearing in the Industrial Court was partly delayed
pending resolution of his
sentence proceedings; and
anticipated hearing in the Industrial Court was long and had to be accommodated
within available listing periods and subject to
the availability of counsel.
This provides the context to the fact that on 17 September 2020, the various
proceedings in the Industrial
Court were listed for a near 3 week hearing on 18
October 2021, over a year later.
management of court lists and the allocation of priorities in respect of the
disposition of matters are matters for the head of
in the disposition of cases has consequential effects for a coroner conducting
an inquest into the death. When a death gives
rise to the possibility of
criminal proceedings for indictable offences, the terms of sections 58 and 58A
58 Procedure where
evidence of indictable offence or indictment to be presented
(1) Subsection (3) applies if, during an inquest or inquiry, a coroner has
reasonable grounds for believing that, having regard to
the evidence given at
the inquest or inquiry, a person mentioned at the inquest or inquiry has
committed an indictable offence.
(2) For subsection (1), the coroner must have regard to—
(a) the admissibility at trial of the evidence given at the inquest or
inquiry; and
(b) whether the director of public prosecutions, or a person who may be
affected by the referral to the director of public prosecutions
of evidence
relevant to the alleged offence, is, or has been, given the opportunity to
present or give evidence in connection with
the alleged offence.
(3) The coroner—
(a) must, by written notice, tell the director of public prosecutions about
the coroner’s belief; and
(b) for a related indictable offence—must not proceed further with the
inquest or inquiry until the day worked out under section
58A, other than
to establish the following facts:
(i) for an inquest—the death of a person, the person’s identity
and the date and place of the person’s death;
(ii) for an inquiry—the date and place of a fire or disaster.
(4) Subsection (5) applies if, during an inquest or inquiry—
(a) the director of public prosecutions, by written notice, tells the
coroner holding the inquest or inquiry that an indictment will
be presented
against a person for a related indictable offence in relation to—
(i) the death of a person who is the subject of the inquest; or
(ii) the matter the subject of the inquiry; or
(b) the Attorney-General presents an indictment against the person for a
related indictable offence.
includes information, and
an indictment includes lay an information (see
Legislation
, dict, pt 1).
(5) The coroner must not proceed further with the inquest or inquiry until
the day worked out under section 58A unless the coroner
limits the inquest or
inquiry to establishing only the facts mentioned in subsection (3) (b) (i)
(6) A coroner must not continue holding an inquest or inquiry if satisfied
that the inquest or inquiry should not be continued.
(7) In this section:
related indictable offence
, in relation to an inquest or
inquiry, means an indictable offence that raises the issue of whether a person
caused a death, suspected
death, fire or disaster the subject of the inquest or
When inquest or inquiry may
proceed—s 58
(1) For section 58 (3) or (5), the coroner may proceed with the inquest or
(a) if a prosecution is not started on or before the day after the day that
is 3 months after the day the coroner—
(i) gave notice to the director of public prosecutions under section
58 (3) (a); or
(ii) received notice from the director of public prosecutions under section
58 (4) (a); or
(b) on a day after—
(i) the day the director of public prosecutions gives notice to the coroner
(A) no indictment is to be presented in relation to the related indictable
offence; or
(B) if an indictment was presented in relation to the offence—the
director of public prosecutions has discontinued or intends
to discontinue the
proceeding started by the indictment; or
(ii) if the person is not committed to stand trial for the offence (the
), and is not indicted for the offence by the
director of public prosecutions or the Attorney‑General within 28 days
day the person is discharged—30 days after the day the person is
discharged; or
(iii) if the person is committed for trial or indicted for the
offence—the day after the day the director of public prosecutions
notice to the coroner that the proceeding for the offence has been finally
decided; or
(iv) if the person is found guilty of the offence, and the director of
public prosecutions has not given notice under subparagraph
(iii) that the
proceeding for the offence is finally decided—30 days after the proceeding
is finally decided.
(2) A coroner may continue an inquest or inquiry after the day mentioned in
subsection (1) but must not make a finding inconsistent
with the judgment or
verdict of the court that finally determined the guilt or innocence of the
person for the related indictable
a matter of principle, the legislative scheme set out in these sections is
founded on a concern about coronial investigations interfering
with criminal
trials; in particular, by potentially exposing accused persons to compulsory
coronial processes, in advance of issues
of guilt or innocence being determined.
As those provisions have been interpreted and applied, the coronial inquest that
is enlivened
by a death falling within the jurisdiction of the coroner is held
in abeyance if the requirements of sections 58(1) and 58(4) are
satisfied. As a
result of the application of the terms of section 58A, the finalisation of the
inquest can be deferred for lengthy
periods of time, often amounting to (more
than a few) years. The trauma caused to the family has been noted. It also means
that recommendations
as to issues of public safety and public administration
that form a central part of the coroner’s role fall to be considered
here) many years after the relevant events. In this case, safety concerns were
effectively addressed in the safety breaches that
were prosecuted. In other
cases (child or family violence deaths, for example), consideration by a coroner
of recommendations for
systemic change to enhance protections for those who are
vulnerable may be unreasonably delayed.
terms of sections 58 and 58A of the Act are ambiguous and do not place
obligations on the named entities to comply with the legislative
scheme they
create. The notices contemplated by the provisions are not mandated, and, in
practice, often not issued. The time frames
set out in section 58A of the Act do
not, in practice, serve any meaningful purpose.
terms of those sections are inapposite given the different meaning that
otherwise applies to the meaning of an “inquest”
under the Act. All
deaths that fall within the jurisdiction of the coroner under section 13 of the
Act are “inquests”.
The ACT differs from other jurisdictions in that
regard. In other jurisdictions, “inquests” refer to the
conducted by a coroner in respect of a death. The
prohibitions contained in section 58, as they have historically been applied in
the ACT, place what may be unnecessarily inflexible constraints around a coroner
investigating a death in circumstances where that
may have little or no bearing
on the ongoing criminal process. The exercise of the investigative powers of the
coroner (not necessarily
associated with the holding of a hearing and not
necessarily involving an accused person) during the currency of a related
prosecution does not necessarily compromise traditional fair trial
protections vested in accused persons or constitute a contempt
of those criminal
proceedings: see generally
Commonwealth of Australia
v Helicopter Resources Pty Ltd
[2020] HCA 16.
legislative scheme created by section 58 and section 58A of the Act, with some
(often significant) variation, has its equivalent
in all other jurisdictions in
Australia. The same consequential delay issues are also experienced elsewhere.
Recommendation
recommend that the Government consult with the Court and other stakeholders with
a view to reviewing the operation of sections 58
and 58A of the Act. The
Coroners Act 2008
, for example, has a much simpler model that
vests a greater deal of discretion in a coroner to not hold hearings (inquests)
that may involve related criminal proceedings.
PROVISIONAL FINDINGS & SECTION 55 OF THE ACT
8 March 2023, I sent provisional findings to parties that may have had an
interest in the inquest; the family, the corporate entities
prosecuted, and the Work Health and Safety Commissioner. The provisional
findings duplicated these findings except for
[50] to [53]. The provisional
findings were sent to the corporate entities in terms that attracted the
operation of section 55 of
the Act. They were given the opportunity to respond
to the adverse comments that had been made in the provisional findings. I
no response from those entities.
family chose to respond to the provisional findings. The family re-iterated
their dissatisfaction with the criminal processes
both as to outcomes and
delays. The family indicated that there were aspects of the fact finding made by
Chief Justice Murrell that
they disagreed with, particularly in those passages
where Her Honour indicated that Mr Holtz had agreed with suggestions as to how
the generator was to be moved. They also expressed their disappointment that the
coroner’s retention of Mr Holtz’s body
for a time after death, and
the extent of Mr Holtz’s injuries, prevented the traditional Māori
mourning ceremony (
) from taking place.
Work Health and Safety Commissioner provided a response, pointing out that the
prosecution of work health and safety matters in
the ACT had been reviewed and
that a series of recommendations had been made to Government. The review had
been made public on 16
March 2023. The Commissioner indicated that she had
responded to the review and that the Government were considering the model that
had been recommended. The Commissioner expressed reservations about inquests
preceding in advance of the prosecution of Work Health
and Safety prosecutions.
indicated above, any changes to sections 58 and 58A of the Act would have to
take into account the impact of the continuation of
investigations
on the integrity of an unresolved prosecution process.
CONDOLENCES
Holtz and his wife, Rangimarie Nellie Holtz, met when she was 15 years old, and
he was 17 years old. Their 42-year marriage was
filled with happy times spent
with family and friends enjoying birthdays, holidays, weddings, family
gatherings and trips together.
Mr Holtz was a hard-working man who was deeply
committed to caring for his family. Mrs Holtz described him as a beautiful
a wonderful father to their children, and the greatest grandfather to
their grandchildren. To his family, Mr Holtz was a loving,
strong, and reliable
figure in their lives, and his death is still profoundly felt by those who knew
and loved him. He did not deserve
to die in the way he did. The victim impact
statements that were received by the Court in the Watts proceedings attest to
the family’s
grief and the tragic emotional dislocation that has been
caused by his senseless death.
express my condolences to the Holtz family.
I have done in other inquests, I observe that section 3BA of the Act requires
inquests to be carried out in way that recognises
that the death of a person,
and an inquest into the person’s death, has a significant impact on the
person’s family and
friends. Again, as in other matters, I am forced to
acknowledge that that statutory obligation has not been discharged. In this
the coronial proceedings have been delayed by the criminal processes that
were involved. However, this Court is not free of culpability
in that regard.
The inquest could have been resumed from the time that the indictable
proceedings against the co-offenders were discontinued
in October 2021.
in the disposition of a coronial inquest can add significantly to the trauma
experienced by surviving family, and on behalf
of the Coroner’s Court, an
apology is made to Mr Holtz’s family for the delay they have experienced
and the trauma that
delay has caused.
I certify that the preceding fifty-seven [57] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Decision of his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Jessica Friendship
Date: 29 March 2023
RTF format (331 KB)
Signed PDF/A format