Tapia v Woolworths Limited [2015] ACTIC 2 (13 November 2015)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
GABRIEL TAPIA v WOOLWORTHS LIMITED
[2015] ACTIC 2
Hearing Date:
Industrial Magistrate Walker
Catchwords:
Workers Compensation – Territory or State of connection –
“usually works”, “usual base”, “principal
business” - state of connection for worker is NSW.
Legislation Cited:
Workers Compensation Act 1951
Cases Cited:
Fisher v Tony Innaimo Transport Pty Ltd
[2015] ACTSC 1
Hanns v Greyhound Pioneer Australia Limited
[2006] ACTSC 5
P J Elliot Holdings Pty Ltd v Baker and Anor
[2014] ACTSC 308
Gabriel Tapia (Applicant)
Woolworths Limited ABN 88 000 014 675 (Respondent)
Representation:
Mr Wayne Sharwood (Applicant)
Mr Andrew Muller (Respondent)
Baker Deane & Nutt Solicitors (Applicant)
King & Wood Mallesons (Respondent)
File Number:
WC 210 of 2015
INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE WALKER
1. The Applicant worker an employee of Woolworths Limited
(“Woolworths”) makes a claim for compensation for an injury
was suffered on 12 April 2013. The issue in dispute is the proper state or
territory of connection.
2. The agreed facts extracted from a document
tendered at the hearing, and upon which the Court relies, are as
3. The Applicant commenced employment with the Respondent on 19
March 2012 as a Duty Manager.
4. The terms and conditions of the
Applicant’s employment in the position of Duty Manager were set out in a
letter of offer
dated 26 March 2012 and an attached Contract of
Employment.
5. During the period from 19 March 2012 until the Applicant
commenced his position as a Retail Operations Graduate, he did not work
store location other than the Canberra Airport Supermarket.
6. On 17 January
2013 the Applicant was offered a new position as a Retail Operations
7. The terms and conditions of the Applicant’s employment in
that position were set out in a letter of offer dated 17 January
2013 and an
attached Contract of Employment.
8. The Applicant commenced in the Retail
Operations Graduate Program (“the Program”) on 11 February
9. The Program was to be conducted over a two year period and was
divided into three phases. The expectation for successful graduates
appointment as a Team or Assistant Store Manager with the possibility for an
exceptional graduate to be placed immediately as
a Store Manager.
the Program, the Applicant received instructions concerning his rotations from
an Area Manager, Mr Darren Storer, and the
NSW/ACT Human Resources Specialist Mr
Paul Kelly.
11. Mr Rod Needham, the Store Manager for the Canberra Airport
store, was appointed as the Applicant’s mentor for the purposes
12. Between 11 February 2013 and 11 April 2013, the Applicant
completed the following rotations in order:
Deli – two weeks at
Canberra Airport store, in the ACT;
Bakery – two weeks at Queanbeyan
store, in NSW;
Produce – two weeks at Queanbeyan store, in NSW;
– two weeks at Queanbeyan store, in NSW; and
Seafood – two weeks
at Mawson, in the ACT.
13. On 12 April 2013, the Applicant commenced another
rotation with Long-life at the Queanbeyan store and on that same date, suffered
an injury to his back.
14. On 15 April 2013 the Applicant completed a
worker’s compensation claim form. His claim was initially accepted by the
Respondent’s
NSW worker’s compensation insurer, and the Applicant
received payments of statutory benefits under the NSW workers compensation
legislation.
15. Following the injury, the Applicant discontinued the
Long-life rotation at the Queanbeyan store, and then completed an Office
rotation, Front-end rotation and Long-life rotation at the Gungahlin
16. During the period 29 July 2013 to 17 November 2014, the Applicant
completed a number of further rotations at various store locations;
Queanbeyan, Jerrabomberra and Jindabyne in NSW; as well as Weston Creek, Conder,
Calwell, Kambah, Woden and Mawson in the ACT.
Each placement was for
approximately one to two months
17. The Applicant completed the Program in
February 2015.
18. On 17 February 2015 the Respondent offered the Applicant a
new position as a Customer Service Team Manager at the Calwell store
in the ACT.
On 19 February 2015 the Applicant accepted the offer of the Customer Service
Team Manager position.
19. In addition to the written agreed facts, the
Applicant conceded that the employer’s principal place of business is
20. The Applicant gave oral evidence as did Mr Paul Kelly who, at the
relevant time, was a Human Resource Manager for Woolworths in
the local area.
The following facts are drawn from their evidence and documents tendered as
attachments to the agreed facts. They
are uncontentious and are relied upon for
this determination.
21. When the worker was employed initially as a Duty
Manager with Woolworths from 19 March 2012, the contract specified that the
would initially be based at the Canberra Airport Supermarket but
indicated that he may be required to work at other locations from
time to time
although he in fact worked at the Canberra Airport Supermarket throughout this
contract. He was there for approximately
eleven months before the new contract
22. The second contract specified that the worker would initially be
based at Yennora Administration Centre (which is in NSW) although
again, he was
advised that he may be required to work at other locations from time to time.
The worker said that he understood that
this meant that alternative locations
were subject to his agreement.
23. At the start of the new contract, the
worker did some brief initial training at Yennora.
24. During the graduate
program, the worker reported to the graduate program manager, Ms Cassandra
Piccimin, based in Yennora, and
the area manager, Mr Darren Storer, and the
human resource manager, Mr Paul Kelly, both of whom were based in Queanbeyan. He
a mentor, being the store manager at Canberra Airport during the
25. Also during the Program, the worker was paid from the head
office centre rather than from a store as he had been when he had been
at the Canberra Airport Store. In fact it was usual for a person employed at a
particular store to be paid from that centre.
26. Following completion of the
Program, the worker was offered employment at Calwell in the ACT. Due to
physical limitations he has
not taken up that position and has been employed
again at the Canberra Airport Store.
27. The worker was asked in
cross-examination whether he was aware that following completion of the Program
he could be offered a
position anywhere in Australia. He responded that he had
hoped for a position local to the ACT and that he would not be prepared
a position in Queanbeyan or Jerrabomberra as it would take 55 minutes to drive
to these locations. He conceded that some
ACT locations, such as Conder and
Calwell would require similar drive times as to Queanbeyan. He stated in respect
to the offer of
a position at Calwell that he was told that it was that location
“or leave”, albeit that for medical reasons he has not
yet commenced
there. I infer from this that although the worker considered that he could not
be required to work at a particular
location, he was aware that ultimately his
choice was to take what was offered to him or relinquish his
employment.
28. Mr Paul Kelly confirmed that he was involved in recruitment
of the worker for the Program. He stated the program was based in
Yennora, was
run and funded from there. The worker was the only person of about 15 on the
program who was located in the ACT. Placement
of the worker during the program
was decided between Mr Storer and Mr Kelly with Mr Kelly advising the worker
where he was required.
Leave would be approved by both Mr Kelly and Ms
29. Turning to the application of the legislation to
these facts, the issue of state of connection is to be determined having regard
to section 36B of the Workers Compensation Act 1951(ACT) (“the
Act”). This section sets out a three stage stepwise test
for determining
the question.
30. Subsection 36B(3) provides that:
A worker’s employment is connected with—
(a) the Territory or State where the worker usually works in the employment;
(b) if no Territory or State, or no single Territory or State, is identified
by paragraph (a)—the Territory or State where the
worker is usually based
for the purposes of the employment; or
(c) if no Territory or State, or no single Territory or State, is identified
by paragraph (a) or (b)—the Territory or State
where the employer’s
principal place of business in Australia is located.
31. In deciding whether a worker
usually works in a Territory
or State, subsection 36B(6) requires the Court to have regard to a number
factors as follows:
(i) the worker’s work
history with the employer over the previous 12 months;
(ii) the worker’s proposed future working
arrangements;
(iii) the intentions of the worker and employer;
(iv) any period during which the worker worked in a Territory or State (a
relevant place
) or was in a relevant place for the purposes of
employment, whether or not the worker is regarded as working or employed in the
place under the workers compensation law of the relevant place; but
(b) regard must not be had to any temporary arrangement under which the
worker works in a Territory or State for a period of not longer
32. In the event that no single usual place of employment can
be identified, the Court is required to have regard to subsection 36B(7)
determining the second limb of the test. It provides that:
(7) In deciding whether a worker is usually based
in a Territory or State regard must be had to the following:
(a) if the employer provides a place from which the worker is expected to
operate—that place;
(b) if a place is stated in the worker’s contract of employment with
the employer—that place;
(c) the place from which the worker routinely receives day-to-day
instructions from the employer;
(d) the place where the worker attends to collect material for the purposes
of their employment;
(e) the place where the worker reports for administrative, human resource and
other issues related to the workers’ employment
Submissions
33. The applicant submits that looking at the
previous 12 months, the worker usually worked in the ACT. The short period spent
NSW under the new contract is not be considered as, according to the
Applicant it falls within the exception at subsection 36B(6)(b)
as a temporary
arrangement for a period of not longer than six months. As to the proposed
future working arrangements and intentions,
the Applicant emphasises the fact
that the worker wished to work in the ACT and, although the employer could offer
work elsewhere,
following completion of the Program with its various short-term
placements, work was in fact offered in the ACT.
34. The Respondent submits
that the Applicant’s approach fails to have regard to the application of
subsection 36B(6)(a) in
that it relies on subparagraph (i), that is the workers
work history over the last 12 months, to the exclusion of subparagraphs (ii)
(iii). The worker was offered a new position in February 2013 in which it is
clear that he would usually be based in more than
one location, and that from
that point he was no longer a worker usually working in the ACT but a worker
usually working in both
the ACT and NSW. On this basis, the Respondent submits
that there was no usual place of work and the Court is therefore required
have regard to the second limb of the test being where the worker is usually
based. The Respondent directed the Court to the decision
of Justice Burns in
Fisher v Tony Innaimo Transport Pty Ltd
[2015] ACTSC 1.
35. Neither party
made submissions in relation to the operation of subsection
Consideration
Usually Works
36. Hanns v Greyhound Pioneer
Australia Limited
[2006] ACTSC 5
; is the seminal authority in the ACT on this
issue. The case has been considered more recently by Justice Burns in P J Elliot
Pty Ltd v Baker and Anor
[2014] ACTSC 308
in which His Honour observed
at paragraph 30:
30. The test of whether a worker “usually works”
in a particular State or Territory, as opposed to whether he or she usually
works in more than one State or Territory, as posited by s 7A is not
quantitative in the sense that it does not depend on establishing
worker undertook any particular proportion of his or her duties in that State or
Territory. It also seems clear that the
test as posited by s 36B (3) (a) is not
satisfied by simple regularity of work in a particular State or Territory. For
person employed to carry goods from Queanbeyan to Braidwood in NSW
each day via the Kings Highway will travel through the ACT for
a very short
period on each such journey, but it could hardly be said that he or she usually
worked in the ACT in their employment
as a truck driver simply because they
spent a few minutes each day traversing the outer rural border of the Territory.
The test found
in s 36B(3)(a) of the Act is incapable of precise exposition, at
least as it was interpreted in Hanns v Greyhound Pioneer Australia
Ferguson v WorkCover Queensland. In some cases the test as espoused in those
cases will provide an obvious answer, but in
many cases it will not. A court
required to apply the test in one of these latter cases must apply its judgment
to the facts of the
particular case, which introduces an element of
unpredictability which is regrettable.
37. I echo His Honour’s
38. Burns J considered the concept of “usual base” in
Fisher v Tony Innaimo Transport Pty Ltd
[2015] ACTSC 1
and highlighted a number of factors which may point to
a particular location being a worker’s base, including start and finish
points, where equipment and merchandise is collected from and where direction is
given from. His Honour made no reference to subsection
factual circumstances of this case are somewhat complicated by the fact that the
worker change his contractual relationship
with Woolworths part way through his
employment with them. He spent 11 months as an employee in a Canberra store,
working, paid and
managed solely at that location on an on-going contract. He
then entered in to a new agreement with very different contractual conditions.
They were that he was initially based in NSW at Yennora, that he was managed at
three levels in NSW and that he underwent a number
of placements in the ACT and
in NSW, where he was at the time of injury. Whilst the contract did not specify
that placements were
only in NSW and the ACT for this worker on the graduate
program, those were in fact the locations, consistent with the worker’s
residence within that region.
40. In the previous 12 months, the worker had
worked the majority of the time in the ACT but also had significant periods of
in NSW. Under his second contract of employment, he had temporary
arrangements for less than six months for work in both the ACT
and NSW which,
pursuant to subsection 36B(6)(b), must not be taken in to account. That still
leaves the majority of the worker’s
employment having been performed in
the ACT in the preceding 12 months.
41. The employment history, however, is
not the sole criteria for consideration of where a worker usually works. The
intentions are also to be considered. The initial
“base” for the first contract was the Canberra Airport Supermarket
and for the second, the Yennora Administration Centre. There was no suggestion
that the worker would operate on an ongoing basis
from Yennora as an
administration centre, given that he was undertaking training for store-based
work. Both employment contracts
specify that the worker “may be required
to work at other locations from time to time”. In the first offer of
contract, the worker was congratulated on his new role with
“Woolworths Supermarkets”; in the second, it is with “NSW/ACT
Supermarkets”. Had the first contract of employment continued as it was
operating then, even if the worker had been temporarily
transferred to
Queanbeyan, it would have been clear that the ACT remained his usual place of
work. However, arrangements under the
new contract are significant to this
determination.
42. The worker gave evidence that he intended to work in the
ACT in the future and that he would leave his employment with Woolworths
than travel to NSW because of the travel time involved. However, that was his
plan after completion of the Program. Clearly
during it, he both intended, as is
evidenced by accepting the employment contract providing for it, and in fact
did, work at other
locations as required in the surrounding region, including
three different locations in NSW. I infer from that that what would eventuate
at the end of the program depended on various factors including his successful
completion of the program and the employer’s
requirements at that
43. The employer had kept its options open through the provision in the
employment contract allowing direction to work at other locations.
the contract was specifically stated as being with ACT/NSW Supermarkets, I infer
that those other locations would be within
that region, according to
requirements.
44. Sub-paragraph 36B(6)(a)(iv) operates only to require that
the Court consider any period worked in another jurisdiction, even though
workers compensation may be payable under the laws of that state. As the worker
was paid under the NSW workers compensation scheme,
this paragraph operates to
require the Court to nonetheless consider the employment performed in NSW.
However, as this was on a temporary
basis of less than 6 months, this subsection
is relevant as to evidence of the parties’ intentions but not for
determining
the 12 month work history.
45. In consideration of the above
factors, as at the date of his injury, I identify that the worker “usually
both the ACT and NSW.
46. Turning to the second limb of the
test, and having regard to the factors in subsection 36B(7),
(a)-the employer
provided various places from which the worker
was expected to operate, being the various stores in the ACT and NSW
Yennora Administration Centre;
(b)-the worker's
contract of employment
with the employer
in operation at the date of injury stated that the initial base was Yennora,
that he may be required to work at other locations, and indeed he
(c)-the place from which the worker
routinely received day-to-day instructions from the employer
included NSW, being from his various
graduate program managers and, I infer,
from each of the local store or department managers from whom he was learning at
the ACT and NSW;
(d)-the place where the worker
attended to collect material for the purposes of his employment
is not a factor as to which there was
(e)-the place where the worker
reported for administrative, human resource and other issues related to the workers'
the employer
included Yennora and his managers in NSW but also the various stores in NSW and
the ACT and his mentor in the ACT.
47. It is clear that there is no single
“usual base” for this worker as at the date of his
48. This finding leads to a consideration of the third limb of the
test, that is the location of the employer’s principal place
of business.
Given that Woolworths is a national corporation whose operations cross state and
territory borders, it appears that
where a worker is employed across those
borders, as this worker was at the time of his injury, this is just the type of
that the third limb of the test is designed to address absent a clear
finding under the first or second limbs. It is conceded by
the worker that
Woolworths’ principal place of business is NSW.
49. The state of
connection for this worker is NSW.
certify that the preceding forty-nine [49] numbered paragraphs are a true copy
of the Reasons for Decision of Her Honour Industrial
Magistrate Walker.
Associate: Jessica Nemaric
Date: 7 December 2015
RTF format (186 KB)
Signed PDF/A format