Robin (a pseudonym) v DPP [2025] ACTCA 40 (19 September 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
Robin (a pseudonym) v DPP
[2025] ACTCA 40
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Mossop and Baker JJ, Muller AJ
The appeal is dismissed
Catchwords:
– CRIMINAL LAW – JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND
PROCEDURE – Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – family
violence offences – choke, suffocate, strangle – aggravated common
assault occasioning actual bodily harm – breach
of family violence order
– coercive control – whether sentencing judge failed to comply with
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
– where sentencing judge
indicated discount solely by reference to percentage reduction – whether
sentence was manifestly
excessive – effect of increased maximum sentence
for offence of choke render insensible – appeal dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Family Violence Legislation Amendment Act 2022
Cases Cited:
Blundell v The Queen
[2019] ACTCA 34
CX v The Queen
[2017] ACTCA 37
DPP v Hojlund
[2025] ACTSC 211
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
244 CLR 120
R v Cranfield
[2018] ACTCA 3
[2014] ACTCA 53
297 FLR 359
[2000] NSWCCA 534
117 A Crim R 497
R v Thompson
[2025] NSWCCA 133
[2018] ACTCA 64
14 ACTLR 70
[2019] ACTCA 30
14 ACTLR 267
Woodward v The Queen
[2017] NSWCCA 44
Texts Cited:
‘Childhood, Infant and Perinatal Exposure to, and Experience of,
Domestic and Family Violence’,
Bugmy Bar Book
‘Early Exposure to Alcohol and Other Drug Abuse’,
(November 2019)
Explanatory Statement,
Family Violence Legislation Amendment Act
Julian Robin (a pseudonym) (Appellant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
Representation:
J White SC (Appellant)
K McCann (Respondent)
Legal Aid ACT
(Appellant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
File Number:
ACTCA 32 of 2024
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: ACT Supreme Court
Before: Burns AJ
Date of Decision: 4 October 2024
Case Title: DPP v Robin (a pseudonym)
[2024] ACTSC 322
Introduction
5 December 2023, Julian Robin (the appellant) entered pleas of guilty to the
following offences:
(a) One count of aggravated act endangering life, namely intentionally choke,
suffocate or strangle another person so as to render
them insensible or
unconscious (CC2023/ 9087) (aggravated choke render insensible);
(b) Two counts of aggravated act endangering health, namely intentionally and
unlawfully choke, suffocate or strangle another person
(family violence)
(CC2023/ 9088; CC2023/10028) (aggravated choke);
(c) One count of aggravated assault occasioning actual bodily harm (family
violence) (CC2023/ 9091); and
(d) One count of contravene family violence order (CC2023/ 10009).
maximum penalty for the offence of aggravated choke render insensible is 13
years’ imprisonment. The maximum penalty for
the offences of aggravated
choke and aggravated assault occasioning actual bodily harm are each 7
years’ imprisonment. The
maximum penalty for the offence of contravening a
family violence order is 5 years’ imprisonment, 500 penalty units, or
4 October 2024, the appellant was sentenced by Burns AJ (the primary judge) as
(a) Aggravated choke render insensible (CC2023/9087): 3 years and 10
months’ imprisonment, commencing on 16 September 2023
and expiring on
15 July 2027;
(b) Aggravated choke (CC2023/9088): 2 years and 4 months’ imprisonment,
commencing on 16 March 2026 and expiring on 15 July
(c) Aggravated choke (CC2023/10028): 2 years and 4 months’ imprisonment,
commencing on 16 March 2026 and expiring on 15 July
(d) Aggravated assault occasioning actual bodily harm (CC2023/9091): 19
months’ imprisonment, commencing on 16 May 2027 and
expiring on 15
December 2028;
(e) Contravene FVO (CC2023/ 10009): Good Behaviour Order imposed for 8 months,
from 4 October 2024 to 3 June 2025.
total head sentence was a period of imprisonment of 5 years and 3 months’
imprisonment, commencing on 16 September 2023
and expiring on 15 December 2028.
His Honour also imposed a non-parole period of imprisonment for 2 years and 9
months, commencing
on 16 September 2023 and expiring on 15 June 2026.
appellant appeals on the following grounds:
(a) The sentencing judge erred in not complying with
(Sentencing) Act 2005
(b) The sentence is manifestly excessive.
the reasons outlined below, neither ground of appeal has been established.
Accordingly, the appeal must be dismissed.
victim of all the offences was the wife of the appellant at the time of the
offending. They had been married for about 18 months,
but had been in a
relationship for approximately 6 years. The appellant and the victim have two
young children together. The appellant
also has a daughter from a prior
relationship, who was residing with the appellant and the victim at the time of
the offending. The
appellant’s daughter was 10 years old at the time of
the offending.
first four offences occurred on Saturday, 16 September 2023. Earlier that week,
the victim requested permission from the appellant
to attend a function on the
Saturday night with a friend. The appellant told the victim that he did not want
her to go out, because
the victim was meant to be having a movie night with the
appellant’s daughter.
the evening of 16 September, the victim again raised with the appellant the
possibility of attending the function. The appellant
eventually gave permission
to the victim to attend, on the condition that she either return home by 7:30pm,
or contact him to seek
permission to stay longer. The victim left home for the
function at 5:30pm. At 7:30pm, the victim sent the appellant a text message
asking for permission to stay at the function. The appellant agreed.
the victim was out, a male performer (apparently from the function that the
victim was watching) texted the victim and asked
whether she was from Canberra.
The appellant was at the family home and saw the text appear on the
victim’s iPad. He began
sending the victim texts accusing her of being
unfaithful.
victim decided to return home. One of her friends walked her to the front door,
where she was greeted by the appellant. Once she
was inside, the appellant shut
the door, and grabbed the victim by the throat. The appellant was angry, and
told the victim that
his daughter had been crying as they were supposed to have
had a movie night together.
appellant then squeezed the victim’s throat until she lost consciousness.
(Aggravated choke render insensible: CC2023/9087)
. When the victim
regained consciousness, she was on the floor and had a sore throat. The
appellant said words to the effect of “I
hope you had fun” and
“don’t you make me go through that again”.
victim did not respond. She eventually stood up and walked towards the master
bedroom. The appellant followed. When they reached
the hallway, the appellant
grabbed the victim forcefully around the throat and pushed her against the wall.
(Aggravated choke: CC2023/9088)
The appellant said words to the
effect of “if it wasn’t for the kids, I would kill you and slice
your throat”. The
appellant then released his grip upon the victim.
victim walked into the master bedroom, where the appellant and the
victim’s two children were asleep. She lay on the bed
for a short while,
before she went to the ensuite bathroom and vomited in the toilet. The appellant
entered the bathroom and accused
the victim of cheating on him. The appellant
pushed the victim’s head into the toilet bowl and flushed the toilet. The
continued questioning the victim about the text message. The appellant
again pushed the victim’s head into the toilet and flushed
it a second
(Aggravated choke/suffocate/strangle: CC2023/10028)
appellant then threw the victim’s phone into the toilet.
victim then attempted to shower. When she turned the tap on, the appellant
turned the water off, telling the victim “no,
shower” and “you have to go to bed and live in your shame”.
The appellant grabbed the victim and
threw her to the ground. As she slumped
beneath the towel rail, the appellant began punching the victim with closed
fists. She curled
up and attempted to cover her head with her arms. Several
punches landed on the victim’s forearms, causing bruising. One punch
connected with her right temple, causing swelling and redness. (
assault occasioning actual bodily harm: CC2023/9091)
the appellant stopped punching the victim, she got up and went to lay in bed.
The appellant’s daughter, who was in her
own bedroom, heard what had
happened. She contacted family members by text and told them that her father was
hurting the victim.
She said that she was too scared to call the police, and was
concerned because the appellant was her father. The family members called
police. Police arrived at the appellant’s home that night and arrested
him. The appellant was remanded in custody.
18 September 2023, a Special Interim FVO was made which prohibited the appellant
from contacting the victim except as permitted
by the FVO. The appellant was
served with a copy of the FVO on the same date in the Alexander Maconochie
Centre (AMC), where he was
11 October 2023, the victim attended her brother’s residence to collect
some mail. The mail included an envelope addressed
to all three of the
appellant’s children. The back of envelope noted the appellant as the
sender, followed by the address of
victim later opened the envelope and found a handwritten letter dated 19
September 2023 and addressed “To my beautiful family”.
noted that the appellant was addressing her directly, although not by name.
(Contravene FVO: CC2023/10009)
. The letter said that the appellant was
sorry, that he was suffering mentally, and that he did not “belong
victim contacted police and reported the appellant’s
offender’s subjective case
appellant was born in 1987. At the time of sentencing, he was 37 years old.
appellant had a disadvantaged childhood. His father was an alcoholic and was
violent towards the appellant, his mother and his
siblings. The appellant first
started consuming alcohol when he was 8 or 9 years old. By the age of 14, he
began drinking “every
day or second day”. He was expelled from
school at age 14. At the time of the offending, the appellant was still
in alcohol abuse. The appellant was consuming 8-12 beers a night on
weeknights, and up to a box of beer a night on weekends.
appellant has a limited criminal history. Prior to the offending that is the
subject of these proceedings, the appellant had committed
one prior series of
offences. On 27 September 2014, when the appellant was 27 years old, the
appellant committed offences of stalking
and common assault in a domestic
violence context. He was sentenced to an 18-month Good Behaviour Order (GBO),
which was successfully
custody, the appellant has been employed within the kitchens at the AMC. The
appellant has also engaged with the Supports and Interventions
Unit of the AMC
with a focus on “substance addition and relationship counselling”.
The appellant also participated in
the Solaris Therapeutic Community Program for
approximately six months, where he made “considerable progress” in
treatment. The appellant has also been attending the “Yeddung Mura
yarning circles”, which are weekly meetings for First
Nations individuals
to discuss alcohol and domestic violence issues. He has also sought the
assistance of a pastoral care worker,
with whom he has weekly meetings.
appellant gave evidence in the sentencing proceedings. He recognised that his
offending was “horrible”, and said that
“disgusted” in his actions. He gave evidence that he had not used
any alcohol while in custody and said that he
found the Solaris Program helpful
in remaining abstinent. Although he had to leave the Solaris Program early due
to safety concerns,
he continues to seek support from his Alcoholics Anonymous
sponsor, and intends to continue seeking that support once he is released
The decision
his sentencing reasons, the primary judge assessed the seriousness of the
offences which occurred on 16 September 2023 by reference
to the following
(a) The statutory circumstances of aggravation (namely, the family violence
(b) The offences occurred at the victim’s home, where she was entitled to
(c) Three children were in the house at the time of the offences, the younger
two children of whom were asleep;
(d) Each offence was short in duration, but formed a part of a course of conduct
which sought to punish and control the victim through
violence and degradation;
(e) The physical harm caused to the victim was not great.
primary judge assessed the first offence of aggravated choke render insensible
as in the upper part of the mid-range of such offences.
His Honour assessed the
two aggravated choke offences as in the lower part of the mid-range of such
offences. His Honour assessed
the offence of aggravated assault occasioning
actual bodily harm as being on the border of the low and mid-ranges.
to the offence of contravening the FVO, the primary judge stated that he was not
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the letter
written by the appellant was
an attempt to manipulate the victim and/or his children. However, his Honour was
also not satisfied
on the balance of probabilities that the letter was
“innocuous”. His Honour proceeded on the basis that the letter
constituted
a “deliberate breach” of the FVO and assessed this
offence as being in the lower range of such offences.
noting that the appellant did not have a lengthy criminal history, his Honour
considered it to be a matter of concern that
the only matter on the
appellant’s criminal history involved domestic violence offending. His
Honour found that the appellant
was not entitled to leniency as a first
offender, but equally found there was not a need to give predominance to
personal deterrence
as a sentencing consideration.
primary judge also considered the appellant’s alcoholism and disadvantaged
childhood. While his Honour noted that “[s]ome
moderation” of
general deterrence and punishment as sentencing considerations was warranted, he
found that general deterrence
remained an important consideration for offences
of this type.
Honour accepted that the appellant had shown remorse. His Honour noted the
appellant’s favourable work history, and his
plan to reside with his
sisters in New South Wales upon release. His Honour considered that the
appellant had “reasonable prospects
for rehabilitation” if he
maintained his commitment to counselling and alcohol abstinence.
to the appellant’s early plea of guilty, his Honour held:
I accept that your pleas of guilty to the present charges were early pleas,
saving the community the cost of a defended trial. I
also accept that your pleas
indicate a degree of remorse. And of course, you have already expressed remorse
in other ways. I will
reduce the otherwise appropriate sentences by
approximately 25 percent because of your pleas of guilty.
primary judge rejected the appellant’s invitation to impose partially
suspended sentences, finding that each of the offences
that occurred on 16
September 2023 required an immediate term of imprisonment, and that it was
appropriate to proceed by way of a
non-parole period. His Honour also held that
there should be a “degree of concurrency” between the sentences for
offences which occurred on 16 September 2023.
primary judge then imposed each of the sentences set out at [3] above. As can be
seen from the above, the sentence for the first
offence of aggravated choke
(CC2023/9088) was accumulated on the sentence for the offence of aggravated
choke render insensible (CC2023/9087)
by 16 months. The sentence for the second
offence of aggravated choke was fully concurrent. The sentence for the offence
of aggravated
assault occasioning actual bodily harm (CC2023/9091) was
accumulated by 18 months. The sentence for the offence of contravening a
dealt with by way of a good behaviour order.
the conclusion of the reasons for sentence, the primary judge asked both parties
if they had any issues to raise. Both parties
responded in the
Determination
Ground One:
Alleged failure to take into account early guilty
an offender pleads guilty to an offence, or provides assistance to the
administration of justice and/ or to law enforcement
authorities, the Court may
impose a lesser sentence to recognise the utilitarian value of the guilty plea
and/ or the assistance
Crimes (Sentencing)
a lesser penalty is applied,
(Sentencing) Act
provides as
Reduction of
sentence—statement by court about penalty
(1) This section applies if a court imposes a lesser penalty for an offence
(Reduction of sentence—guilty plea),
section 35A
(Reduction of sentence—assistance in
administration of justice) or
(Reduction of
sentence—assistance to law enforcement authorities).
(2) The court must state—
(a) the penalty (including any shorter nonparole period) it would otherwise have
imposed; and
(b) if the lesser penalty is imposed under
section 35A
—the reason for the imposition of the lesser
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
has been considered by this Court in
two seminal authorities, both of which concerned the approach to be taken by a
sentencing judge
where the offender had given assistance in the administration
of justice:
[2018] ACTCA 64
14 ACTLR 70
14 ACTLR 267.
, the sentencing judge had stated that she had “taken into
account the
component as to the disclosure of unknown guilty in
undertaking the process of instinctive synthesis”:
at [36]. The
Court held that her Honour had erred in approaching the sentencing task in this
manner, noting that under the
Sentencing Act
, “the sentencing court
must ... identify a starting point for the sentence before reducing it to take
account of assistance”:
at [44]. The Court held that the
sentencing judge had failed to comply with s 37(2) because she “failed to
specify the penalty
that her Honour would otherwise have imposed for the sexual
offence, which was the only offence in relation to which s 36 assistance
the time that
was decided, there was a divergence in the authorities
as to whether a failure to comply with s 37 was an appellable error, the effect
of which was to enliven the Court’s discretion to resentence. The Court
resolved this divergence, holding that non-compliance
with s 37 is a
“specific error” which enlivens the discretion to resentence:
at [48] – [49]. In so finding, their Honours referred to the
benefits to victims, witnesses and court resources which flow
from early pleas
of guilty, and the need for offenders to be encouraged to plead “by giving
them a reasonable expectation that
their plea of guilty will result in a
sentence reduction that is meaningful and reliable”:
R v Cranfield
[2018] ACTCA 3
. The Court held that
“[g]reater clarity about the extent of sentencing discounts also supports
public confidence in the sentencing
, the sentencing judge had made a finding that the offender had
made “significant admissions which greatly shortened the length
trial and reduced the number of witnesses which the Crown needed to call”:
at [52]. However, the sentencing judge “did not comply with
the terms of section 37 and did not state ‘the penalty [he]
otherwise have imposed”:
at [53]. Following the decision in
UG, the Court held that this was a “specific error of significance”
which enlivened
the discretion to resentence:
Importantly
for present purposes, there was a clear breach of s 37 in both
. The question in
was as to the
consequence of that breach. After those decisions, it is now clear that where s
37 is not complied with, the sentencing
discretion must be re-exercised.
contrast, the present case is concerned with the anterior question of when there
will be non-compliance with s 37. Specifically,
how much detail is required to
satisfy the provision? Here, the sentencing judge did not expressly indicate the
sentence that he
would otherwise have imposed, but did state the discount that
was being applied (namely “approximately 25%”), from which
sentence that would otherwise have been imposed could be calculated.
appellant submitted that the mandate in s 37 requires the judge to go further,
and to expressly state the numerical starting point
of the sentence before the
application of the discount.
response, counsel for the Director submitted that the compliance with s 37
should be considered as a “matter of substance
rather than form”.
She submitted that:
Whether or not it may have been more desirable in the circumstances for his
Honour to have specifically stated the numerical figures
for the undiscounted
sentence, the failure to do [so] does not constitute error. The requirement in s
37(2) and the policy of transparency
behind it can be achieved in different
ways, but did not oblige his Honour to state the precise numerical starting
point for the
sentences he would have otherwise imposed.
counsel for the Director observed, in
Blundell v The Queen
[2019] ACTCA
Court rejected the contention that s 37 requires the
express specification of a numerical starting point in every case, and is not
satisfied by a statement of the discount that is applied, from which the
starting point may be discerned.
, the sentencing judge had, like the primary judge, stated that
the sentences to be imposed would be reduced “by approximately
Mr Blundell
contended (amongst other
grounds of appeal) that this statement did not satisfy s 37.
observed that “at first sight the wording of s 37
would appear to support the appellant’s contention”. However,
Court then continued (at [25]–[26]):
The assumption of error is not necessarily one that this Court adopts. The
intent of s 37 is to inform an offender that he has been
given a discount for
his plea of guilty (or for his assistance to the administration of justice or to
law enforcement authorities).
It may not matter whether the statement of the
discount is expressed as a percentage without the necessary calculation being
to the offender. A person who receives a sentence having been informed
that it has been reduced by, say 10%, should have little difficulty
out the sentence before reduction.
It is also important to note that his Honour allowed a reduction of
“approximately 10%” which allowed for a degree of
rounding off in
order to assist in the structure of the overall sentence. In particular, in a
case such as the present where there
were so many sentences to be imposed, his
Honour’s approach was entirely appropriate.
appellant submitted that the above observations were made in
submission may be accepted. As the Court found error on other grounds (namely,
that the quantum of the discount afforded for
the guilty plea was too low and
that the non-parole period was excessively high), the Court was required to
resentence Mr Blundell.
not strictly binding, the approach of this Court in
followed. Viewed both textually and purposively, the requirements of s 37 of the
Sentencing Act
are met where the sentencing judge states sufficient
information in the sentencing judgment to enable the starting point of the
imposed to be calculated. Accordingly, whilst it is preferable for a
sentencing judge to expressly state the starting point as well
as the discounts
to be applied, s 37 is not contravened where a discount is specified with
sufficient clarity to enable the starting
point to be ascertained.
the present case, it is tolerably clear that the starting points for the
sentences were as follows:
choke render insensible
: Starting point of 5 years and 1 month (61 months),
reduced by 25% to 45.75 months, rounded up to 3 years and 10 months (46
: Starting point of 2 years and 11 months (35 months), reduced by 25%
to 26.25 months, rounded down to 2 years and 4 months (26 months);
: Starting point of 2 years and 11 months (35 months), reduced by 25%
to 26.25 months, rounded down to 2 years and 4 months (26 months);
assault occasioning actual bodily harm:
Starting point of 2 years and 1
month (25 months); reduced by 25% to 18.75 months, rounded up to 1 year and 7
months (19 months).
the present case, the primary judge specified the discount with sufficient
clarity to enable the starting points of each sentence
to be worked out.
Accordingly, s 37 has not been contravened. It follows that this ground of
appeal should be dismissed.
Ground Two: Manifest
principles to be applied to a ground of appeal which alleges that a sentence is
manifestly excessive are well known. As this Court
Hawker v The
[2020] ACTCA 40
Appellate intervention is not justified simply because an appellate court may
have a different view as to the appropriate sentence
than the sentencing judge,
or where the result arrived at below is markedly different from other sentences
that have been imposed
in other cases. Rather, the appellant must demonstrate
that the sentence is such that it may be inferred that there was some
misapplication
of principle in the sentencing of the appellant, even though when
and how is not apparent from the statement of the sentencing judge’s
counsel for the appellant accepted that the offences were serious. This
concession was correctly made. The offender choked
the victim until she lost
consciousness. The risk to the victim’s life was clear and apparent. When
the victim regained consciousness,
the appellant was not repentant, but instead
engaged in two further acts of choking over the course of the night. The
would have been terrifying for the victim. The appellant’s
conduct in flushing the victim’s head into the toilet was
degrading and
humiliating.
context in which these acts occurred is also important. The Agreed Statement of
Facts describes an all-too-common picture of the
exercise of coercive control.
Days before the offending, the appellant was placing requirements about when she
would go out and for
how long. The offender continued to exert control over the
victim on the night of the offending. He became angry after reading the
victim’s private text messages and suspecting her of infidelity. The
offender’s controlling conduct continued throughout
the physical assaults,
with the appellant telling the victim that she could not shower, and was
required to “go to bed to live
in [her] shame”. In other words, the
acts of physical violence occurred in a broader environment of emotional
manipulation.
need for deterrence (both general and specific) and denunciation was high. As
Bell CJ recently explained in
R v Thompson
[2025] NSWCCA 133
Domestic violence is a scourge that afflicts modern Australia. Regrettably, this
is not a fresh phenomenon. In a decision given almost
20 years ago, Johnson J,
sitting as a member of this Court, surveyed cases over the previous decade
highlighting the issue:
[2006] NSWCCA 302
(2006) 164 A Crim R
. Thus, for example, in
(Supreme Court of
Tasmania, 5 July 1993, unreported), Underwood J had said:
Domestic violence is a profound problem and it is the duty of the courts to
denounce offences such as these and attempt to deter
its recurrence by you and
other men. The relationship of husband and wife, albeit estranged, is an
aggravating factor for violence
of this kind constitutes a breach of trust. It
is also an abuse of power and control on one who, in the circumstances, was in a
of vulnerability.
By 2016, the High Court was able to observe that “current sentencing
practices for offences involving domestic violence depart
from past sentencing
practices for this category of offence because of changes in societal attitudes
to domestic relations”:
The Queen v Kilic
(2016) 259 CLR
[2016] HCA 48
This Court has routinely decried the commission of crimes of domestic violence
and advised that it “must be dealt with sternly
by the courts, to
mark society’s strong disapprobation of such conduct, and to reinforce the
right of women to live unmolested
by a former partner”:
[2020] NSWCCA 239
observations apply with equal force in this Territory.
community rightly expects that Courts will vindicate and protect the lives of
victims of domestic violence. So much was made clear
by the enactment of the
Family Violence Legislation Amendment Act 2022
(ACT) (the 2022 Amending
Act), which increased the maximum penalty for offences of choke from 10 years to
13 years’ imprisonment.
As the Explanatory Statement for the 2022 Amending
act emphasised:
Setting higher maximum penalties for aggravated offences provides guidance to
the courts and the ACT community about the seriousness
of family violence
offences compared to other offences. The higher maximum penalties will help to
prevent family violence offending
by deterring individuals from committing these
offences. The penalties will also help to protect the community and victims from
risk of further harm from family violence offenders by allowing longer terms
of imprisonment to be imposed and operate as a mechanism
to publicly recognise
the harm done by family violence offending.
clear intent of Parliament must be followed. As the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal
Where there has been a change in the policy of the legislature to a particular
conduct must respect the
change of policy and reflect it in the sentences imposed on those who commit
offences under the new statutory
Woodward v The Queen
[2017] NSWCCA 44
[2000] NSWCCA 534
117 A Crim R 497
may be accepted that the appellant had a strong subjective case, which included
matters which both reduced the appellant’s
moral culpability for his
offending and which weighed in favour of imposing a sentence which facilitated
his rehabilitation.
a child, the appellant was subjected to violence at the hands of his father, and
witnessed his father physically abusing his mother
and siblings. The appellant
started consuming alcohol as a child when he was only 8 or 9 years old, and was
drinking every day or
every second day by age 14. The effects of this upbringing
upon the appellant’s moral development, understanding of relationships,
and capacity for self-control are clear: ‘Early Exposure to Alcohol and
Other Drug Abuse’,
Bugmy Bar Book
(November 2019);
‘Childhood, Infant and Perinatal Exposure to, and Experience of, Domestic
and Family Violence’,
Bugmy Bar Book
(May 2024). In these
circumstances, the sentencing judge properly accepted that the weight to be
given to general deterrence and punishment
should be moderated:
DPP v Robin
(a pseudonym)
[2024] ACTSC 322
his profoundly disadvantaged childhood, the appellant has maintained consistent
employment, and had no criminal history until
2014, when he was then in his late
20s. At that time, the appellant was convicted and sentenced for offences of
stalking and common
assault in a domestic violence context. He successfully
completed an 18 month good behaviour bond for these offences.
his arrest for the present offences, the appellant has taken advantage of
opportunities for rehabilitation. He has engaged
with the Supports and
Interventions Unit of the AMC, focussing on “substance addiction”
and “relationship counselling”.
He has also engaged with the Solaris
Therapeutic Program. He has been described as making “considerable
progress in understanding
his treatment issues and demonstrating behavioural
change”. He has not consumed any alcohol in custody.
there was some dispute about the matter in the written submissions, we
also accept that the appellant was remorseful for his conduct. As senior
counsel for the appellant submitted, the appellant did not
attempt to justify
his actions, nor to minimise his culpability to the author of the Court Duty
Report. Significantly, the appellant
gave evidence on affirmation in the
sentence hearing, in which he said that he felt “disgusted” about
his actions, and
acknowledged that “no one should ever have to put up with
living in fear”.
his oral submissions, senior counsel for the appellant drew a comparison between
a “good painting” and a “good
sentence”, noting that
each incorporates “both light and shade”. The sentence imposed by
the sentencing judge did
precisely that. Whilst recognising, particularly in the
imposition of the head sentence, the importance of the need to protect the
community, to denounce the offending, and the need for general deterrence, the
sentence also afforded the appellant a considerable
degree of leniency, most
particularly in the setting of a non-parole period of two years and nine months.
This non-parole period,
which was slightly over 50% of the head sentence, will
afford the appellant some two and a half years of supervised parole, to
his rehabilitation, and also recognises his reduced moral
culpability.
to the appellant’s submissions, the comparative cases do not demonstrate
that the sentences imposed by the sentencing
judge are manifestly excessive.
but one of the comparative sentences for the most serious charge of choke render
insensible identified by the appellant involved
offences that were committed
before the maximum penalty was increased from 10 years to 13 years imprisonment.
The appellant submitted
that the increase did not “entirely affect the
validity of the comparative cases as yardsticks” because a family violence
context was previously accepted by the courts as an aggravating factor; whereas
after the increase in the maximum penalty, this matter
can no longer be so
characterised: see
DPP v Hojlund
[2025] ACTSC 211
by this submission, the appellant was contending that the alteration in the
maximum penalty should have no, or little,
effect on the sentences to be imposed
for offences of this nature, that submission must be rejected. As the High Court
Muldrock v The Queen
[2011] HCA 39
244 CLR 120
an increase in the maximum penalty for an offence is an indication that the
sentences for that offence ought to be increased.
has the appellant demonstrated that there is any error in the degree of
concurrency afforded. It is well-established that “questions
concurrency and accumulation are discretionary matters for a sentencing judge
and there may be a variety of means to achieve a
total sentence that
appropriately reflects the totality of the criminal behaviour”:
[2017] ACTCA 37
counsel for the Director submitted, in the present case, each offence involved
separate criminality, which could not be reflected
in fully concurrent, or even
largely concurrent sentences. They each involved separate harm to the victim. It
was appropriate for
the cumulation of the violence and harm which the appellant
inflicted upon the victim to be reflected in partially cumulated sentences.
Further, the sentencing judge did impose fully concurrent sentences for two
separate offences of aggravated choking, which was a
generous approach in
circumstances where each of those offences occurred at separate points in time,
and involved a separate risk
to the victim.
appellant has not demonstrated that the sentences imposed were manifestly
the above reasons, the appeal is dismissed.
I certify that the preceding seventy [70] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Court
RTF format (245 KB)
Signed PDF/A format