Carnall v Gibbons [2016] ACTIC 1 (30 November 2016)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
CARNALL v GIBBONS
[2016] ACTIC 1
Hearing Dates:
16, 18 and 28 November 2016
Industrial Magistrate Walker
Catchwords:
–safety duty – particulars –
person conducting a business or undertaking – officer – worker -
characterisation
CORPORATIONS
Legislation Cited:
Corporations Act 2001
Work Health &
Safety Act 2011
(ACT) ss 5, 7, 33, 233, 247, 252
Cases Cited:
Attorney General of New South Wales v Tho Services Ltd (in liquidation)
(ACN 000263678)
[2016] NSW CCA 221
Burridge v Chief Magistrate of the
Australian Capital Territory
[2016] ACTSC 332
Hance v Commissioner of
[2008] FCAFC 196
John L Pty Ltd v Attorney-General
[1987] HCA 42
Karimbla Construction Services P/L v President of
the Industrial Court of Qld & Ors
[2014] QSC 56
Puzey v Commissioner of Taxation
[2003] FCAFC 197
(2003) 131 FCR 244
Safe Work New
South Wales Wollongong Glass Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWDC
Commissioner of Taxation; Riddell v Commissioner of Taxation
[2009] HCA 22
(18 June 2009)
Sun Newspapers Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1938] HCA 73
; (1938) CLR 337
R Carnall (Informant)
J Gibbons (Defendant)
Representation:
Mr Buckingham (Prosecution)
Mr Ronald (Defendant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Prosecution)
Colquhoun Murphy Lawyers (Defendant)
File Number:
CC 40067 of 2014
INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE WALKER
matter is a prosecution pursuant to the
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
2. Charge CC 40067 of 2016
Between 27 February 2014 and 12 March 2014, JAY GIBBONS committed the
following offence in the Australian Capital Territory:
JAY GIBBONS contravened
Work Health and Safety Act
; the person had a health and safety duty (category 3), they failed to
comply with that duty.
Location of offence: 9 Blackburn Street, Pearce
charge as laid is defective. It fails to specify in what capacity the defendant
had the duty it is alleged he breached.
Particulars
were filed in conjunction with the information. The particulars assert that the
defendant was “at all material times
a person conducting a business or
undertaking”. They then purport to delineate the safety duty, to whom it
was owed and the
manner in which that duty was alleged to have been contravened.
the commencement of proceedings, the prosecutor indicated the following:
“the Crown proposes to lead its case in two ways, in some sense
alternative ways, that the defendant Mr Gibbons was either a
person controlling
a business or undertaking or a worker operating under the auspices of the
defendant company”.
prosecutor went on to clarify that it was not alleging a concurrent duty, which
is prohibited pursuant to s 233 of the
, but rather that it put its
case in the alternative, it being a matter for the court to determine as a fact
whether Mr Gibbons was
a person conducting a business or undertaking
(“PCBU”) or a worker.
defence submitted that, despite the prosecution submission to the contrary, this
was an impermissible approach pursuant to s 233
. Alternatively
the defence submitted that this intended approach amounted to an application to
amend the charge which was impermissible
in the sense that in actuality it
purported to create a new charge beyond the two year limitation period. Finally,
the defence submitted
that to allow such an amendment was, in any event, simply
unjust. Counsel for the defendant, Mr Ronald, stated “
... It is my
submission that the matter ought only go forward on the basis of the
particulars, even the information might be inadequate
but we’re not
complaining about that...”
determining how the matter was to proceed I noted that in my view, absent the
particulars, I was satisfied that the information
laid did not disclose the
elements of the offence which must include the characterisation of the person
pursuant to the
. That characterisation delineates the duty arising,
for example whether the person is acting in the capacity of a worker, person
conducting a business other undertaking or otherwise. This is necessarily so
because both the duty and the penalty are determined
by the characterisation of
the person.
particularisation provided that the defendant was a person conducting the
business or undertaking.
noted that without those particulars the defence would have no ability to meet
the charge before the court and that it was the reading
of the charge together
with the particulars filed which satisfied me that it was possible to proceed to
a hearing of the matter.
is of course much authority on the role of particulars in relation to criminal
offences for example
John L Pty Ltd v Attorney-General (NSW)
and more recently in this jurisdiction, the decision of Mossop AJ in
Burridge v Chief Magistrate of the Australian Capital Territory
In the context of the national scheme, the issue was considered by
Jackson J in
Karimbla Construction Services P/L v President of the Industrial
Court of Qld & Ors
[2014] QSC 56.
It is a matter of some complexity. The proper approach
in any particular matter depends to some extent on the particular legislation
which creates the offence, in combination with the requirements and the common
this case, in part in reliance of the concession made by the defendant, I
determined that, whilst less than ideal, it was appropriate
to proceed on the
basis that the particulars perfected the information.
note, however, that the regulator should have regard to the proper formulation
of charges pursuant to the
and that there are numerous authorities
available to assist that process not least those provided by the defence in this
the decisions of
Safe Work New South Wales Wollongong Glass Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWDC 58
at paragraphs 10 to 13
Attorney General of New
South Wales v Tho Services Ltd (in liquidation) (ACN 000263678)
at paragraph 55.
is a co-accused in this matter, Allhomes Renovations Pty Ltd (“the
company”). The matters were to be heard together
but on the morning of the
hearing, the director of the company, Ms Evanilda Cummins attended court and
indicated that the company
was in liquidation. An adjournment was allowed for
the prosecutor to ascertain whether leave was required of the Supreme Court to
prosecute that matter. In order to avoid prejudice to the defendant Mr Gibbons,
I determined to proceed with the hearing in respect
to him. Prior to delivery of
this decision, that matter was mentioned again. The liquidator indicated that he
will not appear in
the proceedings. The Director of Public Prosecutions has
chosen to reserve his position as to whether or not to proceed in that
occasion during the pre-hearing mentions, Mr Shaun Cummins sought to appear on
behalf of Allhomes Renovations Pty Ltd. An ASIC
is sole director of that company and Mr Cummins a member.
is apparent from the way in which this matter was conducted and from closing
submissions that if Mr Gibbons is found to be a person
conducting a business or
undertaking, then the Court will readily find that a duty in relation to the
safe removal of asbestos was
owed to workers and occupants of the site and that
that duty was breached. Determination of this matter revolves around an
of whether the prosecution has established beyond reasonable doubt
that Mr Gibbons was in fact a person conducting a business or
undertaking.
The evidence
17. The following
circumstances of this matter are not in dispute.
In 2011, David Cross and Lyndall Milburn (“the owners”) bought Ms
Milburn’s family home at 9 Blackburn Street, Pearce,
a suburb in the
Australian Capital Territory, from her parents. At the time of doing so, they
knew that it was what in the Australian
Capital Territory is known as a
“Mr Fluffy home”. I am indebted to Wikipedia for the following
summary of that which
was assumed for the purpose of these proceedings:
Mr Fluffy refers to a widespread
contamination incident that occurred in the suburbs of
, the capital city of
. Two companies, referred to collectively as
Mr Fluffy (a nickname coined in the 1990s for Asbestosfluf Insulations, and its
J&H Insulation, the former run by Canberra businessman Dirk
Jansen, the latter owned by a relative of his), imported and installed
amphibole asbestos
(in most cases brown
though instances of blue
crocidolite
have been recorded) as an insulation by
blowing the product into roof spaces of homes during the 1960s and
owners understood that property had been remediated under a Federal government
scheme in the late 1980s however also were aware
that there was a small risk of
the continued presence of the offending material within the
2013, the owners noticed material extruding from a broken cornice and were
concerned that it may be asbestos. As a result they
arranged to have the
material analysed by a business known as Robson Environmental, an employee of
which prepared a report dated
23 October 2013 in which the material was
identified as amosite asbestos. Remedial work was recommended for this area but
advised that further residual amosite asbestos was likely to be
present throughout the internal and external wall cavities and potentially
subfloor areas and advised:
“...the removal of any internal or external walls or any window or
door frames must be undertaken under friable asbestos removal
conditions as
loose amosite installation is likely to be disturbed by such works. Any removal
or remediation works undertaken on
friable ACM must be undertaken by an ACT
licenced class A asbestos remover as per the Code of Practice for the Safe
Removal of Asbestos
Edition) [NOHSC: 2002 (2005)]. Air
monitoring is mandatory during the removal/remediation of friable asbestos. An
independent Class
A asbestos assessor must also be employed to undertake a
clearance inspection, which involves a visual inspection of the asbestos
area followed by atmospheric monitoring once it has been established that the
removal/remediation work has been completed satisfactorily.
A clearance
certificate and copy of the air monitoring certificate should be issued to
provide assurance that the area is safe for
reoccupation”.
owners planned renovation work on the property and were given a recommendation
by their selected kitchen renovator, Granite Transformations,
to have some of
the related building work undertaken by Mr Jay Gibbons.
Coincidentally,
the then ACT Work Safety Commissioner, Mr Mark McCabe, wrote to residents of Mr
Fluffy homes on 18 February 2014.
A further letter is the same terms was
subsequently reissued to “the owner”. The letter referred to the
risk of the presence
of loose fill asbestos in their home and required that
owners advise tradespeople engaged to do work on the home that it was part
the Loose Asbestos Insulation Removal Program operating between 1988 and 1993
and that it is likely that asbestos fibres would
be present, as well as
providing tradespeople with a copy of any asbestos assessment report. The letter
also indicated that only
a licensed asbestos removalist should be engaged to
undertake the removal of asbestos.
owners made Mr Gibbons aware of the asbestos concern regarding work to be done
on their property.
work was undertaken from 27 February 2014 to March 2014. On 11 March 2014, Ms
Milburn expressed some concern to her partner as
to the lack of precautions
being taken in respect to the work. As a result, Mr Cross contacted the ACT
government through Canberra
Connect and was passed on to Work Safe ACT, the
Territory’s work, health and safety regulator.
Subsequently
a Work Safe inspector, Mr Brad Murrell, attended the site. He observed what
appeared to be exposed asbestos in various
locations including the site of new
windows and a packed trailer. He issued two prohibition notices restricting
access to and work
on the property and called in Robson Environmental to assess
and ultimately remediate the site.
The role of Mr
dispute between the parties is as to the role of Mr Gibbons in work being
carried out at the site.
prosecution seeks to rely upon the owners’ dealings with Mr Gibbons and
associated documentation to establish that Mr Gibbons
was a person conducting a
business or undertaking. Mr Gibbons chose not to give evidence and called no
witnesses in his case.
27. I now consider that
28. The owners first contacted Mr Gibbons by telephone.
30 January 2014 and 10 February 2014, the owners and Mr Gibbons communicated by
email. The emails included an Allhomes Renovations
hotmail email address, a
telephone number, 0403509406, and Mr Gibbons own name.
Gibbons visited the home in January or February 2014. He gave the owners a
business card for Allhomes Renovations Pty Ltd listing
Jay Gibbons and Shaun
Cummins on the card. Each had a mobile telephone number. Mr Gibbons’ was
04xxxxxxxx, as in the emails.
Millburn gave evidence that she told Mr Gibbons when he attended the home that
the house had loose fill asbestos, gave him a copy
of the 1990 remediation
report and discussed the proposed works in detail. He assured the owners that he
was qualified to deal with
Gibbons provided an unsigned quote; the revised version only is in evidence. It
is headed “revised estimate”. It is
dated 19 February 2014 and
numbered 0918a.
33. The following information appears on the
heading Allhomes
Renovations;
phone number
04xxxxxxxx (Mr Gibbons’ number as per the quote);
email address,
allhomesrenos@hotmail.com
ABN: 53 160 515
ACT B/L (ACT
building licence number) 20121491;
bank details:
BSB 641-800; ACC: 2xxxxxxxx.
ABN is registered to Allhomes Renovations Pty Ltd. According to an ABN Lookup
with ABN 65 357 480 565 as an
individual/sole trader from 15 February 2010. That ABN does not appear on any of
the correspondence
or contractual documents between Mr Gibbons and the
builders licence number is the same as that which appears in the subsequent
contract linked to Allhomes Renovations Pty Ltd.
bank details are not the same as the WESTPAC, Allhomes Renovations Pty Ltd
invoice account details. There is no evidence as to
whom the bank account
details provided in the quote are linked. It could be another bank account held
by Allhomes Renovations Pty
Ltd, a bank account held by Mr Gibbons or indeed an
account held by another.
undated contract was entered into between the owners and the builder. The
builder is described in that contract as “Allhomes
Renovations” on
the commencement page and initialled by JG, as builder, throughout. At Appendix
A on page 25 of the contract,
the builder is referred to as “Allhomes
Renovations Pty Ltd.” The address of the builder is given as “41
Cres Ngunawal (sic). The email address, ABN, ACT Builders Licence
number and mobile phone number provided are the same as on the
quote. The only
item specific to Mr Gibbons is the mobile telephone
38. The work commenced and had progressed significantly
by March 2014.
owners became concerned about the apparent lack of safety measures. The measures
identified by Robson’s and even by Mr Gibbons
in discussion pre-contract
were notably absent. There were no physical barriers in place, no air monitoring
and negligible PPE in
Cross contacted the WorkSafe ACT on 11 March 2014. That same day inspectors
attended the scene and, being concerned as to what
they observed, immediately
called in specialist assistance from Robson Environmental to assess and
remediate the site.
19 May 2014, Ms Clare Brooks, Inspector, issued a Section 155 Notice requiring
information in relation to a possible contravention
of the Act to Allhomes
Renovations Pty Ltd, ACN 160 515 257, at 41 Mundawari Circuit, Ngunnawal ACT.
This is the same address that
appears on the building contract. It is the
address for Allhomes Renovations Pty Ltd for its WESTPAC bank account 032-733
It is the address linked to the registered operator of the trailer
found with loose fill asbestos in it at the site, namely, Allhomes
Renovations
Pty Ltd. It is the registered office and principal place of business of Allhomes
Renovations Pty Ltd according to an
ASIC business name search. It is the address
on the building contract.
evidence points to Mr Jay Gibbons as the person the owners primarily dealt with
but not the person with whom they contracted.
Whilst not conclusive, the
preponderance of the evidence points to the contract being with Allhomes
Renovations Pty Ltd.
is not clear what relationship Mr Gibbons had with Allhomes Renovations Pty Ltd.
He appears to have been authorised to act as agent
to bind the company in a
contract. He had “equal billing” with Mr Cummins on an Allhomes
Renovations Pty Ltd business
Millburn was asked about her understanding of Mr Gibbons’ relationship
with Allhomes Renovations Pty Ltd. She said that she
understood that she was
dealing with a company, Allhomes Renovations and that Mr Gibbons worked for that
company. He was the one
doing the work, the correspondence was all on Allhomes
letterhead, email correspondence went to an Allhomes email address. When things
“started going wrong”, Mr Gibbons brought Mr Cummins in to meet the
owners. She said that contact was with Mr Cummins
toward the end of the process
when it was not satisfactorily getting finished off. She believed Allhomes was
the company being paid
and with which she followed up.
Cross gave evidence that he thought Mr Cummins was Mr Gibbons’ boss as he
was introduced as the owner of Allhomes. He was
satisfied that Mr Gibbons was
dealing with them on behalf of Allhomes Renovations and he understood that they
had contracted with
Allhomes. However, he had formed the view that workers on
site were employees of Mr Gibbons but conceded that he had no basis for
Was the defendant a person carrying out an
undertaking or business?
the only real issue in contention in this matter is whether the defendant was a
person carrying on a business or undertaking,
I have been directed to no
authority on this point. I have been unable to discern any relevant authority in
my own research. It is
instructive to compare the duty holder definitions in the
person carrying on a business or undertaking
is defined, relevantly, in
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a person
business or undertaking
(a) whether the person conducts the business or undertaking
alone or with others; and
(b) whether or not the business or undertaking is conducted
for profit or gain.
(2) A business or undertaking conducted by a person includes
a business or undertaking conducted by a partnership or an unincorporated
association.
(3) If a business or undertaking is conducted by a
partnership (other than an incorporated partnership), a reference in this Act
a person conducting the business or undertaking is to be read as a reference to
each partner in the partnership.
(4) A person does not conduct a business or undertaking to
the extent that the person is engaged solely as a worker in, or as
of, that business or undertaking.
48. In s 247(1) of the
is relevantly defined as:
A person who makes, or participates in making, decisions that affect the
whole, or a substantial part, of a business or undertaking
of the Territory is
taken to be an officer
of the Territory for the purposes of this
49. In s 252 of the
an officer of public authority
defined as:
A person who makes, or participates in making, decisions that affect the
whole, or substantial part, of the business or undertaking
of a public authority
is taken to be a an officer of the public authority for the purposes of this
Dictionary defines
(a) an officer within the meaning of the
Corporations Act
other than a partner or partnership; or
(b) an officer of the Territory within the meaning of section 247;
(c) an officer of a public authority within the meaning of section
is relevantly defined in s 7 of the
(1) A person is a worker
if the person carries out
work in any capacity for a person conducting a business or undertaking,
including work as—
(a) an employee; or
(b) a contractor or
subcontractor; or
(c) an employee of a
contractor or subcontractor; or
(d) an employee of a labour hire company who has been
assigned to work in the person's business or undertaking; or
(e) an outworker; or
(f) an apprentice or trainee;
(g) a student gaining work
experience; or
(h) a volunteer; or
(i) a person of a prescribed class.
(3) The person conducting the business or undertaking is
if the person is an individual who carries out work in that
business or undertaking.
regard to these definitions, whilst a PCBU may be a worker, being a worker does
not render one a PCBU. Considering the range
of duty holders, it appears that
there is a scale of duty holders with workers at the bottom of that scale,
officers above them and
the PCBU as the primary duty holder. The scaling appears
to relate to the level of control the duty holder has within the business
undertaking.
be a PCBU, the person, whether individual or corporate, must be
“conducting” the business or undertaking. I am satisfied
whoever was conducting it, a business was being conducted in effecting
renovations at the site for profit.
the absence of authority in the work, health and safety field, one might
consider the notion of conducting a business in other
contexts. The issue arises
most commonly in the taxation field.
Spriggs v Commissioner of Taxation; Riddell v Commissioner of Taxation
[2009] HCA 22
(18 June 2009) in a unanimous judgment, French CJ, Gummow, Heydon,
Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ noted at paragraph 59:
The existence of a business is a matter of fact and degree. It will depend
on a number of indicia, which must be considered in combination
and as a whole.
No one factor is necessarily determinative. Relevant factors include, but are
not limited to, the existence of a
profit-making purpose, the scale of
activities, the commercial character of the transactions, and whether the
activities are systematic
and organised, often described as whether the
activities are carried out in a business-like manner.
Hance v Commissioner of Taxation
[2008] FCAFC 196
Finn, Dowsett and Edmonds JJ, in considering
whether an almond investment scheme was a business, referred to some
authorities.
paragraph 73, citing
Puzey v Commissioner of Taxation
[2003] FCAFC 197
(2003) 131 FCR 244
Hill and Carr JJ observed:
. In deciding whether or not a
business is carried on, courts have pointed to what have been called in the
United Kingdom the "badges
of trade", indicia which, while no one of them will
be determinative of whether a business is carried on, collectively will
demonstrate
a business. These include the profit motive (although a non-profit
company may still carry on a business), acting in a business-like
way (although
many businesses may be found which operate in a non business-like way), the
keeping of books of account and records
(although the fact that there are none
will not necessitate the conclusion that a business is not carried on) and
repetition (although
a fixed term project may still be a business).
58. Their Honours continued at paragraph 74:
In approaching the question it is also important to keep in mind the
observations of Dixon J in
Sun Newspapers Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
[1938] HCA 73
; (1938) CLR 337 at 359-60 where his Honour said:
The business structure or entity or organization may assume any of an
almost infinite variety of shapes and it may be difficult to
comprehend under
one description all the forms in which it may be manifested. In a trade or
pursuit where little or no plant is required,
it may be represented by no more
than the intangible elements constituting what is commonly called good will,
that is, widespread
or general reputation, habitual patronage by clients or
customers and an organized method of serving their needs. At the other extreme
it may consist in a great aggregate of buildings, machinery and plant all
assembled and systematized as the material means by which
an organized body of
men produce and distribute commodities or perform services.
in the authorities referred to, and in the case in point, the defining feature
of carrying on a business was one of the person
either engaging in activities,
or delegating responsibility for such activities, in a commercial context for a
profit. A significant
distinction for a worker as defined in s5 is that their
activity is to some extent at the direction of another. In terms of an employee
worker, their activity is for a salary, wage or commission rather than
Mr Gibbons was contacted personally by the owners, he at all times represented
himself to them as part of a business called
Allhomes Renovations. Whether that
is the same entity as Allhomes Renovations Pty Ltd is not a fact that can be
decided on the evidence.
Whether he was employed by the company, was partnered
with it, was a sub-contractor or some other arrangement also cannot be
on the evidence before me.
is simply impossible on the facts before me to conclude beyond reasonable doubt
which category Mr Gibbons falls in to.
such the prosecution has failed to prove an element of the offence, namely that
the defendant was a person conducting a business
or undertaking and the
prosecution must fail.
63. The charge is
L.A. Walker
Industrial Magistrate
30 November
I certify that the preceding sixty-three [63] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of her Honour Industrial
Associate: Christina Karolis
Date: 30 November 2016
RTF format (154 KB)
Signed PDF/A format