DPP v Al-Mofathel [2025] ACTSC 493 (10 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
DPP v Al-Mofathel
[2025] ACTSC 493
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
McWilliam J
Offender convicted and sentenced to a total effective term of imprisonment
of one year and four months, backdated to commence on 31
October 2025 and
suspended from the date of sentence, with the remainder served by way of a drug
and alcohol treatment order.
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – aggravated burglary –
whether drug and treatment order appropriate
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT) ss 45A, 312, 321
Cases Cited:
Cranfield v The Queen
[2018] ACTCA 3
Dawson v The Queen
[2019] ACTCA 9
DPP v Dawson (No 2)
[2022] ACTSC 64
DPP v Fisher
[2023] ACTSC 29
DPP v Stasinos
[2023] ACTSC 179
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
Monfries v The Queen
[2014] ACTCA 46
19 ACTLR 99
MT v The Queen
[2021] ACTCA 26
17 ACTLR 22
R v Campbell
[2010] ACTCA 20
R v Catanzariti
[2020] ACTSC 326
[2021] ACTSC 106
[2022] ACTSC 362
374 FLR 260
R v Toumo’ua
[2017] ACTCA 9
12 ACTLR 103
Director of Public Prosecutions
Mustafa Al-Mofathel (Offender)
Representation:
S Janackovic (DPP)
A Kernaghan (Offender)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Good Legal Lawyers (Offender)
File Numbers:
SCC 8 of 2025
SCC 9 of 2025
McWILLIAM J:
Offence for sentence
Al-Mofathel (
is before the court for sentence
having pleaded guilty to one count of aggravated burglary contrary to s 312 of
Criminal Code 2002
) (CAN 8833/2024) (
). The maximum penalty for that offence is a fine of $320,000, a term
of imprisonment for 20 years, or both.
offender has also requested that the court consider two additional offences when
making a sentence-related order for the principal
offence, pursuant to
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act
The offences which are to be taken into account are:
(a) One count of common assault by joint commission contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) by virtue of s 45A of the Code (CAN 874/2025);
(b) One count of minor theft by joint commission contrary to s 321 of the Code
by virtue of s 45A of the Code (CAN 839/2024) (jointly,
assault is punishable by a maximum penalty of two years’ imprisonment, and
the maximum penalty for minor theft is a fine
of $8,000, six months’
imprisonment, or both.
this case, the sentence that will be imposed is a term of imprisonment, to be
served by way of full-time custody in respect of
the period which the offender
has already spent, with suspension of the remaining period of full-time custody
from the date of imposition
of the sentence as part of a drug and alcohol
treatment order: s 12A(3)(a) of the
Sentencing Act
31 August 2024, the offender and Daniel Fensom (
the co-offender
a residence in Deakin without permission of the occupants. The offenders were
both wearing dark clothing and had their
faces covered. One of the offenders
was holding a claw hammer and the other was holding a club hammer. This conduct
to the charge of aggravated burglary.
victim, who lived at the residence, encountered the offenders inside the
property. One of the offenders yelled at the victim
and punched him on the left
side of his face, causing him to fall back onto the lounge. This conduct gives
rise to the charge of
common assault by joint commission.
a short time, the victim went into the kitchen and was told by one of the men to
empty his pockets. He placed his wallet and
mobile telephone on the table. One
of the offenders took the victim’s wallet and phone, and then both
offenders left the residence.
This conduct gives rise to the charge of minor
theft by joint commission.
The court’s task
offender is to be sentenced in accordance with the sentencing purposes set out
in s 7 of the
Sentencing Act
, and the mandatory relevant
considerations set out in s 33 of the
Sentencing Act
, insofar as
they are relevant. The offender is also sentenced with the principle of
individualised justice in mind:
MT v The Queen
[2021] ACTCA 26
Nature and circumstances of the offence
(s 33(1)(a) of the
Sentencing Act
court is required to consider the nature and circumstances of the offences.
This includes an assessment of the objective seriousness
of the offence. Any
sentence imposed must be proportionate to the seriousness of the offence. The
court takes an objective approach
to that assessment, with the maximum penalty
for the offence as a yardstick.
conduct constituting each offence will also have individual features which guide
the court in determining where the offence sits
within the range of conduct that
falls within any given offence.
relation to other offending that must be taken into account (s 33(1)(b) of the
Sentencing Act
), the usual approach to the objective seriousness of a
scheduled offence has been discussed in
[2010] ACTCA 20
and applies to the scheduled offences
here. When considering the additional offences in crafting the sentence for the
offence, the court cannot impose a penalty exceeding the maximum
penalty for the principal offence (s 57(3) of the
Sentencing Act
However, the usual approach is not the only approach. Here, the co-offender has
already been sentenced in relation to the same
offences, including having the
additional offences taken into account:
DPP v Fensom
[2025] ACTSC 272
). At [2] of that decision, the Chief Justice considered
that the two further offences were integrally linked with the substantive
offence and thus would not result in any significant increase in the penalty to
be imposed. I have taken the same approach for reasons
of both parity and
addition, one of the features for consideration with regard to the scheduled
offences is that they were committed by joint commission.
Accordingly, an
assessment of the offender’s role or degree of responsibility in the
offending, and his culpability, is necessary:
s 33(1)(i) of the
[2022] ACTSC
374 FLR 260
and the cases there-cited.
the offender’s role in the assault has been left deliberately vague in the
agreed facts and otherwise, the conduct of
the offenders was comparable. I have
assessed the objective seriousness on that basis. Otherwise, I have taken into
account the
features informing the objective seriousness as follows:
(a) Both circumstances of aggravation were present, namely the conduct occurred
in company and in possession of an offensive weapon;
(b) The property on which the offender trespassed was residential, which was
more serious than an offence involving commercial premises;
(c) The occupants of the premises were present at the time of the burglary, the
offenders interacted with the occupants and the weapons
were visible to the
occupants while the offenders moved about the premises;
(d) There was a degree of planning or pre-meditation given that the offenders
left the premises and returned, with their faces covered
and with weapons;
(e) In respect of the assault, physical trauma was suffered by the victim, who
experienced pain upon being punched by one of the
those features, the objective seriousness of the conduct was towards the middle
of the range of conduct covered by the aggravated
Victim impact
(s 33(1)(f) of the
Sentencing Act
were no victim impact statements before the court.
Plea of guilty
(ss 33(1)(j) and 35
Sentencing Act
offender pleaded guilty at an early opportunity following negotiations. The
plea enlivens the potential application of a discretionary
discount: s 35(3) of
Sentencing Act
Cranfield v The Queen
[2018] ACTCA 3
. In exercising the discretion, the court must have regard to the
matters specified in s 35(2) of the
Sentencing Act
. Utilitarian value is
a primary consideration:
Monfries v The Queen
[2014] ACTCA 46
R v Toumo’ua
12 ACTLR 103
objective seriousness of the conduct has been discussed above. Of significance
here, s 35(2)(c) of the
Sentencing Act
expressly requires the
court to take into account whether the guilty plea was related to negotiations
between the prosecution and
defence about the charge to which the offender
pleaded guilty. The circumstances in which the plea occurred here involved
negotiations,
which led to the offender pleading to lesser charges which were
scheduled. As stated in
... An offender can benefit either from a substantial discount for the
utilitarian value of an early plea, or from a lower sentence
flowing from a
lesser charge or fewer charges following negotiations, but should not usually
benefit in both ways.
that principle, a 20% discount is appropriate.
Subjective circumstances of the
(s 33(1)(m) of the
Sentencing Act
offender was born in Iraq and suffered a turbulent childhood due to the Iraqi
war engulfing the country. His family fled and
ultimately migrated to Australia
in 1996. He has support from his parents and siblings. He was previously
married. He has no dependants.
He completed year 12 and has been regularly
employed in various industries. Upon release he will require assistance from
(s 33(1)(n) of the
Sentencing Act
). He has access to
accommodation through ACT Housing.
his co-offender, he does not appear to have any separate mental health issues
(that is, other than those related to the consequences
of drug use). However,
he does have a relevant criminal history, extending back as far as 2006 and
including convictions for violent
offending. It disentitles him from leniency
offender also has a substance use disorder, which has included regular use
throughout his adult life and escalated to the use
of methamphetamine through
his mid-20s with continued high frequency use until his current custodial
period. The current offending
was related to the drug use (s 33(1)(p) of the
Sentencing Act
), with the offender consuming drugs at the same premises
he later burgled.
in custody, he has voluntarily completed the EQUIPS Addiction program, for which
he is to be commended (s 33(1)(t) of the
Sentencing Act
(s 33(1)(w) of the
Sentencing Act
evidence did not establish remorse to an extent that would warrant any
significant mitigation, but in the offender’s favour,
he did accept the
unlawfulness of the conduct and elaborated on the wide-ranging impact on the
victims and the general community.
Current sentencing practice
33(1)(za) of the
Sentencing Act
prosecution assisted the court with a number of comparable cases where the
conduct involved home invasions where there was interaction
with the occupants.
They include
DPP v Stasinos
[2023] ACTSC 179
DPP v Fisher
DPP v Dawson (No 2)
[2022] ACTSC 64
R v Catanzariti
[2020] ACTSC
I have taken these cases into account to ensure consistency in sentencing
practice, accepting that the objective in doing so is
not to bind the sentencing
court to achieve numerical equivalence with similar sentences imposed in the
same jurisdiction: see
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
242 CLR 520
regard to parity considerations,
was obviously also of
significance. However, the facts on which the co-offender was sentenced were
different and there were different
mitigating subjective features
Pre-sentence custody
offender has spent 11 days in custody referable to the current offending.
approach to principles of concurrency and accumulation has been set out in
Dawson v The Queen
[2019] ACTCA 9
(and the cases there-cited). Although there is only one offence for which the
offender is being sentenced, and he has spent only
11 days in custody referable
to that offence, he has now spent more than 400 days in continuous custody,
which should be taken into
account. There comes a point beyond which further
time in custody to punish or express denunciation, or to give effect to specific
deterrence, becomes meaningless. I think that point has been reached here.
Disposition: Should a Drug and Alcohol
Treatment Order be made?
have taken into account the relevant sentencing purposes. Accepting
that the imposition of a term of imprisonment is a sentence
of last resort (s 10
Sentencing Act
), no other sentence is appropriate here in terms of
being proportionate to the conduct and the nature of the offence.
to the manner in which the sentence is to be served, disposition by way of a
Drug and Alcohol Treatment Order (
Treatment Order
) is the appropriate
outcome: s 12A(2)(b) of the
Sentencing Act
. There are three reasons for
that finding. First, the offender will have served a short period in full-time
custody referable to
these offences, and as I have said above, totality
considerations have persuaded me that in the circumstances, that length of time
is sufficient to achieve the objective of personal deterrence. Punishment,
denunciation, recognition of victim impact and general
deterrence are reflected
in the length of the sentence, a matter which itself is influenced heavily by
the sentencing practice in
terms of what may be appropriate.
I have considered the objects of a Treatment Order set out in s 80O of the
Sentencing Act
as follows:
(a) facilitating the rehabilitation of the offender by providing a judicially
supervised, therapeutically oriented and integrated
treatment regime;
(b) reducing the offender’s dependency on alcohol or a controlled drug;
(c) reducing the health risks associated with such dependency;
(d) assisting the offender’s integration into the community; and
(e) promoting community safety by reducing re-offending.
Rehabilitation
is promoted by the interventionist and therapeutic basis of a Treatment Order.
The community will be better protected
in the longer term by reducing and
ideally eliminating the criminogenic risk factor that caused this offender to
I am satisfied of the other formal requirements for a Treatment Order:
(a) On the reports provided to the court, the offender is both eligible and
suitable for a Treatment Order: ss 80S and 80T of the
Sentencing Act
(b) The offender’s dependency on substance use and addiction was directly
related to his offending: s 12A(2)(a)(i) and (ii)
(c) The offender has consented to the Treatment Order, having been given a clear
explanation of what it involves: s 12A(2)(c) of
Sentencing Act
(d) The offender will live in the ACT for the duration of the sentence except as
directed by the court: s 12A(2)(a)(iii) of the
Sentencing Act
(e) There are no concerns relating to the safety or welfare of any victim: s
12A(2)(b)(ii) of the
Sentencing Act
is not necessary to set a non-parole period because the making of a Treatment
Order means that the sentence becomes an “excluded
sentence of
imprisonment” under s 64 of the
Sentencing Act
orders of the Court are:
(1) For the offence of aggravated burglary contrary
to s 312 of the
Criminal Code 2002
(CAN 8833/2024), and taking into
account the offences of common assault by joint commission (CAN 874/2025) and
minor theft by joint
commission (CAN 839/2024), the offender is convicted and
sentenced to a term of imprisonment for 20 months, reduced to one year and
months on account of his guilty plea, to commence on 31 October 2025 and
conclude on 28 February 2027.
Drug and Alcohol Treatment Order (Treatment Order)
(2) A Treatment Order under s 12A of the
Sentencing Act
is made for Mustafa Al-Mofathel in respect of the eligible offence of aggravated
burglary, for which he has been convicted and for
which he has been sentenced to
a total term of imprisonment of one year and four months, commencing from today,
and concluding on 28 February 2027.
(3) The conviction and sentence imposed for the said eligible offence is
hereby incorporated into the Treatment Order in the Custodial
Part of the Order.
(4) The Treatment and Supervision Part of the Treatment Order is for 12
months from today, 10 November 2025 until 9 November 2026.
(5) The Custodial Part of the Treatment Order for the eligible offence will
be suspended under s 80W of the
Sentencing Act
from today,
10 November 2025, until 28 February 2027.
Good behaviour order
(6) Pursuant to s 80ZA of the
Sentencing Act
conditional upon compliance with Orders 7 and 8 of the Treatment Order, a good
behaviour order is made, commencing from 10 November
2026 (the day after the end
of the Treatment and Supervision Part of the Treatment Order) and concluding on
28 February 2027 (the
end of the total sentence that is the subject of the
Treatment Order).
(Sentence Administration) Act 2005
Al-Mofathel must sign an undertaking to comply with the good behaviour order,
including the core conditions of the order set out
in s 86 of the
(8) A probation condition is imposed, requiring Mr Al-Mofathel to:
(a) accept supervision by the Commissioner of ACT Corrective Services or their
delegate for the period of the undertaking or such
lesser period as the person
supervising him considers appropriate; and
(b) obey all reasonable directions of the person supervising him including as to
alcohol and drug testing, counselling and treatment.
Treatment and Supervision
Conditions and Directions
(9) For the Treatment and Supervision Part of the Treatment Order:
(a) The core conditions of the Order set out in s 80Y of
Sentencing Act
are hereby imposed.
(b) Mr Al-Mofathel is directed to travel to Canberra Recovery Service
Residential program on 10 November 2025 and admit himself to
the residential
drug rehabilitation program at that facility by 12:00pm.
(c) Mr Al-Mofathel is directed to complete the drug rehabilitation program or
any other program of intervention, treatment or counselling
he is directed to
complete, including urinalysis or case management that may be required by any
member of the Treatment and Supervision
(d) Mr Al-Mofathel is to obey all reasonable directions of any person in charge
of the program and all the rules of the program and
the facility, which may
include directions about where he resides, with whom he associates and his
attendance from time to time.
(e) Mr Al-Mofathel is not to leave his approved place of residence between any
curfew hours directed by the Treatment and Supervision
team, other than for a
medical emergency, and he is to present himself to the front door of the
residence if required by an officer
of ACT Policing.
(f) Should Mr Al-Mofathel leave or be discharged from the treatment program
before completing it, he is to report to ACT Corrective
Services by 4:00pm on
the next business day with a view to having his Treatment Order reviewed.
(g) Mr Al-Mofathel is not to consume or use alcohol, cannabis, illicit drugs, or
prescription drugs not prescribed to him.
(h) Mr Al-Mofathel is to comply with any directions of the court from time to
time about attendance at court in person or by electronic
(10) Pursuant to s 12A(6) of the
Sentencing Act
, I direct that written
notice of the order, together with a copy of these orders, be given to the
I certify that the preceding 33 [thirty-three] numbered paragraphs are
a true copy of the Reasons for Sentence of her Honour Justice
RTF format (245 KB)
Signed PDF/A format