AHMAD v INSURANCE AUSTRALIA LTD T/AS NRMA (Motor Accident Injuries) [2025] ACAT 47 (27 June 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
AHMAD v INSURANCE AUSTRALIA LTD T/AS
NRMA (Motor Accident Injuries)
[2025] ACAT 47
MAI 11/2024
Catchwords: MOTOR ACCIDENT INJURIES
– Where applicant applied
for approval of treatment and care – Where respondent refused application
– Whether respondent’s
decision affected by error
Legislation cited:
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2019
Subordinate
Legislation cited:
Motor Accident Injuries (Treatment and Care)
Guidelines 2023
, clauses 3.2.1, 4.4.2, 6.4.1
Motor Accident Injuries Bill 2019
Cases cited
Ahmad v Insurance Australia Ltd T/As NRMA
[2025] ACAT
Bothe v AAI Limited ACN 005 297 807 trading as GIO (Motor Accident
[2022] ACAT 12
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance v Hines
[2024] NSWPICMP
Montgomery and Insurance Australia Limited ACN 000 016 722 trading as NRMA
(Motor Accident Injuries)
[2024] ACAT 60
Neish v Insurance Australia Limited ACN 000 016 722 trading as NRMA (Motor
Accident Injuries)
[2022] ACAT 24
Williams v AAI Limited ACN 005 297 807 trading as GIO (Motor Accident
[2021] ACAT 100
Presidential Member J Lucy
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) MAI 11/2024
ANWAR AHMAD
INSURANCE AUSTRALIA LTD T/AS NRMA
Presidential Member J Lucy
The Tribunal orders that:
respondent’s decision made on 17 December 2024 to decline the
applicant’s request for right knee arthroscopy and debridement
......................................
Presidential Member J
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
applicant was injured in a motor vehicle accident, when another vehicle failed
to give way. The respondent, being the insurer
of the other vehicle (the
), accepted liability
Motor Accident Injuries
applicant sought review of the insurer’s decision not to fund the right
knee surgery which he had requested. He contended
that the insurer had
overlooked information he had provided and submitted that the opinion of the
orthopaedic surgeon, on which the
insurer had relied when deciding not to
approve the treatment, was flawed in various ways. The applicant also complained
delay in the insurer making its decision and said that the insurer
failed to act in good faith.
applicant has not established that the insurer’s decision was affected by
any error of law or fact, so I have affirmed that
Ahmad sustained a work injury in 2015. He had right knee surgery, performed by
Dr Rizkallah Sherif, on 28 August 2015. He was certified
fit for pre-injury duty
in September 2020.
Ahmad was injured, on 29 March 2023, in a motor vehicle accident.
Ahmad made a defined benefits application to the insurer on 4 April 2023. In
that application, he stated that he had received injuries
face/jaws, head, shoulders, neck, spine and knees” as a result of the
19 April 2023, the insurer accepted liability for defined benefits from the date
of the accident.
9 June 2023, orthopaedic surgeon, Dr Asher Livingston, reported to
Mr Ahmad’s general practitioner that Mr Ahmad reported
experiencing a
chronic dull pain in his right knee that has become exacerbated. Dr Livingston
recommended that Mr Ahmad continue
with non-operative management for the right
knee “for the time being.”
30 October 2023, Dr Raymond Wallace, orthopaedic surgeon, reported to the
insurer that Mr Ahmad would benefit from weekly visits
to physiotherapy for six
weeks in relation to his bilateral knee conditions.
1 February 2024, Dr Livingston reported to Mr Ahmad’s general practitioner
that the motor vehicle accident had stirred up
the right knee degeneration and
that Mr Ahmad may benefit from an arthroscopy to clean up loose chondral flaps.
The Tribunal understands
arthroscopy to be a procedure that uses a
small camera to look inside a joint and diagnose or
treat problems.
15 March 2024, Dr Livingston stated in a letter to Mr Ahmad’s general
practitioner that Mr Ahmad said his right knee had
never fully settled since the
car accident and that he had some intermittent mechanical symptoms in the right
knee. Dr Livingston
stated: “I would recommend that he have a
knee arthroscopy + debridement of loose chondral flaps
” (original
emphasis). The doctor observed that an arthroscopy is indicated to provide
symptomatic relief and improve day to
day function.
the same day, Dr Livingston made a request to the insurer, on behalf of
Mr Ahmad, for right knee arthroscopy and debridement. As
the Tribunal
understands it, debridement is the process of removing dead skin and foreign
material from a wound to promote healing.
20 April 2024, Dr Livingston wrote to the insurer. He stated that it was his
opinion that the motor vehicle accident “has
stirred up a previously
asymptomatic knee.” He stated that, although he had originally suggested
trying non-surgical management,
that had not yielded an appropriate response as
Mr Ahmad was still having pain. The doctor expressed the opinion that the
requested would increase Mr Ahmad’s likelihood of returning to his
pre-injury work and social activities.
15 August 2024, Dr Wallace re-examined Mr Ahmad at the insurer’s request
and provided another report. Dr Wallace diagnosed
the right knee condition as
being an aggravation of pre-existing degenerative osteoarthritis of the lateral
compartment of the right
knee. He expressed the following
Mr Ahmad would not benefit from operative intervention
at his right knee as recommended by his treating orthopaedic surgeon Dr
Livingston.
There is no objective medical evidence that the operation of
arthroscopic debridement in the knee with chondroplasty leads to a durable
reduction in the level of symptoms or increase in function at the joint over and
above ongoing conservative treatment. ... The proposed
surgical intervention of
the right knee is not recommended.
insurer then requested a supplementary medical report from Dr Wallace. The
insurer asked him to provide detailed reasoning for
his opinion that Mr Ahmad
would not benefit from surgical intervention of the right knee.
a supplementary report dated 4 October 2024, Dr Wallace provided the following
reasons for his opinion that Mr Ahmad would not
benefit from operative
intervention at the right knee in the form of the proposed arthroscopic
debridement at the joint:
the time of review with Mr Ahmad on 15 August 2024, he noted only mild symptoms
at the right knee in the form of prepatellar pain,
which is worse with squatting
or walking.
had no evidence of any significant disability at the right knee on clinical
examination at that time.
underwent MRI investigation of the right knee on 5 August 2024 which showed
evidence of mild tricompartmental cartilage irregularity
but no evidence of
significant intra articular structural pathology.
is no medical literature to support the procedure of chondroplasty of the knee
of the treatment of mild to moderate
osteoarthritis.
I note in the Cochrane review
entitled Surgical Interventions for symptomatic mild to moderate knee
osteoarthritis dated 19 July 2019,
the authors conclude there is low quality
evidence from a few small trials indicating there may not be any benefit of
arthroscopic
surgery over nonsurgical treatments including saline irrigation and
hyaluronic acid injection or any one type of surgery over another.
7 November 2024, the insurer declined Dr Livingston’s request for right
knee arthroscopy and debridement, stating that the
treatment request was not
considered reasonable and necessary.
Ahmad applied for internal review of that decision on 1 December 2024.
16 December 2024, the internal reviewer affirmed the original decision to
decline the request for right knee arthroscopy and debridement.
The internal
reviewer found that the surgery was not reasonable and necessary in the
circumstances.
the same day, Mr Ahmad emailed the internal reviewer, pointing out that
Dr Asher Livingston’s letter of 20 April 2024 did
not appear to have
been considered in the internal review.
17 December 2024, the internal reviewer replied to Mr Ahmad’s email,
providing his thoughts about Dr Livingston’s report
dated 20 April 2024.
The internal reviewer then emailed Mr Ahmad what he described as an
“amended and updated internal review
decision, taking into account the
report of Dr Livingston dated 20.04.24 that was omitted in my previous
the revised internal review decision, the internal reviewer accepted that there
was “clear evidence the subject accident
has led to an aggravation of
pre-existing right knee condition.” That is, the internal reviewer was
satisfied as to causation.
However, the internal reviewer preferred Dr
Wallace’s opinion that operative intervention would not benefit Mr Ahmad.
He accordingly
affirmed the insurer’s original decision to decline the
request for right knee arthroscopy and debridement.
Application for review
Ahmad applied to the Tribunal for a review of the internal review decision of 17
December 2024. The parties agreed that the decision
of 17 December 2024 should
be treated as the operative decision under review.
parties filed written submissions and other material on which they wished to
rely before the hearing.
hearing was held on 12 March 2025. Mr Ahmad was self-represented and the insurer
was represented by Mr Iliopoulos of Meridian Lawyers.
Iliopoulos objected to various documents on which Mr Ahmad wished to rely on the
basis of relevance.
The objections
to twelve documents were upheld or partially upheld, and the documents were not
admitted, subject to the proviso that
the tribunal would reconsider that ruling
in relation to most of those documents if Mr Ahmad demonstrated that the
documents were
do so. The insurer’s objections to other documents were
Legal framework
party correctly identified the provision under which the reviewable decision was
made in the documents and submissions lodged
with the tribunal or in the
reviewable decision itself. However, at the hearing, Mr Iliopoulos submitted
that the decision had been
to refuse to pay treatment and care benefits under
section 66 of the MAI Act on the basis that the proposed treatment and care was
not reasonable or necessary.
accept that that is so.
66(1) of the MAI Act provides: “If a relevant insurer accepts liability
for defined benefits, the insurer must pay the
applicant the defined
benefits to which the applicant is entitled.” Treatment and care benefits
are a form of defined
112(1) of the MAI Act provides, relevantly, that a person injured in a motor
accident is entitled to treatment and care benefits
for treatment and care
113 of the MAI Act defines “treatment and care expenses” to mean
“expenses incurred by the injured person
in providing for the injured
person’s treatment and care” but not to include, relevantly,
expenses incurred for treatment
and care that was not reasonable and
120 of the MAI Act makes provision for deciding whether treatment and care is
reasonable and necessary. It provides:
120 Deciding whether
treatment and care is reasonable and necessary
In deciding whether treatment and care for an injured person is reasonable
and necessary, the relevant insurer for the motor accident
must consider the
(a) whether the treatment and care is reasonable and necessary in the
circumstances;
(b) whether the treatment and care—
(i) is directly related to the person’s injury; and
(ii) is appropriate for the injury; and
(iii) will benefit the person;
(c) the appropriateness of a provider of the treatment and care;
(d) whether the treatment and care is cost effective;
(e) the MAI guidelines.
decision not to approve treatment is reviewable by the Tribunal. An
insurer’s decision, made under section 66(1) of the
MAI Act, not to pay
treatment and care benefits for expenses incurred for treatment and care
because, relevantly, the treatment and
care was not reasonable and necessary is
an “ACAT reviewable
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
provides that a
person may apply to the tribunal if an authorising law provides that the
application may be made. The MAI Act is
such an authorising law.
Ahmad, being an applicant for defined benefits, was entitled to apply to the
Tribunal for review of the ACAT reviewable decision
“on a question of law
Subsections
197(1) to (3) of the MAI Act provide for the Tribunal’s powers on review.
Those subsections provide:
197 External
review—decision
(1) In deciding an application for external review of an ACAT reviewable
decision, the ACAT must, by order—
(a) affirm the decision; or
(b) amend the decision; or
(c) set aside the decision and—
(i) make a substitute decision; or
(ii) remit the matter for reconsideration by the insurer that made the
decision (the decision-maker) in accordance with any direction
of the ACAT.
(2) In deciding the application for external review, the ACAT must only
consider the information that was available to the decision-maker
decision was made.
(3) However, the ACAT may, on application by a party, give the party leave
to present information or evidence that was not reasonably
available to the
decision-maker when the decision was made.
Presidential Member Robinson observed, after referring to section 197 of the MAI
Act and the Explanatory Statement to the
Motor Accident Injuries Bill
briefly, the intention appears to be to encourage the parties to gather all the
pertinent information before a decision is
made. This is to discourage parties
‘building a case’ for the purposes of the Tribunal hearing, and is
consistent with
the nature of the review the tribunal is (according to the
Explanatory Statement), intended to undertake, which is clearly stated
review ‘on questions of law and fact’ only (i.e. ‘only’
a review on questions or law and fact and
not a merits review).
similar effect, Acting Presidential Member Kyprianou commented that “in
conducting an external review, the role of the tribunal
is to determine whether
the reviewable decision is affected by any errors of law or
respectfully agree with the observations of those members.
Motor Accident Injuries (Treatment and Care) Guidelines 2023 (
Treatment and
Care Guidelines
) commenced on 18 January 2024. They relevantly
6.4 Treatment and care that is considered reasonable
and necessary
In deciding whether treatment and care is reasonable and necessary an
insurer must consider the factors set out in section 120 of
the MAI Act.
6.4.2 Benefit to the participant
Treatment and care will benefit a person if:
assist the injured person’s recovery or management of the person’s
specific goals, an expected duration and expected outcomes and these are
understood and agreed by the injured person;
it will not
cause adverse outcomes or harm to the person;
medical reports or assessments that show the treatment or care will benefit the
the treatment
or care has been provided in the past to the person with positive results or
6.4.3 Appropriate for an injury
Treatment and care will be appropriate for an injury if:
it is based
on current clinical practice, evidence-based practice or generally accepted
clinical guidelines for the given injury;
there is good
evidence for the efficacy of the treatment over other treatments;
it will not
contradict any treatment and care in the person’s recovery
6.4.5 Cost effectiveness
Treatment and care will be cost effective if:
the short and
long term benefits and expected outcomes from the treatment and care have been
considered and outweigh the costs;
there are no
other treatment and care options that will achieve comparable outcomes,
including any diagnosis options necessary to
determine future treatment and care
delaying the
treatment and care may result in additional treatment and care
Grounds of review
Ahmad provided the following reasons for applying to the Tribunal for review in
his application for review:
internal reviewer made errors and overlooked crucial information during the
review process.
Wallace did not conduct a thorough medical examination, resulting in his IME
reports not reflecting accurate findings.
recovered from my previous right knee injury following a successful surgery on
August 28, 2015.
a year of physiotherapy and observation, conservative treatment for the current
injury has proved ineffective, leading to the
decision to pursue surgical
intervention based on Dr Livingston’s recommendation.
is employing delaying tactics in making decisions on treatment requests and has
failed to provide timely treatment and care,
which is negatively impacting my
physical and psychological well-being.
Ahmad also handed up a much longer list of “Applicant’s questions of
law and fact” at the hearing. He said that
there was nothing new in it,
although on its face it appeared to be different from the list of questions of
law and fact in his application.
The insurer objected to that document being
provided at such a late stage. I indicated that I would limit the questions of
fact to those raised in the applicant’s application or in his
written submissions.
Application of section 66 of MAI Act
is a question as to whether the legislature contemplated that an applicant for
defined benefits may apply to the insurer for
payment of treatment and care
benefits before undergoing treatment, or whether it intended such an application
to be made only afterwards.
66(1) of the MAI Act requires the insurer to pay an applicant “the defined
benefits to which the applicant is entitled.”
A person is entitled to
treatment and care benefits “for treatment and care
“Treatment and care expenses” are “expenses
the injured person in providing for the injured person’s treatment and
care”, but the term does not include expenses
treatment and care” that was not reasonable and necessary or “for
which the injured person
has not paid
and is not liable to pay” (my
use of the past tense might suggest that the MAI Act contemplates that an
application to the insurer to pay for treatment and
care benefits is to be made
after the treatment has occurred and the expense has been incurred. That would
not be a construction
favourable to injured persons, because it would require
them to incur treatment and care expenses before knowing whether they will
reimbursed. The language of section 120 of the MAI Act tends to suggest that the
assessment of what is reasonable and necessary
may be made before treatment has
occurred, as it uses the present and future tense (such as whether the treatment
reasonable and necessary and whether it
the person) (emphasis added).
the issue was not raised by the parties, I have assumed that their joint
position is correct (that is, that first the insurer and
then the tribunal may
prospectively assess whether treatment is reasonable and necessary, for the
purposes of deciding whether to
approve, or confirm the approval of, treatment
and care benefits). I note that, even if this is so, it may be that an applicant
also make an application after undergoing the treatment in question, when
the question of the efficacy of that treatment (and therefore
reasonableness) may be easier to answer and may be answered
differently.
First ground: overlooking information
Ahmad’s first ground of review is that the internal reviewer made errors
and overlooked crucial information during the review
the hearing, Mr Ahmad agreed not to press the first ground to the extent that it
related to the internal reviewer’s failure
to have regard to Dr
Livingston’s letter of 20 April 2024, in light of the parties’
agreement that the tribunal would
treat the revised internal review decision,
made on 17 December 2024, as the reviewable
Mr Ahmad also
accepted that Dr Livingston’s letter of 20 April 2024 did not contain any
new information.
However, Mr
Ahmad maintained that the internal reviewer had made other errors and overlooked
other crucial information during the
Ahmad identified one of the errors as being that Dr Wallace did not look at
documents provided by Mr Ahmad to Dr Wallace, including
a “statement of
evidence” made by Mr
That statement of
evidence was not before the Tribunal. Mr Ahmad submitted that the reports of the
surgeon who undertook his right
knee surgery in 2015, Dr Sherif, should have
been before Dr Wallace. Mr Ahmad also submitted that the insurer should
have asked his
treating surgeon for clinical
Ahmad said that Dr Wallace should have looked at a letter from his workers
compensation insurer, which Mr Ahmad had sent him, stating:
“As you have
confirmed you no longer require medical treatment related to your injury, your
claim will be closed on 30/03/2021.”
The letter did not identify the
nature of the injury in question. Mr Ahmad wished to rely on that letter to
demonstrate that his
right knee injury was not a pre-existing
insurer submitted that none of the documents which the applicant provided to Dr
Wallace was relevant to his opinion with respect
to the right
is a question as to whether a doctor’s failure to have regard to
information may, in some or in all cases, constitute
an error on the part of the
internal reviewer where the internal reviewer relies upon the doctor’s
opinion. Assuming that it
may do so in this case, I am not satisfied that Mr
Ahmad has established that Dr Wallace made any material errors.
relation to the letter from Mr Ahmad’s workers compensation insurer, I
accept Mr Iliopoulos’s submission that the letter
does not refer to any
specific injuries and that it does not express a medical
Further, I accept the
insurer’s submission that Dr Wallace was provided with relevant records
from the workers compensation
If Dr Wallace did fail
to have regard to the letter on which Mr Ahmad relies from the workers
compensation insurer, it is not a material
error, as the letter could not have
realistically affected Dr Wallace’s opinion or the outcome of the internal
review. The
letter is not probative of anything. It merely establishes that Mr
Ahmad told his workers compensation insurer, in early 2021, that
require treatment in relation to an unspecified injury.
Wallace did not refer in his reports to a statement of evidence made by
Mr Ahmad. However, Mr Ahmad has not established that Dr
Wallace made a
material error, which affected the decision of the internal reviewer, in failing
to have regard to such a statement
of evidence. That is because that statement
is not before the Tribunal, so that it is not possible to know what it contained
how that could have affected Dr Wallace’s assessment. I note also that
Mr Ahmad apparently had an opportunity to speak to Dr
Wallace and tell him about
matters contained in the statement. Dr Wallace’s report of 30 October 2023
mentions, albeit briefly,
a social history and records matters reported by Mr
Ahmad. Accordingly, I am not persuaded that there was any breach of procedural
fairness in Dr Wallace failing to refer to (and possibly failing to consider) Mr
Ahmad’s statement of evidence.
the insurer pointed out,
Sherif’s reports were contained in the material it put before the tribunal
and were provided to Dr Wallace. I do not accept
submission that Dr Sherif’s reports were not available to Dr Wallace
during his assessment.
insurer is not under an obligation to ask an applicant’s doctors for
clinical notes, although that may often be good practice.
The insurer submits,
in this case, that it did provide Dr Wallace with the clinical notes of Mr
Ahmad’s general practitioner
at the time of the 2015
insurer should, as a matter of procedural fairness, give the applicant an
opportunity to provide documents on which the applicant
wishes to rely to an
assessing practitioner, and to the internal reviewer. Mr Ahmad did not assert
that he was not given such an
opportunity.
these reasons, Mr Ahmad’s first ground fails.
Grounds 2 and 3: No thorough medical examination and recovery
from earlier injury
2 and 3 are related. They are that Dr Wallace did not conduct a thorough medical
examination and that (contrary to Dr Wallace’s
finding) Mr Ahmad had
recovered from his earlier right knee injury at the time of the motor vehicle
Ahmad made a number of submissions in support of these grounds.
Mr Ahmad’s written submissions, he said he had not required any further
surgical intervention after a successful right knee
surgery on 28 August 2015,
up until the motor vehicle accident. He also said that since being cleared for
pre-injury duties in 2020,
he had not reported any knee-related complaints to
his doctors. These submissions were made in support of his position that he was
fully recovered from the earlier knee injury at the time of the motor vehicle
Ahmad also submitted that the insurer did not ask Dr Wallace the questions which
the insurer asked Mr Ahmad’s treating
Mr Ahmad referred to a
letter the insurer sent Dr Livingston on 17 April 2024, asking a number of
questions, including what clinical
examination findings and orthopaedic tests
the doctor had performed to support the right knee arthroscopy request made on
2024. Mr Ahmad said that there was no equivalent question in the
letter of instructions to Dr
This was said to
constitute an unfairness or an error.
Ahmad referred to Dr Wallace’s report of 15 August 2024, where Dr Wallace
mentioned an MRI investigation of the right knee
conducted on 5 August 2024, and
commented: “This shows mild cartilage irregularity ... There is mild joint
Mr Ahmad submitted that Dr Wallace had “taken just one
comment from the MRI to support his opinion.” He submitted: “one
the reasons I believe asking for knee arthroscopy by Dr Livingston is that MRI
is not picking up 100 per
Mr Ahmad said that
Dr Wallace should have looked at earlier MRIs showing significant problems. Mr
what I'm trying to say is Dr Wallace is not doing his examination properly
because, one reason, insurance is not asking him the
right question. He is just
limiting his findings to those what they are asking for and making his opinion
just obviously what he
has maintain his position.
Ahmad submitted that the insurer should have asked Dr Wallace: “whether
the difference of opinion regarding right knee treatment
between Dr Wallace and
Dr Livingston is due to an error in Dr Wallace's reports and his
examination.”
Ahmad contended that the research Dr Wallace relied upon “does not cover
the trauma” because it was not concerned with
accident-related
Ahmad also submitted that the insurer could not deny reasonable and necessary
treatment when it accepted that the condition was
partially caused by the
That was in
circumstances where physiotherapy, paid for by the insurer, had not worked.
submissions go beyond the alleged errors of law and fact identified in
Mr Ahmad’s application. However, they can be dealt
with briefly.
was open to Dr Wallace to conclude, on the basis of an MRI investigation, that
Mr Ahmad suffered from mild cartilage irregularity
and mild joint effusion.
Mr Ahmad’s submission that Dr Wallace should have put more weight on
an earlier MRI effectively invites
the Tribunal to substitute its opinion on a
medical matter for that of Dr Wallace. Mr Ahmad has not established any error of
or fact on Dr Wallace’s part.
if Dr Wallace made an error, I am not persuaded that it affected the outcome.
Dr Wallace accepted that Mr Ahmad’s pre-existing
exacerbated by the accident. His main reason for his opinion that Mr Ahmad would
not benefit from operative intervention
at the right knee was that there was no
medical literature to support the procedure of chondroplasty of the knee of the
of mild to moderate osteoarthritis. That is, the reasons why he did
not support the proposed treatment did not relate to any view
that Mr Ahmad had
a pre-existing injury.
Ahmad’s submission that the insurer’s questions of Dr Wallace, in
its briefing letters, were inadequate must also be
rejected. The issue before
the Tribunal is whether the internal reviewer erred when making the internal
review decision, including
by relying upon Dr Wallace’s reports. There is
nothing in the questions asked of Dr Wallace which renders his reports
unreliable.
Ahmad’s criticisms of Dr Wallace’s reliance upon certain medical
literature do not establish error. As Mr Iliopoulos
Mr Ahmad has not
provided any expert evidence to the effect that that medical literature should
not have been relied upon in his
circumstances. Dr Wallace was entitled to rely
upon the medical literature to which he referred, and the internal reviewer was
to rely upon Dr Wallace’s opinion.
these reasons, grounds 2 and 3 are dismissed.
Conservative treatment ineffective
4 is that, after a year of physiotherapy and observation, conservative treatment
for the injury had proved ineffective. That
ground does not, on its terms,
identify any error. However, I take Mr Ahmad to mean by this ground that the
internal reviewer should
have preferred Dr Livingston’s opinion that
surgery was needed, because conservative treatment was not working.
to Mr Ahmad’s submission, the failure of conservative treatment does not
necessarily mean that surgery will be effective.
Dr Wallace’s opinion that
surgery was not supported by the medical literature is not inconsistent with
conservative treatment
also being ineffective. It is possible that neither would
Ahmad has not identified an error of law or fact affecting the internal review
Accordingly,
Ground 4 is rejected.
Ground 5: Delaying tactics
Ahmad complained about the delay in making the decision, being a period of about
nine months from the request for treatment.
delay is not wholly unexplained. The insurer was waiting for a response to
questions it had asked Dr Livingston, which it did
not receive. It also asked
for, and received, further reports from Dr Wallace during this period.
is, of course, important that insurers make timely decisions wherever possible.
However, I am not persuaded that the delay in this
case rendered the decision
which was made erroneous. Mr Ahmad has not explained how he says that it
Failure to act in good faith
Ahmad did not identify the insurer’s failure to act in good faith as a
ground in his application. However, in his written
submissions he claimed that
the insurer had:
...not acted in good faith through the following
(a) Reversing the approval for knee surgery to evade liability;
(b) Making unnecessary requests for additional documents despite having
adequate information;
(c) Providing incomplete records to Dr Wallace for the IME assessment;
(d) Failing to give clear and timely responses to my inquiries and requests,
including those directed to the CTP customer resolution
(e) Delaying a decision on my right knee surgery request for nearly nine
months, causing a failure to provide timely treatment and
(f) Conducting an internal review without properly considering all provided
(g) Neglecting to address the concerns I raised in the internal review
application;
(h) Instead of providing funds for a clearly necessary and reasonable
treatment, the respondent is wasting money on repeated IME assessments
Ahmad submitted again at the hearing that the insurer had not acted in good
faith. However, in light of the comments I made about
a similar lack of good
faith ground which he advanced in
Ahmad v Insurance Australia Ltd T/As
[2025] ACAT 11
, Mr Ahmad said he would not elaborate on that submission
insurer and the applicant for defined benefits are both subject to a duty to act
in good faith in relation to an application for
defined benefits and must
endeavour to finalise the application as justly and promptly as
As I observed in
Ahmad v Insurance Australia Ltd T/As NRMA
[2025] ACAT 11
the Tribunal is conducting a review of a reviewable decision to determine
whether the decision was affected by error, it is
not conducting a general
investigation into the probity of the insurer’s conduct. It does not have
generally, whether the insurer acted in good faith when
dealing with the applicant’s defined benefits application.
issues raised by Mr Ahmad under this ground of lack of good faith do not
establish that the reviewable decision was affected by
an error of law or fact.
This ground is dismissed.
Submission based upon precedent
Ahmad relied upon a decision of the NSW Personal Injury Commission in
Insurance Australia Limited t/as NRMA Insurance v Hines
[2024] NSWPICMP
). In that case, the Commission found that a proposed
knee replacement for a Ms Hines was reasonable and necessary where a motor
accident had materially contributed to Ms Hines’ knee
symptomology, which rendered the ongoing continuation of conservative
osteoarthritis treatment options inappropriate.
Mr Ahmad referred to
as a “precedent,” the internal
reviewer was obliged to have regard to the material before him and not to
decisions made
in other cases. Needless to say, that material was different from
the material available in the
New South Wales legislative scheme is significantly different from that in the
Australian Capital Territory. Further, under the
MAI Act, each application for
defined benefits is to be decided upon the material available to the
decision-maker.
these reasons, there is no error in the internal reviewer coming to a different
decision from that made by the Personal Injury
Commission in
Procedural fairness
Ahmad made submissions at the hearing that the insurer had failed to provide him
with procedural fairness because it had asked
Dr Wallace to provide a
supplementary report, on the papers, without informing him first.
question asked of Dr Wallace in respect of the supplementary report was:
“We ask that you please provide detailed reasoning
for your opinion [that
Mr Ahmad would not benefit from surgical intervention of the right knee]
including any medical literature/research/journals
in support.”
do not consider that it was a breach of procedural fairness for the insurer to
request clarification of an opinion expressed in
the principal report, in those
terms, without first consulting with Mr Ahmad. Mr Ahmad had an opportunity to
provide Dr Wallace with
any documents on which he wished to rely before the
principal report. It was not necessary, as a matter of fairness, to give him
another opportunity when the insurer was merely requesting Dr Wallace to clarify
the basis of his opinion. It may have been different
if, for example, the
insurer had asked Dr Wallace to comment on a particular document, not disclosed
to Mr Ahmad. However, that is
not what occurred.
Mr Ahmad has not persuaded me that the insurer’s decision was affected by
any error of law or fact, I have decided to affirm
......................................
Presidential Member J Lucy
Date of hearing:
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Meridian Lawyers
Transcript of hearing dated 12
March 2025, page 7, lines 31-33
Transcript of hearing dated 12
March 2025, page 9, lines 38-45; page 14, lines 45-47; page 15, line 21;
page 16, lines 33-38; page
27, lines 6-12
Transcript of hearing dated 12
March 2025, page 43, lines 46-47
MAI Act, s 33
MAI Act s 192, Schedule 1, Part
1.2, item 13
MAI Act s 193(1)(a)
Williams v AAI Limited ACN
005 297 807 trading as GIO (Motor Accident Injuries)
[2021] ACAT 100
Neish v Insurance Australia
Limited ACN 000 016 722 trading as NRMA (Motor Accident Injuries)
Montgomery and Insurance Australia Limited ACN 000
016 722 trading as NRMA (Motor Accident Injuries)
[2024] ACAT 60
Bothe v AAI Limited ACN 005 297 807 trading as GIO (Motor Accident
[2022] ACAT 12
Transcript of hearing dated 12
March 2025, page 6, lines 6-9
MAI Act, s 112
MAI Act, s 113
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 2, line 43 to page 3, line 32
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 54, lines 27-43
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 3, line 44 to page 4, line 10
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 20, line 22 to page 22, line 32
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 22, line 36 to page 23, line 11
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 25, lines 7-10
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 40, lines 40-41
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 38, lines 1-6
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 38, lines 14-38
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 38, lines 42-46: page 49, lines 18-22. See also
insurer’s written submissions
filed on 6 March 2025 at [48]
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 38, lines 36-38
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 27, lines 40-42
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 28, lines 18-27
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 30, lines 21-27
Transcript of hearing
dated12 March 2025, page 31, lines 1-5
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 31, lines 36-38
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 33, lines 28-31
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 34, lines 36-40
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 41, lines 14-22
Transcript of hearing dated
12 March 2025, page 36, lines 23-27
MAI Act s 20(2)
RTF format (269 KB)
Signed PDF/A format