Manteena Commercial Pty Ltd and Major Projects Canberra [2021] ACTOFOI 9 (8 September 2021)
Manteena Commercial Pty Ltd and Major Projects Canberra
(8 September 2021)
Decision and reasons of Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman Symone
Application number
AFOI-RR/21/10008
Decision reference
[2021] ACTOFOI 9
Manteena Commercial Pty Ltd
Major Projects Canberra
Decision date
Freedom of Information Act
– deciding access – whether disclosure of information is contrary to
the public interest – legal professional
privilege – promote open
discussion of public affairs and enhance government’s accountability
– ensure effective
oversight of expenditure of public funds – allow
or assist inquiry into possible deficiency in the conduct or administration
an agency or public official – reveal the reason for a government decision
and any background or contextual information
that informed the decision –
trade secrets, business affairs and research – competitive commercial
activities of an
1. I am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman for the purposes of
Freedom of Information Act 2016
). For the reasons
set out in this notice, under s
the decision of
Major Projects Canberra (
) dated 12 February 2021.
Background of Ombudsman review
2. On 18 November 2020, the applicant
Manteena Commercial Pty Ltd
) lodged an access application under s 30 of the FOI Act.
The application sought access to:
In relation to the Campbell School Procurement...
(a) The following final version documents relating to Manteena’s
expression of interest dated 27 August 2019, tender dated 23
January 2020
and best and final offer tender dated 5 May 2020:
(i) Correspondence... diary notes, file notes or other records of
conversations... and minutes of meetings between any of the following
versions...
Major Projects
Canberra and its staff including officers, employee, contractors and agents,
including but not limited to members of
the Tender Evaluation Team...
organisations, consultants and contractors with which Major Projects Canberra
and the ACT Education Directorate consulted
or otherwise engaged;
(ii) Documents... including but not limited to briefs, de-briefs,
evaluation reports, assessments, reviews, memoranda or the like
prepared by the
ACT Education Directorate and/or Major Projects Canberra
(b) Any documents... relating to the decision by... Major Projects Canberra
to introduce the Best and Final Offer Request for Tender
into the tender
(c) Any documents... relating to the recommendations of... Major Projects
Canberra regarding the preferred tenderer...
3. I prepared a draft consideration outlining my preliminary view and
provided this to the parties on 17 May 2021. My preliminary
view was that the
original decision should be varied.
4. On 18 June 2021, MPC responded to my draft
consideration. MPC agreed that the original decision should be varied but
that page 204 should be determined to be contrary to the public
interest to disclose and that information in pages 437-441 is out
5. MPC notified the competing tenderer of the review under s 76(2)(c) of the
FOI Act. On
26 August 2021, the competing tenderer made submissions about
the release of tender scores. On 2 September 2021 a notice under s 77
Act was issued to the competing tenderer confirming a decision to allow them to
participate in this review. Their submissions
were considered accordingly.
Information at issue
6. The information at issue in this review is limited to information which
the applicant contends MPC incorrectly decided to refuse
access to. Most of the
deletions made by MPC are not in contention.
7. This means the issue before me is whether the contentious deletions were
decided correctly.
8. In reaching my final decision, I had regard to:
applicant’s application for Ombudsman review,
decision letter,
submissions in this review,
the FOI Act, in
particular Schedule 1, s 1.2 and Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(xiii),
Human Rights Act 2004
(ACT) (Human Rights Act),
section 118
Evidence Act 2011
(ACT) (Evidence Act), and
Wastecorp Pty Ltd and Caboolture Shire Council; JJ Richards Pty Ltd (Third
Relevant law
9. Every person enjoys a right of access to government
information.
However, the FOI Act
permits refusal of access to information if disclosing the information would be
contrary to the public
10. The onus of establishing that disclosure would be contrary to the public
interest rests with the party seeking to prevent
disclosure.
In this case, that
party is MPC.
11. Contrary to the public interest information is defined in s 16 of the FOI
information–
(a) that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
schedule 1; or
(b) the disclosure of which would be contrary to the public interest under
the test set out in section 17
12. Section 17 sets out a test for balancing public interest factors
favouring disclosure and non‑disclosure respectively. This
balancing test
must be used to determine whether disclosure would be contrary to the public
13. Schedule 1 of the FOI Act lists categories of information that are taken
to be contrary to the public interest to disclose, while
Schedule 2 lists public
interest factors that must be balanced to determine whether there is a basis for
refusing access.
The contentions of the Parties
14. In MPC’s decision notice, the Information Officer decided:
I... place significant weight on the rights of third party organisations to
have their business affairs, trade secrets, and commercial
interests protected,
as well as the potential negative impact that could arise for MPC from the
release of such information as those
organisations may be less inclined to do
business with MPC in the future. Therefore, I have decided to delete this
information from
the documents released to you.
Some records contain information that are working notes by individuals that
were compiled as part of a panel decision process; however,
they do not present
the collective decision that was made by the panel. For example, the assessments
by individual panel members
of responses to the Request for Expression of
Interest or Best and Final Offer processes, I have decided that these form part
the deliberative process that led to the panel’s decision and that this
outweighs the factor favouring disclosure for these
15. The applicant provided a list of deletions which it asserted were
incorrectly decided on. These related to deletions made on the
basis of Schedule
1, s 1.2 (legal professional privilege) and Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(xiii) and, as
MPC correctly identified in response
to my draft consideration, Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(xi).
16. MPC’s response to my draft consideration reiterated the view that
information deleted from page 204 should not be disclosed.
MPC’s position
[T]he disclosure of information in respect of the evaluative scores against
the other competing tenderers could adversely affect the
business affairs through damage to its reputation. This may damage the third
party’s reputation publicly and
within the industry. There may also be
financial consequences for third parties as subcontractors may not want to be
associated with
that company if their reputation is tarnished or could affect
them in the employment market.
The situation in respect of the business affairs of MPC (i.e. delivering
infrastructure projects) is particularly pronounced in the
current environment
where the ACT is a small jurisdiction undertaking procurement activities within
a strong market pipeline along
the eastern seaboard. Releasing the evaluation
scores of tenderers in the manner proposed in the draft consideration is likely
result in the ACT Government’s procurement opportunities being
perceived by national construction companies as less attractive
compared to
those opportunities in other jurisdictions. This may lead to less competition
for infrastructure projects within the
ACT and an increased risk of not
achieving best value for money for the Territory (s 2.2(a)(xiii)) on major
17. On 26 August 2021, the competing tenderer submitted that:
it would be
concerned by release of the tender scores because of a lack of context
the lack of
context would mean that people may interpret the scoring of their tender as
reflecting scoring of the company in some
other respect, such as perceived
an example of
how this might happen could be the use of an example of a previous project which
the assessors consider not to be well-selected
or relevant, and
the competing
tenderer ‘would need to carefully consider our participation in future
Territory procurement processes’.
18. Consideration has been given to these submissions in the sections below.
Preliminary issue – scoping
19. MPC responded to my draft consideration by submitting that information in
pages 437-441 is out of scope. The basis for this submission
appears to be that
information deleted from these pages relates to procurements at different
schools. It interprets the application
as being solely for information about the
Campbell School Procurement.
20. The applicant agreed to this scope when contacted during the review, on
the basis that the information does not relate to the
Campbell School
Procurement. Accordingly, the parties agree to the redaction of this
information.
Considerations
Information taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
21. MPC refused access to some of the information at issue on the basis that
it was contrary to the public interest under Schedule
1, s 1.2 because it is
information that would be privileged from production in a legal proceeding on
the ground of legal professional
22. The applicant contended that information on pages 312, 313, 429, 430 and
499 (a duplicate of page 429) is information falling
under Schedule 1, s 1.2 of
the FOI Act.
23. To determine whether information would be privileged from production in a
legal proceeding, I consulted
Evidence Act
, which states:
Evidence must not be presented, if, on objection by a client, the court finds
that presenting the evidence would result in disclosure
(a) A confidential communication made between the client and a lawyer; or
(b) A confidential communication made between 2 or more lawyers acting for
the client; or
(c) The contents of confidential documents... prepared by the client, lawyer
or someone else;
for the dominant purpose of the lawyer or 1 or more of the lawyers providing
legal advice to the client.
24. The applicant submits that information redacted in the abovementioned
pages is not a confidential communication of a nature included
the dominant purpose in each case was not the provision of legal advice.
25. In my draft consideration I said that I accept the applicant’s
submissions. The redacted information does not meet the requirements
Evidence Act
. The communications do not appear to be, either,
between a lawyer and client, or lawyers acting for the client nor does the
purpose appear to be, in any instance, legal advice. I note that the
documents do not contain the dissemination limiting market (DLM),
Legal and this lends weight to my conclusion that the information would not be
privileged from production in a legal proceeding.
26. MPC did not make any submissions to contradict the view I expressed in my
draft consideration. Accordingly, my decision is that
access should now be given
to the information that MPC decided to refuse access to on the basis of Schedule
Public interest test
27. To determine whether disclosure is contrary to the public interest, the
FOI Act prescribes the following five
identify any
factor favouring disclosure that applies in relation to the information (a
relevant factor favouring disclosure), including
any factor mentioned in
schedule 2, section 2.1,
identify any
factor favouring nondisclosure that applies in relation to the information (a
relevant factor favouring nondisclosure),
including any factor mentioned in
schedule 2, section 2.1,
balance any
relevant factor or factors favouring disclosure against any relevant factor or
factors favouring nondisclosure,
decide whether,
on balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public
balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public interest,
allow access to the information.
Irrelevant factors
28. Section 17(2) proscribes a number of considerations from being taken into
account when deciding whether disclosure of information
would be contrary to the
public interest. In this review, MPC’s response to the draft consideration
submitted that:
A factor against the public interest to release this information is the
maintenance of effective conduct of public affairs through
free and frank
expression of opinions. A tender evaluation panel should be free to openly
discuss and deliberate on tender submissions
and provide open, frank advice for
the final recommendation. The information is used for internal business purposes
to ensure value
for money outcomes in a competitive environment, not designed to
be a feedback mechanism for tenderers.
29. MPC cited the South Australian Ombudsman’s determination in
Cumpston and Department of Planning, Transport and Infrastructure
authority in this regard.
30. This authority and the line of reasoning it is said to support misses an
important difference between the South Australian
Freedom of Information Act
and the FOI Act of the ACT.
31. Section 3 of the South Australian legislation establishes that one of its
objects is:
...conferring... a legally enforceable right to be given access to
documents... subject only to such restrictions as are consistent
with the public
interest (including maintenance of the effective conduct of public affairs
through the free and frank expression
of opinions) and the preservation of
personal privacy...
32. A finding that disclosure could ‘inhibit frankness in the provision
of advice from the public service’ is an irrelevant
factor under s
17(2)(e) of the FOI Act. Accordingly, I am not able to consider the impact that
disclosure might have on the frankness
and candour that panel members may or may
not feel they are able to furnish their advice with. I have disregarded this
consideration
from my decision.
33. Additionally, the competing tenderer’s submissions regarding the
lack of context and potential for misinterpretation of
the tender scores as
reflective of a broader assessment of the company’s work cannot be
sustained under the FOI Act.
34. This is because s 17(2)(b) prevents me from considering whether the
giving of access could result in misinterpretation or misunderstanding
information. The Senior Assistant Ombudsman considered similar submissions in
relation to business affairs in
Brindabella Christian College and Education
Directorate
which were similarly in conflict with s
In that case, the Senior
Assistant Ombudsman observed that the reputational harm the business submitted
may eventuate was dependent
on the misinterpretation of misunderstanding of
information. I consider this to be a parallel situation.
Factors favouring disclosure
35. Four factors favouring disclosure are relevant in this review.
MPC’s decision letter and the applicant’s submissions
are consistent
with respect to these factors. I share the parties’ position.
Disclosure log – public interest factors
36. In the course of the review, I noted that the information on page 204
relating to both Manteena and the competing tenderer’s
tender scores had
been deemed to be ‘unreasonable’ to disclose on MPC’s
disclosure log under s 28(6).
37. I wrote to Manteena to clarify how disclosure could promote the public
interest if information was to be provided only to Manteena
and not published to
the public at large. This was because I did not think it would be logical to
find that the public interest in
information would be advanced if the
information was not actually disclosed to the public.
38. Manteena’s response was:
Manteena’s view is that we would be happy to have both parties weighted
scores and comments released as it would appear to be
material to the
decision...
Manteena believe that disclosure is a necessary element as... public
oversight of expenditure [cannot] be promoted if the information
is not actually
39. I agree with this submission and I consider that the information at issue
in this review is not ‘unreasonable’ to
publish on the disclosure
log except for the information which I accept is contrary to the public interest
information.
Promote open discussion of public affairs and enhance the
government’s accountability
40. A reasonable expectation that information could promote open discussion
of public affairs and enhance the government’s accountability
disclosure under the FOI Act.
41. MPC’s decision included finding that this is a relevant factor. I
accept the position of the parties that it is a relevant
factor in this review
because the information at issue could enable members of the public to examine
the fairness and efficacy of
the tender process.
Ensure effective oversight of expenditure of public funds
42. A reasonable expectation that information could ensure effective
oversight of expenditure of public funds favours disclosure under
43. MPC’s decision included finding that this is a relevant factor. I
accept the position of the parties that it is a relevant
factor in this review
because the information at issue could enable public scrutiny of the way public
funds were managed in the tender
Allow or assist inquiry into possible deficiency in the conduct or
administration of an agency or public official
44. A reasonable expectation that information could allow or assist inquiry
into possible deficiencies in the conduct or administration
of an agency or
public official favours disclosure under the FOI
45. MPC’s decision included finding that this was a relevant factor. I
accept the position of the parties that this is a relevant
factor, because the
information at issue could reasonably be expected to allow or assist inquiry
into possible deficiencies in the
tender process and the way that it was managed
by MPC. Although I am not aware of any evidence of any deficiency in these
circumstances,
the factor promotes the general opportunity to inquire into
‘possible’ deficiencies. This reflects the public interest
scrutiny of public expenditure and transparency about the way public funds are
managed. It is the general opportunity to inquire
which is necessary for public
detection of deficiency and ensuring the public that there is no deficiency is
itself in the public
Reveal the reason for a government decision and any background or
contextual information that informed the decision
46. A reasonable expectation that information could reveal the reason for a
government decision and any background or contextual information
that informed
the decision favours disclosure under the FOI
47. MPC’s decision included a finding that this is a relevant factor. I
accept the position of the parties that it is a relevant
factor in this review,
because the information at issue could reasonably be expected to reveal the
reason why the ACT government
decided the outcome of the tender process as it
did and background and contextual information that informed the decision.
Factors favouring non-disclosure
48. Two factors favouring non-disclosure are relevant to this review.
Trade secrets, business affairs and research
49. A reasonable expectation that information could prejudice the trade
secrets, business affairs and research of a person weighs
against disclosure
under the FOI Act.
50. The term ‘business affairs’ means:
the totality of the money-making affairs of an organisation or undertaking as
distinct from its private or internal
51. Both MPC’s submissions and those of the competing tenderer about
the relevance of this factor refer both to MPC’s
business affairs and the
business affairs of the competing tenderer.
52. MPC submits that disclosing the information at issue will affect
‘the business affairs of MPC’. It is argued that
Government’s procurement opportunities [risk] being perceived by national
construction companies as less attractive
compared to those opportunities in
other jurisdictions.’
53. The competing tenderer submitted that it would consider whether to
participate in procurement processes in future if the tender
scores on page 204
were released. However, it is not clear that one company declining to
participate in public works will prevent
MPC from attracting quality tenders in
future. Manteena’s submission that its own information should be published
disclosure log means that I am presented with two different
viewpoints from the two companies. I consider that Manteena’s position
preferable, in light of the objects of the FOI Act.
54. It may or may not be that the ACT Government’s procurement
processes are transparent compared with other jurisdictions.
The extent to which
they are transparent is by design, legislated in the FOI Act and it is to this
statute that I devote my attention.
55. Ultimately, I am not satisfied that private sector entities will in any
large number decline to pursue commercially lucrative
opportunities building
public works because the ACT public has a right to observe transparently scored
tender processes. Some individual
companies may decide that public procurement
processes are too onerous for any number of reasons. The publication of tender
may be one such reason. Yet other companies may centre their operations
on building public works. These are matters of business strategy
which are best
judged by responsible officers of individual companies. I am not however
persuaded that there will be a shortage of
businesses willing to submit tenders
for the commercially lucrative opportunities offered in public procurement
Competing tenderer
56. For the same reason, I do not accept that disclosing the competing
tenderer’s tender score can reasonably be expected to
prejudice their
business affairs.
57. I have noted that the information on page 204 is simply the tender
scores. I am not satisfied that this information reveals enough
competing tenderer (as opposed to their tender in this procurement) to conclude
that it could reasonably be expected to
prejudice their business affairs.
58. The competing tenderer made submissions, which I addressed above insofar
as they relied on irrelevant factors.
59. Disregarding the irrelevant possibility that the tender scores may be
misinterpreted or misunderstood, I do not accept that reputational
reasonably be expected to prejudice the competitor’s business affairs
flowing from the scores of a single tender
Competitive commercial activities of an agency
60. A reasonable expectation that information could prejudice the competitive
commercial activities of an agency weighs against disclosure
under the FOI
61. Information has a commercial value if:
it is valuable
for the purposes of carrying on the commercial activity in which that agency or
other person is engaged (i.e. because
it is important or essential to the
profitability or viability of a continuing business operation, or a pending
commercial transaction); or
arms-length buyer is prepared to pay to obtain that information from that agency
or person, such that the market value of
the information would be destroyed or
diminished if it could be obtained from a government agency which has possession
redacted information on page 204 on the basis that it could reasonably be
expected to prejudice MPC’s competitive commercial
activities. The
information includes the name of the other party which submitted a tender and
the scores each party’s tender
received. MPC’s original decision was
that disclosing this information could reasonably be expected to prejudice its
competitive
commercial activities
‘those organisations may
be less inclined to do business with MPC in the future.’ In my view, this
is unreasonably speculative.
I do not accept that the information is
sufficiently sensitive that its disclosure could reasonably be expected to deter
sector entities from seeking commercially valuable opportunities.
63. The information MPC redacted on page 429 (duplicated on page 499) is
commercially valuable because it compares the internal budgeting
position of MPC
with a tendered offer. I accept that disclosing this information could
reasonably be expected to prejudice MPC’s
competitive commercial
activities.
64. I considered the issue of whether the disclosure of the competing
tenderer’s tender scores on page 204 could reasonably
be expected to
prejudice MPC’s business affairs above. For the same reasons I do not
consider that it is applicable.
Balancing the factors
65. Taking all relevant factors, the FOI Act requires me to balance them and
determine whether the public interest supports disclosure
66. I consider that the two public interest factors favouring disclosure are
generally applicable (promoting open discussion and enhancing
government’s
accountability as well as allowing or assisting inquiry into possible
deficiencies in public administration).
I afford these factors medium weight. I
consider that two public interest factors favouring disclosure (ensuring
effective oversight
of government funds and revealing the reason for a
government decision) are specifically applicable. I afford these factors
considerable
weight. On the other hand, I decided to give considerable weight to
the business affairs and competitive commercial activity factors
vis-à-vis the information at issue on page 429. I was not persuaded that
I should give weight to either factor with respect
to information on page 204.
67. As I have noted information redacted in pages 437-441 is out of scope by
agreement of the parties.
68. Balancing public interest factors is not merely quantifying the number of
factors that apply. My decision must reflect consideration
of the relative
importance and weight of each factor. The weight given to factors depends on the
effect that disclosing the information
could reasonably be expected to have one
the public interest.
69. The FOI Act has a pro-disclosure
The public interest test
and weighing of factors is approached as scales ‘laden in favour of
disclosure.’
70. In my view, the only information that MPC has shown is contrary to the
public interest to disclose is that on page 429.
71. My decision is to
MPC’s decision, under s
72. The following information is contrary to the public interest information:
information at
issue on page 429 which could reasonably be expected to prejudice the
competitive commercial activities of MPC
73. The remainder of the
information at issue should be disclosed to the applicant.
Symone Andersen
Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
September 2021
(2002, L0004, 30 June 2003).
Section 7 of the FOI Act.
Section 35(1)(c) of the FOI
Section 72 of the FOI
Section 17(1) of the FOI
Bill Cumpston and
Department of Planning, Transport and Infrastructure
[2018] SAOmbFOI 12
Brindabella Christian
College and Education Directorate
[2020] ACTOFOI 23
Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(i) of the
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(iv) of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(v) of the FOI
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(viii) of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(xi) of
the FOI Act.
Cockroft and
Attorney-General’s Department and Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd
[1986] FCA 35
(1986) 64 ALR 97.
Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(xiii) of the FOI Act.
Wanless Wastecorp Pty
Ltd and Caboolture Shire Council; JJ Richards Pty Ltd (Third Party)
L0004, 30 June 2003) at [45]-[46].
Section 9 of the FOI
Explanatory
Statement, Freedom of Information Bill 2016
RTF format (865 KB)
Signed PDF/A format