Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Giles (No 2) [2020] ACTSCFC 2 (20 May 2020)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Giles
[2020] ACTSCFC 2
Murrell CJ, Burns and Loukas-Karlsson JJ
The defendant is to pay the plaintiff’s costs.
Catchwords:
Cases Cited:
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Giles
[2020] ACTSCFC 1
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
The Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
(Plaintiff)
Charles Filgate Giles (Defendant)
Representation:
McInnes Wilson (Plaintiff)
Self-represented (Defendant)
File Number(s):
SC 462 of 2019
1. The Australian Capital Territory Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (ACAT) found that the defendant was guilty of professional misconduct
and had recommended that his name be removed from the local roll. On 21 April
2020, this Court ordered that the defendant’s
name be removed from the
roll of legal practitioners: Council of the Law Society of the Australian
Capital Territory v Giles
[2020] ACTSCFC 1 (Giles).
2. ACAT’s finding
of misconduct related to the dishonest misappropriation of $295,644.45 from the
defendant’s trust account.
In ACAT, the defendant conceded that the sum
had been transferred and that the transfer had not been authorised, but he
that he had acted dishonestly; he said that his actions had been honest
but mistaken. The defendant opposed the removal of his name
from the roll,
instead suggesting that he be suspended from practice and/or be entitled to a
restricted practising certificate.
3. In this Court, the defendant opposed
the application for removal of his name from the roll, approaching the issues in
that was very similar to that adopted in the ACAT proceedings. For most
of the hearing, the defendant maintained that his conduct
had been honest but
mistaken. He submitted that the Court should not take the drastic step of
removing his name from the roll.
4. As to the issue of dishonesty, in Giles
at [131] we said:
these proceedings, the practitioner both maintained that he had acquired new and
profound insight and also maintained that
his conduct was the result of an
honest but mistaken belief about his entitlement under the costs agreements. It
was only when he
was well into oral submissions and was pressed by the bench
that he conceded that he had known at the time of the misconduct that
acting dishonestly. This extraordinarily belated acknowledgement of dishonesty
can only reflect a fundamental lack of insight.
5. As to the appropriate outcome, we said at [132]:
Having regard to the gravity of
the practitioner’s misconduct, the history of similar misconduct, his
breach of past assurances,
the dishonesty manifested in other respects connected
with the complaint, and the practitioner’s fundamental lack of insight,
are satisfied that the practitioner suffers from a seemingly permanent character
flaw such that it will never be possible to be
confident about the practitioner
dealing properly with trust funds. We are well satisfied that he is permanently
unfit to practice.
6. The defendant was wholly unsuccessful in opposing the
application.
7. The award of costs is in the discretion of the Court. Costs
are not punitive but compensatory. They are awarded because it is just
reasonable that the party that has caused the other party to incur litigation
costs should reimburse the latter for the liability
incurred: Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
at 567 (McHugh J).
8. The defendant has advanced no reason
as to why he should not be required to reimburse the plaintiff for its
9. The defendant is to pay the plaintiff’s costs.
I certify that the preceding nine [9] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of their Honours Chief
Murrell, Justice Burns and Justice Loukas-Karlsson.
RTF format (195 KB)
Signed PDF/A format