COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY v LP202106; COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY v LP202107 (Occupational Discipline) [2025] ACAT 68 (3 October 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY v LP202106; COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
v LP202107 (Occupational Discipline)
[2025] ACAT
OR 6/2021 and OR 7/2021
Catchwords: OCCUPATIONAL DISCIPLINE – LEGAL PRACTITIONERS
– where respondent solicitor in OR 6/2021 found guilty of professional
misconduct – where parties agreed that he should
be publicly reprimanded
and not granted a practising certificate for a period of time – whether
tribunal should order that
solicitor should not be granted a practising
certificate for two years or for a shorter period of time
Where respondent solicitor in OR 7/21 found guilty of professional misconduct
– where parties agreed that he should be publicly
reprimanded –
where applicant sought orders recommending his removal from the roll –
whether respondent solicitor is
permanently unfit to practise – whether
the tribunal should, alternatively, order that he not be granted a practising
certificate
for two years
Legislation cited:
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
Legal Profession Act 2006
Subordinate
Legislation cited:
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Procedures
Cases cited
Commissioner for Fair Trading v Tasic
[2023] ACAT
Council of Law Society of Australian Capital Territory v Giles
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Legal
Practitioner 201822 (Alveer Singh)
[2019] ACAT 27
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner 20214
Council of the Law Society of the ACT v LP 202103 (Jeffrey Silk)
Law Society v Ford (No 2)
[2024] ACTSCFC 2
[1981] 2 NSWLR 372
Presidential Member J Lucy
Senior Member E Trickett
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY ) OR 6/2021
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL )
COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY OF
THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Presidential Member J Lucy
The Tribunal orders
in proceedings OR 6/2021:
respondent is publicly reprimanded.
local practising certificate is not to be granted to the respondent before the
end of a period of two years commencing on 1 July
respondent is to pay the applicant’s costs on a party and party basis, as
agreed or assessed, in accordance with Orders
4 and 5 below.
parties are to notify the Tribunal as to whether they have reached an agreement
as to the amount of those costs by 26 November
2025 and, if so, they are to
notify the Tribunal of the amount agreed by the same date.
the parties have not informed the Tribunal that they have reached an agreement
as to costs by 28 November 2025 and no application
has been made for an
extension of time to reach an agreement on costs by that date, the registrar is
to assess the applicant’s
costs on a party and party
......................................
Presidential Member J
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY ) OR 7/2021
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL )
COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Presidential Member J Lucy
The Tribunal orders
in proceedings OR 7/2021:
respondent is publicly reprimanded.
local practising certificate is not to be granted to the respondent before the
end of a period of two years commencing on 1 July
respondent is to pay the applicant’s costs on a party and party basis, as
agreed or assessed, in accordance with Orders
4 and 5 below.
parties are to notify the Tribunal as to whether they have reached an agreement
as to the amount of those costs by 26 November
2025 and, if so, they are to
notify the Tribunal of the amount agreed by the same date.
the parties have not informed the Tribunal that they have reached an agreement
as to costs by 28 November 2025 and no application
has been made for an
extension of time to reach an agreement on costs by that date, the registrar is
to assess the applicant’s
costs on a party and party
......................................
Presidential Member J
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
are disciplinary proceedings brought by the applicant (the
Law Society
) against two individuals who were solicitors at the time of the
relevant conduct. They have been given the pseudonyms LP202106 and
LP202107. In
these reasons, we will refer to the LP202106 as the
Vendor Solicitor
LP202107 as the
Advising Solicitor
. Neither solicitor currently has a
practising certificate.
8 April 2025, we found the Vendor Solicitor and the Advising Solicitor to be
guilty of professional misconduct (the
Liability Decision
). The conduct
of both solicitors involved dishonesty. Our reasons for those findings were
provided on the same day (the
Liability Reasons
). We will assume, in
these reasons, that the reader has a knowledge of the Liability Reasons and will
use the same abbreviations
as are used in those reasons.
determining liability, we held a further hearing so that the parties had an
opportunity to provide submissions as to the protective
orders which we should
make. The parties were also provided with an opportunity to file further
evidence and submissions on which
they wished to rely in relation to the making
of those orders and did so.
the reasons which follow, we did not accept the Law Society Council’s
submission that we should recommend that the Advising
Solicitor’s name be
removed from the roll of legal practitioners. We are not satisfied that he is
permanently unfit to practise.
have decided that, having regard to the seriousness of the conduct of both
solicitors, neither should be permitted to practise
for a period of two years.
As neither has a current practising certificate, we have ordered that a local
practising certificate is
not to be granted to either of them for two years. We
have also decided that each solicitor should be publicly reprimanded to mark
seriousness of their misconduct, to uphold the standards of the profession and
for the purposes of deterrence.
Relevant law
Legal Profession Act 2006
) is entitled
“Complaints and discipline.” Section 384 of the Act sets out the
purposes of Chapter 4 as follows:
384 Purposes—ch
The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
(a) to provide a nationally consistent scheme for the discipline of the
legal profession in the ACT, in the interests of the administration
and for the protection of consumers of the services of the legal profession and
the public generally;
(b) to promote and enforce the professional standards, competence and
honesty of the legal profession;
(c) to provide a means of redress for complaints about lawyers;
(d) to enable people who are not lawyers to participate in complaints and
disciplinary processes involving lawyers.
425 of the Act, within Chapter 4, relevantly provides:
ACAT orders—Australian legal practitioners
(1) If, after the ACAT has finished considering an application under this
part in relation to an Australian legal practitioner, the
ACAT is satisfied that
the practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct, the ACAT may—
(a) make 1 or more of the orders mentioned in subsections (3) to (5);
(b) any other order it considers appropriate.
(3) The ACAT may make the following orders in relation to the Australian
legal practitioner:
(a) an order recommending that the name of the practitioner be removed from
the local roll;
(c) an order that a local practising certificate not be granted to the
practitioner before the end of a stated period;
(e) an order publicly reprimanding the practitioner or, if there are special
circumstances, privately reprimanding the practitioner.
is not controversial that the object of disciplinary proceedings against a
lawyer, and of disciplinary orders, is to protect the
public and to maintain
public confidence in the
profession.
The Vendor Solicitor
the Liability Decision, we found that the Vendor Solicitor had sworn an
affidavit in support of a statutory demand knowing it to
contain false
information in three respects. He falsely stated in the affidavit
(a) none of the instalments of the purchase price for a law firm, being the
basis for the debt claimed in the statutory demand, had
(b) the purchase price was due and payable;
(c) there was no dispute about the existence of the amount of the debt claimed
in the statutory demand.
also found that the Vendor Solicitor gave instructions to defend proceedings in
which it was sought to set aside the statutory
demand, in circumstances where he
knew, or should have known, that the statutory demand had been issued for an
improper purpose.
Law Society Council sought the following protective orders in relation to the
Vendor Solicitor:
(a) An order publicly reprimanding the Vendor Solicitor;
(b) An order that a local practising certificate not be granted to the Vendor
Solicitor before the end of two
Vendor Solicitor’s evidence and submissions on protective
Vendor Solicitor provided the Tribunal with a witness statement on which he was
not challenged.
Vendor Solicitor has been in practice for 50 years, having been admitted to the
Supreme Court of New South Wales as a solicitor
in 1973. He enrolled as a
barrister and solicitor of the ACT Supreme Court in 1976. The Vendor Solicitor
was rarely involved in litigation
over the course of his career and was not
involved in commercial litigation.
Vendor Solicitor stated in his witness statement that the Advising Solicitor had
advised him to sue the Purchaser Solicitor for
the full $550,000, not the
$150,000 which was owing, because the 2015 Agreement was between his company and
the Purchaser Solicitor,
and was not with him personally. The Vendor Solicitor
stated that he said to the Advising Solicitor, “What about the $400,000
already paid?” but was assured that was not a problem given that the
Vendor Solicitor was not a party to the 2015
his witness statement, the Vendor Solicitor acknowledged and accepted our
findings in the Liability Reasons and Liability Decision.
for previous disciplinary action, the Vendor Solicitor stated that, in about
2014 to 2015, he self-reported some accounting errors
in his trust account to
the Law Society. He identified the major error as being the payment of a sum of
money to an incorrect but
similarly-named client. The Vendor Solicitor
attributed the errors to the recent retirement of his partner, who had managed
account. He stated that he was fined by the Law Society and lost his
ability to practise on an unrestricted basis for five
Vendor Solicitor also relied upon a reference from Mr David Harper, written in
August 2024. Mr Harper had, at that time, known
the Vendor Solicitor for
forty-five years. Mr Harper was President of the Law Society from 1978 to 1980;
chairman of the ACT Legal
Practitioners Admission Board from 1983 to 2007; a
part-time member of the ACT Administrative Appeals Tribunal from 2000 to 2003;
Master of the Supreme Court of the ACT from 2003 to 2013; and a chairman of the
Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal from
2006 to 2009.
Harper stated that he had read the application for disciplinary action and
relevant judgments involving the Vendor Solicitor and
had had discussions with
the Vendor Solicitor about his conduct and his attitude towards it. Mr Harper
expressed the opinion that
the Vendor Solicitor “is fundamentally a man of
good character who has committed a serious error of judgment in the
circumstances
of this case, aggravated by his failure to accept his mistake and
remedy the situation as soon as he became aware of it.”
the Liability Reasons, on the basis of evidence provided by the Law Society, we
described the Vendor Solicitor as being
That proved to be
As at 27 June 2025, the
date of the hearing on protective orders, the Vendor Solicitor held a restricted
practising certificate and
had applied to renew that certificate. On the same
day, following the hearing, the Vendor Solicitor withdrew his applications for
renewal. The Vendor Solicitor’s right to practise ceased on 30 June
was submitted on the Vendor Solicitor’s behalf that our disciplinary
finding against him was the only finding of professional
misconduct which might
lead to the suspension of his right to practise. It was further submitted that
it was a salutary lesson for
him and he is certainly not at risk of further
misconduct. Before the hearing, the Vendor Solicitor agreed in writing to an
of a public reprimand and a moderate period of suspension from
Sabharwal, for the Vendor Solicitor, submitted at the hearing that the Vendor
Solicitor had shown insight into his conduct, as
evidenced by his witness
statement and his discussions with Mr
Mr Sabharwal said that,
given the Vendor Solicitor’s age of 74, his lifetime in practice of the
law, and that a period of two
years out of the law would make it “nigh
impossible” to return to practice, a suspension of a shorter duration than
years should be
Law Society Council’s evidence and submissions on
protective orders
Law Society Council provided the Tribunal with evidence of the Vendor
Solicitor’s disciplinary history. The Law Society
Council included, in its
evidence, a decision of this Tribunal in relation to the Vendor
Solicitor’s failure to supervise the
management of trust
The facts as recounted
in that decision appear to differ to some degree from the Vendor
Solicitor’s account of what occurred,
but the Law Society Council did not
make an issue of that.
Law Society Council submitted that Mr Harper’s reference should be given
little weight, as it pre-dated the Tribunal’s
findings and did not address
his dishonesty.
focus of the Law Society Council’s submissions was upon the seriousness of
a finding of dishonesty.
Moujalli, for the Law Society Council, drew the Tribunal’s attention to
the judgment of the Full Court of the Supreme Court
(Mossop, McWilliam JJ and
Ainslie-Wallace AJ) in
Law Society v Ford (No 2)
[2024] ACTSCFC 2
), in which the Court emphasised the importance of honesty on
the part of a legal
practitioner.
Their Honours
observed that “a lawyer’s duty of honesty and candour to a court is
a fundamental feature of the practice
of law” and remarked that “the
centrality of honesty and candour of lawyers in dealing with courts ... is
significant
in a number of
elaborated:
Pragmatically,
our system of justice can only function and get through the work that is
required if lawyers, as officers of the court,
can be relied upon for their
candour and honesty. But the obligation of candour and honesty is also
fundamental to the core values
of the judicial system, the fair and impartial
determination of disputes, and to societal confidence in its institutions. Any
of the obligations of lawyers to be honest and candid in their dealings
with courts carries with it an unacceptable risk of both
eroding the
institutions administering justice as well as the social acceptance of the
authority of those institutions.
Law Society Council submitted that the gravity of the Vendor Solicitor’s
misconduct underlying the charges which had been
proven “cannot be
overstated.”
It submitted
that the swearing of an affidavit by a solicitor, knowing it to be false in
material respects, was a serious failure
to honour the high degree of trust and
confidence required of lawyers.
It also submitted that a solicitor who is prepared to be involved in the issuing
of a statutory demand for an improper purpose could
not be relied upon to
discharge his or her duty to uphold the law and further its proper
administration (relying upon
[1981] 2 NSWLR 372
was the Law Society Council’s position that the Vendor Solicitor had not
expressed remorse or contrition for his dishonest
conduct, and that his witness
statement appeared to be primarily intended for the purpose of attributing
responsibility to the Advising
Solicitor for his conduct. Nevertheless, the Law
Society Council acknowledged that the Vendor Solicitor had some limited insight
into the seriousness of his
wrongdoing.
After the Vendor
Solicitor indicated that he recognised that a period of suspension from practice
was appropriate, Mr Moujalli submitted
that “he should be given
credit that he accepts the seriousness of the findings, and that he accepts that
the findings warrant
Law Society Council urged the Tribunal to consider the effect on the
public’s confidence in the profession if the Vendor
Solicitor were allowed
to continue to practise without first serving a period of exclusion from
This, it said, would
have a deterrent effect.
Law Society Council’s position was that the Vendor Solicitor was
temporarily unfit to practise, because he had commenced
a process of
demonstrating insight which would lead to him becoming fit to practise in
Consideration
finding of dishonesty is very serious, as the Law Society Council has submitted.
Deliberately making a false affidavit is conduct
which is likely to mislead a
court. Such conduct tends to undermine our system of justice, as the Full Court
observed in
Vendor Solicitor has shown some insight into his conduct. However, as the Law
Society Council submits, the degree of insight he
has demonstrated is still
his witness statement, the Vendor Solicitor gave evidence which would have been
relevant at the liability stage. As we indicated
in our Liability Reasons, the
Vendor Solicitor did not provide any evidence at that stage of the proceedings
as to his state of mind
at the time of swearing the 2019
nor did he provide
any affidavit evidence in response to the Law Society Council’s
allegations.
The witness
statement he has provided to us now is to be understood in that context.
Vendor Solicitor has stated that he acknowledges and accepts our findings, but
the effect of his witness statement is to indicate
that he was acting upon the
Advising Solicitor’s advice and not to fully accept his own culpability.
To the extent that the
Vendor Solicitor’s evidence is designed to persuade
us that he was not dishonest, but merely acting on advice, we do not accept
The language he uses in the witness statement (for example,
“Notwithstanding my concerns [the Advising Solicitor] assured
and “When it came to my knowledge that the proceedings were
ill-founded...”) tends to suggest that he did
not exercise any independent
judgment about the proceedings to set aside the statutory demand, or about his
affidavit, and that he
still does not realize that he should have done so.
have had regard to the reference from Mr Harper and have placed some weight on
his opinion of the Vendor Solicitor’s character.
However, we have also
taken into account that Mr Harper has not referred to our findings of dishonesty
(having written the reference
before those findings were made) and has described
the Vendor Solicitor as having “committed a serious error of
rather than as having acted dishonestly.
agree with the Law Society Council that, due to the seriousness of his dishonest
conduct and his limited insight, the Vendor Solicitor
is currently not a fit and
proper person to practise law. We accept that he is developing some insight into
his conduct. His insight
is evidenced by his acceptance of our findings and his
acceptance that an order prohibiting him from practising for a period of time
appropriate. We have taken into account his age. There is no evidence to support
his submission that there is no realistic possibility
that he would be able to
work again after two years and he has not explained how, if that is so, he would
be able to work again after,
say, eighteen months. The Vendor Solicitor appears
to have been getting work up until 30 June 2025, and may be able to obtain more
work from the same source in another two years.
into account all of the relevant circumstances and considerations, including the
importance that solicitors behave honestly
and that the Vendor Solicitor has
demonstrated only limited insight into his conduct, we consider that a period of
two years away
from practice, commencing on 1 July 2025, is needed before he
will be fit to practise again. That will give him some time to reflect
conduct in light of our reasons.
the Vendor Solicitor does not have a practising certificate, we will make an
order under section 425(3)(c) of the Act, that a local
practising certificate
not be granted to the Vendor Solicitor before the end of a period of two
years commencing on 1 July 2025.
The respondent suggested different wording
(that a local practising certificate not be granted to the Vendor Solicitor
June 2027) but the wording we have decided upon more
accurately reflects the terms of 425(3)(c) of the Act, and has the same
will also impose a public reprimand, pursuant to section 425(3)(e) of the Act. A
public reprimand serves to protect the profession’s
reputation and to
maintain its standards, as well as serving the purposes of specific and general
deterrence.
Law Society Council sought an order that the Vendor Solicitor pay the costs of
the proceeding calculated on a party and party
basis as agreed or as assessed by
the Registrar of the Tribunal.
433(1) of the Act provides:
If the ACAT finds an Australian legal
practitioner guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct, the ACAT
must order the practitioner to pay costs (including costs
of the relevant council and the complainant), unless the ACAT is satisfied
exceptional circumstances exist.
Vendor Solicitor did not submit that any exceptional circumstances exist and we
find that they do not.
section 433(5) of the Act:
(5) An order for costs—
(a) may be for a stated amount; or
(b) may be for an unstated amount but must state the basis on which the
amount is to be decided.
will make an order that the parties are to notify the Tribunal of any agreement
as to costs, or lack thereof, within two months.
If the parties have not agreed
on costs by then, we will order that the applicant’s costs are to be
assessed on a party and
party basis. Under the tribunal rules, the Registrar is
required to assess the parties’ costs once such an order takes
The period of two months
will encourage prompt negotiations between the parties to resolve any dispute as
to costs, consistently
with the parties’ obligation to cooperate with the
tribunal to give effect to the principle that the tribunal is to seek to
that its procedures are as simple, quick, inexpensive and informal as is
consistent with achieving
The Advising Solicitor
the Liability Decision, we found that the Advising Solicitor had:
(a) signed and issued a statutory demand in circumstances where:
(i) he knew that it was supported by an affidavit containing false
statements;
(ii) he knew that there was a genuine dispute as to the debt claimed in the
statutory demand; and
(iii) he therefore knew, or should have known, that the statutory demand was
issued for an improper purpose;
(b) prepared, settled and witnessed an affidavit prepared by the Vendor
Solicitor knowing that it was false to the extent that it
contained false
statements that:
(i) the whole of the purchase price was due and payable; and
(ii) there was no dispute about the existence of the amount of the debt claimed
in the statutory demand.
Law Society Council sought orders:
(a) publicly reprimanding the Advising Solicitor; and
(b) recommending that his name be removed from the
Advising Solicitor’s evidence and submissions on
protective orders
Advising Solicitor provided the Tribunal with an affidavit, sworn by him, on
which he was not
challenged.
Advising Solicitor was admitted as a barrister of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales in 1967. He commenced private practice
in the Australian Capital Territory
as a solicitor in 1970. He practised continually from then until 20 June 2024.
He was 84 years
old at the time of swearing his affidavit.
Advising Solicitor has provided pro bono services to a charity over a long
period of time, receiving certificates and medals to
recognise that
assistance.
Advising Solicitor stated that he was not in a position where he would ever be
able to return to legal practice, due to his health.
He stated that, before the
events giving rise to these proceedings, he had never been the subject of a
complaint from clients, colleagues
or the judiciary.
Advising Solicitor acknowledged, in his affidavit, the serious nature of the
findings made against him. He stated that he understood
the importance of
courts, other lawyers and members of the public being able to rely on the
integrity and honesty of legal practitioners.
Advising Solicitor annexed to his affidavit two character references from
non-lawyers, one of whom held a senior position in business
and the other of
whom retired from a senior position in government and is a Companion of the
Order of Australia. Both referees attested
to the Advising Solicitor’s
integrity and standing within the business community. Both had known the
Advising Solicitor for
a long time.
Crispin submitted, for the Advising Solicitor, that his lengthy period of
productive practice, his pro bono work and his character
references all speak to
him being a person of ordinarily good fame and character. The conduct the
subject of our findings was, in
Mr Crispin’s submission, “an
aberration from an otherwise honest life in the service of the
was also submitted, on the Advising Solicitor’s behalf, that a
recommendation that his name be removed from the roll of legal
practitioner was
unnecessary and would go beyond what is necessary to protect the community. Mr
Crispin submitted that, given that
the Advising Solicitor has retired and is
unable to return to practice due to his age, there was little utility in a
period of suspension.
However, it was said that he would not oppose a suspension
should the Tribunal be minded to make such an
Advising Solicitor submitted that he was likely to face a costs order which
would greatly exceed the sum of any fine the Tribunal
might consider
appropriate.
He relied upon
Council of the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory v Legal
Practitioner 201822 (Alveer Singh)
[2019] ACAT 27
in which the tribunal
set out a submission that a relevant factor when considering appropriate
protective orders is “the loss
already suffered by the lawyer personally
as a result of the misconduct.”
most appropriate protective order, in Mr Crispin’s submission, is a public
Law Society Council’s evidence and submissions on
protective orders
starting point, in the Law Society Council’s submission, is that the
Advising Solicitor’s conduct is very
It was submitted that
the seriousness of the misconduct needed to be marked for the profession and so
as to maintain public confidence
in the legal profession and the administration
of justice.
Moujalli, for the Law Society Council, submitted that the understanding of the
misconduct which the Advising Solicitor has demonstrated
appeared to be somewhat
superficial.
He pointed out that
the Advising Solicitor had had a substantial period of time to reflect on his
conduct, and it was only when serious
findings had been made by the tribunal,
that he said that he accepted that the findings were
Mr Moujalli
is no acknowledgement of a personal failing on his part. There is no attempt to
grapple with the nature of the finding, being
a finding of dishonesty against
him. No attempt to explain how it is that he allowed himself to engage in
dishonest conduct. The
superficiality of his understanding of the gravity of
these findings is also underscored by the references on which he relies.
for the references on which the Advising Solicitor relied, Mr Moujalli submitted
that neither was from a member of the legal profession
and neither referee
appeared to have been told the nature of the findings that had been made. That,
he said, raised a question as
to whether the Advising Solicitor truly accepts
the gravity of the findings which have been made against
Moujalli accepted that this was a borderline case as to whether an order
recommending the Advising Solicitor’s removal from
the roll was
appropriate.
He acknowledged
that a recommendation for removal is often made where there has been repeated
offending or offending over a protracted
However, Mr Moujalli
submitted that a recommendation for removal may be appropriate where the
offending is extremely serious.
It was appropriate in this case, in the Law Society Council’s submission,
because the Advising Solicitor was permanently unfit
to practice. However, Mr
Moujalli said that if the Tribunal was against him on the removal
recommendation, we should order that the
Advising Solicitor not be granted a
practising certificate for two
Moujalli also submitted that we should not consider the deterrent effect of a
costs order when considering what protective orders
Consideration
Advising Solicitor’s conduct was inconsistent with fulfilling the
obligations of candour and honesty which attach to officers
He prepared and settled
an affidavit knowing it to contain false statements. He also issued a statutory
demand for an improper purpose.
Whilst it was submitted on his behalf that the
loss suffered by the other party in the proceedings to set aside the statutory
was remedied by costs
that does not detract
from the seriousness of the conduct. It also does not take into account the
stress of the legal proceedings
for all parties concerned, or the cost to the
court as a result of those proceedings.
is also relevant, however, to consider that the Advising Solicitor has, until
now, had a long and unblemished career.
accept the Advising Solicitor’s evidence that, until the conduct the
subject of these proceedings, he has never had any complaints
made against him.
The references on which the Advising Solicitor relies have some limitations, as
identified by the Law Society Council.
However, taken with his good disciplinary
history, they demonstrate that he is ordinarily of good fame and character. The
Solicitor’s pro bono work also demonstrates good character. We
are satisfied that the conduct the subject of these proceedings
uncharacteristic.
Advising Solicitor has not shown any insight into his conduct and has not
expressed remorse or contrition. This lack of understanding,
at the end of a
disciplinary process, tends to show that he is not presently fit to practise
note, however, given that the Advising Solicitor appears to consider that his
conduct was not blameworthy in the ways we have found
(or at all), he has shown
some integrity in not expressing, in the affidavit he relies upon before us, any
contrition which he does
not genuinely feel. After the presiding member had
raised this for the parties’ consideration at the hearing, Mr Crispin made
the following submission on the Advising Solicitor’s
nature of the allegation - I'm sorry, the nature of the conduct for which [the
Advising Solicitor] was found to have engaged in
professional misconduct was
Solicitor] was not concerned
at all about ensuring he gave accurate evidence,
the comments in his current affidavit would be very different.
What I would say, members, is that there is an inference available to be
drawn that although [the Advising Solicitor] might not have,
in that affidavit,
demonstrated insight into the specific events for which there has been a
finding, his affidavit is, nonetheless,
consistent with insight into the broader
principle that he must be truthful in affidavits.
... whilst, of course, the latter would be ideal, insight into the
importance of honesty generally would provide, at least, a measure
that conduct would not be repeated were he to return to practice.
accept that submission. Mr Moujalli conceded that we could infer that the
Advising Solicitor understands the importance of honesty,
and especially the
importance of honesty in
affidavits.
We infer from the
Advising Solicitor’s affidavit that he understands the broader principle
that he must be truthful in affidavits,
even though he allowed himself to be
blinded to that principle when engaging in the conduct in question and
apparently still does
not appreciate how his conduct was inconsistent with the
do not consider that an order recommending the removal of the Advising
Solicitor’s name from the roll is appropriate in this
case, having regard
to his long previously unblemished history, his otherwise good character and his
insight into the general principle
that legal practitioners must behave with
integrity. He stated in his affidavit, and we accept, that he understands in
general terms
“the importance of Courts, other lawyers and members of the
public being able to rely on the integrity and honesty of legal
practitioners.”
difficulty is that, while the Advising Solicitor has a broad understanding of
that principle, his legalistic approach to advising
the Vendor Solicitor, and
his single-minded pursuit of a forensic strategy designed to make the Purchaser
Solicitor and Purchaser
Company come to a commercial resolution, led him to
contravene his duty of honesty and candour to a court. He continues to lack
into the way his integrity was compromised by choosing to take that
approach. As Mr Moujalli submitted, what is required here and
what is missing is
any explanation as to how the Advising Solicitor failed to adhere to
professional and ethical standards in respect
of the conduct which we have
consider, as the Advising Solicitor accepts, that a reprimand is an appropriate
protective order. As we have said in relation to
the Vendor Solicitor, a public
reprimand maintains the standards of the profession and has a deterrent effect,
both generally and
for the Advising Solicitor in particular.
are not satisfied, on balance, that the Advising Solicitor is permanently unfit
to practise, despite the lack of insight he currently
displays into his conduct.
It may be, as the Advising Solicitor submitted, that he will never return to
practice, given his health
and his age. However, we have no medical evidence to
support that assertion, and it is possible that he may wish to work as a
again in the future.
Advising Solicitor does not oppose a period of suspension. We consider that an
equivalent order to that made in respect of the
Vendor Solicitor is appropriate.
An order that the Advising Solicitor not be granted a practising certificate for
two years from
1 July 2025 furthers an object of Chapter 4 of the Act, being to
promote and enforce the professional standards, competence and honesty
legal profession.
We accept the
submission of the Law Society Council that the misconduct by the Vendor
Solicitor is comparable to that of the Advising
Solicitor in that they were both
knowingly involved in the swearing of a false affidavit. Although the Advising
Solicitor stopped
practising in 2024 for unrelated reasons, the starting date of
1 July 2025 for the exclusion period is a few days after the hearing,
start of the practising certificate renewal
and is consistent with the
order made in respect of the Vendor Solicitor.
argument that a costs order has a deterrent effect and should be taken into
account when making protective orders was made in
the Advising Solicitor’s
written submissions in the context of opposing a fine (as we understood it). We
were not asked to
impose a fine and do not intend to do so. Costs orders are
made for compensatory purposes. Whilst they may have a deterrent effect,
making of a costs order would not generally affect the tribunal’s
consideration of the appropriate period of a suspension,
or a period in which
the practitioner is not permitted to practise. It has not affected our
consideration of that issue in this case.
Advising Solicitor did not submit that any exceptional circumstances exist such
that we should not make a costs order in favour
of the applicant. We find that
there are no exceptional circumstances for the purposes of section 433(1) of the
Accordingly,
we have made a costs order in the same terms as that made in respect of the
Vendor Solicitor, and for the same reasons.
The Tribunal orders
in proceedings OR 6/2021:
respondent is publicly reprimanded.
local practising certificate is not to be granted to the respondent before the
end of a period of two years commencing on 1 July
respondent is to pay the applicant’s costs on a party and party basis, as
agreed or assessed, in accordance with Orders
4 and 5 below.
parties are to notify the Tribunal as to whether they have reached an agreement
as to the amount of those costs by 26 November
2025and, if so, they are to
notify the Tribunal of the amount agreed by the same date.
the parties have not informed the Tribunal that they have reached an agreement
as to costs by 28 November 2025 and no application
has been made for an
extension of time to reach an agreement on costs by that date, the registrar is
to assess the applicant’s
costs on a party and party
The Tribunal orders
in proceedings OR
respondent is publicly reprimanded.
local practising certificate is not to be granted to the respondent before the
end of a period of two years commencing on 1 July
respondent is to pay the applicant’s costs on a party and party basis, as
agreed or assessed, in accordance with Orders
4 and 5 below.
parties are to notify the Tribunal as to whether they have reached an agreement
as to the amount of those costs by 26 November
2025 and, if so, they are to
notify the Tribunal of the amount agreed by the same date.
the parties have not informed the Tribunal that they have reached an agreement
as to costs by 28 November 2025 no application has
been made for an extension of
time to reach an agreement on costs by that date, the registrar is to assess the
applicant’s
costs on a party and party basis.
......................................
Presidential Member J Lucy
For and on behalf of the Tribunal
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr D Moujalli
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Thomson Geer
Counsel for the Respondent in LP202106:
Mr J Sabharwal
Solicitors for the Respondent in LP202106:
O’Connor Harris & Co
Counsel for the Respondent in LP202107:
Mr T Crispin
See, for example,
Law Society of Australian Capital Territory v Giles
[2020] ACTSCFC 1
Liability Decision at [105] and
Liability Decision at
[129]-[130]
Applicant’s Submissions
on Penalty and Costs in relation to the Vendor Solicitor, filed
24 June 2025 at [1.8] and [4.10]
Vendor Solicitor’s
witness statement filed on 17 June 2025
Vendor Solicitor’s
witness statement filed on 17 June 2025 at [10]-[12]
Vendor Solicitor’s
witness statement filed on 17 June 2025 at [14]
Liability Reasons at [1]
Affidavit of Greg Williams
filed on 23 June 2025 at [6]-[7]
Affidavit of Katie Elizabeth
Miriam Binstock failed on 18 July 2025 at [4] to [7].
Respondent’s
Submissions on Penalty and Costs in OR 6/2021, filed 26 June 2025 at [6]-[7]
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 33, lines 20 to 36
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 33, lines 42 to 47
Affidavit of Samuel William
Harper, filed on 8 May
2025, Ex SWH1
, pages 1-13
Applicant’s
Submissions on Penalty and Costs in relation to the Vendor Solicitor, filed
24 June 2025 at [3.12], [3.13], [4.5];
Transcript of hearing dated 27
June 2025, page 10, lines 8 to 18
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 8, lines 20-32
Applicant’s
Submissions on Penalty and Costs in relation to the Vendor Solicitor, filed
24 June 2025 at [4.1]
Applicant’s
Submissions on Penalty and Costs in relation to the Vendor Solicitor, filed
24 June 2025 at [4.1]
Applicant’s
Submissions on Penalty and Costs in relation to the Vendor Solicitor, filed
24 June 2025 at [4.2]
Applicant’s
Submissions on Penalty and Costs in relation to the Vendor Solicitor, filed
24 June 2025 at [4.4]-[4.6]
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 10, lines 20 to 21
Applicant’s
Submissions on Penalty and Costs in relation to the Vendor Solicitor, filed
24 June 2025 at [4.7]
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 10, lines 21 to 23
Liability Reasons at
Liability Reasons at
Council of the Law
Society of the ACT v Legal Practitioner 20214
[2022] ACAT 33
Commissioner for Fair Trading v Tasic
[2023] ACAT 26
of the Law Society of the ACT v LP 202103 (Jeffrey Silk)
[2021] ACAT 105
ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Procedures Rules 2024
, rule 71(3)
ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2008
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 14, lines 17 to 21
Advising Solicitor’s
affidavit sworn on 26 June 2025
Advising Solicitor’s
Written Submissions on Protective Orders dated 27 June 2025 at [23]
Advising Solicitor’s
Written Submissions on Protective Orders dated 27 June 2025 at [24]-[25]
Advising Solicitor’s
Written Submissions on Protective Orders dated 27 June 2025 at [22]
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 25, lines 8 to 19
Advising Solicitor’s
Written Submissions on Protective Orders dated 27 June 2025 at [26]
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 15, line 1
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 15, lines 9 to 13
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 15, lines 18 to 24
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 15, lines 33 to 36
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 16, lines 1 to 6
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 18, lines 14 to 16
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 14, lines 23 to 24
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 14, lines 26 to 28
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 14, lines 28 to 31
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 24, lines 25 to 29
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 19, lines 35 to 43
Advising Solicitor’s
Written Submissions on Protective Orders dated 27 June 2025 at [21]
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 29, lines 20 to 45
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 32, lines 7 to 11
Transcript of hearing dated
27 June 2025, page 32, lines 12 to 15
Act, s 384(b)
Act, s 37(3)
RTF format (352 KB)
Signed PDF/A format