Police v Marcel Walters (a pseudonym) [2024] ACTCC 3 (10 July 2024)
CHILDRENS COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Police v Marcel Walters (a pseudonym)
[2024] ACTCC 3
Hearing Dates:
20 March 2024 to 22 March 2024
Decision Date:
Magistrate Stewart
Count 1 - not proved
Count 2 - proved beyond reasonable doubt
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Sexual offences – Attempt incest – Act of indecency on a person
under the age of 10 years
Legislation Cited:
Children and Young People Act
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code 2002
Evidence (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
Cases Cited:
De Silva v The Queen
[2019] HCA 48
Johnson v Western Australia
[2008] WASCA 164
(2008) 186 A Crim R 531
Liberato v The Queen
[1985] HCA 66
(1985) 159 CLR 507
R v Anderson
(2001) A Crim R 166
[2021] ACTSC 157
R v Markuleski
[2001] NSWCCA 290
; 52 NSWLR 82
(1987) 11 NSWLR 12
R v MZ (No 3)
[2021] ACTSC 332
R v Shillings
[2003] NSWCCA 272
[2016] HCA 6
(2016) 258 CLR 108
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Prosecution)
Marcel Walters (a pseudonym) (Young Person)
Representation:
G. Cuthel (Prosecution)
J. Cooper (Young Person)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Prosecution)
Aboriginal Legal Service (NSW/ACT)
File Number:
CH933/2023 and CH934/2023
MAGISTRATE STEWART:
INTRODUCTION
accused young person
Marcel Walters
(the AYP) is now aged 18 years. He is charged with offences from when he was
aged 17 years and 10 months. The allegations
relate to 3 July 2023 and his nine
year old half-sister who I shall refer to as MU:
(a) CH 2023/933 attempted incest, contrary to 62(1) of the
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) by virtue of s44 of the
Criminal Code 2002
carrying a maximum penalty of imprisonment for 20 years; and as an alternative
(or back-up) charge:
(b) CH 2023/934 act of indecency on a person under the age of 10 years contrary
– carrying a maximum penalty of
imprisonment for 15 years.
name Marcel Walters is a pseudonym. It is used so that the accused young
person, the complainant (who is a child) and their family
cannot be identified
in this decision.
context of these allegation occurs within a family unit with two parents, each
with their own children, forming a relationship
together and creating further
children together (including the complainant). I will refer to the relevant
family members as follows:
(i) The accused young person: AYP
(ii) The complainant: MU
(iii) The father of MU and the AYP: TU
(iv) The mother of the complainant MU and step-mother of the AYP: BU
(v) The young person older sister of the complainant MU, who is the daughter of
BU and the stepdaughter of TU: KT
(vi) The young person boyfriend of KT: UI
matter was conducted in the Childrens Court by consent of the parties and by
order of the Court. Ordinarily adult matters of
this type would be dealt with
in the Supreme Court, but this is not necessarily so where the accused is a
young person. This is
because very different considerations apply in the
circumstance of a young person being prosecuted for criminal offences.
this matter no prosecution election form was ever
and the bench sheets
indicated defence consent to jurisdiction on both charges on 13 November
to commencing the hearing proper I invited submissions from the prosecution and
defence as to the correct forum for this matter.
The prosecution supported the
defence election. The Prosecution submitted that if the accused was convicted
on the most serious
charge (charge 1) there would be sufficient sentencing
that even if I was not ultimately satisfied of this sentencing jurisdiction, I
had a remaining power to commit the accused young
person to the Supreme Court
for sentence.
defence submitted that the accused young person did not wish to be tried by a
jury, and instead sought that the matter be determined
by a magistrate in this
note that due to both of these offences being defined as ‘excluded
offences’ under the
Supreme Court Act
(ACT), if I had
committed the accused young person to the Supreme Court for trial he would not
have been able to elect for a trial
by judge alone and would have been tried,
instead, by a jury: Schedule 2 of the
Supreme Court Act 1933
375AA has been recently inserted into the
(ACT) by the
Crimes Legislation Amendment Act 2023
It creates a criminal
criminal offences except those
punishable by life imprisonment. In that sense,
the Childrens Court now has a hybrid jurisdiction to deal with more serious
charges than can be dealt with in the Magistrates Court, but has a
lower maximum sentencing jurisdiction for each charge than the
Magistrates Court
- a maximum fine of $5,000, imprisonment for two years, or both, per charge for
children compared to a maximum
fine of $15,000, imprisonment for five years, or
both, per charge for adults.
CRIMES ACT 1900
Summary disposal of certain cases—Childrens Court
(1) This section applies if a person is before the
charged with any offence other than an offence punishable by imprisonment for
(2) However, this section applies to a case to which
applies only as mentioned in
(3) The court may proceed in accordance with subsections (4) to (12) if the
court considers that it has no jurisdiction, apart from
this section, to hear
and determine the charge summarily.
(4) The court may invite the person (the
to plead guilty or not guilty to the charge.
guilty to the charge, the court may accept or reject the plea.
taken to have pleaded not guilty to the charge if—
not plead to the charge when invited to do so under subsection (4); or
(b) the court rejects a plea of guilty to the charge under subsection (5).
(7) When the court is satisfied the case is ready to be listed for hearing,
the court must ask the
to the case being disposed of summarily.
(8) The court may hear and determine the charge summarily, and may sentence
or otherwise deal with the
to law, if—
or is to be taken to have pleaded, not guilty to the charge; and
(b) the court considers that the case can properly be disposed of summarily;
to the case being disposed of summarily and the consent has not been withdrawn
section 375A.
(9) The court may sentence or otherwise deal with the
(a) the court accepts a plea of guilty to a charge; and
(b) the court considers that the case can properly be disposed of summarily;
to the case being disposed of summarily and the consent has not been withdrawn
section 375A.
(10) Before the court decides whether a case can properly be disposed of
summarily, the court must consider the following:
(a) any relevant representations made by the
(b) any relevant representations made by the prosecutor in the
(c) the facts of the case;
(d) the seriousness of the alleged offence;
(e) the circumstances in which the offence is alleged to have been
apparent maturity;
apparent mental capacity;
(i) the suitability of the penalties that the court is empowered to impose;
(j) the difficulty of any question of law that is likely to arise.
(11) If the court accepts a plea of guilty to a charge under this section,
(a) the court considers that the case cannot properly be disposed of summarily;
consent to the case being disposed of summarily has been withdrawn under
Magistrates
Court Act 1930
, section 90A (7) to (13) (Plea of guilty at committal
hearing) applies in relation to the
if the court had accepted a plea of guilty to the charge under that section.
(12) If the court disposes of a case summarily under this section and
convicts the
the offence, the court must not impose a penalty that exceeds—
(a) a fine of $5 000, imprisonment for 2 years or both; or
(b) if the maximum penalty provided for the offence by the law creating it is
less than the penalty mentioned in paragraph (a)—the
maximum penalty.
s 375AA(10)
I considered:
(a) The submissions made on behalf of the accused young person and, in
particular, his desire not to be tried by jury;
(b) The submissions made by the prosecutor in favour of summary disposal;
(c) The facts of the case as summarised to me by the prosecutor;
(d) A consideration of the seriousness of the offences – quite serious and
only able to be dealt with in this Court by virtue
of this section;
(e) The circumstances of the allegations including the incestual nature of them
and the relative ages of the accused young person
and his sister the
complainant;
(f) The fact that the accused young person is now aged 18 and was at the time of
the alleged offences a young person just shy of
attaining his majority;
(g) There was no reason or submission that allowed
the Court to form any conclusion other than the accused young person was of the
usual maturity for his age;
(h) There was no reason or submission that allowed the Court to form any
conclusion that the accused young person was suffering from
any deficit to his
mental capacity such that it would influence this decision;
(i) The sentencing jurisdiction bestowed by the section and the fact that it
would probably not be exceeded if the matter was to
be summarily disposed of;
(j) The absence of any question of law so difficult that it weighed against
summary disposal.
submissions of the parties and my assessment of the matters set out in
above persuaded me that this matter was able be properly dealt with
summarily and I proceeded to do so.
PRELIMINARY ISSUE OF
ADMISSIBILITY
agreement with defence, the prosecution adduced evidence of a recorded
conversation between the complainant and her mother BU on
a provisional basis
with the issue of admissibility to be dealt with later. The exhibit was marked
MFI P7 and was a disc that held
a recording taken by mobile telephone of a
conversation between the complainant and her mother, with some additional input
prosecution sought to have it admitted as an actual recording of complaint.
defence withdrew their objection in their written closing address. As a
consequence the exhibit has become exhibit P7 and is
admitted into evidence
noting that submissions were made seeking a direction on unreliability of the
complainant.
the guidance provided at
Magistrates Court Act 1930
considered the seriousness of the charges and the fact that the adults charged
with these charges are usually tried by jury
in the Supreme Court in this
trial or hearing, I have
directed myself as if the charges had been heard before
have therefore considered it obligatory that I set out:
(a) The principles of law applied: and
(b) The findings of fact which I
have taken into account any warning or direction to be given, or comment to be
made, that would have been made to a jury in the
proceedings had the matter been
tried before a jury.
will be no secret to a learned reader that I have directly utilised many of the
directions in the decision of Mossop J in
[2021] ACTSC 157.
directed myself as follows:
(a) The Crown bears the onus or burden of proving the
guilt of the accused. The Crown has asserted that the AYP has committed criminal
offences, therefore the Crown must prove that the AYP committed those offences.
The AYP does not have to prove that he did not commit
those offences.
(b) The level or standard of proof required in a
criminal trial is proof beyond reasonable doubt. The AYP cannot be found to be
of the offences unless the evidence, which I accept, satisfies me beyond
reasonable doubt of his guilt.
(c) The AYP is presumed by law to be innocent of the
offences with which he is charged, unless, and until, the evidence which I
satisfies me beyond reasonable doubt of his guilt. If the evidence which
I accept satisfies me beyond reasonable doubt of his guilt,
then he loses the
presumption of innocence and the appropriate verdict is guilty. If, however, the
evidence which I accept fails
to satisfy me beyond reasonable doubt of his
guilt, then he remains presumed to be innocent and the appropriate verdict is
not guilty.
(d) As I am the tribunal of the facts, as well as the
tribunal of the law, I must bring an open and unbiased mind to evidentiary
I must view that material coldly, clinically and dispassionately, and
I must not let emotion enter into the decision-making process,
because both the
Crown and the AYP are entitled to my verdict free of partiality or prejudice,
favour or ill will.
(e) I must determine whether each of the witnesses is a
reliable witness. That is, whether the witness has an accurate memory of the
events about which the witness has given evidence and is honestly giving
evidence of that memory.
(f) I must determine the relevant facts according to the
evidentiary material, considered logically and rationally, without acting
capriciously or irrationally.
(g) I may use my common sense, my individual experience
and wisdom, in assessing the evidence given by the witnesses.
(h) I am not required by any rule of law, logic or
common sense to accept a witness wholly or reject a witness wholly. I can accept
everything that a witness has said if I consider all of it worthy of acceptance,
I can reject everything that a witness has said
if I consider none of it worthy
of acceptance, or I can accept that part of what a witness said I consider
worthy of acceptance and
reject the rest of what that witness said as I consider
it unworthy of acceptance.
(i) In a criminal trial the Crown must prove the
essential elements of the charge beyond reasonable doubt. The Crown does not
to prove everything about which evidence has been given beyond reasonable
(j) In this case the AYP did not
take part in an interview with police. He was not obliged to do so. He was
exercising his right to
silence at the time and no inference negative to his
case should be drawn from him choosing to exercise that right.
(k) The AYP gave evidence at his hearing. He was not obliged to do so. His
evidence should be treated in the same way as any other
witness. Regardless of
the fact of his giving evidence, the onus of proof lies at all times upon the
Crown. At all times the burden
lies upon the Crown to prove each element of each
offence beyond reasonable doubt.
(l) Evidence was given by
pre-recorded police interviews
played in court, by audiovisual
with the complainant having
the assistance of a witness intermediary and with support persons
Each of these aspects of
the way in which evidence was given is a usual practice in the ACT. I must not
draw any adverse inference
against the accused and the evidence should not be
given any greater or lesser weight because the evidence was given in these ways.
(m) I do not give myself either
of the warnings or suggestions which are prohibited by
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1991
(n) Liberato direction: I
have considered the Liberato direction in detail when considering the evidence
in the hearing below. There
is no burden upon an accused to demonstrate that a
complainant has a motive to lie. Rather, the burden remains at all times upon
the Crown. In a case like this where the Crown case is very much dependent on
the evidence of the complainant, the Crown must establish
complainant’s evidence on matters essential to establish the charges is to
be accepted beyond reasonable doubt.
As the Crown case is largely based on the evidence given by the complainant, I
need to examine that evidence carefully.
I am entitled to convict the AYP on the
basis of that evidence if I accept it. However, in order for the Crown to
establish the charges
beyond a reasonable doubt, I would need to accept beyond a
reasonable doubt the accuracy of that evidence. It is therefore important
consider it carefully.
(p) Out of an abundance of
caution I have directed myself in accordance with the
direction given
the presence of the alternative charge: Each of the charges against the accused
must be considered separately. If
I am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt in
relation to one of the charges because I have a doubt about the evidence of the
who in this case is the central Crown witness, I must consider what
effect, if any, the doubts that I have about the complainant’s
evidence on
that charge have in relation to the other charge.
(q) Delay in complaint. There
was a delay in some hours before a complaint was made to police in this matter.
The absence or delay
in making a complaint does not necessarily indicate that
the allegation that an offence was committed is false. There may be good
why a victim of a sexual offence may not make, or may hesitate to make, a
complaint about the offence. In the circumstances
of this matter the
complainant was a child who made her initial complaint to her sister immediately
and in the early hours of the
morning. She was taken to police later that day
after she had slept for some hours. I will deal with this aspect of the
prosecution
case in some depth when I consider the defence submissions later in
this decision.
(r) Complaint: In relation to evidence of complaints
made by the complainant after the event, if I accept that the complaints were
made and that evidence is consistent with the evidence of the complainant, then
I can use that evidence in two ways:
I can use evidence of what was said in the complaint as some evidence that the
incident did occur as the complainant said.
The law says that because of the
circumstances in which the complaint was made, I am entitled to use what was
said in that complaint
as evidence of the truth of what the complainant alleged
against a person. I must consider whether I draw that conclusion in this
particular case and so treat the complaint as evidence of the alleged incident
by the complainant. If I do use it as some evidence
of the incident that is the
subject of the relevant count, then I must determine what weight to give
whether I do use the evidence of complaint in that way or not, the fact that the
complainant raised the allegation against
the accused at the time and in the
manner that she did may lead me to accept the evidence she gave. In other words,
it may make her
evidence more believable than if she had not raised the
allegation as she did. If I use the evidence in that way, I must determine
weight the evidence should be given.
(s) I must, however, bear in mind that the fact that a
person says something on more than one occasion does not mean that what is
is necessarily true or accurate. A false or inaccurate statement does not become
more reliable just because it is repeated on
one or more occasions.
(t) In this case, where the accused has pointed to what
are submitted to be differences between the terms of the complaints made by
complainant and the evidence that she has given, I must give careful
consideration as to the significance of those alleged differences
and whether
they cast doubt upon the reliability of her evidence.
(u) Out of an abundance of caution I directed myself that I should not take into
account at all that the AYP is apparently a young
person in the care and
protection system. That fact had no relevance to the matter other than being
part of the factual matrix.
(v) Expert evidence. In this
case the reports of a paediatrician Dr Bhavna Chawla (excluding page 3), a
forensic medical officer
Dr Emily Rushton and a forensic biologist, Jennifer
Stone, were admitted into evidence by consent. These reports contained expert
evidence. An expert witness is a person who has specialised knowledge based on
that person’s training, study or experience.
A witness with such
specialised knowledge may express an opinion on matters within his or her
particular area of expertise. The value
of any expert opinion is dependent
reliability and accuracy of the material which the expert used to reach his or
her opinion; and
degree to which the expert analysed the material upon which the opinion was
based, and the skill and experience brought to bear
in formulating the opinion
The evidence of Dr Chawla related to her assessment
of the complainant at the Canberra Health Services Child At Risk Health Unit at
12.56 pm on 4 July 2023. She performed a sexual assault examination on the
complainant including taking swabs for DNA analysis and
performing and what is
called an ano-genital examination. The examination of the complainant’s
genitalia and anus showed no
signs of injury, trauma or discolouration and
neither confirmed or refuted the possibility of inappropriate sexual
The evidence of Dr Rushton related to the taking of DNA swabs from the shaft
and glans of the penis of the AYP.
The evidence of Ms Stone related to the analysis of samples taken from the
complainant’s body during her forensic examination
and the body of the
accused young person for biological material. All of the samples taken from the
complainant (including low vaginal
swabs, labial swabs and perianal swabs)
returned trace samples of female only DNA from which she herself could not be
excluded as
the source. Both of the samples taken from the penis of the AYP
provided trace samples of male only DNA from which the accused
young person
himself could not be excluded.
I must consider the extent to which the opinions
expressed by Dr Chawla, Dr Rushton and Ms Stone may be applied in the particular
circumstances of this case. I am not obliged to act upon the expert evidence,
particularly if the facts upon which the expert’s
opinion is based does
not accord with the facts as I find them to be. I am also, to a degree, entitled
to take into account my common
sense and my own experiences if they are relevant
to the issue upon which the expert evidence relates.
In this case there was no
challenge to the expertise of Dr Chawla, Dr Rushton or Ms Stone or to the
results that they set out in their
reports. I should therefore accept the
accuracy of those results. I must however carefully consider exactly what those
results prove
and what they do not prove when considering the matters in issue
in the case.
(w) Defence have sought a
unreliable evidence direction pursuant to
(ACT). I will deal with this when I consider the evidence of
the complainant.
(x) Unsworn evidence. The complainant gave unsworn evidence. In accordance
[2016] HCA 6
(2016) 258 CLR 108
[54 and 56], the fact that
the child in this case did not take an oath or make an affirmation (and was not
exposed to the consequences
of failing to adhere to either) is not material to
the assessment of whether the evidence is truthful and reliable. I decline to
direct myself to take into account the difference between sworn and unsworn
Elements of the Offences
Charge 1 CH2023/933: Attempted Incest
44 of the Criminal Code provides:
(1) If a person attempts to commit an offence, the person commits the offence
of attempting to commit that offence.
(2) However, a person commits the offence of attempting to commit an offence
only if the person carries out conduct that is more than
merely preparatory to
the commission of the offence attempted.
(3) The question whether conduct is more than merely preparatory is a
question of fact.
(4) A person may be found guilty of attempting to commit an offence even
(a) it was impossible to commit the offence attempted; or
(b) the person committed the offence attempted.
(5) For the offence of attempting to commit an offence, intention and
knowledge are fault elements for each physical element of the
Only 1 of the fault elements of intention or knowledge needs
to be established for each physical element of the offence attempted
(Establishing guilt of offences)).
(6) However, any special liability provisions that apply to an offence apply
also to the offence of attempting to commit the offence.
(7) Any defence, procedure, limitation or qualifying provision applying to an
offence applies to the offence of attempting to commit
the offence.
(8) If a person is found guilty of attempting to commit an offence, the
person cannot later be charged with committing the offence
(9) The offence of attempting to commit an offence is punishable as if the
offence attempted had been committed.
(10) This section does not apply to an offence against section 45 or section
48 (Conspiracy).
(1) A person who engages in
intercourse
with another person, being a person who is under the age of
10 years and who is, to the knowledge of the firstmentioned person, his
lineal descendant, sister, half-sister, brother, half-brother or
is guilty of an offence punishable, on conviction, by imprisonment for 20
(5) A person charged with an offence against this section shall, unless there is
evidence to the contrary, be presumed to have known
at the time of the alleged
offence that he or she and the person with whom the offence is alleged to have
related in the way charged.
elements of the offence are:
(a) The accused intended to engage in sexual intercourse with another person;
(b) The accused carried out conduct that was more than merely preparatory to the
commission of the offence attempted;
(c) The other person was under the age of 10;
(d) The other person was to the knowledge of the accused, his half sister.
relation to charge 1, it is alleged that the AYP removed the complainants pants
and his own lower clothing and applied pressure
with either his penis, fingers,
or finger or another object to the outside of complainant’s naked genital
area (her ‘private
parts’) with the intention of effecting
penetration on her vagina
Charge 2 CH 2023/934: Aggravated Act of Indecency on a
Person Under the Age of 10 Years
Acts of indecency with
young people
(1) A person who commits an act of indecency on, or in the presence of,
another person who is under the age of 10 years is guilty
of an offence
punishable, on conviction, by imprisonment for 12 years.
(2) However, for an
against subsection (1), the maximum penalty is imprisonment for
(Aggravated offences—
offences involving family
violence) makes provision in relation to an
against this section.
elements of the offence are:
(a) The accused committed an act.
(b) The act was indecent according to the standards of morality and decency held
by ordinary members of the community.
(c) The act is committed on, or in the presence of, another person.
(d) The other person was under the age of 10.
(e) The other person was the half-sister of the accused.
order to prove element (b), the Crown must prove beyond reasonable doubt that
the act was indecent. The word “indecent”
means contrary to the
ordinary standards of respectable people in the community. I must determine the
standards prevailing in our
community when deciding whether the Crown has
satisfied me beyond reasonable doubt that the act alleged in this case was
an act to be indecent it must have a sexual connotation or overtone. If an act
is one which clearly gives rise to a sexual connotation
that is sufficient to
establish that the act was indecent.
Crown may prove element (e) if it proves that the accused knew that the
complainant was not consenting. Element (e) would also
be satisfied if the Crown
proves that the accused realised that there was a possibility that the
complainant was not consenting to
the act, but he went ahead anyway. The Crown
can also prove element (e) if it proves beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
not even think about whether the complainant was consenting to the act,
treating the question of whether she was not consenting as
irrelevant. It is
enough that the Crown proves beyond reasonable doubt element (e) in any one of
these three ways.
deciding this issue, I am concerned with the actual state of mind of the AYP at
the time of the act. It is his mind I must consider.
It’s not a question
of what I would have realised, or thought, or believed. It is not a question of
what a reasonable person
of his age would have thought or believed. This
ingredient of the offence requires that I look at what was going on in the mind
the AYP. In deciding this issue, I can have regard to all the surrounding
circumstances.
relation to charge 2, it is alleged that the act of indecency involved the AYP
removing the complainant’s pants and his own
lower clothing and applied
pressure with either his penis, fingers, or finger or another object to the
outside of complainant’s
naked genital area (her ‘private
THE WITNESS EVIDENCE
The Complainant MU
complainant was the first witness called by the prosecution. Following the
witness intermediary report exhibited at P3, she was
born in March 2014 and was
10 years old at the time of the hearing. She gave evidence with the assistance
of a sworn intermediary.
I determined that MU was capable of giving unsworn
evidence. The majority of her evidence was given by way of pre-recorded
with police and, by consent, I was provided a transcript of that
interview to use as an aide memoire.
said that she asked for the AYP’s iPad in the lounge room and he provided
it to her. She went back to her room and he followed
her there. He was laying
down and when the iPad went black he started being really, really weird. She
tried to go to sleep and he
kept being weird to her. She pretended to be asleep
to see what he was going to do and he kept being weird.
she was asked to explain what weird meant she said that the AYP was tickling her
belly and then he folded her pants and he pulled
his pants and undies down and
pulled her pants and undies down as well. She then felt something round on her
and gestured to her groin. She did not see the round
thing. She said that it felt like a push, a little bit.
push was in the middle of her private, like all of her private and it was going
straight. It did not feel good because the AYP
was being really weird.
then said “I’ll be back” and she went to her father’s
room but her father wanted her little sister to get
to sleep and she said
‘ok’ to that. The AYP had followed her to that room and she tried to
tell her dad but she couldn’t
because he was coming up.
AYP followed her back to her room and she said “I’ll be back”.
The AYP said that he was going to get a drink
and she then ran to her sister KT.
attempt was made to ascertain why she had not complained to her father when the
AYP was coming. She said:
“Because I just didn’t want – because last time- because when
I told my dad yesterday about the AYP not knowing,
um, (the AYP) told my dad,
“did you do it?’ And then the AYP was just lying, that he
was then asked:
Q52. Just so I’m clear, when you told your dad, he spoke to the AYP and
asked ‘Did you do it ?’ and, the AYP said
– lied and said he
A Yes, when he did.
confirmed that she was on the lounge when she asked the AYP for his iPad and
that he was watching a movie named Vacation. She
had asked him for his iPad
because her iPad was flat and she couldn’t find the charger.
was 3.30 when she had gone to tell her older sister KT and when KT woke up her
mum ‘it hit 4’ and that this was in
the dark time.
the AYP had given her his iPad he had followed her to her room after about five
AYP started to tickle her belly and do it weird. She was in her room sitting on
her bed. She tried to fall asleep because she
was really tired but he was still
just tickling her belly.
this stage both were lying on the bed although the AYP did not also have his
head on her pillow.
AYP pulled her over to him and folded down her pants down. He used both his
hands to do this and she ended up on her left side.
He then pulled her pants
down and she felt him pull his pants down.
felt a round thing in the middle of her private. She thought that the round
thing was his private because she had previously
bathed with her father. She
did not know why she thought it was his private.
activity felt like a stick was pulling and it was hurting because he a little
bit pushed too far. That pain lasted for one second.
He had been pushing for
said to the AYP that she’d be right back because she didn’t want the
AYP to know, because he must have thought she
was going to tell their
AYP said that he was going to the kitchen to get a drink and she went up to her
dad. Then the AYP came (to their dad).
then went to KT’s room and told her what happened. She told KT what the
AYP did and KT got out of her room to go tell and
wake up their mum.
went to her mum’s room and her mum told her to sleep in her bed and have a
little nap.
saw the AYP on the couch. He didn’t look at MU or do anything to her.
Her mum and dad went to go tell him if it was true
and he lied.
could not see much in her room. Her TV stayed on and her door was open.
pyjama pants were long Lilo and Stich character pants and they were blue, pink,
light blue and dark blue. She had a pyjama top
with a cat logo on it and blue
undies on. The AYP was wearing black shorts, a black t shirt and a gold
described the AYP as have peachy skin that goes white when she touches it. He
has white freckles on his body. He is nice and
he shares but he is weird. He
is weird to nine year olds and she is nine. She could not say what made her
think he was weird.
AYP had been playing a game called Roblox on his iPad and she had been playing a
game named Caveman.
MU was in her bed and the AYP was there he just kept saying “are you
ok?” and she said “I’m fine”.
was a blue pillow, a blue pink and aqua sheet and blanket on her bed and she was
lying on top of them. Neither she or the AYP
ever went under the blanket and he
did not lie on the sheet.
said to police in conclusion “
um, no, that’s just it and is what
was asked further questions in evidence-in-chief by the crown prosecutor.
went to her dad’s room to go and tell him what happened.
was not able to answer questions about why she wanted to tell her dad what
happened, or what was weird between them or what she
meant when she used the
word private.
she was lying next to the AYP she was looking at the floor and her legs were
next to his legs. She was putting her legs straight
and his legs were straight
did not understand when asked to explain what the middle part of her private
was not able to articulate where she felt the hurt the hurt on her body. The
witness intermediary told the Court that the witness
was indicating an area on
her body but MU was not able to verbalise this. I ignored what the intermediary
told me as being inadmissible
because the evidence did not come from MU herself
and I was not able to see her gesticulation because of the presence of a table
in the witness facility and the camera angle.
forgot what she told her mum on the night. She was played a recoding of part of
that conversation and identified herself and her
mum speaking in it. MU said
she knew that the conversation was being recorded.
copy of the conversation and transcript of the recording is exhibited at
that recording MU said that the AYP came into her room and was watching her play
Roblox. The AYP was laying down on top of the
doona next to MU. He was getting
weird, doing weird stuff to her.
asked she said that he was tickling her belly and then he did the leg and did
the doodle. When asked to explain she said that
he grabbed her leg and put it
not his and he was moving with his clothes still on. The he did the
AYP pulled her undies and pants down and he was behind her. She then thought he
was asleep and he pulled her to her side to face
AYP pulled his pants down and she agreed when led that she could feel his skin.
asked “where did his doodle touch you?” she said “in the
middle”. She did not know how she knew it was
doodle but it felt like a
round thing.
then told him “I’ll be back”, the AYP climbed over her on all
fours and she went up to dad. Dad told her that
he need to get (the baby)
asleep and she went to her room. MU followed her to her room. She said
“I’m going to bed”
and he waved to her and said bye and
goodnight. MU then went to her sister and told her.
cross examination MU agreed that she sometimes stayed up late but disagreed that
she had trouble sleeping. She disagreed with
propositions that she felt
stressed because she could not get to sleep, that she went and saw her mum or
sisters because she couldn’t
sleep, that her parents sometimes told her
she looked really tired and that she sometimes looked grey in the face because
agreed that she felt anxious about going to school sometimes and that she does
school at home most of the time. She did not agree
that she took pills from the
doctor for her anxiety.
agreed that she spent a lot of time at home with her sisters and mum and that
they teach her everything she knows. She agreed
that when they teach or tell
her things that she believed they were the truth.
said that prior to the AYP coming to live with them people in her house would
talk about him a little bit. She denied that people
said the AYP was weird and
that mum would say he was weird. She did not know if KT said that the AYP was
weird sometimes and that
KT did not say to stay away from the AYP. KT did say
that MU had to keep her clothes on around the AYP, but KT did not say that
because the AYP was weird.
agreed that sometimes she played computer games for a long time and it was hard
to stop playing sometimes. She agreed that she
put a lot of effort into winning
games and getting lives and doing well in the game and that Roblox was one of
those games.
disagreed with propositions that she got upset when she died in the game, that
she got upset when she wanted to play but can’t,
or got upset when her
parents have taken a game off her, or when she was tired and hungry little
things made her upset.
did not agree that the AYP was in the shed or garage when she asked to borrow
his iPad. She disagreed that the AYP originally
said no to her borrowing his
iPad and that she was not upset with him. She agreed that the AYP did give her
the iPad and that she
went back to her room with it and played Roblox.
did not agree that the AYP stayed in the shed after that.
did not agree that the battery on the AYP’s iPad then went flat. Nor did
she agree that she was upset about that as she
maintained that the battery had
not gone flat on that device. She did not agree that the AYP came to her room
and asked for his
iPad back. She was not annoyed at him. She did not agree
that the AYP walked in and picked up his iPad off the floor and then left
because the battery was flat. She did not agree that the AYP then walked out of
agreed that the AYP walked up the hall. The context of that agreement was not
disagreed that she couldn’t sleep in her room and that she followed the
AYP out of her room. She did not agree that the
AYP was in their Dad’s
room getting blankets but agreed that she did want to speak to her dad and that
he was busy with the
baby. She did not agree that she was upset by that.
did not agree that the AYP went back to the lounge with blankets. He did start
watching TV and she did go back to her room, but
she did not close the
then went to see her sister KT. She was not feeling tired when she spoke to KT.
It was not 3.30 in the morning and she was not
upset that she couldn’t
sleep. She was not upset that she couldn’t play Roblox anymore. Nor was
she upset that the AYP’s
iPad had died or that her dad didn’t want
knew that KT hated the AYP and thought that KT thought he was weird a little
bit. MU agreed that she want her sister’s attention
and that she had told
her that MU was being weird.
said that KT did not start asking her questions. KT did not ask her if the AYP
had touched her and did not ask her about the AYP’s
agreed that KT had first told their mum BU what had happened and that BU then
started asking questions. She agreed that BU seemed
really worried. BU did ask
if the AYP has pushed his doddle into her private. MU did not feel confused
MR COOPER: Is it possible you think what happened with the doodle happened
because (BU) and (KT) said it happened?---Yes. (I note
that whilst the answer
was given, at the time, I thought that this question was not properly understood
by the witness because it
contained too many propositions)
said that BU had not asked her again and again what had happened. BU did not
make her say it lots of times. Each time she had
to tell BU she did not talk
agreed that the AYP did not put his leg over her and that she was pretending to
sleep and that she had her knees up in front of
her in a sleep position.
agreed that BU did not fold her pants down or look at her vagina and say it was
red. BU did not ask her what happened again the
next morning but did ask for
her story again before going to the police station.
agreed that she went with her father TU to live at a different house. She was
not feeling okay about the AYP at the different
house and she was not thinking
that maybe it didn’t happen. She was not confused about why all of this
was happening.
agreed that then she went back to live with both her parents. She agreed that
Mum had told her that she believed her. She agreed
that mum had said that the
AYP had to go to jail.
agreed that she got an iPhone for her birthday and that it was an iPhone 14. It
was not something to do with the AYP and was not
for what she was doing to the
agreed that recently she was living with both mum and dad and that she was
feeling stressed about giving evidence in court. Her
mum had asked her to
practice her story with her.
did not agree that her mum had asked her lots of times or that mum said the
story was wrong sometimes. She agreed that mum did
tell her to tell the court
that something with the AYP had happened.
re-examination MU said that she had stopped using the AYP’s iPad because
she wanted to go and tell KT. MU forgot what she
had first said to her mum
did not know why she had said ‘yes’ to defence counsel’s
question about whether she said the doodle thing happened
because her mum and
sister said it did. I formed the view that MU did not understand this question
and this confirmed my view that
MU did not understand the original question in
cross-examination.
did not remember where her legs were when the AYP folded her pants
Evidence of UI
is aged 16 and gave sworn evidence. He lives in the care of BU and is in a
relationship with BU’s daughter KT. His record
of conversation with
police from October 2013 is exhibit P8.
the night in question he was laying down with KT. MU came into the room and
whispered into KT’s ear. He and then KT got
up and went and woke up BU to
tell her what had happened. He got ‘really pissed off about it’ and
went to the AYP and
threatened him by saying “if it’s true I will
stab you right now on this couch”.
then returned to BU’s room where the complainant told them about 10 times
what had happened. He then returned to the AYP
and threatened him by saying
‘this better not be fucking true. Otherwise I will bash you on this
couch. Each time the AYP
denied the allegation by saying words like “No.
I swear to God it’s not true. I don’t do that’. I thought
that those denials were important as was the fact that they were extracted by
significant threats of harm.
next day UI and KT took the sheets and a pillowcase off the bed for evidentiary
observed that MU did not deserve to go through ‘that stuff’ and that
her father appeared to not believe her on the
night. TU said ‘Stop lying.
Stop lying’ to MU and was told to get out of the room by his wife BU.
was laying down with KT in KT’s room from about midnight.
knocked on the door and looked pale and frightened. She went to KT and
whispered in KT’s ear. He then wanted to go out
and stab the AYP to
said that “(the AYP) was acting real weird and, like, just going under the
blanket and, like, touching all her legs and stuff”.
described the AYP as being fat and ugly with freckles all over his face and that
he was a blondish ‘rang-er’ (as in
having red hair) and aged about
said that the AYP knocked on the door at about 12.30 to 1.00 and that it
occurred roughly four months prior to the interview.
KT told UI what MU had told her, MU said to him “(UI) please don’t
hurt (the AYP). Please don’t hurt him.”
went to BU and told MU to tell BU exactly what happened. He thought that BU was
shocked. BU requested he and KT to wake BU’s
husband TU and they went and
woke him up. TW was laying down in the baby’s room trying to get her to
woke up TU.
left BU’s room to give the family some privacy. He went out to the AYP
who was in the dining room on the couch. The AYP
had pants on and an Adidas
jumper. He looked like a big chubby boy with a fat face with freckles all over
it. He then threatened
the AYP who denied doing anything to MU.
knew that the AYP was TU’s son and had only known him for about two weeks
prior to the incident. He thought that the AYP
was just another kid but felt
that there was something weird about him.
said that KT had told him that the AYP was a bit weird and that everyone thought
he was weird. UI thought that he was a bit weird
went out to the AYP a second time, threatened him and he seemed real scared.
The first time he went out the AYP was laying there
with his eyes wide
said that he had not spoken to anyone else about the incident and didn’t
really speak about it much any more. He had kept
it between BU and everyone
could not remember what the AYP was wearing on the night.
cross-examination UI agreed that he had a big gold watch on his right wrist in
Court and that BU was his foster mum and that he
was in a relationship with her
daughter KT.
agreed that it would have been hard for him to live in that house if he had said
to BU that he believed the AYP.
had been living with BU in the same house and agreed that everyone talked about
important things that were going on at home. He
did not agree that this case
had been on everyone’s lips and denied that there had been discussions
going to say in court.
the topic of preparing for court, UI said that he had not seen BU practising
gave straight forward evidence. He is young, immature for his age and appeared
to be quite fixed in his own belief system. I
detect some exaggeration and a
significant element of self-aggrandisement in his version. I thought that he
told things as he thought
they were and despite his over-protective nature was
attempting to tell me the truth. I thought that he was a relatively reliable
The Complainant’s Sister KT
is aged 16 and has the same biological mother as the complainant and lives in
the same house as them. She took part in a recorded
conversation with police on
17 October 2023 and that interview was played as the main portion of her
evidence in chief. It is tendered
as exhibit P9. Parts of that interview were,
by agreement of the parties, redacted with leave of the Court.
told police that MU came into her room and said that the AYP was being really
weird. She looked pale and sick looking. KT asked
her what happened and she
don’t want him to get into trouble and I don’t want to get in
trouble either.” She then whispered in KT’s
ear that the AYP was
“touching her, like, private parts.”
then told her boyfriend UI and they both went and told her mother what MU had
been told had occurred.
saw the AYP sitting on the lounge like nothing had happened and went into her
mother’s bedroom. It was 3 or 4am in the
woke KP and the complainant’s mother and the complainant told her
everything that happened. Her mother recorded it. The
complainant then told
her father TU what had happened and he said “(MU), stop fucking
then went out to the AYP and started yelling at him. The AYP said “Oh, I
didn’t do it. I didn’t do it”.
They then went back into her
mother’s room.
was then asked some specific questions by police. She told them that the AYP
had come to stay with them for a few days and mostly
hung out with his father
had not been doing much the day prior to the event. She had been playing
Minecraft with her boyfriend and “chilling and
stuff”. Everyone in
the family was in the house that night.
had come into her bedroom at about 3.00 or 4.00 in the morning. KT was in bed
with UI. MU knocked on the door and asked to come
in. MU displayed the same
really bad anxiety that she had showed when her parents were leaving her.
said “(the AYP)’s being really weird”. KT said
“what’s he doing?”. MU then said “He’s
me, like, being really weird.”
was asked about the AYP being on the lounge after MU’s disclosure. She
said that the AYP was lying on the lounge with a
blanket over him like nothing
had happened. He was watching TV. When her mother was asking questions KT
thought that he was pretending
to be asleep.
told police that MU had told KT in their mother’s room that MU had
initially gone to her father’s (TU’s) room
before going to
KT’s room. The AYP followed MU to TU’s room and MU couldn’t
say anything to her father. TU then
asked her to leave because he was trying to
get a baby to sleep.
the presence of KT, in their mother’s room, MU had complained of the
“Um so I’m pretty sure they were laying in bed in (MU)’s room.
And – no, so (MU) was laying in bed –
no wait. So MU asked for the
iPad off (the AYP) because he was in the loungeroom. To play Roblox, I think, or
to watch YouTube.
Um, and then she grabbed the Ipad and went into her
room...And then, um, he started laying down with her. And then, um, (MU) was
trying to sleep, Like, she was acting asleep, because (the AYP) started being
weird. Um, and she said that they were on top of
the sheets and not under them.
Um and he um started, like, touching her legs and her, like, private part and
stuff. And then, um,
um, I’m pretty sure she – she said, like
– ‘his doodle’, like, touched her, or something. Um, and yeah,
that’s what she said.”
mother filmed part of this and KT was asked to leave her mother’s room.
She then went back to her own room and whilst
on the way had seen the AYP acting
had seen UI yell at the AYP from her mother’s room. UI said “If this
it true” and the AYP said “No, I
didn’t do it, No I
didn’t do it”. UI then said “Well, you better not
that day KT and her mother went with MU to the police station. She put the
AYP’s jumper and iPad in plastic bags.
told police that she thought that MU understood what “private parts”
and “doodle” meant. I note that (at
least in the unredacted parts
of the interview) KT was not asked to explain the meaning of those terms herself
or explain any common
family usage or definition of those terms.
her recorded evidence was played, KT was asked further questions by the
prosecutor in Court. She gave evidence about a floorplan
of the family home
that she had drawn in her police interview (exhibit P10). Little turns on that
told the Court that the AYP was sleeping in the loungeroom on the lounge. He
didn’t really have any possessions with him
for that stay.
confirmed that she and UI had been playing Minecraft before retiring to bed at
saw that the AYP was laying on
the lounge watching TV. She could not remember if he was alone or what MU was
described her relationship with the AYP as being “very close and I did
love him a lot, like, he was a brother to me. But
the, I guess we just
drifted.” They drifted “...before he moved out to go live with his
other family”. That occurred
in about 2021 or 2022.
explained that MU had come into her room and was standing near her bed. She
said that MU whispered in her ear so that UI didn’t
get “mad or
something”.
told her mother that MU said (the AYP) was being weird and was touching like her
private parts”. Her mother then woke up
her step-father TU. TU then
said “Stop fucking lying MU” and then her mother asked MU some
questions. KT was present
for those questions but could not remember more about
the conversation.
confirmed that MU had used the word “doodle” previously and in the
context of her interview, that MU understood what
the word meant.
it was not specifically asked, I took judicial notice of the fact that
“doodle’ is a commonly used colloquial
term for “penis”.
cross-examination KT agreed that the AYP was only staying in KT’s family
not remember if he had to pack
his blankets away in the baby’s room.
couldn’t remember if she had, in fact, seen the AYP watching TV in the
loungeroom at as late as 11.00 pm.
denied being part of any conversation about the AYP being weird. She did not
say to MU all the time “don’t fucking
go near the AYP MU, make sure
you put your clothes on”.
disagreed with the proposition that she did not want the AYP moving in with
them. Rather she did want that to happen and she
had felt sorry for him.
MU had come into KT’s room she did not ask her if the AYP had touched her.
And she did not ask MU if he had touched her
private part.
agreed that she was living with her mother at the time of the hearing and that
the case was an important thing in the family business.
She said that there had
been no discussions about what everyone was going to say in court.
that context, KT said that her mother had not been practising with MU.
thought that KT was truthful and reliable and did her best to remember what she
could and in the detail that it was presented at
the time. The level of detail
that she provided was important because of her age and her obvious understanding
of the seriousness
of the allegations. It reflected the level of detail that MU
had provided to the police and court and in her telephone recorded
complaint. I
concluded that KT was not exaggerating or being unfavourable to the AYP in her
evidence, but that she was perhaps reluctant
to disclose the full detail of her
past and present dislike for him.
reluctance may have been the result of traditional and careful witness
preparation and not disclosing what might be thought to
be bad character
evidence or just reluctance to disclose the entirety of her dislike. Either way,
it did not affect my overall assessment
The Mother of MU and TK, BU
attend a police station in October 2023 and took part in a recorded interview
with police. Once again, by virtue of an agreement
between the parties, some
irrelevant and/or inadmissible portions of that interview were redacted by order
of the Court.
told police that at around 3.00 am in the morning of July 3 (2023) she had been
woken by her daughter KT and her daughter’s
partner UI. She woke up to
being told that the AYP had “been weird” with MU.
came into the witness’s bedroom behind KT and UI. BU said to MU
”What’s going on, can you explain to Mummy?”
MU replied that
the AYP “was being weird, he like touched me with his doodle”. MU
complained:
“...She was playing Roblox on his iPad, because her iPad had gone flat.
She’d walked to her room. A short time later,
not long, um (the AYP) had
followed her into her room. Um, they were on top of her blanket, her doona, not
under the covers, because
I asked her and she said “No, on top.”.
Um, then he started acting weird MU said. And I said “What do you mean
that?” and she said “Well, he started tickling my belly.” And
I said “Why was he doing that?”
And she said “I don’t
know Mum.” She said “And then I pretended to go to sleep.”
She said “I,
I looked the other way. I was facing the other way.”
And then she said he had – I need to get this right, um –
then pulled her pants down. And I said – no sorry I said – no she
did say that. But then I said “Did he
pull your pants down? Or did you
pull them down?” And she said “No he pulled my pants down”.
And I said “Where
too?” And she, liked, showed me, you know, just
– basically, just before the knees, And I said “Your undies as
well?” And she said “Yes” And I said “Did he pull his
pants down and his undies?” And she said yes.
And she then said that he
started doing this weird thing to me, and he – I said, “What do you
mean?” And she said
, “Oh he pulled me over to face him and then he,
um – he put his doodle onto my private part and he tried to, like, put
in.” And I said, “Are you sure it was his doodle and not his
fingers? Like, how do you know it was his doodle Bub?”
And she said
“Because it was a big round thing, Mum.” ...And then she said,
“Then he tried to push it in, but
it didn’t, like.” I said
“Did it go in, (MU), though?” And she said “No. But my private
part hurts.”
And I said, “Well what do you mean?” And she
said, “Like, he was, like – like putting up – like pushing
against it,” and then “really hard.” And then she said that
she turned around and pretended to go to sleep
or something. And then –
because – she said that he was being “really weird” and when
she’d face the
other way or something...and then he’d put his leg
over onto her. And I Said “What do you mean?” And she said
like, because she was facing the other way and he was facing, like – like
that sort of – back to – oh...Like
he was behind her basically, and
she was faced the other way. And he’s put his leg over her and he’s
kind of on top
of her, you know like this, like sort of moving. And then
that’s when she’d gotten out of bed.”
had then walked up the hallway to the room that her father was in. He told MU
to go away because he was trying to get the baby
asleep and the baby was
teething. MU said “I wouldn’t have been able to tell Dad anyway,
because he followed me up the
hallway.” What this meant was that MU said
that the AYP had followed her from her room to their father’s room. MU
walked back down the hallway, waved to the AYP and said good night. She
then went into her sister KT’s bedroom.
all three came into the mother’s own bedroom she got MU in the room and
“I went over the story, like, so many times
mother was in shock, crying was a mess and didn’t want to believe it. She
thought that another daughter would “go
off” because “we
already knew that (the AYP) was a bit weird prior to this”.
she had gone over the story with MU “so many times with her” she
recorded what she had been told on her mobile phone.
Her husband walked in and
a heated argument ensued in front of MU. “Don’t fucking lie
MU”, “That wouldn’t
have happened” and “You better
be telling the truth” were all things said by the father. He was told to
the room by the mother and the complainant then slept with her mother for
the remainder of the morning.
telephoned the police at about midday. A blanket and MU’s clothes were
placed in bags and they attended a police station.
in the interview BU confirmed that the other daughter had never liked the AYP to
begin with and had not wanted him there when
he visited.
said that she recorded “basically, everything she told me that happened
– on my phone” because she wanted to
keep it as evidence. The
recording was given to police when they attended later on the day of the event.
BU had her phone down
when she was recording and MU did not know at the time
that she was recording. BU told her “I think when I stopped the
that’s when I had said to her...Mummy’s just recorded
– like, had to record this.”
told police that MU used the word “doodle” to describe a
“dick”. And the she used ‘private parts’
to describe
her ‘vagina” saying “...she either uses private part or
asked MU to pull her pants down and show her mother. BU said “I just had
a look, um, because I didn’t want to touch
anything, um, in case. But it
just looked a bit red, you know, on the outside.” This was different to
how it would (otherwise)
made it clear to police that she thought that the vaginal redness meant that the
AYP had unsuccessfully attempted to insert his
penis into MU’s vagina.
Although it was inadmissible as a medical opinion I thought it was important to
use this statement
to assess BU’s evidence as a whole and contrast it with
the actual evidence of the recorded conversation that she made with
MU’s own evidence. And also the other witnesses.
was able to describe the lighting in MU’s room at night. There were
hallway and kitchen lights on at night. They put “a
fair bit of light
on...because she gets very scared of the dark.” There was also light from
detailed animosity between her family and the father’s family. She told
police that his family think that she and her daughters
had put the allegation
into MU’s head. Further, they did not believe that the allegation
happened and that they were criminals
and bad people.
had gone to get a drink and he was on the lounge.
She thought that he had a
t-shirt and track pants on. He had been wearing a black Adidas jumper earlier.
KT put that jumper and
an iPad in to a bag for police.
and her husband TU had argued before police were called. He did not want her to
telephone police and she, on advice from her own
mother, wanted to telephone
in the interview BU remembered that when MU had come into BU’s bedroom to
complain she was worried about getting onto trouble.
BU had said “You
need to tell Mummy” and MU said “No, I’m scared like I’m
going to get into trouble.”
BU then reassured her daughter.
told police that KT used to say the following to MU all the time
“Don’t fucking go near (the AYP) MU. Like, make sure
you put your
clothes on”.
the end of her interview BU told police that her husband had left the house for
three months after the event. She accused him
of influencing MU:
“...at the start he brainwashed and manipulated (MU) really badly. Um I
mean, to the point where she would not even talk to
me. Come near me,
nothing...Um, because he had put that much stuff in her head that I was going to
take her away from (TU)...And,
like, her brain has really been twisted and
manipulated and brainwashed and affected so badly.”
told police that MU was living at home at the time of the interview and was
“so angry”. “And her attitude has
changed and she just says,
‘I want the AYP to go to jail. I hate him. I don’t like him. I
hate him for what he did
were created in the police interviews. I found that all of the floor plans in
the hearing to be so unrepresentative of
any scale or dimension or geometrical
symmetry that they were of no probative value.
evidence-in-chief BU told the Court that the AYP had come to stay with them for
two or three days prior to July 3 (2023) and he
had been kicked out of his usual
residence. They did not have a spare room for the AYP and so he slept on the
lounge. He didn’t
have many possessions when he came to stay with them.
The AYP had turned up at their house with two relatives. BU then agreed for
to stay a few days until things could be worked out.
prosecutor asked BU questions about the recording that she made of the
conversation with MU in her bedroom. BU could not remember
the exact time in
the morning the recording was made. In the context of it being put to her that
MU came into her room at about
3.00 or 4.00 in the morning she said “I
wanted to make sure that what she was telling me – and she had said the
thing for an hour – like over and over and that’s when I said,
‘Okay, well, I want you to tell me in full again...”
BU made the recording, she, MU, KT and UI were in her bedroom. The recording of
the conversation was played. It is exhibit
P6. I have anonymised and set out
the relevant contents of it here:
BU: So you got the iPad...Where was the AYP?
MU: No. I was playing Roblox and then the AYP was in the loungeroom. And then
when I was playing Roblox, the AYP came into my room.
He watched me play
Roblox. And then when...
BU: And where did he go in your room?
MU: Just on my bed. And then he was watching me.
BU: Was he sitting up or laying down?
MU: Laying down.
BU: Next to you?
BU: On your bed?
BU: On top of the doona, or under the doona , or...
MU: On the doona.
BU: On top?
BU: Okay. Yep
MU: And then when – and then he was getting weird. And then when I...
BU: What do you mean he was getting weird?
MU: He was doing weird stuff.
BU: Like what?
MU: Like, he was doing that to me.
BU. Tickling your belly.
MU: And then, um – and then, when – and he started to get weirder.
Ad that’s when he, um showed me his doodle.
I mean not show me, did
BU: But you need to explain to me. So he started tickling your belly here.
BU: And then didn’t you say something about the leg?
MU: Oh yeah. He did the leg and then he did the doodle.
BU: Okay, So he put your leg over – grabbed your leg? Tell me. You need
to tell me in your words.
MU: He grabbed, um, my leg and put it onto his again, and that’s when he
was moving...
BU: With clothes still on?
MU: Yes. And he was moving.
BU: Like – like this? Like...
BU: And then, after that?
MU: then he did – and then he did – and then he did the doodle.
BU: No, but who pulled your pants – did you pull your pants down or
MU: No. He did.
BU: And where did he pull them down to? Show me.
MU: To here.
BU: The undies and the pants?
MU: No audible reply.
BU: And how were you laying? Show me how you were laying. Lay down on the bed
and show me how you were laying.
MU: I was laying like this, but – and then, um I – but I was laying
BU: And then how did he pull them down? Was he behind you here?
BU: And then...
MU: And then he thought that I was asleep. And then he pulled me to this side.
UI: What? Show me. You were laying like this.
UI: And he was behind you?
UI: And then he’s pulled you over, look at ...what way?
BU: Tio face me. Like, this way.
BU: And then what happened from there?
MU: And then – and then he just pulled my pants down and he did the doodle
BU: No, but did he pull his pants down?
BU: So could you feel his skin?
MU: Mm-hmm.
BU: Could you see his skin?
BU: So you could just feel it?
MU: Mm-hmm.
BU: And then where did his doodle touch you?
MU: In the middle.
KT: Are you sure it was his doodle and not his fingers?
BU: Are you sure it was his doodle and not his fingers?
MU: NO. His doodle.
BU: How do you know it was his doodle?
MU: I don’t know. Because I felt it – like a round thing.
BU: And then you went where after it happened?
MU. And then I said, ‘I’ll be back.’ And then that’s
when he, um – he – he, um went like this.
BU: That’s when he’s went like that on all fours to get over her,
and then she said that she’ll be back, and then
he’s gone up –
then what did you do?
MU: I went up to Dad. And then I went up to Dad.
BU: And then Dad what?
MU: And then dad said I need to get (the baby) asleep so can you please get
– and that’s when I went to my room. He
followed me to my room. And
then I said, ‘I’m going to bed.’ He waved to me and said bye
and goodnight, I think.
‘Goodnight.’ And then that’s when I
went to KT and told her.
cross-examination BU agreed that MU had trouble getting to sleep and could stay
up later than 3.00 due to trauma from a home invasion.
agreed that MU suffered from anxiety and that sometimes she comes to BU when she
can’t sleep.
agreed that MU would be tired and anxious when she came to her and it was like
she was wide awake.
agreed that there were 10 people in the house in the night of the incident.
agreed that MU was close to her sisters and very close to her father. MU was
was asked if she was the boss of the family. She said “Well, I
wouldn’t say that I run the show but someone’s
got to be, you know
strict to it in the family and that, yes, is myself because I don’t do
drugs and I don’t, you know,
so I’ve had to help TU through, you
know, his life and teach him different things because he wasn’t taught
that in his
life.” So I would say yes, I would say that I’m more of
agreed that the family discussed things together. She also agreed that on a
couple of occasions she had discussed with the girls
that the AYP was
had difficulty agreeing that she said in her interview the words “KT used
to say all the time “Don’t fucking
go near the AYP, MU, like, make
sure you put your clothes on.” She explained that this was in reference
to MU getting out
of the shower and not covering herself.
agreed that one of her daughters did not want the AYP to move into the
disagreed that she had spoke to KT after KT gave evidence about what questions
were asked of her in court the previous day.
agreed that on the night of the event that it was KT who first told her what
MU’s problem was. She further agreed that it
was KT who had first told
her that the AYP had either been weird or had touched MU. She agreed that she
was immediately worried
that the AYP had sexually assaulted MU.
agreed that she then asked MU questions and that one of those questions was
‘Did he lift his leg onto you.’ She agreed
that she had asked about
the AYP’s doodle and if it had gone near her private.
disagreed that she was asking her story again and again to get it straight.
accepted that the recording was made at around 5.55am. She couldn’t
remember exactly what time MU had come it but she agreed
that it was maybe
between 3.00 and 4.00.
agreed that she was angry with TU because he had doubted the complainant.
agreed when it was put to her that she had taken MU to hospital on the following
day, being the 4
of July but she could not agree how many hours
after the event that was.
agreed that she gave the doctors a version of what MU had told her. She agreed
that she did not tell TU about the vaginal redness
on the night of the event but
thought that she had told the doctors. She agreed that she had not told TU
did not agree with the proposition that she did not pull MU’s pants down.
She did not answer the proposition that she did
not see any redness.
agreed that she said on the night that she wanted to call the police. She did
not agree with the proposition that she was worried
that MU would forget about
what had happened to her.
agreed that she had let MU sleep in the following morning, but she did not ask
her again that morning what had happened.
agreed that she did not like her husband’s family and that she thought
they were nasty people and criminals. She agreed
that she thought that her
husband’s children were weird, but added that she felt sorry for
disagreed that she had kicked TU out of the house. Her view was that she had
told him to get out and that he had gone of his
own accord. She did not agree
that the reason she had kicked him out was that TU didn’t agree with her
that the offending
had definitely happened.
TU left, MU and his children left with him.
was then the following exchange:
“Do you accept that TU is not a sophisticated person? ---What do you
Would you say he’s a simple man?---No, he’s been a bit of hard
He might not be as intelligent as you?---NO, because he’s been though a
lot in his life. He turned to drugs and alcohol and
I helped him though
And you say?---he is a different person he is today because of me. Yes, I might
be a bit tough but someone has to be, okay?”
did not agree that she started to think that TU was starting to take MU away
from her. She said that TU was putting into MU’s
head that ‘Mummy
won’t give you back’ when she was ringing them or wanted to see
them. BU thought that this played
on MU’s anxiety and made MU
said that she was not worried that MU would stop saying that it happened. She
agreed that TU and MU moved back into the family
disagreed that TU was only allowed to move back in if he believed MU. She did
agree that TU was not allowed to talk to the AYP
when he came back.
agreed that MU’s attitude changed when she came back. She agreed that MU
says that she hates the AYP but could not remember
if that was said when she
moved back to the home.
agreed that MU has said that she wanted the AYP to go to jail because of what he
had done to her. She agreed that those words
did not sound like MU and added
that she was shocked when she heard them. She disagreed that this was MU
parroting her.
said that she had not spoken to MU about what she would say in court in the lead
up to the hearing.
clarified in re-examination that she had asked MU about the topic of lifting of
legs because she wanted MU to use her own words
and not MU’s words about
what had happened.
was concerned about BU’s evidence. Her free recall in the first part of
her police interview was inconsistent with MU’s
style of speaking,
MU’s actual words used in her police interview, and in court, and
MU’s actual detail and style of
speaking in the recorded complaint.
police interview took place more than three months after the allegation was
made. The level of detail and content that
BU gave in the interview was striking
and I thought that rather being a truthful recall it was an attempt to buttress
MU and probably
the result of mulling over the issue for months and putting two
and two together to make a much larger sum than four.
example of this was the vaginal redness. This was the only potential piece of
objective evidence that might have confirmed MU’s
complaint. This was a
feature of BU’s evidence that was apparently not repeated at the hospital
when MU was subjected to forensic
examination and not disclosed to TU. This
latter omission was crucial as disclosing the redness to TU would have provided
evidence to TU of an application of force to MU’s vulva. MU
herself denied the evidence.
did not accept BU’s evidence on this topic. The prosecution did not seek
leave to rebut the issue with the relevant expert
witness. I conclude that BU
had lied about the vaginal redness and had never seen it.
fact that BU sought to create a recorded piece of evidence by using her
telephone was most unusual in itself. That was compounded
by the fact that she
allowed two teenagers KT and UI to get involved in the process.
was a very real sense that BU could not remove herself from the allegations and
put MU and a proper investigation of the complaint
first. It was unwise,
unnecessary and difficult to understand why BU repetitively drew out MU’s
complaint for more than an
hour before recording it or letting MU get to sleep.
The task of exhausting memory and lawful recording of evidence was reserved
qualified investigators.
combined effect of these observations about BU’s evidence led me to a
conclusion that BU’s evidence about the allegations
was not objective, not
truthful at times and therefore not reliable.
Ultimately,
I disagreed entirely with the prosecution submissions about BU’s evidence
being credible. I decided that other
than about peripheral matters, where BU
differed from the evidence of MU, the telephone recording of MU’s
complaint and KT,
BU’s evidence should be rejected as being untruthful and
unreliable.
The Father TU
was the final witness for the prosecution and is the biological father of the
AYP and the complainant MU. He completed a recorded
interview with police in
October 2023. That interview was played in the hearing and is exhibit P12. As
with the others there were
agreed redactions that were ordered by the
told police that he was in the baby’s bedroom putting them to sleep
because they were teething. MU came into the room and
said good night. She
then went to her room with the AYP’s iPad.
came back to the baby’s bedroom and said “Daddy I really want you to
come here so I can talk to you.” He said
“You better be quiet,
bub. I’m trying to get the baby to sleep. You need to go back down to
your room.” She
was standing outside the door and the AYP was also there.
MU said “Can you tell the AYP to go to bed too Dad?”
said ”Yep, so both of youse, go on – go off to bed.”
told police that it was about 15 minutes later that MU went into KT’s room
and then they went and spoke to BU. BU asked
him to go to her and told him what
MU had told her. TU said “MU, can you hop out of the room? I don’t
want you to lie.
Like, this is a big thing.”
said “And I didn’t mean to say that to her in the kind of words.
It’s just because I just felt it was hard being
biological parent to both
of them.” He then said to MU “You need to tell Mummy the truth and
not lie or anything like
that.” BU then said “You need to get out
of the room because, um, you’ve said that MU’s lying.” He
apologised and left.
then confronted the AYP and asked him what was going on. The AYP said
“Nothing, Dad.” TU said “Well, apparently
MU is saying that
you’ve touched her on the leg and – you were rubbing her leg”.
The AYP said “No Dad, I’d
never do that to my sister.” TU
responded “Well I - I’d hope not for your sake buddy.”
AYP was sitting there and crying and said “Dad, I’m telling you now,
I didn’t do it.” TU replied “Okay
then we’ll try and
sort it out”. TU then went back to BU’s bedroom and they discussed
whether police should be
called. He asked BU not to do so and suggested they
get both stories first. Despite this, BU rang police.
then went and sat with the AYP and they watched television in silence. The AYP
looked like he was in shock. Later, TU’s
sister came and picked up the
AYP from the house.
the request of the AYP’s caseworker, TU gave the AYP’s iPad to
TU’s sister so that it could be returned to the
AYP. TU took the jumper
that the AYP had been wearing and washed it without thought.
attended the police station with the AYP and was present when forensic
procedures were undertaken. After this his relationship
with BU went downhill
and he moved out for three months.
the elicited further detail from TU. He told them that the AYP was standing
beside MU when he had told her to go away form
the baby’s bedroom. The
AYP told TU that he then went to the lounge room and laid on the lounge.
then said that the AYP “...went in and fixed the iPad, and I think it was
Roblox or something MU was playing.” I took
this to mean that the AYP had
told TU this.
told TU that the AYP was sitting or laying on her bed. Then about 10 or 15
minutes later MU went in to KT.
did not see MU go to her room because the layout of the house prevented
said that when he was in BU’s bedroom BU said that “KT went to her
and said that, um the AYP was acting weird towards
her, and um, touched her
between the legs – like rubbing her legs and stuff”. He then said
to MU “MU, you know
you can’t lie about this kind of thing.
It’s not something you can play around with.” MU then said
not lying Dad.”
said that BU, MU, KT and UI were present for this conversation. He said that MU
presented as sacred and pale at the time but that
he did not know what was
running through her mind.
agreed that MU’s bedroom was quite close to the lounge room: “You
just come from the lounge room, you go around, and
her bedroom’s
told police that the AYP was sleeping in the lounge room and did not bring many
clothes with him. He could not remember what the
AYP was wearing on the night
except that TU had loaned him a new black jumper. TU later found that jumper
behind the lounge in a
bag and washed it.
could not remember what MU was wearing on that night.
had described the AYP to police as being quite kind natured. He also said
“...he’s always been a soft, quiet, um,
sort of a upset child
because he didn’t have a mother and father to grow up with. Um, and just
always kind hearted, like –
gave evidence to the courtroom. He said that his relationship with both BU and
the AYP at the time was good.
prosecutor asked TU how the AYP he reacted to TU when he put allegations to him
in the lounge room. TU said “Upset that
they would like – that
I’d asked him. That’s probably why but – he looked scared and
just, like I said in
my statement, basically as shocked as what I was. But I
think he might have been more scared than anything.”
asked why, TU said “Because he knows what his dad’s like when
someone goes to touch his children or tries to hurt
them. I’m very close
to my kids. I don’t like anyone touching my kids.”
cross-examination he told the court that he loved both his children the same and
“It’s just something’s happened
and I need to get to the
bottom of it. Simple. That’s why we’re here today.”
did not think that BU thought his children were weird. He was not aware if
BU’s daughters hated the AYP.
agreed that he had not spoken to the AYP since he had moved back in with his
wife. He became incensed when counsel for the AYP
put to him that he
wouldn’t be able to live with BU if he did not believe MU. He did not
answer the question and replied “wanker”.
I requested counsel to put the question again, TU said “Well, most
probably for the simple fact...(inaudible)...How can
you not believe your little
girl and how can you not believe your own biological son if they’re both
telling you that something
that’s not right or something that is right.
I’m stuck in the position where I can’t believe anyone, hey.
why we’re here today, yes.”
was asked about the blankets that the AYP was using. He was not sure if they
could have come from his room, but he said that they
could not have come from
the baby’s room. He then added that no-one goes into his wife’s
again lost his temper when asked if the AYP was sleeping in the lounge room.
When I reminded him that his behaviour was not appropriate,
“I know that. I’m sorry, your Honour. But
I’ve just told him my answer. No-one’s allowed in my wife’s
room so he didn’t get the blankets from there. He couldn’t have got
it from (the baby’s) room because I was in
there putting my baby to sleep
because she was teething. There’s your answer.”
was then asked about the living arrangements after he had left the family home.
He was asked “Is it fair to say at that
time, you were not trying to
brainwash MU?” UT said “Why would I brainwash MU? For what? And why
would I brainwash my
own little girl when I was staying at my sister’s
was finally asked about conversations in the house in recent times given the
reunification. He disagreed with the proposition
that there had been
discussions about what everyone was going to say in court. He said
“No.” when asked if BU had been
practising with MU in that
was not difficult to understand the vexed position that TU was in as father of
both children. It was, however, difficult to understand
the witness’s
vitriolic attitude to counsel for the defence. Objectively, it was as benign a
cross-examination as one might
observe in a criminal trial. It appeared to be
lost on TU that the propositions that were, apparently, offensive to him
from his son’s instructions about blankets and his wife’s
evidence to the court on the previous day.
of his lack of composure and explosive temper, I formed the view that TU was a
witness of truth but for one issue –
his complete inability to verbalise
the whole complaint. He persisted with describing the allegation as touching
and rubbing on
the legs when he was obviously aware of the compete nature of the
allegation. For obvious reasons he was not able to cope with re-telling
full part of that part of the story.
did not think that this was a reason to discard all of his evidence or put him
into an unreliable or untruthful category of witness.
I simply followed the
assessment of witness direction and discarded that portion of his
Evidence of the Accused Young Person
AYP gave evidence on his own case. He did not have to. He is to be treated the
same as the other witnesses in the hearing.
He has to prove nothing. Nothing
he says or does in this type of case changes the fact that the prosecution must
prove every element
of an offence beyond reasonable doubt to prove an
AYP gave evidence in court and told the court that MU had been given his iPad in
the garage. He had been in the garage because
he had been smoking bongs.
court is entitled to take judicial notice of the term ‘bongs’ to
mean the consumption of cannabis through a water-cooled
device of some
AYP said that he had around four of five bongs. He was asked how it affected
him and he said: “Not too bad because I need
a lot to actually affect
asked him for his iPad and he had initially said no because he was using it to
watch music on YouTube. MU whinged and he gave
the iPad to her. She left and
he sat in the garage for a bit longer.
AYP then “smoked a couple more”, went inside and said goodnight to
everyone that was awake. He then walked up the
hallway to MU’s room and
opened the door:
“The iPad was on the floor, and she was just laying there. So I asked if
everything was alright. She said, ‘Yes’.
And then I asked if the
iPad was alive or dead. She said it was dead. And then I said good night, went
to my dad, she followed
and then...”
AYP said that he picked up the iPad, checked it and put the iPad back on the
floor because it was dead and he did not have a charger
for it. There were not
enough chargers in the house.
asked if he had his stuff with him when he moved in, he said he didn’t
have anything. He said “I had a jumper and
that was about it. I
don’t know where that jumper went.”
returned to his version of the night. “I recall going to my dad in (the
baby’s) room, and then I said goodnight, grabbed
some blankets and went
out and sat it all up in the lounge.”
he was in the baby’s bedroom he recalled that MU was near him, and he was
pretty sure that the baby was asleep on her
bed and his father was on the ground
that he watched a movie on the lounge.
cross examination the AYP agreed that he was wearing a gold watch and he told
the court that he was wearing a black jumper and
black pants. He said the only
clothing that he had with him was the jumper. He had been wearing his
dad’s clothes.
AYP disagreed with the proposition that he had a pretty good relationship with
BU prior to the 3
of July. He agreed that BU did let him stay at
the house and he was having a difficult time with his own family. He said that
to this incident he had a good relationship with MU.
AYP agreed that he had lived with MU in 2020 and 2021 and she had spent a lot of
time with him.
agreed that he had just said in his evidence that he had been in the shed
smoking bongs and that the shed contained dirt bikes,
family rubbish, all of the
kids toys, bikes, shoe rack “and they’d had a spot where all the
bongs went.” That
was everyone’s bongs.
agreed that he was smoking those bongs for about four hours from around 10.30 or
11.00 until about 3.00 or 3.30 (am) and didn’t
really leave the garage in
that time. He didn’t think that the garage was heated and he was wearing
a jumper and track pants
in any event.
AYP agreed that he was listening to music on his iPad, but was not watching
music videos on YouTube. His case worker had provided
the iPad to him at the
start of 2023 and he had brought it to BU’s house without the
was asked who he thought would be awake when he went inside at 3.00am. He said
that he thought MU would be awake and his father
would be “kind of awake
as he doesn’t really sleep heavy.” He agreed that when he said
goodbye to MU she was laying
bed and that her lights were off.
was then asked “And why did you say goodnight to her when she looked as if
she was asleep?” he said “Because
I was going to bed.” This
was a loaded question as it had not been established that MU was asleep.
was then asked “But why wouldn’t you have left her?” He said
“Because she was moving a little bit so I
was like goodnight and I heard a
goodnight back so I left.”
said that he put his head in the door because he was getting his iPad. He
didn’t take the iPad because it was dead. He
pressed it and saw that it
was dead and he didn’t have a charger. His iPad was next to the bed and
he walked in one or two
steps and it was there. He picked it up and asked if it
was dead. MU said “Yes”. He pressed it and it was dead so
and said goodnight.
AYP said that he thought that MU’s iPad was also in the room.
then went to say goodnight to his dad. Hid dad was laying there with the baby
and they both said goodnight. He was told to go
to bed because of the baby. He
didn’t turn around then, “No, so I picked up the blankets and
pillows and then I turned
around and left.”
said that the pillow were at the end of the bed, down near the wardrobe. He
also said that the TV on the wall was on but he couldn’t
remember what
show was on.
he was reminded of TU’s evidence about the blankets and what he felt about
that he said “Why? It’s what I thought
said that he was pretty sure that he picked up a blanket. He couldn’t
remember the blanket colour
and was pretty sure the pillow was pink. He agreed
that he could not remember the colour despite using them for more than once in
July 2023. (I must say that I did think that little turned on that given that
many people – myself included - would struggle
to accurately recall the
colour of their present set of bedding, let alone do so in cross-examination and
whilst faced with a serious
allegation).
AYP then walked back to the couch with MU walking behind him. “She walked
behind and then went her own way. And I went
to the lounge room.”
was then asked about going to his father’s room. He said that he realised
MU was behind him when he was half way to the
room. He agreed that he had heard
MU’s evidence that he was following her and said “Same as what I
said about my Dad.
was out to him that his dad had told police that it was MU in front (when they
came to his bedroom). The AYP said “Still
was asked if he had another interaction with MU “Not until she come back
with dad and then dad was saying all this stuff.”
He agreed that he then
had no other interaction with MU that night. He did not see MU go to KT’s
room. He watched the first
movie that came up on TV as this provided him with
background noise to get to sleep.
was asked about what happened when his father came to the couch with MU. He said
“Yes, when she followed my dad out of I
think it was BU’s room. Not
too sure what room they came out. I just seen coming up the hallway...And then,
dad asked me
like, If I done it. I told him no. I never would do it... That
when I seen her.”
said that he thought that was about 15 to 20 minutes after he had started to
watch a movie on TV.
dad had said “Did you actually do it” and he had responded “No
I would never do it. I’d never touch my
sister. Never.”
said that he knew what his father was talking about because “He also said
that apparently I touched MU and I had never done
AYP was asked what the first words his father said were and he responded
“Did you touch your sister?” He said that
he had responded
“What do you mean? And then he said whatever...he told me and I said
“No, I’d never do it. I’d
never touch my sister.’ And
he’s like, “Are you sure?” and I said, ‘Yes, I’m
a hundred per cent sure.”
knew that when his father said ‘sister’ that it was MU he was
referring to because “It’s the only sister
that I actually say
it’s my sister.”
then turned up and threatened him and then his dad came back and sat with him.
He then fell asleep.
AYP said that he was “...shocked but more surprised than anything.”
say anything to MU.
He didn’t want to speak to her.
was asked if he moved from the couch and replied that UI had told him to stay
there. He said that despite UI’s evidence,
UI had only come out to him
was asked if he had tried to call someone he confirmed that he did not have a
phone. Instead of asking his father if he could
leave he said that kind of sat
there and froze (I reminded myself that the AYP was then aged 17, was already
in the early hours of the morning in winter.)
agreed that he was concerned about his safety with UI. He had smoked bongs and
cigarettes in the garage until he was collected
by another family member. He
didn’t know how to “leave without explaining to them that I
didn’t do it.”
crown prosecutor put the allegations to him. He denied each of them. I took
each and every denial into account. I have set out
some that contained issues
other than the bare allegations.
denied having sat on MU’s bed at all during that visit. He denied that he
had touched her at all during that night and had
not tickled her.
said that there was about 40 minutes between him giving MU his iPad and him
going to her room. He denied lying on her bed and
pulling MU over to him.
denied thinking that it was dark, no-one else was awake and that he could try
and get away with it.
denied that he followed MU to their father’s room in the hope that MU
wouldn’t do anything.
were then asked his relationship with MU. He agreed that he had previously said
that when he lived with the family that
MU really only spoke with him, BU and
TU. He then moved away for at least a year.
he came back (in July 2023) “I wasn’t really a fan of anyone in the
house except for me dad.”
thought that they had been saying stuff to MU to make MU not like him
“Like MU was a part of everyone. So they were all
treating me like I was
an imbecile in the house.” They would stop talking when he came into a
room and he thought that he
had walked in on BU having a conversation with KT
said that the reason he gave MU his iPad in those circumstances was that he was
a sharing, caring person.
he lived with the family previously they were all like a family and talked like
a family. Things changed when they moved.
confirmed that on the night he had consumed seven cones and felt “Down to
earth, normal.” He said that was just under
a gram (of cannabis).
last meal that he would have consumed before smoking cannabis in the evening was
breakfast that morning (this being the morning
prior to the allegations). He
did not consume alcohol and ‘maybe’ had a bottle of Coke.
agreed that that breakfast, a bottle of Coke and some water was all that he
consumed prior to smoking the cannabis. He told the
court that he had a high
tolerance to cannabis.
agreed that MU’s room was a long way from BU’s room and a bit of
distance from TU’s room. It was not as far
from the lounge room.
denied that with MU’s room being distant from her parent’s rooms it
was good opportunity for him to try something.
denied getting into MU’s bed and trying to have sex with her.
denied thinking that MU wouldn’t complain.
AYP said that his father had asked him again in the morning if he had done it.
“I said no and he informed me that my aunty
was on her way.”
“I can’t remember it word for word, but I remember him saying,
‘Look mate, you need to
tell me if you’ve done it or not. If you
remember doing it.’ And I said ‘I’ve never done, I never
never thought about it.’ And then he said ‘Well,
they’re going to the police and your auntie’s on the way.’
did not ask his father how the complaint was made because he got arrested and
didn’t speak to him. He didn’t ask his
father at another time. It
didn’t cross his mind “I’m new to all this
Police Witness Statements
evidence was placed on the record by tendering statements. Those statements
were from officers Girvan, McLennan and Davidson
in exhibits P2 and P13.
statements gave relevant and admissible details of the investigation and
contents of them does not require repeating in this decision because the
contents do not have an effect on the issue of proof
of the charges.
A Consideration of Liberato
direction applies in this matter. There was a significant
conflict in the evidence between that given by the complainant and the
given by the AYP. Even if I prefer the evidence for the prosecution, I should
not convict unless I am satisfied beyond a
reasonable doubt of the truth of that
evidence. Even if I do not positively believe the evidence given by the accused,
I cannot find
an issue against him contrary to that evidence if the evidence
gives rise to a reasonable doubt as to that issue.
preferable formula to explain the direction to a jury is originally taken from
R v Anderson
(2001) A Crim R 166
per Kirby J at 121 and has been repeated
in cases such as
Johnson v Western Australia
[2008] WASCA 164
(2008) 186 A Crim R 531
De Silva v The Queen
[2019] HCA 48
and more recently
by Loukas-Karlssson J in
R v MZ (No 3)
[2021] ACTSC 332
(i) First, if you believe the evidence of the accused, obviously you must
(ii) Second, if you find difficulty in accepting the evidence of the accused,
but think that it might be true, then you must acquit.
(iii) Third, if you do not believe the accused, then you should put his
testimony to one side. The question will remain: has the
Crown, upon the basis
of the evidence that you do accept, proved the guilt of the accused beyond
reasonable doubt.
parties made submissions on
. The prosecution set out the law.
The defence submitted that the AYP’s evidence raises a reasonable doubt
(thus following
limbs one or two of the jury direction in
four reasons:
(a) The AYP was smoking bongs when MU asked for his iPad in the garage. The
fact of smoking cannabis was a reasonable concession.
It made sense because he
would not be likely to smoke bongs inside the lounge. It explained how MU knew
he had the iPad to ask
for it. There was no evidence that he had a subscription
that allowed him to watch movies on his iPad or was watching the film
on his iPad. The reason MU knew about the AYP watching
‘Vacation’ was that she came back with TU when he put the allegation
to the AYP. The AYP watched ‘Vacation’ because his iPad was dead
and it was what popped up on TV. That was consistent
with life experience with
TV. He was consistent in cross-examination about sitting in the garage
listening to music and being in
his zone. The evidence had the ring of truth to
it for a young person his age. It made sense and raises a reasonable doubt.
(b) The fact that he left the room because his iPad had died. The defence
submitted that this accorded with the length of time that
the iPad had been used
and battery life – four hours of listening to music. It made sense that
when MU borrowed the iPad after
four hours of listening to music the iPad
battery died. This evidence fitted in with the chronology of the night. The
defence pointed
to MU’s oral evidence where she said the battery did not
die and her evidence interview where she said the battery did die.
The battery
not dying was inconsistent with four hours of watching videos. This evidence
raises a reasonable doubt.
(c) The fact that he had to get blankets is consistent with the sleeping
arrangements at the time. The AYP was sleeping on the lounge.
BU gave evidence
that she was a clean freak and so it not surprising that he had to pack his bed
up each morning and set it our
each night. It was cold and late and he had
finished his bongs. Other people in the house watched TV to help them get to
His version of getting blankets made sense and created a reasonable
(d) His demeanour in evidence was candid, simple and responsive. He accepted
that everyone gossiped about him in the house. He
did not criticise other
witnesses and answered questions directly. Cross-examination did not reveal any
basis on which to reject
his account beyond reasonable doubt. His demeanour
contrasted with some of the prosecution witnesses whose answers were at times
non-responsive, evasive and unnecessarily taking opportunities to criticise or
bring him down. He was vulnerable. He had been kicked
out of the house after
these allegations. His father had stopped talking to him when he moved back in
three months later. His father
was aggressive and made threatening comments in
the witness box. His evidence should be understood in that context. This
explains why he did not stand up to his father on the night the
allegations were made. It explains why he was shocked and scared.
His evidence
will consider the ‘bong’ submission first. I decided to direct
myself about the evidence of cannabis consumption.
I did not have any expert
evidence from a toxicologist on cannabis consumption, nor was there any exact
evidence about the type or
strength of cannabis used. What I was told by the
AYP was that he had consumed seven bongs and in doing so consumed just under a
gram of cannabis. He was not cross-examined in a manner that directly
questioned his evidence of being tolerant to cannabis consumption.
gave evidence that the AYP was intoxicated. There was no expert evidence as to
the increased or decreased likelihood
of committing sexual offences after seven
bongs or suffering gross memory loss such as ‘black outs’ after
seven bongs.
In fairness, I directed myself to ignore any suggestion of
unlawfulness in relation to cannabis use, possession or supply to young
under the age of 18. I directed myself that cannabis use is decriminalised in
this jurisdiction for adults, is common-place
and that no negative inference
should be drawn from the mere fact of use of that drug. Ultimately, I decided
that the evidence of
cannabis use could not be used in any way that was negative
to the AYP. I concluded that the sole use of the ‘bong’
was for it to be a part of his version of events.
observed that no other witness was asked about or gave evidence about smoking
cannabis and no other witness was asked about or gave
evidence about smoking
cannabis in the garage. Given BU’s evidence about her stance on drugs and
her efforts in reforming
TU’s alcohol and drug use, I thought that these
omissions gave rise to deep concerns about the truthfulness of this aspect
the AYP’s evidence.
were topics that should have been put to BU (if not every other member of the
household) and I did not know if this was an oversight
or because defence
counsel were caught unawares by the evidence of the AYP on this topic. This was
a glaring omission from every
aspect of the defence case except the evidence of
the AYP himself.
accept that it was put to MU in cross-examination that the AYP was in the garage
when she asked for the iPad. MU denied this, but
there were other key witnesses
who were deprived of the opportunity to comment on it.
agree that the AYP was more likely to smoke bongs outside than inside the house.
This was supported by BU’s evidence on her
stance on drugs. This does not
mean that the AYP was telling the truth about whether he was outside smoking
bongs that night. It
just means that if he was smoking cannabis it was
reasonable for him to do that somewhere outside and probably somewhere with
given that it was winter time.
he could have consumed seven bongs and still committed the offence as alleged.
The only aspect of his version that would
be different on the Crown case was
that the iPad exchange did not take place in the garage.
might also mean that MU was mistaken in her answer about where the iPad exchange
took place. That may or may not have any effect
on whether the prosecution can
prove its case on the criminal standard.
do not understand the submission about how smoking bongs allowed MU to know he
had the iPad in order to ask for it. It could hardly
have been a secret between
the children and young people in the house that the AYP came to stay with an
iPad and little else. There
was no evidence on the defence case that MU had
gone to the garage twice. The AYP said that she came to the garage and asked
the iPad. He initially refused and relented when she sooked about his
refusal. MU denied going to the garage. She gave evidence
that she was in the
lounge room when she asked for the iPad.
in with the defence submissions on the bong evidence was the submission that MU
knew that the AYP was watching ‘Vacation’
because she came out to
the lounge room with TU. No other witness supported this version. It had no
relevance to whether or not
the bong evidence was truthful nor did it create a
reasonable doubt because on everyone’s version the AYP was watching TV on
the lounge after he had been in MU’s bedroom. Thus, it was a neutral fact
that was not in dispute.
the AYP creating a factual dispute in his evidence by putting MU there when TU
went out to the lounge and put the complaint
to the AYP, neither MU or TU were
cross-examined on the presence of MU at the time. I concluded that this issue
further cemented
a finding that the AYP was not being truthful on the
defence submitted that the reason that the AYP was watching TV was because his
iPad was dead. The fact of him watching TV after
being in MU’s bedroom is
not disputed. That does mean that this undisputed fact created a reasonable
doubt, it just meant
that it was a fact that was not in dispute.
agree that a young person smoking cannabis and listening to music has the ring
of truth to it. This does not mean that it creates
a reasonable doubt –
it means that it is an aspect of the AYP’s version that is consistent with
common sense. Regardless
of any prior enjoyment of cannabis and music, it is
undisputed that the AYP went into MU’s bedroom. The issue is what can
proved that he did once in the bedroom. I thought that this submission was
irrelevant to the issue of the AYP’s evidence
creating a reasonable doubt.
concluded that the AYP was being untruthful about the bong evidence. There was
not a shred of evidence that supported it. Even
if I had accepted that he had
been in the garage smoking bongs, that version was not exculpatory. The bong
evidence did not create
a reasonable doubt or provide for a finding that he was
being truthful about denying the offending. This absence, combined with
failure to put the version of ‘everyone’s bongs being in the
garage’ to any other witness meant that I found
it disproved on the
criminal standard.
second defence submission was that he left MU’s bedroom because the iPad
died and presumably not because MU disrupted his
offending by going to their
father’s bedroom.
is accepted that the submissions on the iPad battery eventually running out make
sense, but this is a peripheral issue. On the
defence case the retrieval of the
iPad from MU’s bedroom gave him an opportunity to offend. The Crown was
likely able to prove
the offences regardless of the state of charge of the
found that there is no reason to accept this submission as creating a reasonable
doubt or finding that the AYP was telling the truth
allegations.
third defence submission was that the blanket evidence gave rise to a reasonable
vehemently denied that the AYP’s bedding was in his bedroom and denied
that the AYP took it out of the room on the night
in question. MU also denied
that the AYP was in their father’s room getting blankets.
accept that the AYP required bedding to sleep on the lounge. I accept that the
couch bed probably did have to be made and unmade
and packed away each day. It
made sense that the AYP would be needing his bedding when he decided to go to
sleep early that morning.
are common sense issues about the necessities of life that do not support a
contention that the AYP’s evidence on the
topic created a reasonable
doubt. The defence bedding evidence was shut down by TU, who I thought was
telling the truth on the topic.
TU had no reason to lie about this. His
evidence made perfect sense, because common sense and life experience informs
that a teething baby’s room is the last place to store bedding
for nocturnal teenagers.
witness disputed that the AYP eventually went to bed on the couch and that he
was watching TV. That fact of the bedding and it’s
origin was immaterial
to the allegation. On everyone’s else’s version the AYP was on the
couch watching TV when on his
own eversion he said that he was.
it was undisputed that the need for bedding only arose after the AYP had been in
MU’s bedroom. It was not an issue that
could have affected the assessment
of what could be proved that he did whilst inside the bedroom.
bedding and watching TV on the couch evidence of the AYP had no effect on his
evidence creating a reasonable doubt. Rather, I
formed the view that it was an
aspect of his version that was untruthful.
fourth submission was on the broader issue of reliability of the AYP’s
account. Those submissions are noted. I have made
findings above about
untruthfulness. Those findings answer and defeat these defence submissions on
reliability.
are some other reasons why I found that I could not accept the AYP’s
version as being truthful:
(a) MU was not cross-examined about her door being shut and this was not
with the evidence of her requiring light from outside her room.
(b) I concluded that the AYP’s evidence about the jumper being a piece of
clothing that he brought into the house was also
untruthful. It was
diametrically opposed to the only prosecution witness who was trying to be
supportive of him – his father.
TU gave evidence that the jumper was his
and he loaned it to the AYP. TU then gave evidence that he washed it after the
taken from the house.
these reasons, I formed the view that I could not conclude that the AYP was
telling the truth about key matters in his evidence.
Thus, I rejected the first
limb of the
had considerable difficulty in accepting the evidence of the AYP and concluded
that I had to consider the evidence as a whole to
work out whether the
prosecution case could negative the AYP’s version beyond reasonable doubt.
I then set about considering
the whole of the evidence with a view to what I
could find proved on the criminal standard.
DEFENCE REQUEST FOR s165A(2) WARNING AS TO “CIRCUMSTANCES
OF UNRELIABILTY - SINGLE WITNESS ACCOUNT”
defence sought a s165A warning on five grounds. It was difficult to understand
the whole basis of the application for the direction.
No submissions were made
grounds were:
a. The evidence of MU generally;
b. MU’s vulnerability to influence;
c. Her complaint;
d. Inconsistencies; and
e. Pressure.
give such a warning, I had to be satisfied that there are circumstances (other
than solely the age of MU) particular to MU that
affected the reliability of the
child’s evidence and that warranted the giving of the warning or
information.
the first ground the defence relied on five confusing compound questions and
their answers. That evidence had no weight because
it was misleading or
confusing. I declined to give the direction on that ground.
the second ground was transcript said to relate to vulnerability to influence:
And because you do school at home, so I’m just talking about home school,
are your sisters and Mum at home with you a lot?---Yes
And they teach you everything you know?---Yes
And so when they teach you or tell you things, you believe that they are
true?---Yes
Did KT say, ‘You have to keep your clothes on around him?---Yes.
thought that this ground alone was not a proper basis for a direction. I
decided to see if there were other grounds that may give
collective weight with
this ground to form the basis for a direction.
third ground was a collection of questions and answers that were said to relate
to the complaint. It included:
You knew KT hated the AYP?---Yes
You knew that KT thought he was weird?---A little bit
You wanted KT’s attention?---Yes
And so you said to KT that the AYP as being weird?---Yes
When you first went and spoke to mum, do you remember that?---Yes
Did KT first tell her what had happened?---Yes
Did BU start asking you questions?---Yes
Did BU ask you if he had pushed his doodle into your private?---Yes
Is it possible you think that what happened with the doodle happened because BU
and KT said it happened?---Yes
the last question and answer has no weight because it was misleading or
thought that this ground alone was not a proper basis for a direction. I
decided to see if there were other grounds that may give
collective weight with
this ground to form the basis for a direction.
fourth ground included the following that were said to relate to
inconsistencies:
Were you upset because the battery died on the iPad?---It didn’t go flat,
But compare
Yep. So what did you do to try and fall asleep? A Um, just like turning when the
iPad got flat, I just put it down on my floor and
then when I – and when
it was flat put it on my floor, and I just tried went to sleep.
Did BU ask you if the AYP put his leg over you?---Yes
But the AYP did not put his leg over you did he?---No
In Mum’s bedroom, MU, I’m just asking you about when you were in
Mum’s bedroom talking to Mum, Mum did not actually
fold your pants
And she didn’t look at your vagina and say it was red?---No
thought that this ground alone was not a proper basis for a direction. I
decided to see if there were other grounds that may give
collective weight with
this ground to form the basis for a direction.
fifth ground included the following transcript that was said to relate to
Did Mum say that the AYP had to go to jail?---Yes
And have you been feeling stressed about giving evidence in court?---Yes
And did Mum ask you to practice your story with her?---Yes
Did Mum tell you to tell the Court that the thing with the AYP happened?---Yes.
thought that this ground alone was not a proper basis for a direction. I
decided to combine the other three grounds to see if they
collectively amounted
to a basis to give the direction.
guessed that the submissions should be taken to mean that MU was so vulnerable
to influence that she was unreliable and that her
complaint evidence was
unreliable and that her inconsistencies made her unreliable and that the family
pressure that she was under
made her unreliable.
considered all of the pieces of transcript under those grounds and decided that,
in the absence of any other submission or explanation
why, they could not
individually or collectively amount to a proper basis for giving the
CONSIDERATION
Defence Submissions on the AYP’s Evidence and the
Defence Case
defence submitted that the defendant should be believed because his evidence was
simple direct and honest. I have found that
it was not honest in the
consideration and reject that submission.
defence submitted that the AYP did not wish for MU to be criticised. The
evidence was that he was kind and generous person.
This was contrary to the
nasty things that were said about him in evidence. The latter submission was
correct. Whilst the AYP appears
to be have auburn hair, objectively, he is
neither fat nor ugly and those comments were unnecessary and inflammatory. I do
that this submission is relevant to the AYP’s evidence being
accepted – it cannot be, but I will take the level of vitriol
into account
when I consider the evidence as a whole.
raised the fact that UI had a gold watch on his right hand at the hearing. I
took this to be a suggestion that UI may have
been the actual offender and not
the AYP. This was not put to MU or UI and was inconsistent with evidence about
UI being in bed
with KT at the time of the incident. I took this submission to
be a baseless flourish by counsel and rejected it.
defence submitted in summary that MU’s evidence could not be accepted to
the criminal standard of proof and reiterated earlier
submissions and the
content of the trail directions.
AYP’s case was centred around denial. The disproved aspects of the
AYP’s version such as cannabis consumption in
the garage, the bedding
retrieval and who owned the jumper served to show just how fragile the
AYP’s version was.
found that TU’s evidence was truthful and also fatal to the credibility of
was personally crushed under the pressure of loving and supporting the AYP and
MU. There was not the slightest indication that
TU was trying to harm the
AYP’s case intentionally. On the contrary, his honest answers cut through
significant aspects of
the defence case and rendered side issues such as
cannabis consumption and dead iPad batteries to be of no difference to the real
issue of what occurred in MU’s bedroom.
AYP accepted that he was in MU’s bedroom at the correct time to commit an
offence. The issue for determination was whether
MU’s evidence was
capable of disproving the AYP’s denial beyond reasonable doubt.
The Prosecution Case
came across as a meek 10 year old who was feeling the enormity of giving
evidence and the fact that her complaint had been the
genesis of family
separation and the complete isolation of the AYP. Her language was
uncomplicated. MU struggled with complex questions
and I did my best to work
with the witness intermediary to weed out those that offended the ground rules.
As will be seen, some
questions slipped through.
good example of MU’s difficulty with compound questions is encapsulated in
the defence submissions at their paragraph 25.
A question and answer in
cross-examination was repeated in the submissions:
What was it about what happened between you and (the AYP) that you thought was
“weird”? If you don’t know (MU),
that’s okay?---I
don’t know”
answer was attacked and identified as something that showed that the prosecution
could not prove that her vulva was touched.
Firstly, other than MU, who could
ever know which part of the question MU was responding to? Secondly, did MU
give up because she
didn’t know how to answer – or is that what she
meant when she said “I don’t know”? I thought that
derived from MU’s answer to that question was pure speculation and it
evidenced the basic difficulty with non-compliance
with ground rules in
children’s evidence.
thought that the vagueness of the answer was an inadvertent defence creation. It
was not a matter that required tidying up by the
prosecution in re-examination.
I accorded the answer no weight as it was misleading or
Assessment of MU’s Evidence
evidence was detailed but not so complex as to be suspicious. Her lack of
knowledge about her own anatomy was unsurprising
given her age. It was
inconvenient for the Crown case, for example, that she was not able to verbalise
what part of her anatomy
her ‘private parts’ were.
submissions attacked this part of MU’s evidence as being vague and not
capable of proof beyond reasonable doubt. Defence
pointed to an absence of
evidence from MU about the meaning of ‘private parts’. This was
correct. It was clear that
she could not verbalise what ‘private
parts’ meant and she did not also verbalise where the pain was caused. MU
not remember what private meant.
thought that contrary to the defence submissions, if MU did not know the words
‘vagina’ or ‘vulva’ the court
could not expect her to
articulate or define them. It was entirely consistent with her age and stage of
development that she did
not colour her evidence with adult terms such as vulva,
perineum, labia, vagina, vaginal canal and anus.
it was consistent with her age, language skills, immaturity and general
presentation as a witness that when she said ‘I
remember’ she was displaying embarrassment at either not knowing how to
describe ‘private’ or embarrassment
at having to describe
could not and did not explain in adult language what she said the AYP was
physically doing. That was entirely consistent with her
age. Those inabilities,
in my view, only served to strengthen the credibility of what she was able to
verbalise in her complaint.
MU’s language was indicative of MU speaking
in her own words about what had happened to her from her viewpoint as a
nine-year-old
was a tangible ring of truth when KT told me that MU had said to her that she
didn’t want to get herself or the AYP into
trouble. It was also sensible
that she whispered in KT’s ear so that UI did not exact retribution on the
AYP. As it turned
out, UI behaved in precisely the way that MU had anticipated
– with aggression and threatened violence to the AYP. The fact
UI’s response to MU’s complaint was a feature of the defence case
gave further strength to the fact that that MU
had complained. It was also
entirely unflattering to UI, who is a member of MU’s family. This
evidence was undisputed and
obviously true.
presentation to KT was also compelling. She displayed the same really bad
anxiety symptoms as when her parents were leaving
her. MU looked pale and sick
found that this evidence fell within a category of circumstantial evidence
called distress evidence and that it required a special
direction. I directed
myself that KT’s evidence of MU’s appearance at the time may be used
by me as circumstantial evidence
that independently supports MU’s evidence
where it is reasonably open to me to find a causal link between the alleged
and the distress.
thought that the causal link between the allegations and the demeanour was
proved beyond reasonable doubt and used the distress
as independent support of
MU’s complaint.
accepted beyond reasonable doubt that the following was said by MU in the
presence of KT in KT’s bedroom. KT asked her what
happened and MU said:
“I don’t want him to get into trouble and I don’t want to get
in trouble either.” She then whispered in
KT’s ear that the AYP was
“touching her, like, private parts.”
defence submitted that the prosecution required proof of pressure on the vulva
and description of where she felt the hurt. I
thought that MU was unequivocal
in her evidence in chief about what she felt being in the middle of her private.
defence relied upon another compound question and a failure to answer by MU as
showing an absence of proof beyond reasonable doubt:
“So, my question was, where did you feel the hurt, it hurt? Where on your
body? Are you able – you’re able to use
any words you want, MU? [NO
is no need for me to repeat the same observations about the use of compound
questions. There are up to six questions in one
there. The failure to respond
was accorded no weight as it was misleading or confusing.
After considering the defence submissions and the whole of MU’s evidence I
ultimately accepted beyond reasonable doubt that
MU’s ‘private
parts’ are her vulva – her external female genitalia. Her belly is
her belly and it was not
described by her as a private part. At the time of the
application of pressure that caused pain, the AYP and MU were laying facing
other, the pressure hurt MU and it was ‘in the middle’ of her
private part. There is not another private part under
her pants at the front of
her body that has a middle and is not her belly. Hence my finding on the
criminal standard.
was then taken to BU’s room where she expanded upon her complaint to KT. I
accepted beyond reasonable doubt that all of the
following was said by MU in the
presence of KT and BU:
“Um so I’m pretty sure they were laying in bed in (MU)’s room.
And – no, so (MU) was laying in bed –
no wait. So MU asked for the
iPad off (the AYP) because he was in the loungeroom. To play Roblox, I think, or
to watch YouTube.
Um, and then she grabbed the Ipad and went into her
room...And then, um, he started laying down with her. And then, um, (MU) was
trying to sleep, like, she was acting asleep, because (the AYP) started being
weird. Um, and she said that they were on top of the
sheets and not under them.
Um and he um started, like, touching her legs and her, like, private part and
stuff. And then, um, um,
I’m pretty sure she – she said, like
– ‘his doodle’, like, touched her, or something. Um, and yeah,
that’s what she said.”
MU said the following in the complaint that BU recorded:
(a) She said that the AYP came into her room and was watching her play
(b) He was laying on top of the doona;
(c) He was getting weird, doing weird stuff to her;
(d) He was tickling her, then did the leg and did the doodle;
(e) He grabbed her leg and put it on his and he was moving with his clothes
(f) Then he did the doodle;
(g) He pulled her undies and pants down and was behind her;
(h) He pulled her to his side to face her;
(i) He pulled his pants down and she could feel his skin;
(j) His doodle touched her in the middle. She didn’t know how it was
doodle but it was a round thing.
(k) She told him “I’ll be back” and went to her father’s
told police the following throughout her interview:
(a) She asked for the AYP’s iPad in the lounge room and he provided it to
(b) She went back to her room and he followed her in there;
(c) He was laying down and he started being really, really weird when the iPad
went black;
(d) She tried to go to sleep and he kept being weird to her;
(e) She pretended to be asleep to see what he would do and he kept being
(f) By weird she said that he was tickling her belly and then he folded her
pants down;
(g) He used both his hands to do this and she was then on her left hand side;
(h) He then pulled his pants and undies down and hers as well;
(i) She felt a round thing in the middle of her private;
(j) She did not see what pushed against her private part but it was round;
(k) She thought it might have been his private because she had previously bathed
with her father
(l) It felt like a push, a little bit. That push was in the middle of her
private, like all of her private and it was going straight;
(m) It felt like a stick was pulling and it hurt because he pushed a little bit
(n) The pain lasted for on second;
(o) He had been pushing for two seconds; and
(p) It did not feel good because he was being really weird.
did not fully understand what MU meant by a ‘stick pulling’. It was
not explored in evidence, and I cannot make a finding
her complaints means. I do suspect that she was trying to explain a sensation
like a stick dragging on
the skin, but I cannot find that proved to the criminal
standard. The stick description was hers and hers alone – the issue
that the touching caused pain to her for about one second.
cross-examination MU agreed:
(a) That she thought what happened with the doodle was because BU said it
(b) BU did make her say it (her complaint) lots of times;
(c) BU did ask her if the AYP put his leg over her;
(d) He did not put his leg over her;
(e) When she was pretending to be asleep she had her knees up in front of her.
re-examination MU said:
(a) She forgot what she first said to her mum about the doodle.
(b) She did not know why she said in cross-examination that the doodle thing
happened because she was told it did;
did not remember where her legs were when he folded her pants down.
was not able to tell the court what the middle of her private part was. She
could not say where the hurt was on her body.
found that the complaint evidence was consistent with MU’s evidence.
thought that there was nothing exceptional about a simple first complaint, such
as the one whispered in KT’s ear, being expanded
upon almost immediately
when a nine year old child is safe in her mother’s bedroom. That first
compliant was consistent with
the complaint that followed - it just wasn’t
the complete version.
version of the broader events surrounding her complaints made sense. She had
tried to immediately complain to TU, but
couldn’t because the AYP was
there. TU, MU and the AYP were all consistent in their account that the AYP was
present when
MU spoke to TU. Yes, there were differences about who was in the
lead to that bedroom, but they all agreed that both were at the
entrance to
TU’s bedroom.
TU sent her away without knowing the seriousness of her presence.
thought that there was considerable strength in the complaint made by MU to KT.
It was made immediately after her attempt to complain
to her father. It was in
the middle of the night. It involved going into her sister’s bedroom and
invading her privacy when
her sister was in bed with her boyfriend. I gave it
significant weight as evidence of the truth of what happened to MU.
also gave some weight as evidence of the truth of what happened to MU to
KT’s evidence of complaint in their mother’s
bedroom. This evidence
was recorded about 3 months after the events.
also gave some weight as evidence of the truth of what happened to MU to the
telephone recorded complaint in their mother’s
bedroom. This captured
exactly what MU said. I thought that it lacked the immediacy and spontaneity of
what was whispered in KT’s
ear, that it was not the first iteration of
that particular complaint and that it should not be accorded nearly as much
the initial complaint to KT in those circumstances.
thought that it as a matter of common sense and life experience, the time of day
and the manner of MU’s complaint to KT made
her evidence more
believable.
find that there can be no criticism of the immediacy of MU’s complaint.
Further, I did not think that it was unreasonable,
in the early hours of the
morning, to let her sleep before exposing her to a police interview.
find that this is not a case where there was a delay in complaint and no such
direction is required.
Defence Submissions on a Reasonable Doubt
defence made submissions on the issue of the iPad battery becoming flat or
‘dead’. It was an issue that the defence
submitted required
detailed consideration. Defence pointed out that in her police interview MU
said that the battery on the iPad
went flat, she put it down on her floor and
tried to go to sleep. That version was provided to police later on the same day
cross-examination the following questions and answers occurred at about 3.50 pm
on the end of MU’s first day giving evidence.
I have gone included a
couple more questions and answers from page 49 of the transcript to give context
to the defence case:
And then in your room, you started playing Roblox on his iPad?---Yes.
But then the battery on the iPad died so you couldn’t play
anymore?---No
Were you upset because the battery died on the iPad?---It didn’t go flat
Did he walk into your room and just grab the iPad off the floor?---No
And then he checked that it was – he saw that it was flat and he just left
it there?---No
context of the defence case is that AYP’s version was that the iPad
battery was flat. The defence submitted that MU’s
answer was absolute
battery and this was about something
in the bedroom.
defence submitted that this inconsistency raised an “important credibility
issue in relation to the complainant’s
evidence” (about what
occurred in the bedroom).
dead battery inconsistency occurred at the end of MU’s day at court. She
had waited for her turn to give evidence, been
called, watched her police
interview and had been asked many questions both counsel at that time. Her
evidence on the battery was
erroneous on both her version and the defence
version. It contrasted with her strong consistency on the core matters in
I still decided to consider it in relation to assessing MU’s
submitted that there were inconsistencies between MU and BU’s evidence. I
note that I have already made a ruling on
the unreliability of BU.
first inconsistency defence identified was the sequence of the assault. BU
said that MU was assaulted and then rolled over and
pretended to be asleep. MU
said that she was rolled to face the AYP and then the assault happened.
make the following observations. Firstly, I found that BU was not reliable.
Second, utilising BU as a foundation for showing inconsistency
revolved around
her capacity to remember MU’s version correctly. I find that MU is not
inconsistent – BU is inconsistent
with MU and MU’s version should
not be accepted. The submission is rejected.
submitted that there was a further inconsistency between the two. They pointed
to BU saying that the AYP put his leg over
MU and then was ‘humping’
her. MU gave evidence that’s he was lying on her left and he was behind
her and he was
make the same observations about BU’s unreliability. I formed the view
that she exaggerated MU’s complaint and that
where it diverged from the
evidence of MU and KT her evidence should be ignored. This submission only
further confirms my view that
it was BU who was inconsistent and not MU.
submitted that MU’s ‘flat denial’ of having a red mark on her
vagina created an inconsistency with her mother.
I make the same point –
I have rejected the evidence of vaginal redness. It was not repeated to TU, or
the staff at the hospital
where MU was subject to a forensic examination.
find that MU’s evidence was inconsistent with BU’s evidence about
the redness, because it was a lie made up by BU.
The submission is
did not understand the fourth submission on this topic to be a complaint about
MU being inconsistent. It was an attack of MU’s
credibility by way of
being coached by her mother for giving evidence. Defence pointed out an
inconsistency between MU and BU’s
evidence using MU as the foundation to
prove BU’s inconsistency. The topic was BU talking to MU about her
evidence. MU said
that her mother did talk to her about giving evidence and
told her to tell the court that the thing with the AYP happened.
is important to review the questions to MU on this at page 55 of the transcript:
And have you been feeling stressed about giving evidence in court?---Yes.
And did Mum ask you to practice your story with her?---Yes
Did she ask you lots of times?---No
Did Mum say you got the story wrong sometimes?---No
Did Mum say that she wants you to say that it happened?
HIS HONOUR: Did you understand that one MU?---No
MR COOPER: Did Mum tell you to tell the court that the thing with the AYP
happened?---Yes
difficulty with these questions was that they were not quantified with the
witness by either party. That is, how did MU’s
Mum practice with her?
What did that mean to MU? It should have been dealt with in re-examination to
determine if MU understood
the questions and what her answers actually meant.
That did not occur.
tribunal of fact cannot speculate. The sum total of the evidence was that BU
had asked MU to practice her story with her. MU
was not asked if they did
actually practice her story. BU did tell MU to tell the court that the thing
with the AYP happened. MU
had already told KT that at the time, told her mother
that at the time and the police that late that day. It was an issue that I
thought required consideration with regards to the reliability of MU.
was not surprising that BU had asked MU to practice and not surprising that MU
was told to tell the court that the incident did
occur. I did not believe
BU’s denials of this.
fact is that MU’s evidence in court was consistent with her earlier
recorded complaints and the pre-recorded police interview
with KT. Nothing new
came out of BU’s endeavours – whatever they were.
thought that this matter might not affect my assessment of MU’s
truthfulness and reliability – rather I thought that
she had withstood
this extra level of parental pressure and remained truthful and reliable. For
example, at the hearing MU did not
expand her complaint to include vaginal
redness or a ‘hard’ and round thing touching her. Put another way,
the unwise behaviour of BU, MU was consistent with her prior evidence.
I still decided to further consider the submission.
submitted that MU’s evidence was contaminated and that there were eight
indicia of influence. They submitted that the
contamination was such that MU
could not be accepted beyond reasonable doubt.
defence submitted that MU was vulnerable to influence from her sisters. MU
agreed that she was home schooled and that her
mum and sisters taught her
everything that she knew. She accepted that KT had told her to keep her clothes
on around the AYP.
the females in the family had taught MU and the AYP was weird.
MU had a motive to say that the AYP had been weird because she wanted attention,
that she could not sleep, it was past 3.00
am, she was tired, she was anxious,
she was only nine years old and her father had rejected her attention because of
I thought that this submission was a long bow to draw. It was never
put to MU that she had made up the complaint to get KT’s
attention. I
repeat the relevant portions of page 50 of the transcript:
Were you upset because the AYP’s iPad had died?---No
Were you upset that dad didn’t want to listen?---No
You knew that KT hated the AYP?---Yes
You knew that KT thought he was weird?---A little bit
You wanted KT’s attention? Yes
And so you said to KT that the AYP was being weird?---Yes
I just want to talk to you about what you said to KT, what happened in that
conversation. Did KT start asking you questions?---No
Did she seem worried about what weird meant when you told her?---Yes
Did she ask if the AYP touched you?---No
Did she ask about his doodle?---No
considered that MU was saying she wanted KT’s attention because she wanted
to complain about the AYP’s sexual misbehaviour,
not because of this
defence theory. I rejected the submission.
the defence submitted that there was a real risk that the complaint started out
as being weird, but developed into a sexual
assault complaint because of
BU’s leading questions.
considered that this submission ignored the nature of the complaint to KT that
the AYP had been touching her private parts. I
thought that this submission
was baseless and rejected it.
the defence submitted that the recorded complaint by BU was concerning. This
submission concerned the behaviour of BU. Defence
submitted that she made the
recording because she was worried that MU would not remember her lived
experience. BU denied this in
evidence. Defence further submitted was that BU
knew that MU’s story had come out by way of leading question rather than
experience and, presumably, therefore had to be preserved because MU would
theory was not put to any witness. I rejected it.
the defence criticised the decision to ‘delay’ going to police.
Defence repeated what BU said in her evidence
“I wanted her to have a
couple of hours sleep before, obviously, bringing her to police. So, you know,
she could remember...”
did not understand how allowing a nine year old to get her first sleep of the
night before taking her to police was an indicia of
influence. From BU’s
perspective MU was nine years old, she had been sexually assaulted, it was well
after 4.00am in the morning
and MU had not yet gone to bed.
saw no basis for this submission and rejected it.
the defence reiterated the inconsistencies between BU and MU’s evidence.
I have already dealt with this submission.
In any event, it mitigated against
influence by BU, because MU was consistent in her evidence.
defence submitted that BU knew that MU could be brainwashed. They pointed to
BU’s evidence that when MU returned home
after three months living with TU
her attitude had changed. MU wanted the AYP to go to jail. The defence pointed
to this question
and answer in cross-examination:
MR COOPER: Is it possible you think what happened with the doodle happened
because (BU) and (KT) said it happened?---Yes.
question was followed up in re-examination and MU answered that she did not know
why she had said ‘yes’ to defence
counsel’s question. I
thought then and confirm know that MU did not understand either question.
questions were multi-part and too confusing for a ten year old to understand. I
concluded that the answers had no weight in those
circumstances because they
were misleading or confusing. I rejected the submission.
overall eighth submission was not put to MU. TU denied brainwashing MU. I did
not accept BU as being reliable. I rejected the
submission.
submitted that BU, TU and KT were not credible. Defence submitted that there
was a real risk that they were discussing their
evidence with each other to try
and control the outcome of the case.
agree that BU was not credible. This submission ignores the true position that
TU was in. He was not advocating for the AYP or
MU – he wanted the court
to resolve where the truth lied. I find that he did not want to control the
outcome at all. I reject
the submission.
made further submissions on this issue and pointed out that TU and BU disagreed
that BU is not a truthful or
reliable witness. In my view, TU’s answer resolved the issue – he
had not brainwashed MU.
Her consistency in her evidence showed that to be
correct. I rejected the submission.
submitted that KT’s denial of BU’s evidence “But KT used to
say all the time, ‘Don’t fucking
go near the AYP MU. Like, make sure
– put your clothes on” confirmed the overall submission about
could not be so. The denial by KT meant that she was in disagreement with her
mother – this was not a display of collusion
at all. I rejected the
submission.
correctly submitted that KT had given evidence that she had wanted the AYP to
move back into the house prior to the incident.
BU then gave evidence next day
and aid that another daughter had wanted the AYP out of the house. This was
submitted as evidence
of collusion.
denied that there had been discussions about what everyone was going to say at
court. I have determined that BU is not truthful
or reliable. I rejected the
submission.
submitted that KT made out that she liked the AYP when MU gave evidence that KT
the AYP and thought he was weird. I reminded
myself of the actual questions put
You knew that KT hated the AYP?---Yes
You knew that KT thought he was weird?---A little bit
is an obvious inconsistency between MU and KT. On this occasion it would
appear, strangely, that the defence is preferring
the evidence of MU.
thought that the fact that defence were now relying on MU to show some type of
conspiracy fuelled by family dislike of the AYP was
hypocritical given the
attempts that they had previously made to discredit MU. However, the household
female dislike for the AYP
was a relevant issue and I thought that it had to be
a consideration for assessing whether or not the prosecution case
that process of scrutinising the defence submissions, these matters remained
relevant considerations for assessing MU’s
evidence and the persecution
case generally:
(a) The dead iPad battery inconsistency;
(b) BU had asked MU to practice her story with her. MU was not asked if they
did actually practice her story. BU did tell MU to
tell the court that the
thing with the AYP happened;
(c) MU was vulnerable to influence from her sisters;
(d) The females in the family had taught MU and the AYP was weird;
(e) The house dislike for the AYP, capably expressed by the level of vitriol
expressed at the hearing, had influence MU to make a
false complaint
taking the residual five defence submissions into account I scrutinised the
prosecution case in accordance with the directions.
considering:
(a) The content and manner of MU’s account with her complaint evidence;
(b) The timing and nature of her complaints;
(c) Her distress at the time of making her complaint to KT;
(d) The consistency between her account and the complaint evidence; and
(e) The consistency between her account and the account of KT.
I found that MU was to be believed beyond reasonable doubt.
of course, meant that her evidence had negatived the defence case beyond
reasonable doubt. Put another way, after scrutinising
the prosecution case I
did not think that the AYP’s evidence was possibly true – it was
proved to be false and I had
no doubts that were reasonable about his
finding was not the end of my consideration of the matter.
thought that there was requirement to make a finding about what part of the
AYP’s body was used to touch MU’s vulva
given that I had accepted
MU’s evidence. The AYP was aged 17 at the time. Common sense and life
experience must play a role
in the determination of facts in criminal cases. I
made these findings in light of MU’s evidence being accepted on the
(a) MU did not see a penis and she could not see much in the bedroom;
(b) MU thought that the round thing might have been a penis;
(c) Prior to her pants coming down the AYP had been moving - simulating
intercourse - behind her;
(d) The body position with clothes off that MU described mitigated against the
use of any of the AYP’s body parts besides an
erect penis or fingers to
apply pressure to MU’s genitalia – they were facing each other
laying down beside each other;
(e) There was no evidence of ejaculation;
(f) There was no evidence of penetration;
(g) MU said nothing about the round thing being lor feeling, long,
(h) The AYP was seen almost immediately after this event by his father;
(i) No person gave evidence about seeing an erection in the AYP’s
(j) MU was old enough to understand that a penis might have been used when the
AYP’s pants came down. She was not old enough
to understand what a
flaccid or erect penis felt like on her own skin;
(k) It is not possible to accept that the AYP affected enough pressure to cause
pain to MU’s genitals with a flaccid penis;
(l) It is not possible to accept that, at his age and apparent good health, the
AYP experienced an erection strong enough to apply
enough pressure to cause pain
to MU’s genitals and then lost that erection almost immediately and
without any evidence anywhere
of ejaculation;
(m) The shape of the pads of fingers and thumbs are round.
found beyond reasonable doubt that the ‘round thing’ thing was not a
penis, it was a thumb or a finger.
believing MU’s account of what occurred physically proved beyond
reasonable doubt, I was still not satisfied that there
was an attempt to
penetrate her vagina or anus. I made that finding because I was not satisfied
that there was there was evidence
of an intention to effect penetration or do
anything other than the external sexual touching that took place.
cannot find beyond reasonable doubt that the sexual touching was preparatory to
sexual penetration. There were no words spoken
and no evidence of what the
AYP’s intentions were other than what he expressed in his physical
behaviour. He was aged 17 at
the time and cannot be expected to have any great
degree of sexual experience or skill. It was not light. There was no evidence
that the AYP had displayed any prior grooming or sexual behaviour towards MU.
There was no evidence to suggest that the AYP intended
to commence sexual
offending against his sister with penetrative intercourse. Put another way, the
Crown did not prove beyond reasonable
doubt that the AYP intended to do anything
more sexually than I have found proved that he did.
did not think that the
direction should have had any role to
play in my consideration of the second verdict given the basis on which the
first charge could
not be proved. That is, the reasonable doubt that I had on
the first count did not cause any effect on my assessment of the evidence
relating to the second charge.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the AYP’s intention was to touch
and then apply brief external pressure to MU’s
vulva with his thumb or
finger. I find that the circumstances of this sexual touching were that the AYP
had got into his half-sister’s
bed, whilst they were clothed he laid
behind her in a ‘spoon’ position with her lying on her left and he
simulated intercourse
from behind, he then pulled her over and whilst they were
facing each other pulled her pants and underpants down to expose her genitals
and that he had also pulled his own pants down. He then touched and applied
external pressure to MU’s vulva with his thumb
or finger for two seconds.
It caused pain for one second. The offending stopped when she got out of bed and
went to her father’s
room to complain. She felt constrained from
complaining because the AYP had followed her to her father’s room, so
she went to her sister’s room and complained.
do not know if the AYP went to his father’s room to hear what MU would say
or if he did so to spoil her ability to complain.
I accept that, at that time
and in full knowledge of his offending, The AYP was in fear of retribution from
his father.
find beyond reasonable doubt that the AYP’s behaviour in MU’s bed
(a) An intentional physical act committed by the AYP;
(b) An act that was indecent according to the standards of morality and decency
held by ordinary members of the community;
(c) The act that was committed on MU;
(d) That MU was under the age of 10, namely nine;
(e) That MU was the half-sister of the AYP.
return a verdict of not proved to charge CH2023/933 attempted incest.
return a verdict of proved to charge CH 2023/934 Aggravated act of indecency on
a person under 10.
I certify that the preceding four hundred and sixty-eight [468] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of
his Honour Magistrate
Associate: Jonathan Pears
Date: 11 July 2024
Children and Young People
(CYP Act) defines a young person as a person who
is 12 years or older but not yet and adult. The
Legislation Act 2001
(ACT) defines ‘adult’ at
in the dictionary as meaning
“an individual who is at least 18 years old”. A child is defined at
s 11 of the CYP Act
as meaning “a person who is under 12
(Crimes Act) which precluded a prosecution election for
summary disposal as the maximum penalties for both of these offences exceeds
five years.
13 September
Supreme Court Act 1933
Miscellaneous Provisions Act 1991
(1987) 11 NSWLR 12
30 A Crim R
R v Markuleski
[2001] NSWCCA 290
Evidence Act 2011
[2003] NSWCCA
There was mention of
the term ’hard round thing, not a finger’ in the statement of
Officer McLennan dated 14 September
2023 at [6] (Exhibit P13). This was his
account of what another officer named Solly had told him the complaint was
did not make an issue of it. BU was not asked about it and she
was the witness who telephoned police. MU did not ever say something
reflected a ‘hard round thing’. I put it aside as an exaggeration
by BU or accidental misrepresentation by Officer
RTF format (726 KB)
Signed PDF/A format