Anthony Noakes v Sita Australia Pty Ltd and Adecco Industrial Pty Ltd [2014] ACTIC 1 (29 May 2014)
ANTHONY NOAKES V SITA AUSTRALIA PTY LTD AND
ADECCO INDUSTRIAL PTY LTD
[2014] ACTIC 1 (29 May
NEGLIGENTLY BREACH SAFETY DUTY –
Occupational Health and Safety Act
1989 s48 – maximum penalty
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
Legislation Act 2001
Occupational Health and Safety Act
1989 (ACT) ss48, 37, 38 &
Rocla Pty Ltd v Inspector Timothy John Cody
(2007) 159 IR 467
Rodney Douglas McCracken v Mark Raymond
[2003] ACTSC 74
; BC200305246
Sacco Builders Pty Ltd v
Inspector Chaston
(2009) 188 IR 79
[2009] NSWIRComm 153
No CC 43178 and 43179 of
Industrial Magistrate: Walker
Industrial Court of the
Date: 29 May 2014
IN THE INDUSTRIAL COURT OF
No. CC 43178 and 43179 of 2013
CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ANTHONY NOAKES
SITA AUSTRALIA PTY LTD AND ADECCO INDUSTRIAL PTY LTD
Magistrate: Industrial Magistrate Walker
Date: 29 May
Place: Canberra
defendants, Adecco Industrial Pty Ltd and Sita Australia Pty Ltd, are each
charged with one count of having negligently breached
a safety duty contrary to
section 48 of the
Occupational Health and Safety Act
1989 (ACT) repealed
(‘the Act’).
That section provides:
(1) A person commits an offence if—
(a) the person is required to comply with a safety duty; and
(b) the person fails to comply with the safety duty; and
(c) the failure exposes anyone to a substantial risk of serious harm; and
(d) the person either—
(i) was reckless about whether the failure would expose anyone to a
substantial risk of serious harm; or
(ii) was negligent about whether the failure would expose anyone to a
substantial risk of serious harm.
Maximum penalty: 1 500 penalty units, imprisonment for 5 years or both.
(2) Absolute liability applies to subsection (1) (a).
(3) Strict liability applies to subsection (1) (b).
particular safety duty breached by Adecco is detailed in section 37 of the Act
and requires that an employer shall take all reasonably
practicable steps to
promote the health, safety and welfare at work of the employer's
particular safety duty breached by Sita is detailed in section 38 of the Act and
requires that an employer shall take all reasonably
practicable steps to ensure
that persons at or near a workplace under the employer's control, who are not
the employer's employees,
are not exposed to risk to their health or safety
arising from the conduct of the employer's undertaking.
the time of the commission of these offences, a penalty unit was set pursuant to
Legislation Act 2001
at $500 for a corporation. Thus
the applicable maximum penalty is $750,000 or 5 years imprisonment or both.
in each of these cases the prosecution exercised its discretion to elect summary
disposal pursuant to section 374 of the
. Those elections
were filed electronically with this Court on 24 September 2013, prior to the
second mention of the matters. I am
therefore bound by the prosecution’s
election to deal with the matters summarily.
maximum penalty available in respect to each defendant for these offences is
therefore a fine of $5000, imprisonment for 2 years
or both; in practical terms,
a fine of $5,000.
Blackfella Gowen, whom I shall respectfully refer to as Blackfella, his
preferred appellation, died in the early hours of
the morning on 13 January 2009
as a result of being pinned by the gib extension to the control panel of a
Palfinger vehicle loaded
the time he was employed by Adecco but working for Sita, under a labour hire
arrangement entered into between the two corporations
on 13 December 2006.
30 December 2008, he approached Adecco for work after speaking with his
neighbour, Mr Terry Larkham, who was employed as an industrial
manager for Sita.
He attended Adecco’s office for interview and induction on 5 January 2009.
On or before that date a job order
from temporary workers for Sita was produced
by Adecco. That order description included the following
information:
Driver of a Hiab crane-must carrie [sic] the hiab
specific ticket. Driver must also carry a HR licence and be able to operate both
machines. There will be picking up bins. Looking for someone who has great
attention to detail and has a strong head on the shoulders.
They must be
experienced. They will be located out at Hume so some may have to be willing to
travel out. PPE-this is a site requirement.
They must wear steel cap boots and
high vis[ibility] shirt. Any additional gear will be advised.
Hiab crane is a vehicle mounted loader crane with an hydraulically powered
articulated arm fitted to the vehicle. The name “Hiab”
is used as a
synonym for all makes of loader cranes, reflective of the original Finnish
manufacturer’s name of Hydrauliska
Industri AB (HIAB). The Palfinger
Vehicle Loaded Crane (VLC) is one such “Hiab”.
there are, and were at the relevant time, industry standards in respect to
training, no licence was, or is, required to operate
an HIAB crane with less
than 10 tonne lifting capacity. Blackfella had a heavy rigid vehicle licence (HR
licence) and had experience
driving trucks. He was also licensed and experienced
in operating bobcats and forklifts. He had no experience or training with the
operation of an HIAB crane.
from Adecco had visited the site that Blackfella was to work at, nor had they
ascertained what particular plant or equipment
he would be required to
6 January 2009, Blackfella commenced work at Sita’s waste management
operation based in Hume. On the first day he worked
with Michael Roach, a Sita
employee, who demonstrated the operations of the trucks to be utilised. The
Palfinger VLC was fitted to
the truck. The crane could be operated by controls
from both the passenger and driver’s sides of the truck. Mr Roach operated
the crane throughout the day.
7 January 2009, Blackfella worked with Mr Roach again. Blackfella had one
attempt using the crane but when the bin move the wrong
way, he overcompensated
with the truck controls and began to lose control. Mr Roach took over and he
operated the equipment for the
rest of the day.
8 January 2009 Blackfella worked at the Hume premises with Mr David Miller. Mr
Miller was an Adecco employee who had been working
with Adecco for 5 months
outsourced to Sita. Mr Miller demonstrated the use of the truck and the crane to
Blackfella. It is not in
evidence before me as to what training or experience Mr
Miller had in the use of the crane or in training others.
did not work again for Adecco and Sita until 12 January 2009. On that day he
worked with Mr Miller on a different kind
13 January 2009, Blackfella commenced work before 4 o’clock in the morning
in company with Mr Miller. Blackfella was the
driver designated for the day. The
vehicle being used was fitted with the Palfinger crane. They went to work to
collect a large garbage
bin from behind the Evatt shops.
Miller went to collect the bin to position it for loading. Blackfella commenced
the operation of the crane. When Mr Miller turned
around Blackfella was trapped
between the crane’s gib extension and the control panel on the passenger
side of the truck. His
feet were suspended from the floor. He was crushed and he
died. Mr Miller’s efforts to release Blackfella using the driver’s
side controls did not work because Blackfella’s weight was pressing down
on the controls on the passenger side. Mr Miller turned
off the truck. Police
and ambulance attended. Blackfella died at the scene.
had a duty to protect the health, safety and welfare of its employee by
adequately checking the job requirements at Sita and
Blackfella's training
qualifications or experience for that job. Through an inadequate induction
process and a failure to follow
up after Blackfella was placed with Sita,
through failing to be aware of Sita’s requirements and take reasonably
steps to ensure that he had the information, instruction and training
and supervision necessary to perform his work safely, and through
monitor Blackfella's work at Sita, Adecco negligently failed to protect him. As
a result Blackfella was exposed to substantial
risk of serious harm, which
eventuated in his death.
had a duty to protect Blackfella as a third party working at a workplace under
its control. By negligently failing to conduct
any or adequate risk assessment
to identify the hazard posed by use of the Palfinger crane, by failing to
ascertain what knowledge,
training or competence Blackfella had in operating the
crane, by failing to provide proper information, instruction or training on
use of the crane and by failing to ensure proper supervision or training to
perform his work safely, Sita exposed Blackfella
to substantial risk of serious
harm, which eventuated in his death.
appears that Blackfella had operated the PK 9501, the Palfinger crane once, and
that ineffectively, prior to the occasion which
led to his death.
was provided with some material regarding operation of that crane. Mr Jonathan
O’Brien, consulting engineer, provided a report
to the DPP and concluded
that the capacity of the hinged boom of the crane to free fall when the machine
was not operated precisely
in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions rendered it particularly dangerous to the inexperienced operator. I
that Mr O’Brien, a person with over 30 years experience in civil
engineering and professing a particular expertise in relation
to cranes, amongst
other things, found the operator’s manual for the PK 9501 in his words
“difficult to read, highly
confusing and poorly written in terms of its
intended audience”. A simplified form of instruction in the form of decals
to the machine was apparently also widely misunderstood by uncertified
operators in the industry in the ACT. It is not challenged
that Blackfella was
not a strong reader.
regard to considerations of general deterrence, I note that there is evidence
before me that following the incident, the office
of Regulatory Services
commissioned an audit of vehicle loading cranes in 2009. The audit was across a
range of measures from maintenance,
to skills and documentation. It is
concerning that only 23% passed on the audited measures but perhaps even more
relevant that nearly
90% of those who responded that were involved in use of the
cranes (“dogging”) were not trained in accordance with Occupational
Health & Safety regulations then in force.
defendants relied on affidavits produced by senior staff in relation to the
corporation’s response to this incident.
Kim Grady, who oversees all work, health and safety functions across the Adecco
group of companies in Australia, attested that
Adecco commenced operations in
around 1986 and offers services in the form of temporary staffing, permanent
placement, outsourcing,
consulting and outplacement. It operates in all states
and territories in Australia except Tasmania. It has approximately 420 full-time
employees and places approximately 5000 temporary employees under labour hire
contracts across a range of industries each week. She
attested as to the
contractual arrangement with Sita, which purported to have terms and conditions
of business dated 13 December
2006. At paragraph 3 the following is included
“the client must provide a safe working environment and system of work
risks to health and such information, instruction, training and
supervision of employees as necessary to enable them to perform their
manner that is safe and without risks to health, and the client is responsible
for all personal injuries and death that
may be sustained by employees or third
parties while Adecco employees are under the supervision of the
client....”. This was
an interesting attempt to pass on the responsibility
for work safety.
had systems in place prior to this incident to ascertain workers’
qualifications and to address occupational health and
safety to some extent. The
OHS Candidate Selection And Induction Procedure dated July 2007 evidences this.
According to Blackfella's
candidate registration checklist, he completed an
online questionnaire. One of the requirements of the induction procedure was
ensure the work assignments offered to employees are suitable”.
The requirement was not met.
the incident, Adecco has revised its general induction package and now keeps a
permanent electronic copy, which can be shared
with clients and hiring managers.
Other policies and procedures have been undertaken including a complete review
of systems and procedures,
including an external one obtained at a cost of
$115,000. Significant human resources have been dedicated to pursuing
accreditation
of safety management systems. Widespread training for new starters
has been instituted. The installation of safety software to assist
management of hazards and corrective actions has been installed at initial cost
of $90,000 and an ongoing cost of a $20,000
annual fee. Better assessment of
clients has been implemented (I note that with Sita only one location being
Lithgow, not where the
incident happened, had been subject to assessment before
the contract was entered into). The institution of toolbox talks at client
has been utilised by Adecco to ensure a recognised process now for discussing
safety. There has been significant investment
in recruitment of staff into work
health and safety management. Audits of work health and safety procedures have
been instituted
on a regular basis. It was noted that Adecco has never been
convicted of an offence under occupational or work health and safety
also relies upon its excellent reputation as a responsible corporate citizen
with significant community contribution and engagement,
its cooperation with the
regulator in this investigation and its contrition. Regret and remorse were
expressed to the family and
friends of Blackfella and are also inherent in the
remedial action and the plea of guilty entered in respect the
Jon Dyster, general manager of human resources for Sita, attested that Sita
commenced operations in Australia in the year 2000
when it acquired the business
of Pacific Waste Management Holdings Pty Ltd, changing the name to Sita in 2001.
It employs 1755 employees
and engages approximately 441 labour hire workers and
contractors across 100 sites, facilities and offices within Australia. Mr Dyster
noted that between 2001 and 2009, Sita progressively developed and implemented
an environmental quality and safety (EQS) system nationally.
That process was in
train when the incident happened. It included setting national standard
operating procedures requiring labour
hire workers, amongst others, to be
assessed for their competence before commencing work at the site and any
identified gaps to be
addressed by training before they commenced.
to his affidavit, that process was applied in Canberra since late 2002; clearly
it was not applied in this instance. The
Canberra site was certified to
Australian Standard 4801, the standard applicable to occupational health and
safety management systems,
in June 2008. It continues to maintain that
certification. Following this incident, local managers were retrained in the EQS
system and the induction of drivers was reviewed to ensure that they
had been properly trained. A new management group was put in
compliance manager was appointed in March 2009 and an on road supervisor
position created in November 2013 to assist with
developing safe work practices
and addressing safety concerns.
after the incident, Sita subcontracted its truck mounted crane operations in the
Canberra area. Further a national crane review
was conducted and Sita decided to
remove all PK 9501 cranes from its fleet nationally in May 2011 due to the
identified potential
for the cranes to drop suddenly in operation. Sita trucks
were fitted with truck mounted cranes with remote controls. Subsequently,
mounted cranes have been replaced with forklifts in order to deliver and remove
waste containers more safely. A new induction
process has been instituted,
processes for engaging, inducting, training and supervising labour hire workers
have been revised, including
supervision and close monitoring in the use of
plant and equipment for the first month of employment for any employee. The
operating manual and training program have also been revised and is
applied to all new Sita drivers, employees, labour hire workers
drivers. It includes an on-the-job training component with a driver trainer or
experienced driver and a driver competency
assessment. Competency is reassessed
every 2 years. An independent specialist risk assessment firm has been retained
to improve plant
risk assessment processes and a suite of plant management
procedures, also independently reviewed, have been developed and rolled
nationally. Sita also uses toolbox talks as a safety discussion point and has
reduced complex safety information into a set of
simple and easy to understand
rules known as “lifesaving rules” which both illustrate and
summarise basic safety requirements
in poster form.
Dyster also attested to Sita’s community involvement, cooperation with the
regulator, the provision of counselling following
the incident to other
employees and its expression of remorse to Blackfella’s
Sentencing considerations
starting point in relation to determination of any criminal sentence is the
maximum penalty imposed by the legislature for the
offence. In this case that is
nominally $750,000 or 5 years imprisonment. I note, however, that section 374(6)
states that if a prosecutor elects to have the case
disposed of summarily, the court must hear and determine the charge summarily
and sentence or otherwise deal with the defendant according to law.
cases in which the defendant elects to have the matter dealt with summarily, the
court has no discretion in cases in which
the prosecution has elected to commit
the matter to the Supreme Court for sentence. In practical terms, that means the
maximum penalty
that I can apply is $5000 in respect to each defendant.
regard to the maximum penalty, the court is required to consider the objective
seriousness of the particular matters before
Sacco Builders Pty Ltd v
Inspector Chaston
(2009) 188 IR 79
[2009] NSWIRComm 153
at paragraph 37).
assessing the objective seriousness of the offence, the consequences of the
breach do not of themselves establish the seriousness
of the offence, or
therefore what penalty should to be applied. However where the breach was likely
to have serious consequences,
the occurrence of death or serious injury may
evidence the degree of seriousness of the relevant risk. In
Rodney Douglas
McCracken v Mark Raymond Johnsen
[2003] ACTSC 74
; BC200305246, Higgins CJ,
in dismissing an appeal against sentence for a breach of s 28 of the
Occupational Health and Safety Act
arising from the implosion at Canberra
Hospital, said at [54] -
A substantial fine was called for and
her Worship imposed a substantial fine. The objective circumstances tragically
illustrated the
terrible risks involved in the exercise. I do not consider that
her Worship was in error in noting the tragic consequences that followed.
no breach of the
principle to assess the need for adequate
precautions by reference to the consequences, both actual and potential, of the
to take them.
, supra at paragraph 39).
Those observations are apposite to this case.
issue here was expressed most articulately by Blackfella’s
daughter-in-law, Ms Meredith Gowen, when she stated at the conclusion
detailed exposition as to the devastating effect upon Blackfella’s three
children, his grandchildren and herself of
his loss, the
“And I realise that we are not the only family
in this country suffering from these issues but the difference is, these issues,
were for this family, avoidable.”
note that the charge in respect to both defendants is that the breaches were
committed negligently. The offence provision makes
no distinction in terms of
the penalty between offences committed recklessly or negligently. However, the
court must recognises that
an offence committed negligently is at a lower level
of culpability than one committed recklessly.
take into account the inadequacy of systems which were in place for both
corporations. I take into account the disregard to any
existing procedures by
both Adecco and Sita staff and their failure to have regard to an obvious risk,
namely the risk of serious
harm associated with an untrained person operating
heavy moving machinery. I take into account the serious and predictable
consequences
of that disregard. I have taken into account the fact that the
serious harm which eventuated was Blackfella’s death. I have
account the fact that these offences were committed negligently.
Objectively,
I assess these offences at the mid-range of seriousness for offences of their
is authority to the effect that making allowance for the subjective factors must
not produce a sentence which fails to take
into account the objective gravity of
the offence. In the decision of
Justices Boland, President, Marks
and Staff, considered an appeal from a single judge to the effect that the
sentence imposed was
manifestly excessive on the basis that insufficient weight
had been given to circumstances of mitigation. Justices Boland and Staff
concurred with the assessment of the first instance judge that the offences with
which she was dealing were objectively very seriously
(Marks J concluded that
the sentencing process had miscarried in a separate decision). In that instance,
the materialised risk of
serious injury was death which resulted from a young,
untrained and unsupervised employee being involved in operating a boom lift
above the ground. Her Honour at first instance found, as upheld by the appeal
court, the fact that the boom gate itself may have
had a fault which contributed
to the accident, not unlike the Palfinger crane, was not substantially
mitigating in relation to the
breach of the safety duty. Nor was the fact that
significant remedial measures had been taken after the incident so compelling
it should offset the objective seriousness of the offence. A penalty of
$180,000 out of a maximum of $550,000 was considered by the
appeal court to be
at the lower end of an acceptable range of penalty.
note the approach taken by then Chief Justice Higgins in
Rocla Pty Ltd v
Inspector Timothy John Cody
[2007] ACTSC 9
(2007) 159 IR 467
, in relation
to mitigating factors. In that case, the worker was seriously injured when his
arm was dragged into a machine. The magistrate
at first instance noted that the
defendant corporation had spent many hours investigating and responding to the
incident. Significant
remedial measures had been adopted which his Honour
considered demonstrated that the corporation was serious and genuine in respect
to work safety issues. His Honour noted that the corporation had cooperated with
the regulator with respect to the investigation.
He also noted the level of
support provided to the employee. Each of those were taken into account in
mitigation. He concluded that
the particular breach in that case was towards the
lower end. His Honour noted however that deterrence was a critical factor in the
interests of workplace safety. A penalty of $200,000, being 20% of the
million-dollar maximum, was applied. Chief Justice Higgins
agreed that the
penalty imposed should compel attention to occupational health and safety issues
but noted also that proper recognition
must be given to the evidence of the
specific efforts the defendant had made to implement, review and improve its
safety program.
In his Honour’s view, the magistrate had not given
adequate recognition of those facts in setting the penalty. The penalty
reduced to $100,000, being 10% of the maximum available.
criminal offences, the provisions of the
Crimes (Sentencing) Act
apply to sentencing of these matters.
details the overarching purposes
in relation to sentencing and
provides for more particular
considerations.
(1) A court may impose a
sentence on an
for 1 or more of the following purposes:
(a) to ensure that the
is adequately punished for the offence in a way that is just and appropriate;
(b) to prevent crime by deterring the
and other people from committing the same or similar offences;
(c) to protect the community from the
(d) to promote the rehabilitation of the
(e) to make the
accountable for his or her actions;
(f) to denounce the
(g) to recognise the harm done to the victim of the crime and the
(2) To remove any doubt, nothing about the order in which the purposes
appear in subsection (1) implies that any purpose must be given
greater weight
than any other purpose.
defendants submitted that specific deterrence was not a significant
consideration having regard to the fact that the defendants
are not previously
recorded and the remedial work which has been undertaken. Remorse, demonstrated
by, in the case of Adecco, assistance
to Blackfella’s family, and in both
cases by the remedial work and pleas of guilty are relied upon.
consider that all of the purposes detailed in
have some application in
both of these cases.
is appropriate in so far as it contributes to deterrence. In a corporate
context, financial punishment is clearly significant.
deterrence is a very significant factor in this type of offending. The courts
have a role to play in setting the standard
for work safety by ensuring that
failures are appropriately punished where it is in their power to do so.
deterrence, it seems to me, continues to have a role to play. Whilst I am
satisfied that both corporations have taken this
breach seriously and have made
very significant efforts to redress it, corporations are constituted by
individuals. The sting of
a mosquito is easily forgotten whereas the bite of a
lion will remain forever in the memory.
need for protection of the community is obvious. The vast majority of the
community as workers are potentially exposed to the
Rehabilitation
is relevant to the issue of deterrence. Rehabilitation has to some extent been
demonstrated by both offenders but I
note again that a corporation has a limited
Accountability
is important. Whilst both defendants have addressed this situation responsibly,
public accountability remains an important
aspect of sentencing.
Denunciation
of the negligence demonstrated by both of these corporate defendants is an
important part of any sentence.
Recognition
of the harm done to the victim and indeed the community is a factor which sadly
is almost impossible to redress by any
sentence that this court might impose but
nonetheless is a consideration in sentencing.
number of the provisions of sub-section 33(1) have particular application in
this case and I address them as follows:
nature and circumstances of the offence, which have been detailed above;
injury loss or damage resulting from the offence
effect of the offence on the victim’s family
action the offenders have taken to make reparation for any injury loss or damage
resulting from the offence (I note in this respect
that I am aware only of
emotional support having been provided to Blackfella’s family and
counselling to other workers who
might have been impacted; if there are other
forms of reparation I am unaware of them);
degree of responsibility of the offender for commission of the offence. I note
that there is combined responsibility between the
corporate management and
individual employees which led to these offences;
plea of guilty: in respect to those pleas, I note that in terms of the number of
mentions before the court they were not entered
as a particularly early stage of
these proceedings. However, I note they were indicated in the context of
agreement as to particularisation
of the charges. In a separate judgement in
, supra, Marks J observed at paragraph
“Particularisation of a charge brought
against a defendant is a fundamental requirement in the administration of the
justice system. It is a basic tenet of criminal law that a defendant
and the court must at all times be made aware of the particulars
of the charge
that has been asserted by the prosecutor. These are the particulars of how it
is asserted that the offence has been
committed”.
this type of prosecution in particular, given that the Act, and the act that has
replaced the Act relied on here, give broad duties,
it is essential that early
particularisation of the allegation is provided to the defendant, and indeed to
the court to assess the
propriety of any plea of guilty which might be entered.
I would urge the regulator, as informant, as well as the prosecutor, to give
particular consideration to this issue in future matters.
the circumstances, I am satisfied that it is appropriate to deal with the pleas
of guilty in these cases as early pleas which would
ordinarily attract a
discount in the region of 25% on any penalty imposed.
am to consider pursuant to section 33(1) any assistance by the offender to law
enforcement authorities and I note that both defendants
co-operated fully with
regulator in these investigations. I am to consider the financial circumstances
of the offender and I note
from the affidavits provided by their employees that
they are both large corporations. I am to consider any demonstrated remorse
that has been addressed already.
am also to consider current sentencing practices. I note as a result of the
election made by the prosecution that any penalty that
I impose will be
completely out of kilter with current sentencing practice.
sentencing these offenders, I wish to add my condolences to those that have
already been offered to Blackfella’s family.
The depth of the
family’s loss can never be compensated for; no penalty will address that
loss, least of all that which I am
constrained by law to impose.
considered all of the factors I have detailed, I now record convictions in
respect to each defendant. Despite the pleas of
guilty and other mitigating
factors, in light of the need to mark these offences, I impose the maximum
penalty available to me on
conviction, that is $5000 per
I certify that the preceding
Sixty paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment herein of her
Honour, Industrial Magistrate Walker.
Associate: Amy Winner
Date: 10 June 2014
Solicitor for the Prosecution: Mr M Thomas
Director of Public
Prosecutions ACT
Barrister for the Defendant Sita: Mr B Hodgkinson
Instructed by Baker & McKenzie
Barrister for the Defendant
Adecco: Ms W Thompson
Instructed by Sparke Helmore Lawyers
hearing: 26 May 2014
Date of judgment: 29 May 2014
RTF format (182 KB)
Signed PDF/A format