Haltiner and Registrar of Firearms [2008] ACTAAT 16 (15 May 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: HALTINER AND REGISTRAR OF FIREARMS
[2008] ACTAAT 16
AT07/35 & 74
Catchwords:
Firearms – suspension and cancellation of licence
– use of firearm associated with consumption of alcohol – use
firearm as a means of intimidation – possession of unregistered
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
Firearms Act 1996
, 113, Sch 2
Hamilton and Registrar of Firearms
[2003] ACTAAT 9
(20 February
Mr M H Peedom, President
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL ) NOS: AT07/35 &
GENERAL DIVISION )
Mr M H Peedom, President
The decisions under review are
.................................
CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL ) NOS: AT07/35 &
GENERAL DIVISION )
REASONS FOR DECISION
15 May 2008 Mr M H Peedom, President
The applicant in this
case has applied for the review of two decisions made by a delegate of the
respondent. The first decision,
given on 28 June 2007 was to suspend the
applicant’s firearms licence number N0004540 (
). The second decision, given on 3 December 2007, was to
cancel the licence. The decisions were made pursuant to
sections 39(1)
(3)(c) of the
Firearms Act 1996
), respectively.
The Tribunal is conferred with jurisdiction to review the decisions in question
by paragraphs (d) and (e) of section
113 of the Act.
The licence
2. The licence is a class A and B licence and is expressed to expire on
22 August 2010.
3. In his application for the licence the applicant
stated that the reason for holding the licence was for the removal of rabbits,
hares, pigs, foxes, feral cats, feral dogs and dingoes. He identified himself
as the owner of rural property near Braidwood, New
South Wales on which he
intended to use firearms in accordance with the licence.
4. Pursuant to
section 17 and items 1 and 2 of Schedule 2 of the Act, the licence authorised
the applicant to possess or use a registered
firearm of the kind to which the
licence applied for the purpose established by the applicant as the genuine
reason for possessing
or using the firearm. The firearms registered in the name
of the applicant were:
Rifle Winchester .222
short rimfire lever action;
Winchester .30/30 lever action;
and over barrel shotgun 12 gauge;
Rifle Finlan Larson Winchester
The T documents
5. Pursuant to section 37 of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
1989 the respondent lodged with the Tribunal statements containing
explanation of the reasons for the decisions, the findings on material questions
of fact relevant to the decisions and the evidence
considered relevant by the
delegate in arriving at the decisions (
“the T documents”
6. The T documents show that the decisions under review were made by
the delegate following the provision of information to the Australian
Police by the Detective Senior Constable Hinton of the New South Wales Police on
21 June 2007 regarding complaints about
incidents that had occurred at the
applicant’s property about 12 to 18 months beforehand and since that time.
Evidence was
given at the hearing of the appeal about the incidents by a number
of persons and is set out below.
7. On 26 June 2007 an officer of the
New South Wales Police conducted an inspection of the applicant’s property
and located
a .308 rifle which was not secured. It was loaded. The applicant
had explained that he was going shooting but was having breakfast
at the time.
The officer also found an unregistered air rifle at the applicant’s
8. The applicant was charged under the
Firearms Act 1996
Firearms Act
) with being the holder of a
Category A or B licence and not having approved storage and with possessing an
unregistered firearm.
9. On 2 May 2007 then Acting Sgt Munro of the
Australian Federal Police advised the applicant that he had suspended the
licence pending
the hearing of the charges by the Queanbeyan Local Court. He
said that he had suspended the applicant’s licence because he
the opinion that the applicant was no longer a fit and proper person to hold a
licence. He said that, based on the information
provided to him by DSC Hinton,
he had formed the view that the applicant may have pointed a loaded firearm in
the direction of people;
that he may have threatened people with a loaded
firearm; he may have threatened to shoot people who were using an easement on
property; and he had been charged with two offences, being unsafe storage of
a firearm and possession of an unregistered firearm.
He had determined to
suspend the applicant’s firearms licence pending the finalisation of the
charges against him.
10. On 24 October 2007 the charges were dealt with
by the Queanbeyan Local Court. The first charge was found to be proved but was
dismissed without conviction. In respect of the second charge the applicant was
convicted and fined $100.
11. By letter dated 31 October 2007, Acting
Sgt Munro requested the applicant to provide reasons as to why his licence
be cancelled pursuant to section 43(3)(c) of the Act within 7 days.
By letter dated 3 December 2007 Acting Sgt Munro advised the
applicant that no
response had been received from him. He said that he had determined to cancel
the applicant’s firearms licence
pursuant to section 41(3)(c) of the Act
on the basis that he was not a fit and proper person to hold a licence. He had
formed that
opinion on the basis of the convictions recorded against the
applicant in the Queanbeyan Local Court and the information contained
statement of reasons for suspension of the applicant’s licence.
The hearing
12. At the hearing of the appeal the applicant was represented by Mr B
Collaery, a legal practitioner, and the respondent was represented
Pilkinton, of counsel. Evidence was given by the applicant and on his behalf by
Mr N Greaney. Evidence was given on behalf
of the respondent by Mr G Barclay,
Mr P Jansson, Ms C Payne and Mr B Albrighton.
13. In affidavits admitted
in evidence at the hearing, the applicant stated that he was a plumber resident
in Canberra. He was the
owner of a rural property in the Braidwood district and
when he visited the property he stayed in a caravan. He had been continuously
licensed to carry a firearm since he was 18 years of age and had been taught how
to use firearms safely by his father who had served
in the army.
applicant said that in the past few years he had become concerned about the
intrusion onto his property of hunters using
pig dogs. He had advocated the
need for pig dog owners to report any of their missing dogs. This had made him
unpopular with newly-arrived
neighbours. He had also had an unrelated dispute
with a neighbour about gate-closing and other farm practices. This had given
to a visit to his property by officers of the New South Wales Police. When
they arrived he had just taken his rifle out of a locked
metal travelling case
and was finishing his breakfast before stepping out of caravan to feed his
cattle. He had been delayed by
a phone call and the police had charged him with
having an insecure firearm. The police had also asked him if he had any other
in his caravan. He realised he had an old slug gun in his cupboard
which had been there unused and untouched since he was about
17 or 18 years of
age and he had not remembered to hand it in when the gun amnesty was
15. The applicant said that a number of his cattle had been
killed by wild dogs and he had had to humanely shoot them. He said that
his responsibility as a primary producer to eradicate vermin seriously and
always carried his rifle with him when he was
inspecting his cattle in the
morning and the evening. He had shot three wild dogs on his property in the
last 10 years.
16. The applicant referred in his affidavit to an
incident at his property that had occurred in about January to June 2006. On
day in question he had heard a 4 stroke motorbike on his property and later
saw two of his wire fences had been cut in a way that
would allow a large
vehicle to drive through to parts of his property. Later that night he had gone
with Mr Graham Barclay in Mr
Barclay’s vehicle around his property to
shoot rabbits and other vermin. They noticed car lights approaching. He said
it was a four wheel drive vehicle with a hunting dog in the back. He had
not given the persons in the vehicle permission to be on
his property. He got
out of the vehicle taking his rifle, a 22 Mag Winchester with him. He held the
rifle in his hand with the
barrel pointed down towards the ground and said to
the persons in the vehicle that if the pig dog got off the vehicle he would
it. He had ejected two to three cartridges from his rifle. He had
threatened to call the police but Mr Barclay had told him not
to worry about it
and to let them go and give them another chance. He decided to let them go. As
they drove away towards his caravan,
Mr Barclay had let off some fire crackers
in the direction of the four wheel drive vehicle.
17. In oral evidence
given at the hearing, the applicant stated that on the night of the incident
referred to above, another man
named Greg had accompanied him and Mr Barclay
when they went hunting. Prior to going hunting Mr Barclay and Greg had come to
shed and they were drinking alcohol for about an hour and were bonging on
some marihuana on a little bottle for about half an hour.
They were drunk like
fishes. He said he did not drink alcohol but might have a little bit of port
every now and then.
18. They had left to go hunting in Mr
Barclay’s vehicle and Mr Barclay was driving. Greg had been sitting in
the back of the
vehicle drinking alcohol out of a can. The applicant had a
rifle and Mr Barclay was handling a spotlight. The rifle was a Magnum
Winchester. When they came across the four wheel drive vehicle it had some
young people on the back and some young people in
the front. There was a young
lady and the others were boys. When he got out of Mr Barclay’s vehicle he
took his rifle because
it had to be secure and he didn’t like leaving it
with Mr Barclay and Greg.
19. The applicant said that Mr Barry
Albrighton had purchased a property nearby his. Mr Albrighton had come to see
him and asked
him about access along a Crown road near their properties. The
applicant had said that he would give Mr Albrighton a key to unlock
across the road. Subsequently, the Crown’s Department had got involved
and told him that the lock and a chain should
be removed from the gate. When he
had bought the property it had a gate with a lock on it and he had kept the lock
on the gate to
secure his caravan and to stop piggers coming through and causing
damage. Subsequently a number of the land-owners from the area
himself had attended a meeting to discuss the issue of the locked gate on the
road. He had obtained an enclosure permit
to allow him to keep his cattle
within his property. Some people didn’t close the gate when they went
through it and his cattle
got out. At some time the gate was removed and had to
be replaced.
20. The applicant had subsequently agreed with Mr
Albrighton that they would clear an area of land and put up a new fence. Survey
pegs had been put into the ground to show the line of the fence but someone
removed them. He had complained to Mr Albrighton that
he had removed the pegs
and Mr Albrighton had commenced digging fence post holes on the
applicant’s side of the boundary.
He had told Mr Albrighton that he
wanted the fence line within a centimetre of where it was supposed to be. Mr
Albrighton had showed
him fencing material that he had purchased but the
applicant considered that it was not suitable as it was not new. During the
of a discussion about the fence, Mr Albrighton had told the applicant
that no-one liked him and he ought to leave the valley. When
he turned to walk
away, Mr Albrighton kicked him in the leg and when he fell down he was attacked
by Mr Albrighton using his fists.
The applicant had retaliated and tried to get
away from Mr Albrighton. They had both said that they shouldn’t be
and the applicant offered his hand to Mr Albrighton. Mr Albrighton had
then struck him in the face. The applicant fought back and
hit Mr Albrighton in
the mouth and saw blood gushing from his face. Mr Albrighton had then taken the
keys from the applicant’s
car and threw them over the fence. He had then
gone and reported the matter to the police.
21. The applicant and Mr
Albrighton had subsequently attended a mediation session and the issue between
them regarding the fence
had been resolved. The applicant agreed that there had
been an occasion when he had said to Mr Albrighton that he would keep him
sights. He had said this because he didn’t trust him. He couldn’t
recall whether he had any rifles at the time
he made the comment but he agreed
that he did carry his weapons with him some of the time.
applicant recalled an incident in June or July 2006 when Mr Jansson and his
partner, Ms Payne, were driving through the right
of way on his property. He
had gone to his van and got his rifle because he didn’t want it lying
around and insecure. The
applicant said that when he went out to feed his
cattle he would keep his rifle locked inside his van. If he saw people coming
was his practice to take his rifle out of his van and also to take it with
him when he went to see his neighbours. He said that
was normal practice among
23. The applicant was cross-examined by Mr Pilkinton. He
agreed that the storage of his rifles in a cupboard in his caravan did
properly secure them but he said that he kept the door of his caravan locked.
The slug gun that had been found by the police
was kept in the same cupboard.
It was not registered. When the police came to his property he had thought
and recalled that he had the slug gun in the cupboard
and handed it to them. He might have noticed the slug gun when he opened the
cupboard to take out his other rifles but it just didn’t come to him. He
agreed that Constable Hinton had given evidence to
the Court at Queanbeyan that
when the .308 rifle was found it was loaded but he said that Constable Hinton
was lying. He subsequently
accepted that cartridges were in the magazine of the
rifle at the time.
24. The applicant was asked why he ejected bullets
out of his rifle after he approached the four wheel drive vehicle containing the
young people on the night he went shooting with Mr Barclay. He said that he had
done it just to put some pressure on the people
in the vehicle so that they knew
he was angry with them. He did not do it to scare them but to let them know not
to come back onto
his property. He agreed that when he was standing at the back
of the vehicle, he had said that if the dog got off the vehicle he
would shoot
it. He denied that he had pointed the rifle at any person.
applicant agreed that at the time he had said to Mr Albrighton that he would
keep him in his sights he could have had two
rifles with him. He had made the
comment to Mr Albrighton because he didn’t trust him. It was just a
figure of speech.
26. When asked to explain why he went to his van to
get his rifle before speaking to Mr Jansson and Ms Payne he said that it was
good idea because, if there is a vehicle coming down the other side and grabbed
hold of the rifle and he was not keeping an eye
on it, there would be trouble.
There had not been any other vehicles in the vicinity at the time apart from his
van and Mr Jansson’s
vehicle and he did not trust anyone after what Barry
Albrighton did to him and what he did with the fence line. He had had quite
few cars along the road and if he wasn’t watching they could stop. There
had been people with bows and arrows on the road.
The applicant agreed that his
van was able to be locked.
27. Mr Greaney is a proprietor of a plumbing
business. He said that he had known the applicant nearly all his life. He
him as a family man and he would have no hesitation in having him
supervise his 16 year old daughter if the need arose. He had never
applicant be violent or aggressive. He said the applicant was a responsible
person with firearms.
28. A statement dated 21 June 2007 was provided
to DSC Hinton about the incident by Mr G Barclay. In the statement Mr Barclay
that he owned the property adjoining the applicant’s property. On
the day when he had gone shooting with the applicant he
had received a telephone
call from the applicant who advised him that someone had damaged the fence of
his property. He had later
gone with the applicant to inspect the damage.
Later that night he had gone spotlight shooting with the applicant. They had
only one gun. It was a lever action .22 Magnum long rifle owned by the
applicant. They had gone to the place where the fence had
been damaged. A
utility vehicle was driving towards them and both vehicles stopped. There were
five young men and a young girl
in the other vehicle. The applicant had been
aggressive and told the people in the other vehicle that they were trespassing
he was sick of it. At the time the applicant was speaking to the other
people he was holding his rifle in his hands and he had a
bowie knife on his
side and an ammunition belt around his waist.
29. The young people were
obviously scared and said that they were lost. There had been a dog chained in
the back of the utility.
Mr Barclay said words like “we shoot dogs on
this place”. The applicant had then said “you’re damn
He then stood next to the side of the utility and held the gun up
and levered and cocked the rifle. He put it up to his shoulder
and aimed it
into the back of the utility. Three of the young people who were in the back of
the utility had been within the line
of the rifle barrel. The applicant had
been yelling and ranting. A man named Greg who had been with the applicant and
said to Mr Barclay “for God’s sake restrain him”.
Mr Barclay said “settle down Marc you can’t shoot
the dogs, they are
restrained”. The applicant had then said “alright I’ll shoot
your tyres out”. He then
shouldered the rifle towards the front
30. Mr Barclay then told the young people to get out of the
place. Later when they had been driving back towards the applicant’s
house, they came across the young people again on a Crown access road between
his place and the applicant’s property. The
applicant said words like
“chase them down, get them”. Mr Barclay had told the applicant that
it was an access road
and that he should calm down. The young people turned off
the main track, jumped out of the vehicle and ran and hid. The three
then gone home.
31. There had been a number of occasions, Mr Barclay
said, when the applicant had discharged his firearm in the direction of Mr
property both during the day and at night. He had spoken to the
applicant about this and the applicant had denied shooting. He
was concerned
his family’s safety, particularly
when the applicant had firearms. He had
seen guns lying around the shed on the applicant’s property which had been
32. In oral evidence given at the hearing Mr Barclay said
that on the night he was invited to go shooting with the applicant all
them had been drinking before they set off. They had been drinking from a
bottle that the applicant said was his father’s
favourite port. Mr
Barclay had been smoking as well. When they came across the four wheel drive
the applicant had approached it
with his rifle and a knife strapped to his leg.
The applicant had aimed his rifle at the back of the vehicle and people were in
the line of fire. A girl who was in the front of the vehicle and the line of
fire had been sobbing. Mr Barclay had told the people
in the four wheel drive
that he had their number plate and registration details and if they came back he
would visit them in the
33. Mr Barclay was cross-examined by Mr
Collaery. He said that he and Greg had been smoking marihuana on the night of
the incident
but not the applicant. He used marihuana for the treatment of his
depression. He had observed the applicant drinking three to four
ordinary sized
glasses of port before they went shooting.
34. Mr Jansson resides on a
360 acre rural property nearby the applicant’s property with his partner,
Ms Payne. He said that
on an occasion in winter 2006 he and Ms Payne were
travelling along the right of carriageway through the property owned by the
He saw a male person who he assumed to be the applicant feeding
cattle with bread from a trailer attached to a white van about 50
metres from
the carriageway in the paddock. As he approached, the male person gestured with
his hands hailing them to stop. He
stopped on the carriageway and saw the male
person turn and walk towards the white van and take a rifle from it and then
walk towards
them. The male person came to the passenger side of the vehicle
where Ms Payne was seated. He was holding the rifle in his left
hand and it was
pointed towards the ground. Mr Jansson introduced himself and Ms Payne to the
applicant. He felt surprised and
intimated by the fact that the applicant was
holding a rifle. He was very concerned at the fact that the applicant had held
during their conversation.
35. In cross-examination Mr Jansson
agreed that, after a meeting had been held in Braidwood to discuss the issue of
the gate being
locked on the road, that the applicant had agreed that he would
not lock it and that he had ceased doing so. He was aware that the
had a problem with straying cattle but said that he had always closed the gate
after him when he went through it except
when it was open on his
36. Ms Payne said that when the applicant approached Mr Jansson
and herself with a rifle she felt a bit fearful. She said that there
else around at the time.
37. Mr Albrighton is the owner of a rural
property adjoining the applicant’s property. To gain access to his
property, he
travels through the Crown easement road through both properties.
When he first purchased his property in October 2006 a gate across
the road was
kept shut and padlocked. He and a number of other neighbours and the applicant
had a meeting with the Department of
Crown Lands and the local council about the
land-owners being denied access to their properties. As a result of the
meeting, the
applicant agreed not to lock the gate.
38. In about
February 2007 Mr Albrighton visited the applicant at his property to advise him
of some road works that were to take
place on the road and to enquire whether he
wanted to divert the easement across the property in order to allow him more
He said to the applicant if the road was diverted it wouldn’t be
necessary for him to say hello to the applicant. The applicant
had replied:
“Don’t worry, I will keep you in my sights”. At the time he
made this remark, he said he could see
two loaded rifles next to the applicant.
He told the applicant that he believed the remark was totally inappropriate and
be tolerated again.
39. On 27 August he visited Mr Matt
McKenzie-Fox, the care-taker of his property. The applicant was present and
there had been a
discussion about the construction of a boundary fence between
their two properties. The applicant became aggressive and attacked
fight had ensued and both men suffered injuries. Mr Albrighton obtained
treatment for his injuries and reported the matter
cross-examination Mr Albrighton agreed that he had not inspected the
applicant’s rifles on the occasion in February
2006 when he had had a
discussion with the applicant. He said that he assumed, because the bolt of one
of them was secured and the
other had a magazine fixed, that they were loaded.
Mr Albrighton denied that he was the aggressor in the incident that had occurred
on 27 August 2007.
The legislation
41. Provision is made
for the suspension of a licence by section 39 of the Act. It states:
39 Suspension of licence
(1) The registrar may, if the registrar is satisfied there may be grounds for
cancelling a licence, suspend the licence by serving
personally or by post on
the licensee a notice—
(a) stating that the licence is suspended, the period of suspension and the
reasons for suspending it; and
(b) requesting that the person provide the registrar with reasons why the
licence should not be cancelled.
(2) The registrar must suspend a licence in accordance with this section if
the registrar has reasonable grounds for believing that
the licensee has been
charged with, committed, or threatened to commit, a domestic violence
(3) A suspended licence does not authorise the possession or use of firearms
during the period specified in the notice suspending
(4) In this section:
domestic violence offence
—an offence is a
violence offence
if the conduct making up the offence is domestic violence
under the Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act
42. Provision is made for the
cancellation of a firearms licence by section 41 of the Act. It relevantly
41 Cancellation of licence
(3) A licence may
be cancelled—
(a) for any reason for which the licensee would be required to be refused
a licence of the same kind; or
(b) if the licensee—
(i) supplied information that was (to the
licensee’s knowledge) false or misleading in a material particular in, or
in connection
with, the application for the licence; or
(ii) contravenes any provision of this Act, whether or not the licensee
has been convicted of an offence for the contravention; or
(iii) contravenes any condition of the licence; or
(c) if the registrar is of the
opinion that the licensee is no longer a fit and proper person to hold a
licence; or
(d) for any other prescribed reason.
...........
Reasons for
43. In relation to the incident which occurred some time in January to
June 2006 when the applicant confronted the young persons
found on his property,
it is necessary to treat with caution the version of events given by Mr Barclay
having regard to his and the
applicant’s evidence as to the consumption of
alcohol and smoking of marijuana by Mr Barclay prior to the incident and since.
Nevertheless, I consider that Mr Barclay gave his evidence as to the events
which occurred truthfully. Even on the applicant’s
own evidence that he
emptied the cartridges from his rifle in the presence of the young persons in
the four wheel drive vehicle to
put some pressure on them, to let them know that
he was angry and to let them know not to come back to his property, a conclusion
that his actions involving the use of his rifle were designed to intimidate them
is justified. Mr Barclay’s unchallenged evidence
that a young girl in the
vehicle had begun sobbing suggests that he was successful in his endeavour.
Furthermore, his actions in
participating in a shooting venture with persons he
described as being drunk like fishes, by itself, demonstrates a failure to act
responsibly with a firearm.
44. In relation to the incident involving Mr
Jansson and Ms Payne, I accept their evidence that they stopped their vehicle at
applicant’s directions. No other reason was advanced that there was
any other occasion for them to become engaged in conversation
applicant. Nor was there evidence of anything about their conduct or appearance
to suggest that the applicant’s rifle,
some distance away in a van capable
of being locked, was at risk of misuse by them.
45. I find that the
applicant retrieved his rifle from his van and kept it with him during the
course of his conversation with Mr
Jansson and Ms Payne as a means of
intimidating them.
46. By itself, the comment made by the applicant to
Mr Albrighton that he would keep him in his sights, even if said whilst rifles
were nearby, does not in my view, justify a conclusion that the applicant was
issuing a threat to Mr Albrighton. The evidence in
relation to the physical
altercation between Mr Albrighton and the applicant does not enable a conclusion
to be drawn as to which
of them was responsible for initiating it. In any
event, it did not involve a misuse of a firearm and it is unnecessary to reach
conclusion about the matter.
47. In relation to the unregistered slug
gun handed by the applicant to the New South Wales Police, I do not accept the
applicant’s
explanation that a rifle kept in the same cupboard for many
years as the cupboard which contained rifles which he accessed on a frequent
basis only came to his memory because the arrival of the police caused him to
think about the matter deeply. I also take account
of the fact of his
conviction for possessing an unregistered firearm.
48. The Tribunal has
previously taken the view that in determining the manner in which the discretion
to cancel a licence issued
under the Act should be exercised, it should accept
that it is a principle underlying the Act that the possession and use of
is a privilege conditional upon the overriding need to ensure public
safety (see
Hamilton and Registrar of Firearms
[2003] ACTAAT 9
February 2003)).
49. In arriving at a conclusion on the matter, I have
taken account of the fact that the applicant demonstrated that he had a
reason for the issue of a firearms licence and there is nothing to
suggest that that reason has ceased to exist. I also accept that
the loss of
the applicant’s licence may disadvantage him or cause him to incur
additional cost in the management of his property.
The findings by the Tribunal
based on the evidence before it demonstrates, however, that the applicant has
engaged in serious misuse
of a firearm registered under his licence and that a
conclusion that he is no longer a fit and proper person to hold a licence is
50. The decisions of the respondent should be
PUBLICATION
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by
________________________________________________________________________
AT07/35 & 74
MARC PETER HALTINER
RESPONDENT:
REGISTRAR OF
PARTIES JOINED:
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANT:
MR B COLLAERY
RESPONDENT:
MR S PILKINGTON
PARTIES JOINED:
SOLICITORS: APPLICANT:
COLLAERY LAWYERS
RESPONDENT:
ACT GOVERNMENT
PARTIES JOINED:
OTHER: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
PARTIES JOINED:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
MR M H PEEDOM,
DATE/S OF HEARING:
26 FEBRUARY &
DATE OF DECISION:
_______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (53.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format