Hill and ACT Planning & Land Authority & Anor [2008] ACTAAT 32 (25 November 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: HILL & ACT
PLANNING & LAND AUTHORITY & ANOR
[2008] ACTAAT 32
(25 NOVEMBER
Catchwords:
Land and planning – approval of pre-existing tennis
court lights – whether lights previously approved – jurisdiction
– applicability of Territory Plan – issues of height, visual impact,
noise and disturbance – impact on nature reserve
– application of
Building Act 2004
Environment Protection Act 1997
Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991, ss 8, 276
Land (Planning and Environment) Regulation 1992, s 43, sch 7
Planning and Development Act 2007
Eames and ACT Planning & Land Authority
[2003] ACTAAT 43
September 2003)
Stanley and Minister for Planning
[2002] ACTAAT 40
(20 September
Ms P O’Neil, Senior Member
Dr E McKenzie, Senior Member
Mr J Ashe, Member
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/55
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
PJ & JM HILL
ACT PLANNING &
CARMELA CARRABS
& RELTON ALLAN
Party Joined
Ms P O’Neil, Senior Member
Dr E McKenzie,
Senior Member
Mr J Ashe, Member
The decision under review dated 19 October 2007 is varied by omitting
conditions 1 and 2 and substituting the following:
the development is to be carried out only in accordance with the following:
(a) site plan
stamped approved on 16 April 2008 modified to remove the shade cloth to the
chainwire fence on the western side of the
tennis court and to reflect
accurately all relevant dimensions;
(b) additional
drawings and engineer’s specifications approved in accordance with the
following conditions.
by 27 February 2009, the applicants lodge with the Authority for approval
further drawings and engineer’s specifications
prepared by an
appropriately qualified person showing compliance with Australian Standard 4282
................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT08/55
LAND AND PLANNING DIVISION )
PJ & JM HILL
ACT PLANNING &
CARMELA CARRABS
& RELTON ALLAN
Party Joined
REASONS FOR DECISION
25 November 2008 Ms P O’Neil, Senior Member
McKenzie, Senior Member
Mr J Ashe, Member
This is the second of two applications arising from a dispute between
neighbours about a tennis court. Mr Peter and Mrs Janet Hill
applicants”
) live at 103 Hawkesbury Crescent Farrar. They have sought
review of a decision of the Land (Planning and Environment) Act 1991
“the Land Act”
) retrospectively approving with conditions
tennis court lights at the home of Ms Carmela Carrabs and Mr Relton Helman
“the party joined”
), of 105 Hawkesbury Crescent Farrar
“the subject land”
). Both matters were heard together on
11-12 November 2008.
2. The lights comprise four Hubbell 1000 watt tennis lights mounted on
tapered metal poles, two on the northern side of the court
and two on the south.
The underside of each light is about 9.3 metres from the surface of the tennis
court. On the western side of
the court facing the applicants’ residence,
the poles are some 8.8 metres from the tennis court fence, which is some 100-150
millimetres from the boundary. The nearest part of the applicants’
residence is 9.4 metres from the boundary. The court extends
across the full
width of the block and adjoins Farrer Ridge Nature Reserve.
3. It is unclear when the lights were installed, but an ACT Electricity
Authority installation inspector signed off a ‘Ready
Certificate’ for the wiring for the lights on 9 August 1978 and
left them connected. This confirms that the lights
were installed some time
before that date, probably not long before.
4. In response to complaints by the applicants on 11 May and 1 June 2007
that the lights were unapproved and were causing light pollution
on their land,
the respondent wrote to the party joined on 14 June 2007, informing them that a
indicated that the light towers and attached
floodlights were not approved. The respondent stated that in order to regularise
matter the party joined would need to lodge a development application for
the unapproved structures or remove them.
5. On 10 July 2007 the party joined submitted a development application
seeking approval of the lights. The applicants opposed the
application in
writing on 15 August 2007. On 19 October 2007 the respondent approved the
existing tennis court lights with conditions,
in particular that the party
joined were required to lodge with the respondent for approval revised
architectural drawings:
(i) Revised site plan showing location of the tennis court fence, including
setbacks from all boundaries, and setbacks from the Southern
(ii) Diagram indicating that the light spill is contained within the tennis
court area in accordance with Australian Standard, AS4282
‘Control of the
Obtrusive Effects of Outdoor Lighting’.
6. Under cover of a letter dated 22 January 2008 and a
development application dated 24 January 2008 the party joined submitted
architectural drawings. In their letter of 22 January 2008 they
indicated that the revised plans and details were prepared following
consultation with Mr Gordon Ahern of John Ranieri and Associates, Consulting
Engineers–Architectural Lighting Consultancy.
The letter states that it is
proposed to adjust light angles and fit each of the four existing lights with
new baffles and shielding
so that light levels do not exceed 10 lux on the
relevant boundaries as per AS4282. It was also proposed, in order to reduce
levels as far as possible below 10 lux, to fit maximum obscuration shade
cloth to the chainwire fence on the western (relevant) site
boundary. The party
joined also proposed not to operate the lights during curfewed hours (11 p.m.
till 6 a.m.). The revised plans
include the following annotations:
LIGHTS–ADJUST ANGLE &
FIT WITH NEW BAFFLES
RELEVANT BOUNDARIES–
ILLUMINANCE IN VERTICAL
PLANE NOT TO EXCEED
10 LUX AS PER AS4282
PLASTIC COATED CHAINWIRE
FENCE TO 3600 HIGH
91% SHADE CLOTH TO
RELEVANT BOUNDARY
CHAINWIRE FENCE
In addition, each of the two plans include handwritten annotations by Mr
Solution in accordance
with AS4282
7. On 16 April 2008, following further consultation with the applicants, who
maintained their opposition to the lights, the respondent
approved the revised
drawings. The applicants subsequently sought unsuccessfully to have the decision
revoked. On 23 June 2008, by
leave of the Tribunal, the applicants lodged their
application for review of the respondent’s decisions approving the lights
and the revised architectural drawings.
Do the lights need approval?
8. The party joined do not agree that the lights require approval. They
contend that “the tennis court lights as indicated
on amended plan
29980/A, were approved and erected in accordance with referenced plans and as
per regulations current at time of
approval”. Building plan 29980/A, which
was submitted on 24 May 1973 and approved on 31 May 1973, includes a diagram of
proposed tennis court but does not include any reference to the tennis court
lights other than the following note: ‘P.P. &
Fut. Court Light
Conn.’ with an arrow leading to an electrical power point symbol. We
interpret this note to be shorthand for
‘Power Point and Future Court
Light Connection’ and a reference to tennis court lights to be installed
at some time in
the future. In the absence of any other reference on this plan
to the lights, we do not accept that this plan provides evidence that
were approved, merely that the proposed location of an electrical power source
for future lights was approved. Nor do
we attach any significance, as do the
party joined, to the fact that there is no note on plan 29980/A requesting
details of either
lights or supporting structures or any restrictions on type of
luminaire, height or detail of supporting structure. This is consistent,
believe, with an absence of any firm proposal to build a tennis court at that
time and that this was a matter to be dealt with
in the future.
9. The party joined also refers to the Ready for Test Certificate 095413
issued by the ACT Electricity Authority for the wiring for
the lights on 9
August 1978 and see this as supporting their contention that the lights were
approved. Although confirming the existence
of the lights at that time, this
certificate only constitutes approval for the electric wiring work for the
lights not the lights
themselves or the supporting poles. Nor, we find, can one
infer with any confidence existence of approval for the lights from the
existence of approval for the electrical wiring.
10. The party joined are supported in their contentions by evidence provided
by Mr Wagdy Hanna, who provided an expert witness report
for the party joined
and appeared before the Tribunal. Mr Hanna, a retired architect and principal of
Wagdy Hanna and Associated
Pty Ltd. Architects and Property Consultants with
extensive experience in all facets of the building industry, is very familiar
planning and building approval processes in the ACT. Mr Hanna sets great
store by the professional competence of ACT Government officers
and believes
that if the tennis court lights were not approved when they were installed this
would have come to the notice of officers
during the approval processes for the
various additions and alterations that have occurred to the property over the
years. He is
of the view that the fact that this did not occur suggests that the
Department was satisfied that the tennis court, lights and fence
were approved
structures. Although Mr Hanna’s evidence has been helpful to the Tribunal,
it falls short, we believe, in providing
convincing evidence that the lights
were ever approved.
11. The Tribunal has concluded therefore that the lights were not approved
prior to the approval by the respondent on 19 October
The Tribunal’s jurisdiction
12. The question whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the
applicants’ appeal against the respondent’s decisions
of 19 October
2007 and 16 April 2008 was considered by the President of the Tribunal on 14
August 2008. It was argued in that hearing
that the Tribunal did not have
Environment) Regulations
1992, which excludes the operation of section 276 of
the Land Act if the development in question is listed in schedule 7 of those
regulations. The President concluded that the neither item 5 nor item 6 in
schedule 7 exclude the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. Counsel
for the respondent
provided further submissions on this issue in the substantive hearing, but has
not persuaded the Tribunal that
it should depart from the ruling by the
President on 14 August 2008.
The Territory Plan
13. The applicants argued that the respondent and this Tribunal are required
to assess applications for unapproved developments under
the provisions of
section 205
Planning and Development Act 2007
). This requires the respondent to treat an application for
approval for a development that has already been undertaken as if the
development had not been undertaken. Section 205 does not, however, apply to the
development application under review, which is being
governed by the provisions
of the Land Act. The Land Act was repealed and replaced by the
2007 Act on 31
March 2008, when a new Territory Plan also came into effect. However
transitional provisions require this application to be considered
under the Land
Act and the version of the Territory Plan in force at the date of the
development application. While the Land Act
has no provision comparable to
section 205 of the 2007 Act, a decision cannot be made that is inconsistent with
the Territory Plan
(section 8 Land Act). That has been the approach of the
Tribunal in earlier cases where approval has been sought for existing
developments
(see for example,
Stanley and Minister for Planning
(20 September 2002). In this case concerning tennis court lights,
however, the Plan is of only limited assistance.
14. The Territory Plan has no specific provisions relating to tennis courts
in residential areas, but provisions of varying degrees
of relevance are to be
found in Part B1: Residential Land Use Policies and Part A3: Plan Administration
Policies, especially paragraphs
9.2 (d) and (e); 9.3 (a), (b), (c), (d), (e),
(j) and (p). Appendix III.1: Residential Design and Siting Codes for Single
has limited relevance except for Performance Control 6: External
Appearance of Buildings as it relates to structures, plant and equipment
above roofs. There are no setback provisions applying to the lights.
The evidence
15. As in the case of the fence, all parties provided written evidence and
Mrs Hill, Ms Carrabs and Mr Green gave oral evidence.
Mr Hanna provided expert
evidence on behalf of the party joined and Dr Doug Jarvis appeared for the
respondent. None of the parties
called a person with technical expertise in
lighting to give evidence at the hearing.
16. The applicants object to approval of the lights on a number of grounds,
of which the principal ones, in summary, are as follows:
(1) compliance with
AS4282 has not been adequately demonstrated; (2) the floodlights are of
excessive height; (3) the floodlights
are a cause of intrusive visual impact;
(4) there is excessive night-time noise and disturbance associated with the use
of the floodlights;
and (5) no light management plan has been submitted to
address light pollution impacts on Farrer Ridge Nature Reserve. The applicants
also object to the proposal to install shade cloth on the western fence of the
tennis court.
Compliance with AS4282
17. The applicants argue that the revised architectural drawings submitted
by the party joined in January 2008 do not demonstrate
compliance with AS4282
and merely state incompletely what the standard requires. They also question
whether it will be possible to
modify and adjust the lights so as to achieve
compliance with the standard. The party joined and the respondent have relied on
professional engineering advice from Mr Ahern that, by appropriate
modifications and adjustments, compliance with the standard can
be achieved. The
contribution of Mr Ahern under the auspices of John Raineri & Associates Pty
Ltd was limited and he was not
called to give evidence, but neither did the
applicants seek to provide the Tribunal alternate expert evidence to contest his
18. The Tribunal understands that, in addition to planning approval, the
modified lights will also require building approval under
Building Act
which will require a demonstration of compliance with AS4282 before
a certificate of occupancy and use may be issued by the respondent.
respondent has commented that compliance is a matter of enforcement not planning
and if the lighting system does not comply the
party joined will be in breach of
the approval and remedial action may be taken.
19. The plan approved on 16 April 2008 as giving effect to the conditions of
approval shows on the fence nearest the applicant’s
“Plastic coated chainwire fence to 3600 high 91% shadecloth to relevant
boundary chainwire fence”. The applicants
object to the approval of the
heavy shade cloth over the 3600 metre fence for the whole of its side facing
their residence. They
believe it would be unsightly and a detriment to their
20. On 28 August 2008 the ACT Government Solicitor wrote to the applicants
on behalf of the respondent as follows:
I am instructed to advise that, should the matter proceed to hearing, the
respondent will propose to the Tribunal the following amendment
to the decision
under review:
That the site plan (T14, folio 55) provided in response to condition
2(a)(ii) of the decision be amended to remove the shade cloth
from the chainwire
21. Two reasons were given in the letter. Firstly, it was stated that the
shade cloth was not necessary to achieve compliance with
AS4282. Secondly, it
was conceded that the shadecloth would have a detrimental effect on the
applicants’ amenity.
22. However, when the matter came to hearing the respondent disavowed that
undertaking and submitted that the provision of shade
cloth should remain within
the approval, as a precautionary measure. Given the respondent’s earlier
concession in the letter
of 28 August 2008 and in the absence of a technical
report or expert evidence explaining the necessity of such an extensive area
shade cloth, we are not inclined to approve that aspect of the decision.
23. We note that the plan was endorsed by Mr Ahern as meeting AS4282 with
shade cloth on the western fence nearest the applicants’
However we also note that at the eastern fence the relevant standard was
expected to be met without shade cloth, which
we question can be attributed to
vegetation beyond the fence. In the absence of a technical report or other
expert evidence, the
Tribunal is not able to find with certainty that AS4282 can
be satisfied. However, given (1) the views of the respondent in the
28 August 2008 that the shade cloth is not necessary for compliance with AS4282;
(2) the apparent endorsement of Mr Ahern
that the standard can be met; and (3)
the application of the
Building Act
, we would be prepared to approve the
development subject to a condition requiring the provision of a more precise
technical specification
of what is required in order to meet the relevant
sections of AS4282.
Height of the lights
24. The applicants argue that the lights, being mounted 9.3 metres above the
surface of the tennis court and at an even greater height
above natural ground
level, are of excessive height. They assert that the lights contravene provision
O1.1 and P1.1 of Appendix III.1
of the Territory Plan, which regulate the height
of residential buildings. They also rely on research they have undertaken into
court designs and codes indicating that lights with a height of 6–7
metres are adequate for a residential court. They see the
decision in
Eames and ACT Planning and Land Authority
[2003] ACTAAT 43
(24 September 2003) as providing a precedent for requiring the height of tennis
court light poles to be no greater than 6 metres.
25. The respondent comments that the lights have been on the subject land
for over 30 years and were there when the applicants bought
their land 19 years
ago. The respondent is of the view that the circumstances taken as a whole do
not warrant an order that the party
joined partly demolish the light towers to
reduce their height to one seen by modern light installers as sufficient. The
considers that an obligation to reduce the height of the towers would
be unduly onerous for the party joined and would provide little
benefit for the
applicants. It is the respondent’s view that the Tribunal’s
decision in
is distinguishable from the current matter, as
that case involved construction of a new tennis court not alterations to an
court. The respondent argues that the applicants’ reliance on
Appendix III.1 to claim the height of the towers should not exceed
8.5 metres is
misplaced as Appendix III.1 applies to ‘buildings’ not
‘structures’ and the towers are structures
not buildings. Finally,
the respondent submits that, having regard to AS4282, any reduction in the
height of the towers would be
likely to increase light spill to the western
boundary, although the applicants contest that assertion.
26. The party joined argues, on the basis of enquiries with lighting
equipment suppliers, that putting in lights complying with AS4282
existing poles at 6 metres height would not light the court adequately. In
light of the evidence, the Tribunal has concluded
that requiring the party
joined to reduce the height of the existing lights in their present locations is
not justified in the absence
of more certain evidence as to how AS4282 can best
be met. We are satisfied that there is no requirement in the Territory Plan
reduction of the height of the lights below their present level.
Visual impact of the lights
27. The applicants argue that the floodlights tower high above nearby
2-storey rooftops and that the negative impact is exacerbated
when the lights
are switched on at night. In the applicants’ view the floodlights infringe
provisions O6.2 and P6.2 of Appendix
III.1 of the Territory Plan, which provide
as follows:
To ensure that external colours and finishes of
buildings and structures above roofs are not excessively obtrusive or likely to
a loss of amenity to the streetscape or neighbours.
Structures, plant and equipment situated on or visible
above roofs to be so located and treated as to be as inconspicuous as
28. The applicants say that neighbours, friends and passing strangers who
live in the area have commented adversely on the visual
impact of the lights in
a residential setting. The applicants also argue that the Tribunal’s
decision in
was made largely to reduce adverse visual impact.
29. The respondent repeats its submissions in relation to the
applicants’ complaints about the height of the floodlights in
its comments
the complaints about the towers’
height is their visibility. Concerning
the impact of the lights at night, the respondent draws attention to the
requirement to comply
with AS4282. The respondent is also of the view that the
impact of the lights is also rendered acceptable by distance and the scope
screening by vegetation on the applicants’ block.
30. Referring to provisions P6.2, Dr Jarvis submitted that P6.2 is not
intended to refer to court lights but rather radio antennae.
He noted that
performance measure D6.2 provides that single masts may be located on a
free-standing structure at the rear of a dwelling;
and that viewed from the
street one of the lights is visible above the roof line of the subject land only
from one vantage point,
complying with P6.2 and O6.2. During its view of the
subject land the Tribunal noted that only one light was visible from one vantage
point in the street.
31. In light of the evidence the Tribunal is not persuaded that the
applicants have demonstrated that the visual impact of the light
significant that the lights should be removed or reduced in height. We are also
of the view that the lights meet the requirements
of provisions O6.2 and P6.2 of
Appendix III.1of the Territory Plan and are not otherwise in conflict with the
Noise and disturbance associated with the use of the floodlights
32. The applicants have complained that in addition to light pollution the
lights facilitate noisy and disturbing use of the tennis
court during hours of
darkness, which disturbs their amenity. They allege among other things that it
is impossible to sleep or rest
in their bedrooms or work effectively in their
studies when the tennis court is in use.
33. The party joined has disputed the seriousness of these claims and
proposed in their letter of 22 January 2008 not to operate
the lights during
curfewed hours (11 p.m. to 6 a.m.). The respondent argues that there is
insufficient justification to impose more
onerous curfew conditions than those
proposed by the party joined and that the applicants cannot reasonably complain
that neighbours
use their property for the purpose for which it was intended and
outside curfewed hours. They add that if noise is excessive, irrespective
source, the noise can be addressed in the ordinary way by complaint to the
police or Environment ACT.
34. The Tribunal notes that paragraph 9.3(d) of Part A3 of the Territory
Plan requires a relevant authority when assessing a development
proposal to
carefully consider “impacts on the amenity of surrounding land uses,
including impacts on ... the level of noise
generated...”. However, in the
circumstances of this case where the tennis court is already in place, the
Tribunal considers
that the Territory Plan is not the appropriate vehicle for
dealing with the noise issue and that any future concerns, should they
should be taken up with Environment ACT for consideration in terms of the
provisions of the
Environment Protection Act 1997
Impacts on Farrer Ridge Nature Reserve
35. The respondent sought comments on the original development application
submitted by the party joined on 10 July 2007. In response
Environment
ACT replied that the application could be supported provided that all outdoor
lighting complies with AS4282 and that
a light management plan must be submitted
which covers issues such as spill to adjacent areas and proposed times of
36. The applicants assert that no light management plan was submitted and
that no compliance with AS4282 was demonstrated in relation
to the reserve. The
respondent has questioned the bona fides of the applicants in raising this issue
and asserts that this is not
a matter about which the applicants have a
legitimate interest. The respondent notes that the conditions of approval
require compliance
with AS4282, and observes that no complaint has been raised
by Environment ACT, which has responsibility for the reserve. The party
dispute that there is a requirement to consider the issue of light spill onto
the reserve.
37. The Tribunal notes that paragraph 9.3 (j) of Part A3 of the Territory
Plan requires a relevant authority when assessing a development
proposal to
carefully consider “impacts on flora and fauna wildlife habitats”,
and we have done so. No evidence has been
provided of any adverse effects on
Farrer Ridge Nature Reserve from the lights or the use of the tennis court at
any time during
the 30 or more years that the lights have been in existence, and
we have concluded that any impacts are likely to be minor. Moreover,
that compliance with AS4282 should prevent any light spill onto the reserve thus
avoiding any adverse impacts from the use
of the lights.
38. There is no requirement arising from the Territory Plan or otherwise
that would justify imposing a requirement to remove or reduce
the height of the
existing lights. The Tribunal has concluded that approval of the development
with conditions would not be inconsistent
with the Territory Plan. On the basis
of the evidence we are satisfied that the existing lights can be modified or
adjusted so as
to ensure compliance with AS4282 and that the lights should be
approved. The intent of this decision is to ensure that the party
have lights on the existing poles so long as compliance with AS4262 is achieved.
It would be appropriate, however, to
vary the conditions imposed by the
respondent in its decision of 19 October 2007 so as to provide a more precise
technical specification
of what is required in order to meet AS4282, to ensure
the dimensions are correctly represented on the site plan and also to remove
proposed shade cloth. The installation of shade cloth on the fence on the
western side of the tennis court appears to be unnecessary
to meet AS4282 and
would have detrimental effect on the applicants; the conditions of approval will
be amended accordingly.
PUBLICATION DETAILS
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by Member's
________________________________________________________________________
APPLICANTS:
PJ & JM HILL
RESPONDENT:
ACT PLANNING &
LAND AUTHORITY
PARTY JOINED:
CARMELA CARRABS & RELTON ALLAN HELMAN
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANTS:
RESPONDENT:
DR D JARVIS
PARTY JOINED:
SOLICITORS: APPLICANTS:
RESPONDENT:
ACT GOVERNMENT
PARTY JOINED:
OTHER: APPLICANTS:
RESPONDENT:
PARTY JOINED:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
MS P O’NEIL, SENIOR MEMBER
MCKENZIE, SENIOR MEMBER
MR J ASHE, MEMBER
DATE/S OF HEARING:
11 & 12 NOVEMBER 2008
DATE OF DECISION:
_______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (111 KB)
Signed PDF/A format