DPP v Gowshall [2025] ACTSC 490 (7 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
DPP v Gowshall
[2025] ACTSC 490
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
Judgment and Punishment – Sentence – driving at or near police
aggravated dangerous driving – objectively serious offending
– profound impact on victims – degree of remorse for
– underlying mental health condition – drug use – both
contributing to reckless behaviour – good
work record – family
support – assessed as suitable for intensive corrections order
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
Road Transport (General) Act 1999
Director of Public Prosecutions
Andrew Gowshall (Offender)
Representation:
J Melloy, S Pitney (DPP)
E Wallis, E Chen (Offender)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
Legal Aid ACT
File Number:
SCC 46, 47 of 2025
Gowshall, you pleaded guilty to one count of driving at or near police (CAN
2024/11496) and one count of aggravated dangerous
driving (CAN 2024/11498).
maximum penalty for the offence of driving at or near police is 15 years. The
maximum penalty for the aggravated dangerous driving
offence is a fine of
$48,000 and three years’ imprisonment. Under
Transport (General) Act 1999
there is an automatic licence
disqualification of twelve months or longer if the court so orders.
facts on which you are to be sentenced are as follows.
the first offence:
(a) You drove at or near multiple police officers on two different occasions in
the context of a lengthy police pursuit while you
were driving erratically to
evade apprehension.
(b) On the first occasion you drove headfirst towards the police vehicle in
which Constable Bewick and Constable Quinnell was seated.
(c) On the second occasion Constable Bewick was outside her vehicle deploying a
Tyre Deflation Device (TDD) and as a result was placed
in a more vulnerable
position and in far greater danger.
(d) There were no other passengers in your vehicle at the time. Your offending
occurred in the middle of a Sunday and in relatively
close proximity to houses
that lined the street.
the second offence, the facts on which you are to be sentenced are as follows:
(a) You drove on the wrong side of the road and drove in close proximity to two
pedestrians who were walking their dog. You drove
onto the green belt at various
locations in the pursuit, including their houses and a school. You rear ended
another vehicle and
continued to drive after the police had successfully
deployed the TDD.
(b) Your offending occurred in the middle of the day through residential areas
along main roads and along shared pedestrian areas.
(c) Your dangerous driving lasted for approximately 30 to 35 minutes through a
number of residential suburbs.
(d) You drove at high speeds when you were pursued by the police.
(e) You had used methamphetamine prior to the offending.
(f) This offence is statutorily aggravated by virtue of your failure to stop for
the police.
further circumstance of aggravation is that you were on bail at the time for
other driving offences, one of the conditions of which
included a condition not
to drive a motor vehicle. This is in itself a significant aggravating factor on
offences occurred on 17 November 2024.
were arrested on that date and have been in custody since then.
plea negotiations which resulted in you facing fewer charges, you entered pleas
of guilty in this court on 9 April 2025. I will
therefore apply a discount of 20
percent on account of your pleas of guilty.
two young police officers who were the victims of count one have been profoundly
affected by your behaviour on that day. Constable
Quinnell explained the fear
that is always at the forefront of any police officer’s mind as they go
apprehension materialised on that day for both
officers. What impacted Constable Quinnell most on that day was not only the
he personally faced but your complete disregard for the safety of your
fellow human beings going about their business on a Sunday
Bewick who has been the victim of another similar incident before has been
affected even more badly and she now doubts whether
she can continue with
policing work.
circumstances, on any view of the matter, mean that your offending on that day
was objectively very serious. By far the most
serious of the two offences is the
offence of driving at or near the police officers.
I accept that you were recklessly, rather than intentionally, risking the safety
of the two police officers and others and that
you drove near as opposed to at
the two police officers, nevertheless they were two separate incidents which
necessarily means a
greater degree of criminality was involved. The fact that
the maximum penalty for that offence is 15 years in itself indicates the
seriousness with which that offending is to be viewed.
turn now to personal circumstances. You are now 42 years old. Although you have
a number of convictions for driving offences, I
note that they all occurred
between 2006 and 2010 although you appear to have some outstanding matters which
have not yet been disposed
have read the psychological report dated 1 July 2025 tendered on your behalf. I
accept that at the time of your offending you were
suffering from a persistent
depressive disorder with suicidal ideation. It is evident from that report and
from the information provided
by family members that in 2023 you suffered a
number of stressful events in your life. These events cause the onset of the
illness and caused you to increase your drug use in order to
alleviate stress. You began using hard drugs which caused a further
your mental health, a vicious cycle which ultimately resulted in you exhibiting
reckless behaviour. That report indicates
that you were already experiencing
mental and behavioural disturbances in September 2024 some two months prior to
the commission
of these offences.
accept that you have exhibited a degree of remorse for your offending
notwithstanding the comments you made at the time of the preparation
presentence reports. Your counsel told me that these comments were more about
your frustration about the issue of the previous
warrant which you were unaware
of at the time and your inability to understand at the time why the police
wanted you.
have taken into account the letter which I received from your stepfather, your
mother and your sister. It is evident that you have
a good work record and that
you have a good deal of family support. The corrections department have now
assessed you as a suitable
candidate for an intensive correction order. The
material in the presentence reports and in the letters tendered on your behalf
me some confidence that you are capable of rehabilitating yourself and once
again becoming a useful and productive member of the
have also taken into account the comparative table of sentences tendered by the
prosecution at the sentencing hearing.
and the fact that you have now spent almost one year in custody has caused me to
accept your counsel’s submission that
it is appropriate that I impose an
intensive correction order.
I intend to take into account the almost one year in custody by imposing an
intensive correction order, I will sentence you
for the offence of aggravated
dangerous driving first.
orders of the Court are:
(1) For the offence of aggravated dangerous driving
(CAN 2024/11498), you are convicted and sentenced to 9 months and 18 days
imprisonment
reduced from 12 months (by 20 percent discount) in recognition of
your plea of guilty. I order that the term of imprisonment commence
November 2024 which means that you have now completed serving that sentence
because the end date was 3 September 2025.
(2) Further, pursuant to
Road Transport (General) Act 1999
(ACT), I order that the automatic disqualification period for the offence of
aggravated dangerous driving be extended for a period
of two years to start from
(3) For the offence of driving at or near police (CAN 2024/11496), you are
convicted and sentenced to 2 years, 4 months and 24 days
imprisonment reduced
from 3 years (by 20 percent discount) in recognition of your plea of guilty and
further reduced by the additional
66 days you have spent in custody referable to
this matter from 3 September 2025 to today, 7 November 2025. I order that the
of imprisonment commence today, 7 November 2025 and expire on 25 January
2028, with a total term of 2 years, 2 months and 19 days.
(4) I order that the sentence of imprisonment for the offence of driving at or
near police be served by way of intensive correction
order subject to the core
conditions listed in
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act
I certify that the preceding twenty-one [21] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Sentence of her Honour Acting
RTF format (179 KB)
Signed PDF/A format