Hosmer Holdings v Sixsmith [2025] ACTMC 13 (13 June 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Hosmer Holdings v Sixsmith
[2025] ACTMC 13
Hearing Dates:
4 December 2024, 26 March 2025
Decision Date:
Magistrate Temby
See paragraph [78]
Catchwords:
– LEASES – implied
terms – guarantor - costs
Legislation Cited:
Court Procedures Rules 2006
, rr 1619 and 1720(3)(c), Schedule
Leases (Commercial and Retail) Act 2001
Cases Cited:
Arthur McWitton Pty Limited v Perpetual Trustee Co Limited
Beach Petroleum NL v Jonson
(1995) 57 FCR 119
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd v Shire of Hastings
(1977) 180 CLR
Canvas Graphics Pty Ltd v Kodak (Australasia) Pty Ltd
Jorgensen v Wilson
[2023] ACTSC 124
Motor Trades Association of Australia Superannuation Fund Pty Ltd v
[2007] FCA 1878
Polleycutt v Taylor
[2020] ACTSC 158
Saddler v Wakim
[2023] ACTMC 11
Hosmer Holdings Pty Limited (First Applicant)
Stavroula Lourandos (Second Applicant)
Stephania Lourandos (Third Applicant)
Cameron James McDougall (3
Aikaterina Yiannakopoulos (Fourth Applicant)
Nicholas James Lourandos (Fifth Applicant)
Alayna Sixsmith (Respondent)
Representation:
Jason Moffett (Applicants)
MV Law (Applicants)
File Number:
CL 6 of 2024
MAGISTRATE TEMBY:
Introduction
Applicants own a block in Braddon. On 1 October 2019 they entered into two
agreements – a lease and a licence – with
Mort Street Bar Ltd
Mort Street Bar
) for the use of premises on the block and an associated
Street Bar was in arrears with respect to its financial obligations under the
two agreements for some time. Ultimately, the Applicants
terminated the
agreements in July 2023 and they now seek to recover the debt that Mort Street
Bar owes to them.
Mort Street Bar was in liquidation, the Applicants brought the present
proceedings against the Respondent, relying on a guarantee
that the Respondent
gave to them with respect to Mort Street Bar’s obligations under the two
agreements. I note that Mort Street
Bar has now been
deregistered.
The relevant agreements
Applicants are, and were at all relevant times, the Registered Proprietors of
, Block 20, Braddon.
9 December 2019, the Applicants entered into a lease with Mort Street Bar for
the use of premises (
the Premises
) on that block (
on 9 December 2019, the parties entered into a related licence which permitted
Mort Street Bar to use one of the car parks
on the block (
the Licence
Both the Lease and the Licence commenced on 1 October 2019. The Respondent was a
guarantor with respect to both agreements.
Mort Street
Bar’s financial obligations under the Lease
the Lease, Mort Street Bar was obliged to pay the Applicants ‘Rent’
by monthly instalments (clause 7). ‘Rent’
was defined to mean
the aggregate of all the amounts payable by the Tenant under this
Lease explicitly identifies certain items that Mort Street Bar was required to
pay to the Applicants, namely:
(a) water consumption charges (clause 8.2);
(b) a contribution to outgoings for each ongoings year (clause 9.1 and Items 12
and 25 of the Reference Schedule at Annexure A to
the Lease);
(c) any GST payable on a taxable supply (clause 12.2); and
(d) interest payable on any amounts not paid by Mort Street Bar on time,
calculated on daily balances at the rate of 14% per annuum
(clause 13.6 and Item
15 of the Reference Schedule).
Lease also identified an ‘Annual Rent’ figure (clause 1.1 and Item
14 of the Reference Schedule). That figure was
$100,000 at the commencement of
the Lease and was subject to rent reviews (clause 7.2 and Items 16 and 17 of the
Reference Schedule).
of the Annual Rent figure is not expressly required by the Lease. However, an
obligation for Mort Street Bar to do so (and,
therefore, that ‘Annual
Rent’ fell within the definition of ‘Rent’ given by the Lease)
should, by implication,
be read into the Lease. Implying such a term satisfies
all of the conditions for the implication of specific terms set out in
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd v Shire of Hastings
180 CLR 266 at 282-3.
note, in particular:
(a) the nature of the Lease, being an agreement that is typified by the use of
premises in exchange for the payment of rent (in the
sense of being a land use
payment rather than the definition given by the Lease);
(b) the parties’ agreement on an Annual Rent figure;
(c) the absence of any other obligation to pay a land use charge; and
(d) the assumption in certain clauses of the Lease that the Lease did require
Mort Street Bar to pay Annual Rent (see, for example,
clause 12.1).
my view, it is reasonable and equitable to imply a term that Mort Street Bar was
required to pay the figure agreed for Annual Rent,
it is necessary to do so to
give business efficacy to the agreement, it is obvious that such a term should
be implied, it is a term
that is capable of clear expression and it does not
contradict any express term of the contract.
also note that Mort Street Bar made payments to the Applicants which included an
amount for Annual Rent, without reservation or
objection. It is apparent that
the parties proceeded on the basis that Mort Street Bar had an obligation to pay
the Annual Rent figure.
Street Bar also had an obligation to take out and maintain certain kinds of
insurance (clause 22). If Mort Street Bar failed
to do so, the Applicants could
(with notice) pay any outstanding premiums or take out any relevant insurance
policies. The Applicants
could then recover those amounts from Mort Street
Street Bar’s obligation to make payments under the lease continued despite
the termination of the Lease (clause 13.5(a)).
maintenance obligations
the termination of the Lease, Mort Street Bar was required to return the
Premises to the Applicants in the same repair and condition
as they were in at
the commencement of the Lease (except for fair wear and tear) (clause
Default and termination
of the clauses referred to above was an essential term of the Lease (clause
27.1). As such, the Applicants could terminate the
Lease, on giving notice, if
Mort Street Bar did not comply with any of those clauses (clause 27.3).
Street Bar was required to vacate the Premises on termination of the Lease
(clause 28.1). It was required to remove its property
prior to the date that the
Lease was terminated (clause 28.2) and make good any damage caused in removing
its property from the Premises.
Mort Street Bar was required to pay the
Applicants liquidated damages if it did not comply with its obligations under
of an essential term also required Mort Street Bar to compensate the Applicants
for loss or damage they suffered as a consequence
of the breach (clause
27.4(a)). The Applicants’ entitlement to damages is in addition to any
other remedy to which they are
entitled, including termination of the Lease
(clause 27.4(c)) and recovery of rent, outgoings, costs, expenses and interest
Street Bar was required to pay the Applicants’ reasonable legal costs (on
a full indemnity basis) in relation to any breach
or default by Mort Street Bar
under the Lease (clause 33.8(d)).
Relevant terms of the
the Licence, Mort Street Bar was obliged to pay the Applicants a licence fee of
$2,000 per annum (subject to review), payable
in monthly instalments (clauses 4,
7(a) and Item 3 of the Reference Schedule) and any GST payable on a taxable
supply (clause 19).
Applicants could terminate the Licence, on giving notice, if Mort Street Bar did
not comply with any term of the Licence (clause
10(b)). Further, pursuant to
clause 6 of the Licence, the Licence was taken to be interdependent with the
Lease, such that the Licence
would terminate on the termination of the
the Licence does not contain a clause which explicitly entitles the Applicants
to seek recovery of unpaid licence fees, they
are entitled to damages for breach
of contract. Mort Street Bar is liable for the Applicants’ costs in
relation to the enforcement
of the Licence (clause
Guarantees and indemnities
clause 29.1 of the Lease, the Respondent guaranteed to the Applicants:
(a) the due payment by Mort Street Bar of all the amounts payable by Mort Street
Bar under the Lease; and
(b) the timely performance and observance of all the covenants and agreements
contained or implied in the Lease and to be performed
and observed by Mort
Street Bar.
clause 29.2 of the Lease, the Respondent also gave the Applicants an indemnity
against claims made against the Applicants as
a result of Mort Street Bar
breaching the Lease, however no claims of that kind have been made against the
Applicants.
29.3(b) reads:
The guarantee and indemnity given by the Guarantor
under this clause 29 will be irrevocable and continuing and will extend to cover
all obligations of the Tenant to the Owner however arising, and they will
continue and remain in full force and effect until the
due performance and
observance by the Tenant of all the agreements and conditions to be performed
and observed by the Tenant in
accordance with the terms of this Lease.
rights of the Applicants, and the liabilities of the Respondent, under the Lease
continued beyond the termination of the Lease
(clause 29.3(a)(vi)).
17 of the Licence is to similar effect as clause 29 of the Lease. Clauses 17.1
and 17.3(b) read:
17.1 The Guarantor guarantees to the Licensor
the timely performance and observance of all the covenants and agreements
or implied in this Deed and to be performed and observed by the
17.3(b) The guarantee and indemnity given by the Guarantor under this
clause 17 will be irrevocable and continuing and will extend
to cover all
obligations of the Licensee to the Licensor however arising, and they will
continue and remain in full force and effect
until the due performance and
observance by the Licensee of all the agreements and conditions to be performed
and observed by the
Licensee in accordance with the terms of this Deed.
rights of the Applicants, and the liabilities of the Respondent, under the
Licence continued beyond the termination of the Licence
17.3(a)(v)).
Mort Street Bar was in arrears
23 February 2023, the Applicants’ then property managers for the Premises
(CBRE) produced an ‘Aged Arrears Report’.
It showed that Mort Street
Bar was, as at 16 January 2023, in arrears with respect to its financial
obligations to the Applicants
in the sum of $88,257.32. CBRE produced a balance
report on 7 February 2023 which summarised the components of that arrears
Financial obligation
Balance owing
Base Rental – Retail
Rent Deferred – Payable (Covid)
Rental Abatement / Free – Covid 19
($5,416.67)
Fitout incentive
($5,555.55)
Car Park Rental
Car Park Rental Abatement – Covid 19
Car Park Rental Deferred – Covid 19
Insurance Recharge
Water & Sewerage Recharges
OPEX – General
OPEX – Deficit/Surplus
GST Output Payable
is a shorthand for the sums Mort Street Bar was required to pay by way of
outgoings pursuant to clause 9.1 of the
Lease. The “Covid 19” rent
deferrals and abatements reflect an agreement that the parties had apparently
agreed to, in
order to deal with disruptions caused by COVID-19, under the
Leases (Commercial and Retail) COVID-19 Emergency
Response Declaration 2020
refer to an apparent agreement because the only evidence of the terms of that
agreement are contained in an email that CBRE sent
to Mort Street Bar on 10
February 2021, which purported to ‘
confirm the outcome of mediation to
’ but which Mort Street Bar did not respond to, despite the email
requesting that Mort Street Bar confirm its agreement to the
terms which were
set out in the email. Ultimately, I accept the Applicants’ position that
the arrangement resulted in payments
that Mort Street Bar would otherwise have
been required to pay under the Lease and the Licence being reduced or deferred
the Applicants’ reliance on that arrangement is to Mort Street
Bar’s benefit.
figures in the CBRE documents are uncontested. Not in the sense that the
Respondent, having considered the documents, decided
not to challenge the
accuracy of the documents at the hearing, but in the sense that the Respondent
decided not to contest the proceedings
Nevertheless,
I reviewed the figures in the Aged Arrears Report that I could calculate for
myself (being the monthly amounts for rent
and licence fees, and the associated
GST charges) to satisfy myself that I could rely on the documents. I note that
the licence fees
for each year, and the rent figures for Years 2 to 4, were
correctly calculated in accordance with the terms of the Lease and the
and the associated GST amounts were correct.
rent figure for Year 1 was not correct, however the error was small (being
$71.16 per month) and the error was in Mort Street
Bar’s favour (that is,
the amount said to be owing was less than what the Applicants were entitled to
charge). The error was
rectified in the Year 2 figures. I also note that the sum
of the various amounts said to be owing in the documents are correctly
calculated in the total that is identified in each of the documents.
am satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the figures set out in the
reports do not exceed Mort Street’s liability
under the Lease and the
or about July 2023, the Applicants’ subsequent property managers for the
Premises (Sentia) produced a ‘Statement’
which identified amounts
which became owing by Mort Street Bar to the Applicants, and amounts paid by
Mort Street Bar, in the period
1 February 2023 to 30 June 2023. As I did for the
documents produced by CBRE, I reviewed the rent and licence fee against the
requirements
of the contract and confirmed that those amounts, and the
associated GST charges, had been correctly calculated. The total of the
individual sums ($60,270.05) had also been correctly calculated.
am satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the figures set out in the
reports accurately reflect Mort Street’s liability
under the Lease and
Licence during the period 1 February 2023 to 30 June 2023.
and Licence were terminated
13 June 2023, the Applicants gave Mort Street Bar and the Respondent notice that
Mort Street Bar was in default of its obligation
to pay $148,524.37. Mort Street
Bar in fact owed $148,527.37 according to the spreadsheets that had been
prepared by the Applicants’
proper managers, however I do not consider
that the error, which was in Mort Street Bar’s favour, invalidates the
amount of $148,527.37 was the amount by which Mort Street Bar was in arrears
with respect to its financial obligations under the
Lease and Licence, as
identified in paragraphs 29 and 36 of these reasons ($88,257.32 + $60,270.05).
The total comprised arrears
in payments for:
(a) annual rent;
(b) water and sewerage outgoings;
(c) Mort Street Bar’s outgoings contribution;
(d) insurance;
(e) the Licence fee;
(f) GST; and
(g) amounts owing under the temporary COVID arrangement.
Applicants gave Mort Street Bar 14 days to remedy the default. Mort Street Bar
did not remedy the default, entitling the Applicants
to terminate the Lease and
the Licence.
12 July 2023, the Applicants wrote to Mort Street Bar, giving notice that the
Lease and Licence would terminate 14 days after that
notice was served on Mort
Street Bar. It was served on Mort Street Bar by sending the notice to Mort
Street Bar’s registered
office by express post on 12 July 2023. Under
clause 30.2 of the Lease, the notice was taken to have been given on 14 July
thus resulting in the termination of the Lease and Licence on 28 July
Amounts owed by Mort Street Bar to the Applicants
noted above, Mort Street Bar was in arrears with respect to its financial
obligations to the Applicants in the sum of $148,527.37
as at 30 June 2023.
produced a ‘Tenant Account Statement’ for Mort Street Bar which
identifies, amongst other things, the additional
amounts owed by Mort Street Bar
for July 2023, until the end of 26 July 2023. While Mort Street Bar’s
liability continued until
the termination of the Lease and Licence on 28 July
2023, the error is again in Mort Street Bar’s favour.
total amount owing to the end of 26 July 2023 was $12,661.49. Like I did for the
other reports, I confirmed that the calculation
of the rent and licence fees
figures, and the total figure, set out in the report were correct..
Accordingly,
as at the termination of the Lease and Licence on 28 July 2023, Mort Street Bar
was indebted to the Applicants in an
amount of at least $161,188.86 ($88,257.32
+ $60,270.05 + $12,661.49). The Applicants do not seek to recover the total
amount owing
to them for Year 1 rent, nor for the amounts owing to them for 27
and 28 July 2023.
9 August 2023, the Applicants called on a bank guarantee that Mort Street Bar
had delivered to the Applicants prior to the commencement
of the Lease. The full
amount of $27,500 was paid by the National Australia Bank on 11 August 2023.
This reduced the debt that Mort
Street Bar owed to $133,688.86.
Street Bar did not remove all of its property prior to the termination of the
Lease, nor return the Premises to the Applicants
in the same repair and
condition as they were in at the commencement of the Lease, as they were
required to do. The cost to the Applicants
to remove Mort Street Bar’s
property and return the Premises to their original condition was $5,896.
clause 27.4(a) of the Lease, the Applicants are entitled to recover the amounts
identified in paragraphs 46 and 47 of these
reasons, totalling $139,584.86
($133,688.86 + $5,896).
to clause 13.6 of the Lease, the Applicants are also entitled to interest on the
amounts Mort Street Bar owed to it from
time to time.
Court Procedures Rules 2006
permits the Court
to order that interest be included in the amount for which judgment is
regard to the fact that the parties agreed under the Lease that Mort Street Bar
would be liable to pay a particular rate of
interest on unpaid amounts, being
14% per annum, I consider that that is the appropriate rate of interest to apply
to Mort Street
Bar’s arrears under the Lease.
is no contractual right to interest for unpaid amounts under the Licence,
however I also consider that it is appropriate to
apply a 14% interest rate for
arrears under the Licence as well. While that is higher than the applicable
rates for pre-judgment
interest under Schedule 2 of the
Court Procedures Rules
, I consider that it is
appropriate to apply the rate of interest sought by the Applicants given
(a) the Licence was, to some extent at least, interdependent with the Lease;
(b) the overall sum claimed by the Applicants is less than the amount they are
owed under the Lease and Licence;
(c) the Applicants have not sought interest in relation to their repair costs;
(d) the contribution made to the overall sum, for arrears under the Licence, is
the Applicants’ repair costs (with respect to which, as I have noted, the
Applicants do not seek interest), Mort Street
Bar is required to pay interest in
the sum of $52,945.46 for the amounts that Mort Street Bar has owed from 1
February 2021 until
13 June 2025.
Applicants’ claim
against the Respondent
18 August 2023, the Applicants wrote to the Respondent, demanding payment of the
amount that Mort Street Bar owed to them. As noted
earlier in these reasons,
under the Lease and the Licence the Respondent guaranteed:
(a) the due payment by Mort Street Bar of all the amounts payable by Mort Street
Bar under the Lease; and
(b) the timely performance and observance of all the covenants and agreements
contained or implied in the Lease and the Licence and
to be performed and
observed by Mort Street Bar.
circumstances where all of the amounts owing by Mort Street Bar fall within the
scope of these guarantees, the Applicants are entitled
to recover the amounts
owed to them by Mort Street Bar from the
Respondent.
Applicants seek a costs order in their favour.
starting point for a consideration of the Applicants’ request is
Leases (Commercial and Retail) Act 2001
It provides:
The parties in a proceeding under this Act must bear
their own costs unless the Magistrates Court or Supreme Court makes an order
Saddler v Wakim
[2023] ACTMC 11
, I summarised
the principles that have been developed in the cases that have considered the
operation of
It is clear that the Court has a discretion to depart from
the usual rule where the circumstances of the particular case make it
Arthur McWitton
Pty Limited v Perpetual Trustee Co Limited
[2005] TT 793
of 2000 (9 March
2005), per Magistrate Burns (as his Honour then was)).
accept the Applicants’ submission that it is appropriate to award them
their costs in this matter. This is for the following
(a) it was a term of both the Lease and the Licence that Mort Street Bar would
be liable for the Applicants’ costs in relation
to the enforcement of the
agreements being, at least in relation to the Lease, on a full indemnity
(b) on the evidence before the Court, there was no defence that Mort Street Bar
or the Respondent could have raised to the Applicants’
claims; and
(c) the Respondent’s failure to respond to the demand that was issued to
her, and to engage in the proceedings that the Applicants
were subsequently
forced to commence, meant that the Applicants were required to pursue the matter
to final hearing and incur a range
of costs in doing so.
Respondent should pay the Applicants’ costs on an indemnity basis for
reasonable legal costs incurred prior to the commencement
of proceedings. The
Applicants are contractually entitled to recover those costs on that basis
(clause 33.8(d) of the Lease).
Respondent should otherwise pay the Applicants’ costs on a party-party
basis. This includes the Applicants’ costs
with respect to the steps they
took in order to commence proceedings, such as the preparation of their
Originating Application. I
accept that the arguments in favour of making a costs
order, particularly the terms of clause 33.8(d) of the Lease, support an
that the Respondent should pay all of the Applicants’ costs on an
indemnity basis, however, ordinarily, costs in proceedings
are awarded on a
party-party basis. The usual features that might justify an indemnity costs
order are absent in this case including,
in particular, any notice from the
Applicants that they intended to apply for an indemnity costs order (or, in
fact, rely on clause
33.8) in either of the notices that were sent to Mort
Street Bar or the demand that they sent to the Respondent prior to commencing
proceedings.
Application for fixed
costs order
Applicants seek a fixed costs order. Such an order may be made under rule
1720(3)(c) of the
Court Procedure Rules
main reason favouring the making of a fixed costs order in this case is the
likelihood that the Respondent will not attend any
formal assessment of costs,
given her lack of participation in the proceedings to date. It is desirable to
save the parties (and
the Applicants in particular) the difficulties,
inconvenience and added expense of assessment.
the power to make a fixed sum costs order should only be exercised when the
court considers that it can do so fairly between
the parties and the court must
be confident that the method used to fix costs is logical, fair and reasonable:
Beach Petroleum NL v
Jonson (No 2)
(1995) 57 FCR 119.
considerations in this regard, as noted in
Polleycutt v Taylor
[2020] ACTSC 158
, are that:
(a) the evidence relating to the costs sought must be sufficiently detailed and
must clearly identify the components of the costs
incurred and how they have
been calculated:
Motor Trades
Association of Australia Superannuation Fund Pty Ltd v
[2007] FCA 1878
(b) the costs should be proportionate to the nature and importance of the case:
Canvas Graphics Pty Ltd v Kodak (Australasia) Pty
[1998] FCA 23.
similar effect, the court in
Jorgensen v Wilson
[2023] ACTSC 124
noted that:
An affidavit in support of
an application for a gross sum costs order should provide a secure foundation
for the court’s assessment
of the reasonableness of the gross sum sought.
That requires the court to have sufficient information to assess, at a
broad-brush
level, whether costs have been reasonably incurred and are of a
reasonable amount.
Applicants tendered copies of all of the invoices rendered to them by their
solicitors and their Counsel’s fee notes. The
Applicants did not, however,
identify a figure that they submit is appropriate. The Applicants accepted that
one method of determining
a fixed costs order is for the court to apply a
percentage to the Applicants’ total costs, however the Applicants did not
any submissions as to what an appropriate discount should be.
an aside, I note that, were a fixed sum costs order to be made, it would be
preferable to have two discount percentages, one applying
to the period prior to
the commencement of proceedings and one applying after the commencement of
proceedings, given that the Applicants’
costs with respect to each of
those periods is to be assessed on different bases. However, this issue was not
discussed at the hearing.
was a straight-forward matter. Mort Street Bar failed to pay the amounts it owed
under the Lease and the Licence. Prior to commencing
proceedings, the Applicants
chased payment, issued the relevant contractual notices, took possession of the
Premises and arranged
for the Premises to be repaired. Proceedings were
commenced in August 2024 and, other than needing to obtain an order for
substituted
service, the matter proceeded expeditiously to hearing in December
2024. The proceedings were uncontested and the hearing was short.
further hearing was held in March 2025, it too was short.
evidence relied on by the Applicants comprised property and company searches,
the property manager reports, the email identifying
the terms of the temporary
COVID arrangement, the Lease, the Licence, the contractual notices and documents
in relation to the required
repair work. All of this material should have been
readily to hand and the legal issues that the material raised were not
those circumstances, the Applicants’ legal costs are higher than I would
have expected. By my calculation, the sum of the
invoices and fee notes
(a) $62,200.09 in professional fees excluding Counsel’s fees; and
(b) $13,475 in Counsel’s fees.
addition, the Applicants’ solicitors say that:
(a) as at the date of the further hearing in March 2025, the work-in-progress
balance was $5,568.20;
(b) their estimate for the further hearing was $660; and
(c) Counsel’s estimate for the further hearing was $2,200.
Accordingly,
total costs are estimated to be $84,103.29. This figure does not include the
Applicants’ repair costs incurred
in repairing the Premises, which I have
identified earlier in these reasons as being part of the total sum recoverable
by the Applicants
under clause 27.4(a) of the Lease.
figure of $84,103.29 for legal costs seems out of proportion to the nature of
the case, the total sum sought to be recovered and
the work that I would have
expected to be undertaken to progress it. However, it is not possible to
identify the extent to which
that is so.
a general proposition, the total fees charged by Counsel seem reasonable and the
time spent by the Applicants’ solicitors
on various tasks since November
2024 do not seem excessive. However, the narrations set out in the invoices for
professional fees
for the period 3 July 2023 (the beginning of the period
covered by the invoices) to 23 October 2024, and Counsel’s fee notes
12 July 2024 (the beginning of the period covered by the fee notes) to 14
November 2024, are redacted.
the periods covered by these invoices and fee notes (which includes the periods
prior to and after the commencement of proceedings),
approximately $44,000 was
charged in professional fees and expenses and approximately $9,000 was charged
by Counsel. Because the
narrations are redacted I do not know what the
Applicants’ solicitors or their Counsel did.
circumstances where those sums comprise a large percentage of the
Applicants’ total costs, the fact that I cannot ascertain
Applicants’ solicitors and their Counsel did makes it difficult to
identify what the appropriate discount percentages
should be (or, alternatively,
to identify an appropriate figure on some other basis). This, in turn, makes it
difficult to assess
the merits of the Applicants’ application for a fixed
sum costs order.
Ultimately,
I am not confident that I can determine a method to fix costs that is logical,
fair and reasonable to both parties. As
I have noted, the Applicants did not
make any submissions as to what an appropriate figure should be, nor as to how I
should calculate
an appropriate figure, and I do not consider that I have
sufficient information to assess, even at a broad-brush level, whether costs
incurred between July 2023 and November 2024 were reasonably incurred and were
of a reasonable amount. Accordingly, I do not consider
that I am in a position
to make a fixed sum costs order and I therefore decline the Applicants’
application.
make the following orders:
be entered against the Respondent in favour of the Applicants in the sum of
$139,584.86.
Respondent is to pay interest to the Applicants in the sum of $52,945.46.
Respondent is to pay the Applicants’ costs:
indemnity basis with respect to reasonable legal costs incurred by the
Applicants in responding to Mort Street Bar’s default
under the Lease and
the Licence, prior to the commencement of proceedings; and
party-party basis with respect to costs incurred by the Applicants in commencing
and pursuing proceedings against Mort Street
Bar and the
Respondent.
Court orders that the Respondent pay the Applicants’ costs in an amount
agreed by the parties pursuant to
Court Procedures Rules
or, if no agreement as to costs is filed within 28 days from the date
of this order, in an amount assessed by the Registrar under
Court Procedures
I certify that the preceding seventy-eight [78] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Decision of His Honour Magistrate
Associate: Noelle-Alexis Bowles
Date: 13 June 2025
RTF format (248 KB)
Signed PDF/A format