BN and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate [2021] ACTOFOI 15 (23 November 2021)
‘BN’ and Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development
Directorate
[2021] ACTOFOI 15
(23 November 2021)
Decision and reasons for decision of Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
Symone Andersen
Application number:
AFOI-RR/21/10023
Respondent:
Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
Catchwords:
Freedom of Information Act 2016
deciding access – whether disclosure of information is contrary to the
public interest – contribute to
the administration of justice generally,
including procedural fairness – contribute to the administration of
justice for a
person – an individual’s right to privacy under the
Human Rights Act 2004
1. I am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman for the purposes of s 82 of the
Freedom of Information Act 2016
2. Under s 82(2)(c) of the FOI Act, I have decided to
decision of the Chief Minister, Treasury and Economic Development Directorate
) dated 30 June 2021 and
a decision to refuse
access to the information at issue.
Background of Ombudsman review
3. On 11 May 2021, a person (
the original FOI applicant
access application under the FOI Act. The application was made to CMTEDD and
Any complaints, or action requested, that have been directed at the occupiers
of [address in Canberra] since 2019.
4. On 30 June 2021, CMTEDD’s Information Officer decided to give
partial access to 5 documents.
5. On 20 July 2021, a person (
the review applicant
) who was a relevant
third party consulted in accordance with s 38 of the FOI Act applied for an
Ombudsman review of CMTEDD’s
decision under s 73 of the FOI Act.
6. On 20 October 2021, the original FOI applicant made an application under s
77(2) of the FOI Act to participate in this review.
7. On 27 October 2021, a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman decided to allow the
original FOI applicant to participate under s 77(3) of
the FOI Act.
8. On 1 November 2021, I communicated my preliminary view to the parties in
my draft consideration. The purpose of my draft consideration
was to give each
party an opportunity to make submissions on material issues before I finalised
my decision.
9. On 2 November 2021, CMTEDD wrote to me to advise that it accepted the view
set out in my draft consideration.
10. On 8 November 2021, the original FOI applicant wrote to me and included
submissions which I considered carefully.
11. The review applicant provided information in response to my draft
consideration, however their submissions did not address the
points in my draft
consideration or otherwise present any additional information for me to
Information at issue
12. The information at issue in this review is all the information that
CMTEDD identified and decided on in its decision of 30 June
13. The issue to be decided is whether giving the original FOI applicant
access to the information at issue would be contrary to the
public interest. The
review applicant sought Ombudsman review on the basis that they believed it
14. In making my decision, I had regard to:
decision notice issued to the original FOI applicant and decision notice issued
to the review applicant
submissions in support of its decision which I received after CMTEDD was
notified about this Ombudsman review
the FOI Act,
particularly ss 7, 9, 16, 17, 35, 72, and Schedule 2, ss 2.1 and 2.2, and
Rights Act 2004
Human Rights Act
), particularly
Relevant law
15. Every person enjoys an enforceable right of access to government
information.
However, the FOI Act
creates an exception to this right by allowing for access to be refused to
information that is ‘contrary
to the public interest
information’.
16. Contrary to the public interest information is defined in s 16 of the FOI
information—
(a) that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
schedule 1; or
(b) the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
interest under the test set out in section 17
17. Section 17 of the FOI Act sets out the test that must be used to balance
public interest factors favouring disclosure and non-disclosure
respectively.
This test required me to:
identify any
factor favouring disclosure that applies in relation to the information
(a relevant factor favouring disclosure), including
any factor mentioned in
Schedule 2, s 2.1
identify any
factor favouring non-disclosure that applies in relation to the information
(a relevant factor favouring non-disclosure),
including any factor
mentioned in Schedule 2, s 2.2
balance any
relevant factor or factors favouring disclosure against any relevant factor or
factors favouring non-disclosure
decide whether,
on balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public
interest, and
balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public interest,
allow access to the information.
18. Any party seeking to prevent disclosure of government information bears
the onus of establishing that information is contrary
to the public interest
information.
The contentions of the parties
19. CMTEDD’s decision notice to the FOI applicant said:
I consider that release of the information contained in the document may
contribute to procedural fairness by allowing you to have
a copy of the
documents that fall within the scope of your request.
I consider that the protection of an individual’s right to privacy...
is a significant factor as the parties involved have provided
their personal
information for the purposes of working with the ACT Government. This, in my
opinion, outweighs the benefit which
may be derived from releasing the personal
information of the individuals involved in this matter.
As a result, I have decided that release of this information (addresses,
mobile numbers, identifying details and names of individuals
not employed by the
ACT Public Service) could prejudice their right to privacy under the
Rights Act 2004
20. The review applicant submitted in their application for review that
release of any ‘sensitive and personal information’
would place
their safety at risk.
21. I address these submissions in my reasons below.
Considerations
22. I carefully considered an unredacted copy of the information at
Information taken to be contrary to the public interest under Schedule
23. I was satisfied that none of the information at issue was taken to be
contrary to the public interest to disclose under Schedule
1 of the FOI Act.
Irrelevant factors
24. In making my decision, I did not have regard to any of the irrelevant
factors which a decision-maker is prohibited from considering
under s 17(2) of
the FOI Act.
Factors favouring disclosure
25. Two factors favouring disclosure are relevant in this review.
Contribute to the administration of justice generally, including
procedural fairness
26. A reasonable expectation that disclosure of government information could
contribute to the administration of justice generally,
including procedural
fairness, weighs in favour of disclosure under the FOI Act.
27. CMTEDD’s Information Officer decided that this factor was relevant.
28. In my draft consideration, I disagreed with that finding. My reason for
disagreeing was that:
On the information before me, I am not aware that any adverse action was
taken based on any of the information at issue and it is
not clear to me how
disclosing information that is not the basis for any action can reasonably be
expected to promote procedural
fairness. In essence, it is not clear to me that
there is any procedure that has been applied in relation to the original FOI
Accordingly, I am not satisfied that there is necessarily any
procedure to administer fairly to begin with.
29. When given the opportunity to respond to my draft consideration, CMTEDD
advised that it did not wish to make submissions as it
accepted my view.
30. However, the original FOI applicant responded to my draft consideration
and provided additional material for my consideration.
Contribute to the administration of justice for a person
31. A reasonable expectation that disclosure of government information could
contribute to the administration of justice for a person
weighs in favour of
disclosure under the FOI Act.
32. This factor was not one which CMTEDD identified when making its decision
but in considering the submissions of the original FOI
applicant it seemed to me
to be more relevant than the public interest factor promoting the administration
of justice generally.
33. The original FOI applicant submitted information about proceedings in the
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal (ACAT) in which
they had been a party. It
was difficult to determine precisely where this information fit in the making of
my decision. This was
in part because the other party in the ACAT proceeding may
not be the review applicant. It seems there is an assumption by both the
original FOI applicant and the review applicant that they know one
another’s identities.
34. Broadly, the applicant’s submissions provided me with a logical
argument for how disclosing the information at issue could
reasonably be
expected to promote the administration of justice. By disclosing complaints
made to the ACT Government within the scope
of the original FOI
applicant’s access application, the nature of any allegations made could
be revealed to the applicant.
35. But as the original FOI applicant notes in their submissions, ‘in
all cases, no adverse results have been found.’
Without confirming the
identity of the review applicant, it is enough to say that the ACAT proceeding I
was referred to related to
parking, noise levels and video surveillance.
Disclosing the information at issue, even if it was the case that it had been
by the same person involved in the ACAT proceedings, would not actually
contribute to the administration of justice because it would
not establish that
any of the ACAT’s orders had been breached. Indeed, the original FOI
applicant may refer to the schedule
of documents and note that the documents
containing the information at issue all date from before ACAT made the orders
included in
their submissions. Indeed, the ACAT orders note that the proceedings
between the parties were finalised upon their issuance.
36. Accordingly, I decided that disclosing the information at issue could not
reasonably be expected to contribute to the administration
of justice for a
person in any meaningful sense.
Pro-disclosure bias
37. In addition, it is intended that the FOI Act be administered with a
pro-disclosure bias.
The relevance
of that in this matter is in the fact that I am not satisfied there is any
relevant factor favouring disclosure. While
that is the case, it is insufficient
grounds for refusing access to the information at issue and I was still required
to consider
the steps outlined in s 17 of the FOI Act to determine whether the
public interest would be better served by non-disclosure.
Factors favouring non-disclosure
38. One factor favouring non-disclosure is relevant in this review.
An individual’s right to privacy
39. A reasonable expectation that disclosure of government information could
prejudice an individual’s right to privacy under
Human Rights Act
favours non-disclosure under the
Human Rights Act
Everyone has the right—
(a) Not to have his or her privacy, family, home, or correspondence
interfered with unlawfully or arbitrarily...
41. In my draft consideration, I expressed the view that the information at
issue could reasonably be expected to prejudice a person’s
the nature of the information at issue
is not typically disclosed in original
form. While the FOI Act frequently enables the disclosure of information that
may not typically
be disclosed, the specific reference to arbitrariness in this
factor is not replicated in other listed factors. In the present circumstances,
it would prejudice the right to privacy under s 12 to, in effect,
retrospectively undermine the review applicant’s ability
to correspond
privately with the government about personal concerns and complaints.
42. The submissions made by the original FOI applicant focused on the reasons
why the information at issue should be disclosed. They
did not make any
contention vis-à-vis the comments I made in my draft consideration about
this factor.
43. Accordingly, I decided that disclosing the information at issue could
reasonably be expected to prejudice an individual’s
right to privacy to a
considerable extent.
Balancing the factors
44. Disclosure of the information at issue could not reasonably be expected
to contribute to the administration of justice generally,
including procedural
fairness or for a person. The value of the information at issue could only be to
enable the original FOI applicant
to try to establish the source of the
complaints, which the original FOI applicant notes did not lead to any adverse
finding or action.
45. On the other hand, when a member of the public makes a complaint to a
government agency it is generally not in the public interest
to disclose
original copies of correspondence because this could reasonably be expected to
prejudice the right to privacy under the
Human Rights Act
circumstances, the way in which this prejudice may be expected to occur is by
disclosure interfering with the person’s
correspondence or ability to
correspond privately with the government on sensitive matters.
46. The right to privacy is not an absolute basis for non-disclosure under
the FOI Act and it must be balanced against the public
interest factors which
favour disclosure. For instance, a member of the public’s report of a
pothole in a road may be in the
public interest to disclose if the government
fails to adequately address the pothole in a timely fashion and a road accident
It may be that in that case all that is needed to prevent prejudice to
the person’s right to privacy is the redaction of their
name and personal
information. But in the present circumstances, for the reasons I discussed
above, there is little public interest
in the disclosure of the information at
issue and as a result there is little to weigh against the protection of an
individual’s
right to privacy under the
Human Rights Act
. Moreover, the
correspondence is private as a whole and CMTEDD’s decision to merely
redact personal information to attempt
to de-identify the document failed to
prevent prejudice to the individual’s right to correspond privately with
the government.
Accordingly, I decided that the information at issue is contrary
to the public interest information under s 16(b) of the FOI Act.
Antecedents
47. It is worth noting that s 35(1)(e) permits a respondent to refuse to
confirm or deny that it holds information where:
(i) the information is contrary to the public interest information; and
(ii) doing so would, or could reasonably be expected to—
(B) be an unreasonable limitation on a person’s rights under the
Human Rights Act 2004
48. For the reasons I outlined in this notice, I consider that CMTEDD should
probably have applied this provision. The information,
in my view, is contrary
to the public interest information and because the reason for my view is
prejudice to individual privacy
Human Rights Act
, I consider that
subsection (B) is satisfied.
49. However, CMTEDD did not apply the provision and the original FOI
applicant is now aware that information exists within the scope
application. For practical reasons, it is necessary to decide on the information
at issue with the applicant already being
aware of the existence of some
information.
50. For these reasons, under s
of the FOI Act, I decided to
CMTEDD’s decision of 30 June 2021 and
my decision that all the information at issue is contrary to the public interest
information in respect of which access should be
Symone Andersen
Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
November 2021
Section 7 of the FOI Act.
Section 35(1)(c) of the FOI
Section 72 of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(xiv) of
the FOI Act.
Section 9 of the
Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(ii) of the FOI Act.
RTF format (806 KB)
Signed PDF/A format