Inquest into the death of Mohammad Sarowar Kawsir Rony, Sultana Razia, Mohammad Shahidullah [2025] ACTCD 6 (24 October 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Matter Title:
Inquest into the death of Mohammad Sarowar Kawsir Rony, Sultana Razia,
Mohammad Shahidullah
[2025] ACTCD 6
Decision Date:
Coroner Archer
See [60] - [61]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– Road accident, triple fatality – multiple
injuries – referral to the Director of Public Prosecutions –
prosecution – findings as to manner and cause of death – decision
not to conduct a hearing – publication of
findings to establish a record
of road related deaths
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
File Number:
CD 300, 301 and 302 of 2022
CORONER ARCHER:
Introduction
16 October 2022, Mohammad SHAHIDULLAH (“Mr Shahidullah”), Sultana
RAZIA (“Ms Razia”), and Mohammad Sarowar
Kawsir RONY (“Mr
Rony”) were passengers in a red Toyota Yaris (“the Yaris”)
being driven by Anwar JAHID (“Mr
Jahid”). Mr Jahid was the son of Mr
Shahidullah and Ms Razia, and the brother of Mr Rony.
approximately 1445 hours the Yaris was headed south on John Gorton Drive,
Whitlam in the Australian Capital Territory (“ACT”)
when it collided
with a Toyota HiAce (“the HiAce”) being driven in the opposite
direction by Mr SU
Shahidullah, Ms Razia and Mr Rony died at the scene from injuries sustained in
the accident. Mr Jahid survived the accident but
sustained severe physical
injury and traumatic brain injury. The driver of the HiAce, Mr SU, suffered
injuries resulting in permanent
evidence arising from a police investigation into the collision indicates that
Mr Shahidullah suffered a medical emergency associated
with Type 1 diabetes
mellitus immediately prior to the accident. In a panic, and with the intention
of obtaining medical help for
Mr Shahidullah, Mr Jahid drove the Yaris at speeds
that ultimately led to him losing control of the vehicle and crashing into the
shall with respect, and where appropriate, refer to the deaths of Mr
Shahidullah, Ms Razia and Mr Rony as “the
deaths were reported to the ACT Coroner’s Court on 17 October 2022, as
they fell within the terms of
section 13(1)(g)
Coroners Act 1997
being deaths that “[appear] to be directly attributable to an
was required to hold an inquest
into the manner and cause of their deaths and make findings that are required by
of the Act. That section of the Act relevantly
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find, if possible—
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the person has
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
(i) state whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection with
the inquest or inquiry; and
(ii) if a matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the matter.
Circumstances Surrounding the Deaths
The Collision
Australian Federal Police conducted an investigation into the circumstances of
the deaths as part of a broader investigation into
whether Mr Jahid had
committed criminal offences involving the manner of his driving prior to the
was established from that investigation that Mr Shahidullah, Ms Razia and Mr
Rony arrived in Australia from Bangladesh on 25 September
2022. They travelled
on tourist visas, for the purpose of visiting Mr Jahid and his wife. Mr Jahid
and his wife were also from Bangladesh
and had gained Australian permanent
residency in 2021. Mr Shahidullah was an insulin-dependent diabetic, and it is
unclear whether
he brought insulin with him.
red Toyota Yaris contained several medium sized suitcases, and other bags packed
with clothing and snack foods, consistent with
preparation for travel. The bags
had been removed from the vehicle prior to Police arrival. The suitcases were
tagged with Malaysia
Airline luggage tags in the name of “Razia
Sultana” indicating arrival in Australia via Sydney on 25 September
the early afternoon of Sunday 16 October 2022, Mr Jahid was driving the Yaris
westward along William Hovell Drive in Whitlam, ACT.
There were three passengers
seated in the Yaris. Mr Shahidullah sat in the rear seat on the driver’s
side, Ms Razia sat in
the rear seat on the passenger side, and Mr Rony sat in
the front passenger seat.
Jahid held an active Provisional 2 NSW driver’s licence. He had held a
provisional licence since April 2022.
approximately 1440 hours, Mr AP and Ms CT saw the Yaris and its occupants to be
parked at the intersection of William Hovell Drive
and Coulter Drive. Witness
statements were obtained by police from Mr AP and Ms CT. I summarise the
relevant content below.
...I slowed down and at that intersection there was already a
red hatchback that was stationary and waiting for the lights to turn
[W]hile we were waiting, the front passenger stepped out...opened the car boot
and took out...a packet of Oreos and tried
to hand it over to his backseat
passengers. ...
[A]fter that I heard a short yell or scream. ... I then drove around and had
a look, and realised it actually may be a medical distress.
... I said,
‘Do you need any help?’ And the driver said,
‘Ambulance.’ ...[S]o I said, ‘Do you want
an ambulance
here[?]’ And then... instead of then saying yes, he said,
‘Hospital.’ ... I then pointed in the direction
of Calvary. ... Even
in communicating with them, I could see they were very panicked.
...[T]hey seemed to have a lot of luggage and a lot of belongings in the
...[T]hey weren’t willing to wait for an ambulance. They just wanted
...[A]round the car there seemed to be... newly thrown or
dispersed items. ...
... [I]t appeared that the person in the front passenger seat had gotten out
of their car and ...there was something going on between
the front ... and the
back passenger person.
... [I]t definitely seemed that there had been some kind of conflict going
[on] in the red car or maybe someone who was sick...
accept that Mr Shahidullah had become very unwell and may have been unconscious
in the rear of the vehicle. Mr Jahid and Mr Rony
were outside the vehicle and in
an apparent state of panic, trying to help their father. Mr AP got out of his
vehicle to assist and
had a conversation with Mr Jahid. During that
conversation, Mr Jahid said the words ‘ambulance’ and
‘hospital’.
Mr AP offered to lead the persons to North Canberra
(Calvary) Hospital and Mr Jahid nodded in agreement, but before Mr AP could
to his vehicle, Mr Jahid hurriedly got back in his vehicle and drove west
on William Hovell Drive, turning south on John Gorton Drive,
Whitlam in the
the car departed, Ms CT and Mr AP observed items being removed from the rear and
back seat of the car and left near the roadway.
It appears the items were
removed to create space for Mr Shahidullah to lie down. The items remained at
the spot until recovered
by the police.
Investigating
police have evaluated what directions are produced by GPS-based map programs at
that location when different words are
entered as the destination. There were
differential outcomes depending on the words used. The nearest hospital from
that location
was North Canberra (Calvary) Hospital. However, it may be that
that Mr Jahid had used words that caused directions to The Canberra
(“TCH”) to be produced. That was generally the direction in which Mr
Jahid headed.
after, at about 1445 hours, Mr SU was driving the HiAce north along John Gorton
Drive, Whitlam, in the ACT. John Gorton Drive
is a duplicated, arterial road
that runs primarily north to south connecting the Molonglo Valley area to the
district of Belconnen.
Gorton Drive changes into Coppins Crossing Road just south of the Hazel Hawke
Avenue traffic signals and sometimes the relevant
road area is described as
Coppins Crossing Road.
the Yaris was travelling south along John Gorton Drive, the vehicle entered into
what is known as a “yaw” (which involves
a car turning around its
vertical axis), rotating clockwise. This happened at the ‘Form One
Lane’ merging point after
the intersection with Hazel Hawke Avenue. The
Yaris crossed the unbroken white lines delineating the north and south bound
where they meet just after the painted island and entered the path of the
HiAce. The two vehicles collided in a head on collision,
the area of impact
being within the north bound lane. There is a slight bend in the road at that
point (curving to the right) which
may have influenced the movement of the Yaris
into a yaw. The curve would be comfortably negotiated at a speed within the
speed limit.
a result of the collision, the HiAce rotated counterclockwise and came to rest
across the north bound lane of John Gorton Drive,
with the rear of the vehicle
near the centre line markings and the front of the vehicle on the grass at the
outer edge of the roadway.
The HiAce sustained major front-end damage.
Yaris rotated counterclockwise and came to rest on a grassy embankment beside
the north bound lane of John Gorton Drive facing
towards the roadway. The Yaris
also sustained major front-end damage, partially collapsing the driver and front
passenger cabin space.
SU was completely without blame for the collision. There was nothing he could
have done to avoid the oncoming car.
Road Conditions
weather at the time of the collision was clear and sunny, and the temperature
was about 18 degrees Celsius.
road surface was dry and in good repair around the area of the collision. The
roadway had undergone upgrades and duplication,
except for a portion that spans
between Holborow Avenue in Denman Prospect and Hazel Hawke Avenue in Whitlam.
The road surface, was
comprised of a bitumen surface and a short section of
reseal, and associated line marking, and retro-reflective pavement markers
(which were in good condition). There was gravel on the median and hard shoulder
adjacent to the crash site, but the line of travel
of the Yaris did not see it
enter these areas.
remaining section of John Gorton Drive between these intersections merges from a
dual carriage to a single lane in each direction,
divided by double unbroken
white lines. While the speed limit on most of John Gorton Drive is 80km/h, the
speed limit where the collision
occurred was signposted at
Emergency Services Response
1447 hours, a member of the public called 000. The ACT Ambulance Service
(“ACTAS”) arrived first at the scene followed
shortly by the ACT
Fire Brigade (“ACTFB”). The AFP arrived shortly after.
Rony was found seated in the front passenger seat. It is clear that he had not
been wearing a seat belt at the time of the collision.
He could not be removed
from the car due to crush damage to the portion of the car in which he was
seated. He was clearly deceased.
Shahidullah (rear seat, drivers’ side) and Ms Razia (rear seat, passenger
side) were removed from the car and placed in a
grassy area nearby for further
assessment by ACTAS. It was soon evident that both were deceased.
Razia was wearing a seat belt with a sash across the chest. The evidence
suggested Mr Shahidullah was wearing a seat belt in some
fashion, possibly
across the lap but without the chest sash.
assisted ACTFB in removing the roof of the vehicle, and extracting Mr Jahid, who
received medical attention at the scene before
being transported to TCH by
SU had removed himself from the HiAce before the arrival of emergency services.
He received serious injuries as a result of the
collision and was transported to
TCH by ACTAS.
scene and conducted an examination of the three deceased
persons and pronounced
life extinct.
Injuries to Mr SU and Mr Jahid
SU sustained a transverse fracture of the distal third of the right ulna, being
the right forearm, resulting from high impact blunt
force trauma in keeping with
the forces generated in a motor vehicle collision. The injury required surgical
intervention, with the
surgical wounds resulting in permanent scarring.
Jahid suffered a severe brain injury from the collision. Imaging of his brain at
TCH showed multiple haemorrhages and an MRI showed
diffuse axonal injury. He
also suffered multiple fractures which required surgery. He remained in hospital
until July 2023. He suffers
permanent disabilities as a result of the accident,
including a reduction in cognitive capacity and permanent compromise of his
Collectively the injuries will require lifetime disability supports.
Post-Mortem
my direction, forensic pathologist Professor Johan Duflou performed post-mortem
examinations on Mr Rony, Ms Razia and Mr Shahidullah
on 18 October 2022. CT
technology was used in each of the three examinations.
respect of Mr Shahidullah, given the history known to investigating police, a
full internal examination was conducted and included
toxicology and
biochemistry. The following passages appear in Professor Duflou’s
post-mortem report in respect of this death:
At autopsy, the
deceased was found to have a large number of injuries to the surface of the
body, typical of a motor vehicle collision.
Extensive internal injury was
identified on CT scan, including injury to the head, chest and abdomen, and
there were also pelvic,
bilateral upper limb, and left lower limb injuries. No
unexpected injuries were identified. With reference to natural disease
the deceased was noted to have a degree of coronary artery narrowing
but not generally felt sufficient in severity to result in an
acute cardiac
event. Fatty infiltration of the liver, and changes in the kidney are very
likely diabetes related. A urine test revealed
the presence of a very high level
of glucose and scanty ketones, while a vitreous fluid biochemistry test returned
typical non-diagnostic
postmortem values. No specific changes of severe diabetic
ketoacidosis were identified on kidney microscopy. Toxicology revealed
presence of oral antidiabetic agents only.
COMMENTARY:
The deceased has sustained severe injuries which can be expected on their own
to be sufficient to cause death. There are also injuries
such as fracturing of
forearm bones, suggestive of the deceased attempting to brace prior to the
crash, which would suggest he was
at least semiconscious at the time of the
crash. Internal bleeding similarly indicates the deceased was alive at the time
crash. Natural disease in the form of likely marked hyperglycaemia
secondary to diabetes was identified on the basis of urine testing,
was a degree of heart, kidney and liver disease all typical of diabetes. I
conclude that partial incapacitation as a result
of diabetes appears possible on
pathological grounds and witness observations appear to support this. It appears
unlikely the deceased
was having a primary cardiac or cerebrovascular
incapacitating event immediately preceding the crash.
cause of death given in each case was multiple injuries with a range of internal
injuries causing bleeding and fractures being
identified by CT scan.
respect of Mr Shahidullah, a condition said to have contributed to death was
“Diabetes Mellitus with Hyperglycaemia”.
Hyperglycaemia means high
blood glucose levels (blood sugar levels). It can affect people
with diabetes. Factors leading to hyperglycaemia
include not taking enough
glucose-lowering medication or insulin. Clinically, a person who is
suffering from severe hyperglycaemia
can have a range of symptoms, including
loss of consciousness. Severe hyperglycaemia resulting in unconsciousness is
considered a
medical emergency and is generally initially treated by ambulance
at the scene followed by emergency department continuation of treatment.
untrained person administering care the recommended approach is general
supportive treatment such as keeping the airway clear.
Calling for
assistance from emergency services is essential. When the nature of the episode
is unknown and the person is conscious,
it is a reasonable response to
administer food or drink that might raise glucose levels. In the setting of
hyperglycaemia, the marginal
but further raising of glucose levels that may
therefore result would not have a significant detrimental
Investigation of the Accident
two vehicles involved in the collision were uplifted by the AFP and transported
to the Road Policing Centre for the purpose of
mechanical examination. The
mechanical examination on the Yaris was significantly constrained by the amount
of damage that had been
occasioned by the collision. It was not possible to
determine if there was a mechanical condition or defect that may have
contributed
to the collision.
examination that could take place suggested the Yaris was in a good condition.
Analysis of the Movement of the Cars
17 October 2022, Police from the ACT Police Major Collision Team (“ACTP
MCT”) used Crash Data Retrieval (“CDR”)
software to download
the event data record (“EDR”) from the airbag control module
(“ACM”) which had been
previously removed from the HiAce.
ACM is the module in the vehicle that determines when the airbags deploy in the
event of a collision. To do this it uses a variety
of sensors that collect and
save information that can be retrieved after the collision. An analysis of this
EDR showed that 5 seconds
prior to the airbag being deployed, the HiAce was
traveling at marginally above the posted 60km/h speed limit.
reiterate that Mr SU’s driving did not contribute to the cause of the
26 October 2022, Police from the ACTP MCT used the CDR software to download the
EDR from the ACM which had been previously removed
from the Yaris. An analysis
of this EDR shows that 5 seconds prior to the airbag deployment time, the Yaris
was traveling at 150km/h
in the 60km/h zone.
Blood Analysis
mandatory blood sample was taken from Mr Jahid when taken to TCH. Results of
that sample were negative to alcohol and prescription
Medications Found in the Car
Yaris was searched by the AFP. Medications were found some of which, it can
safely be said, belonged to Mr Shahidullah. Some of
those medications were
insulin medications associated with the treatment of diabetes. These
hyperglycaemic medications would have
lowered the level of glucose and, if
ingested may have improved Mr Shahidullah’s condition.
evidence available to me suggests Mr Jahid knew his father had diabetes. It is
less clear whether he was aware as to how the condition
affected his father, how
it was being medically treated, what medication his father was taking and what
had caused the episode that
became manifest in the car.
Configuration at Scene of Accident
location of the accident has been the subject of substantial re-configuration.
An analysis of the scene at the time suggested
that permanent speed limit signs
may have been missing but that several temporary signs were present on John
Gorton Drive, including
a southbound 60km/h ‘roadworks’ sign.
addition, two chevrons indicating a change in road direction were missing,
seemingly due to damage caused by cars passing along
that part of the road.
is unlikely, given the speed that the Yaris was travelling, that these issues
were relevant to the cause of the accident.
Shahidullah’s Condition Prior to the Accident
it is not possible to be conclusive about Mr Shahidullah’s condition prior
to the accident, I find that, having regard
observations of witnesses as to his state of unconsciousness;
distress of the occupants of the car;
medical history;
medications found in the car; and
Duflou’s autopsy finding and opinions,
probable than not that he suffered a hyperglycaemic episode when he was a
passenger in the car being driven by Mr Jahid.
It is also probable that Mr Jahid
was attempting to transport Mr Shahidullah to a hospital in circumstances where
Mr Jahid perceived
there to be a medical emergency. The course Mr Jahid took may
have been based on an erroneous assumption that TCH was the nearest
from the point where he stopped to speak to Mr AP and Ms CT.
Course of the Inquest
Referral to the DPP
58 of the Act provides a mechanism by which cases that might involve the
commission of indictable offences can be referred
to the Director of Public
Prosecution (“DPP”) for consideration of whether someone should be
charged. Mr Jahid’s
manner of driving gave rise to the possibility that he
had committed offences, including culpable driving causing death contrary
section 29(7)
Crimes Act 1900
. By letter dated 6 December 2022 the
deaths were referred to the DPP for consideration of whether prosecution action
should be taken
in relation to the conduct of Mr Jahid. At that stage, the
investigation of the deaths was not complete.
full brief of evidence was prepared and submitted to the DPP.
9 February 2024, the AFP were informed that no charges would be brought. That
advice was relayed to the Court on 13 February 2024.
is not open for this Court to canvass or assess the DPP’s reasons for
deciding not to bring charges. However, it is apparent
that the medical
condition Mr Shahidullah suffered at the time of the collision was a factor that
was considered important in the
context of determining:
whether the
elements of the charge of culpable driving had been made out;
whether the
defence of a defence of sudden or extraordinary emergency set out in section 41
Criminal Code 2002
might have been available at trial; and
whether, in
light of all the circumstances of the case and Mr Jahid’s catastrophic
injuries the prosecution of Mr Jahid was
in the public
Decision Not to Conduct a
to section 34A of the Act, I am able to dispense with a hearing if I am
satisfied that the manner and cause of death are
sufficiently disclosed and a
hearing is unnecessary. I was so satisfied. The information available to me to
make the findings I had
was not likely to be meaningfully elaborated by
requiring witnesses to attend to give oral evidence.
55 Processes
2 October 2025, copies of my provisional findings were forwarded to Mr Jahid and
he was given the opportunity to make submissions
in respect of the (implicit)
criticism made of his manner of driving before the collision. Section 55 of the
Act required me to invite
Mr Jahid to make a submission or give a statement to
me about the proposed comments. Mr Jahid made a submission. The effect of the
submission made was that he had no independent recollection of the crash and the
events immediately before it. Although he raised
suggestions as to matters that
in his view required further investigation he did not directly challenge the
factual basis of the
findings that were proposed. I have considered his
submission and have taken it into account.
Findings I am
Required to Make
to section 52 of the Act I find that Mohammad Shahidullah, Sultana Razia, and
Mohammad Sarowar Kawsir Rony died on 16 October
2022 of multiple injuries
sustained in a motor vehicle accident that occurred on John Gorton Drive,
Whitlam, in the Australian Capital
Territory. In respect of Mohammad
Shahidullah, I find that a condition said to have contributed to death was
“Diabetes Mellitus
with Hyperglycaemia”.
do not find a matter of public safety arises from the deaths.
express my condolences to the family of the deceased. The deaths were an
unspeakable tragedy.
apologise to the family for the delay in finalising my inquest.
I certify that the preceding sixty-three [63] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the reasons for findings of his Honour Coroner
Associate: Jacqueline Du
I have made orders assigning
pseudonyms to all witnesses and persons involved in the investigation save for
the deceased people and
driver of the
Under the Act, meaning
given to the term “inquest” varies. In this context it means a
process of investigation. There
can be a “hearing” for an
RTF format (239 KB)
Signed PDF/A format