Inquest into the death of Nathan Allen Mugridge [2024] ACTCD 7 (30 October 2024)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Matter Title:
Inquest into the death of Nathan Allen Mugridge
[2024] ACTCD 7
Decision Date:
Coroner Archer
See [29]–[31]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– manner and cause of death – head injuries
– motor vehicle accident – excessive speed – unlicenced
driving – intoxication – high-performance vehicles –
non-roadworthy vehicles
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
File Number:
CD 138 of 2022
CORONER ARCHER:
INTRODUCTION
20 May 2022, Mr Nathan Allen Mugridge died in a single motor vehicle accident on
Kingsford Smith Drive, near the intersection with
Verbrugghen Street, Melba, in
the Australian Capital Territory. At the time of his death, Mr Mugridge was 21
years old. I will, with
respect, refer to him as Nathan.
it is clear Nathan’s death was a result of the head injuries he sustained
in the accident, the precise cause of that
accident cannot be ascertained.
Multiple factors had likely contributed to the collision.
death was reported to the ACT Coroner’s Court on 20 May 2022, as it
appeared to be “directly attributable
to an accident”, for the
purposes of
Coroners Act 1997
(ACT) (“the
of the Act requires me to hold an
into the manner and cause
of Nathan’s death. In doing so, I must make findings as required by
of the Act. That section of the Act relevantly provides:
(1) A coroner holding an inquest must find,
if possible—
(a) the identity of the deceased; and
(b) when and where the death happened; and
(c) the manner and cause of death; and
(d) in the case of the suspected death of a person—that the person has
(4) The coroner, in the coroner’s findings—
(i) state whether a matter of public safety is found to arise in connection with
the inquest or inquiry; and
(ii) if a matter of public safety is found to arise—comment on the matter
have chosen to publish my findings as it is in the public interest to provide an
accessible record of road accident deaths that
occur in the ACT.
findings that follow are made based on the following material received by me
during the inquest:
(a) Police coronial report, dated 17 June 2022, which includes information
provided by independent witnesses to the accident;
(b) Post-mortem report, dated 1 July 2022, prepared by Professor Johan
(c) Mechanical inspection statement, dated 30 June 2022, prepared by the AFP
Vehicle Inspection Team;
(d) Assessment report in relation to the road and environmental conditions of
the relevant sections of Kingsford Smith Drive at the
time of the accident,
dated 23 May 2022, prepared by ACT Transport Canberra and City Services;
(e) RTA evidentiary certificates, dated 1 July 2024, prepared by the Road
Transport Authority; and
(f) The brief of evidence prepared in respect of the criminal proceedings, which
includes relevant dash camera footage.
CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING NATHAN’S DEATH
some time in the afternoon of 20 May 2022, Nathan left his home address in
Latham with his friend, Mr Samuel Berron (“Mr
Berron”), to
“play pokies and have a few drinks” at the Belconnen Soccer Club in
McKellar. Mr Berron drove, despite
having consumed “maybe one beer and a
few bongs”. They departed in Mr Berron’s vehicle, a blue 2002 Subaru
WRX (“the vehicle”).
stumbled, and Nathan asked Mr Berron if he was all right.
Mr Berron passed
Nathan the keys to his car, and asked if Nathan would like to drive anyway,
knowing that he had “really wanted
to drive that car from the day [he] got
it”. Nathan agreed to drive, and Mr Berron sat in the passenger seat in
next to Nathan.
a short time later, the vehicle was seen to be travelling south on Kingsford
Smith Drive, a dual carriageway arterial road that
is separated by a wide grass
median. That section of the road, nearing the intersection with Verbrugghen
Street in Melba, comprises
two 4.5-metre traffic lanes. It has a posted speed
limit of 70 km/h, and a slight downward grade with a gentle bend to the left as
you head in a southerly direction.
to Mr Berron, as they were travelling along Kingsford Smith Drive, going down
the hill past the intersection with Spalding
Street, Mr Berron told Nathan that
he “fucking love[s] this hill”, as the single-lane road opens into
two traffic lanes
at that part of the road. Mr Berron recalled that he thought
Nathan was “driving like a granny”, and that he told Nathan
“give it a bit” to “listen to the turbo if [he] wanted to hear
what it sounds like”. Whilst Mr Berron
did not remember feeling “any
force or fastness”, he said that Nathan had probably put his foot down and
Berron then heard Nathan screaming “fuck” as loud as he could.
Dashcam footage from an oncoming car showed that the
vehicle failed to negotiate
a curve. As the road straightened after the curve, the vehicle was seen on that
footage to have entered
into a yaw. It continued into a broadside skid,
passenger side first, moving across the median strip separating the north and
lanes of Kingsford Smith Drive. It collided with several street signs
as it crossed the median strip, and continued to skid for about
before striking a light pole near the intersection of Kingsford Smith Drive and
Verbrugghen Street.
car hit the light pole on the driver’s side. The pole wrapped over the
vehicle, and crushed the vehicle’s roof onto
Nathan’s head.
the driver’s seat with catastrophic head injuries.
Paramedics observed no
signs of life, and no attempt was made to provide life-saving measures. ACT Fire
& Rescue Service extricated
Nathan from the vehicle using specialised
equipment. Nathan was pronounced life extinct at the scene by the attending
Forensic Medical
the collision, Mr Berron was able to extricate himself from the vehicle.
Witnesses observed that shortly after he had extricated
himself from the
vehicle, he began yelling at Nathan, climbed back into the passenger seat, and
struck Nathan in his chest and shoulder
areas multiple times.
Berron was subsequently charged with, and convicted of improperly interfering
with, or offering indignity to, a dead human body.
on the available evidence, I do not find that Mr Berron had engaged in any
physical act that contributed to the cause of the
accident, or to Nathan’s
POST-MORTEM EXAMINATION
post-mortem examination was conducted by Professor Johan Duflou, forensic
pathologist, on 24 May 2022. Professor Duflou’s
opinion was that the cause
of Nathan’s death was severe head injuries. He did not find injuries
consistent with interpersonal
violence. I accept Professor Duflou’s
POLICE INVESTIGATION
Mechanical Condition of the Vehicle
the collision, Mr Berron’s vehicle was examined by a member of the AFP
vehicle inspection team. The inspection identified
the vehicle as an all-wheel
drive vehicle, fitted with a two-litre high performance turbo-charged flat
four-cylinder engine with
a five-speed manual transmission. The base model of
the vehicle has a power to weight ratio of 118.3 kW/t. The engine system
various aftermarket components, including an electronic boost
controller with an in-cabin switch to change boost pressure, an aftermarket
exhaust system, an aftermarket high flow air filter, and an aftermarket blow off
valve. In his interview with the police, Mr Berron
indicated that the vehicle
had been “tuned and what not”.
Berron also confirmed that the vehicle had a damaged front bumper and a damaged
rear subframe (that is, a structural unit that
serves as a mounting point for
the engine, steering, suspension, and other critical assemblies) prior to the
accident. Whilst the
AFP’s inspection of the vehicle did not identify
leverage in the damaged subframe as a specific mechanical fault (likely due
the extent of the collision damage), it did reveal that the vehicle appeared to
have been poorly maintained, and it would not
have been roadworthy due to
insufficient tyre depths and suspension height. It is unclear whether Nathan, as
the driver of the vehicle,
was aware of the vehicle’s mechanical
Unlicenced Driving
conducted with the ACT Road Transport Authority revealed that Nathan had never
held a driver licence. It is unclear whether
Mr Berron was aware, as he handed
Nathan the keys to his vehicle, that Nathan did not hold a driver licence.
the time of the collision, Mr Berron’s driver licence was suspended due to
unpaid fines.
Berron’s vehicle is commonly considered as a high-performance vehicle, and
it is banned for P1/P2 drivers in New South Wales,
Victoria, and South Australia
(with exemptions required in Queensland). That said, given there are no
high-performance vehicle restrictions
in the Australian Capital Territory in
respect of P-plate drivers, and neither Nathan nor Mr Berron held a valid driver
the time, the issue of whether inexperienced drivers should be
allowed to drive high-performance vehicles does not arise in this
Analysis of the Scene of the Accident
the accident, members of the AFP’s Major Collision Team and a Fatal Crash
Callout Officer from Roads ACT conducted
an examination of the scene. Based on
an assessment of the tyre marks found at the scene, investigators were of the
opinion that
immediately prior to the collision, the vehicle was likely
travelling at a speed between 123 km/h and 138 km/h. The road surface,
delineation, road markings, road signs, and streetlights were all in a good
state of repair. The weather at the time of the accident
was clear and dry, and
the road surface was also dry.
Blood Alcohol Reading
cardiac blood was sampled for toxicological testing at the ACT Government
Analytical Laboratory. Results revealed a
blood alcohol level two times the
legal limit for drivers with a full licence (0.103 g/100mL). It also revealed
the presence of benzodiazepines
and cannabis. As Professor Duflou noted, whilst
a cardiac blood sample is suboptimal for interpretation purposes, it remained
likely Nathan was intoxicated at the time of the collision.
Berron’s blood was not tested, as he was the passenger in the vehicle.
DECISION TO DISPENSE WITH A HEARING
considered the information provided to me by members of the AFP and Professor
Duflou, I was satisfied that the manner and cause
of Nathan’s death were
sufficiently disclosed, and, as such, a hearing was unnecessary.
3 and 8 October 2024, I communicated my provisional decision not to conduct a
hearing, and the reasons therefor, to Mr Berron’s
Nathan’s family respectively. A copy of my provisional findings was
provided to Nathan’s mother, who agreed
that a hearing was unnecessary. Mr
Berron advised that he did not wish to receive a copy of the provisional
findings or make submissions
in relation to those findings.
that reason, in accordance with s 34A(1) of the Act, a hearing was formally
dispensed with.
FORMAL FINDINGS
on the material before this inquest, for the purposes of s 52(1) of the Act, I
That Nathan Allen Mugridge died on 20 May 2022 on the
Kingsford Smith Drive, near the intersection with Verbrugghen Street, Melba,
the Australian Capital Territory, as a result of head injuries sustained in a
motor vehicle accident.
precise cause of the accident cannot be identified. Excessive speed,
inexperience, intoxication, the performance characteristics
of the car, and the
poor mechanical condition of the vehicle were factors that had likely
contributed to the collision.
do not find any matter of public safety to arise in connection with the inquest
into Nathan’s death.
CONDOLENCES
extend my sincere condolences to Nathan’s family.
I certify that the preceding thirty-two [32] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the reasons for findings of his Honour Coroner
Markus Ching
Date: 30 October 2024
As opposed to most other States
and Territories, the ACT uses the term “inquest” to refer to a
process of investigation.
It does not necessarily encompass a
RTF format (145 KB)
Signed PDF/A format