Tuggeranong Town Centre Pty Ltd and Commissioner for ACT Revenue [2008] ACTAAT 22 (24 September 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL
CITATION: TUGGERANONG TOWN
CENTRE PTY LTD AND COMMISSIONER
[2008] ACTAAT 22
(24 SEPTEMBER
Catchwords:
Rates and land tax – determination of unimproved
value of shopping centre site in Tuggeranong – comparable sales evidence
– adjustments for income earned from existing land use, differences in
size, location and date of sale, special benefits and
method of sale –
hypothetical development analysis.
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1989, s 37
Rates Act 2004
Taxation Administration Act 1999
AG Robertson Limited v The Valuer-General of New South Wales
LGR 261 (NSW)
Commonwealth v Arklay
[1952] HCA 76
(1951) 87 CLR 159
Commonwealth Funds Management Limited & PT Limited and Commissioner
for ACT Revenue
[2005] ACTAAT 26
Gwynvill Properties Pty Ltd v Commissioner for Main Roads
Mr M H Peedom, President
Ms P O’Neil, Senior Member
Dr D McMichael, Senior Member
24 September
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT07/25
GENERAL DIVISION )
TUGGERANONG
TOWN CENTRE
COMMISSIONER
Mr M H Peedom, President
Ms P O’Neil, Senior
Dr D McMichael, Senior Member
The decision under review is set aside and substituted by a decision that the
unimproved value of Block 3 Section 1 Division of Greenway
as at 1 January 2006
is $25,000,000.
.............................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
TRIBUNAL ) NO: AT07/25
GENERAL DIVISION )
TUGGERANONG
TOWN CENTRE
COMMISSIONER
REASONS FOR DECISION
24 September 2008 Mr M H Peedom, President
Ms P O’Neil,
Senior Member
Dr D McMichael, Senior Member
The application for review of decision
This is an application to review a decision of the respondent which
disallowed an objection by the applicant to the determination
of the unimproved
land value of Block 3 Section 1 Division of Greenway (
“the subject
) at 1 January 2006 at $39,500,000.
2. The respondent had earlier determined the unimproved value of the subject
land as at 1 January 2004 at $17.6M and as at 1 January
2005 at $20m so as to
give an average unimproved value of $25.7M over three years. The average
unimproved value of the land was
used by the respondent to calculate the
applicant’s liability for the payment of rates for the year 1 July 2006 to
3. The application to review the respondent’s decision is made
pursuant to
section 107(1)
Taxation Administration Act 1999
The hearing
4. At the hearing of the appeal the applicant was represented by Mr D
Miller, of counsel. The respondent was represented by Dr J
Griffiths, SC and Mr
D Mossop, of counsel. A number of documents were tendered in evidence and the
Tribunal had before it the respondent’s
statement of reasons for the
decision under review and the material required to be lodged with the Tribunal
pursuant to section 37
of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1989.
5. Evidence was given on behalf of the applicant by Mr G Jackson and Mr M
Tebbatt. Written statements prepared by Mr R Rowlands
were tendered in evidence
on behalf of the respondent. In the event of his inability to attend the
hearing, evidence was given in
support of his expert opinion by Mr A Shephard
who had assisted him in the valuation. Evidence was also given on behalf of the
by Mr M Chappé de Leonval (Mr Chappé).
6. Mr Jackson is a director of m
property, property
strategists. He is a certified practising valuer; licensed valuer (WA);
practising real estate valuer (NSW); registered
valuer (Qld); Fellow of the
Australian Property Institute (FAPI); Past Councillor of the Victorian
Divisional Council of the API;
Member of the Divisional Professional Board of
the API; Past Member of the Tax Reform Committee of the PCA and a Member of the
Group of Valuers. He holds an Associate Diploma in Valuations (RMIT)
and has had extensive experience in statutory valuations in
all the major
CBD’s throughout Australia, major shopping centres around the country,
industrial estates and a number of specialised
properties including ski fields,
oil refineries, telecommunication facilities and privatised public
infrastructure.
7. Mr Rowlands is the chief executive of Landsburys, Independent Property
and Advisory Services. He is a registered valuer without
limitation in New
South Wales and Queensland and a licensed real estate agent in New South Wales.
He is a Fellow of the Australian
Property Institute. He has over 30
years’ experience in the property industry with significant expertise in
all property types.
He has provided advice, research and valuation across a
diverse range of projects and developments throughout Australia including
shopping centres and bulky goods throughout New South Wales.
8. Mr Shephard is an associate director of Landsburys. He holds a Bachelor
of Property Economics (Hons), University of Technology.
He is a certified
practising valuer and a registered valuer and an associate member of the
Australian Property Institute. He has
practised as a valuer for 6.5 years
assisting the directors of Landsburys. His expertise is primarily in
development and providing
valuations for large master plan estates including
retail and commercial precincts.
9. Mr Tebbatt is a director of WT Partnership, Quantity Surveyors and
Construction Cost Consultants. He holds a Bachelor of Applied
Science and is an
associate of the Australian Institute of Quantity Surveyors.
10. Mr Chappé de Leonval is a director of Rider Levett Bucknall,
quantity surveyors. He holds a Bachelor of Science in Quantity
Surveying from
the University of Natal, Durban.
Statutory provisions
11. Provision is made for the annual re-determination of the unimproved
value of rateable land and for the method of determination
sections 10
Rates Act 2004
). They state:
10 Annual redeterminations
(1) As soon as practicable after each 1 January, the commissioner must
redetermine the unimproved value, as at that date, of each
parcel of land
rateable on that date.
(2) An annual redetermination of the unimproved value of a parcel of land
applies to rates for the period—
(a) beginning on 1 July in the calendar year in which the relevant date
when the redetermination is made falls; and
(b) ending on 30 June in the next calendar year.
6 Meaning of unimproved value
unimproved value
of a parcel of land held under a lease
from the Commonwealth is the capital amount that might be expected to have been
the relevant date for the lease of the parcel, assuming
(a) the only improvements on or to the parcel were the improvements (if
any) by way of clearing, filling, grading, draining, levelling
excavating—
(i) if the Territory or Commonwealth had, before the parcel became
rateable as a separate parcel, granted a development lease of land
that included
the parcel—made by the lessee under that lease or by the Territory or
Commonwealth, or the cost of which was
met by that lessee or by the Territory or
Commonwealth; or
(ii) in any other case—made by the Territory or Commonwealth or the
cost of which was met by the Territory or Commonwealth;
(b) the circumstances that existed on the prescribed date also existed on
the relevant date; and
(c) on the relevant date, the lease had an unexpired term of 99 years;
(d) a nominal rent was payable under the lease for the 99 year
unimproved value
of a parcel of land held in fee simple is
the capital amount that might be expected to have been offered for the parcel at
sale on the relevant date on the reasonable terms and conditions that
a genuine seller would require, assuming that no improvements
had been made on
or to the parcel.
(3) In this section:
prescribed date
, for a parcel of land, means—
(a) for a determination of the unimproved value of the parcel—the
date the parcel became rateable; or
(b) for an annual redetermination of the unimproved value of the
parcel—the date the redetermination applies; or
(c) for a redetermination of the unimproved value of the parcel under
(Redetermination—error or changed circumstances)—the date
for the redetermination mentioned in the notice under
12. “Relevant date” is defined in the Dictionary to the
as follows:
relevant date
, for a parcel of land, means a date when a
determination of the unimproved value of the parcel is or is to be made.
13. In the present case the relevant date is 1 January 2006 and the
prescribed date is 1 July 2006. The effect of
section 6(1)(b)
is that, although the valuation must be as at 1 January 2006, it must assume
that the circumstances existing on 1 July 2006 also
existed on 1 January
Approach to valuation
14. Consistently with the observations expressed by the High Court of
Australia in
Commonwealth v Arklay
[1952] HCA 76
(1951) 87 CLR 159
Tribunal’s approach to determining the unimproved value of land in
accordance with
is to rely upon the evidence of
comparable sales of other land either before or after the date of valuation.
15. The expert valuers on whose evidence the parties relied took a similar
approach although they also sought to support their opinions
by reference to the
hypothetical development method of valuation.
Agreed and disagreed matters
16. Directions given by the Tribunal required the parties to submit a
statement identifying the issues upon which their respective
expert witnesses
agreed and in respect of which they disagreed. The following were some of the
matters that were the subject of
(1) The subject land is Block 3
(2) As at 1 January 2006, the date of valuation, the land had planning
permission for the following uses:
more than three (3) Supermarkets to a maximum gross lettable floor area
) of 10,823m
, with each
supermarket having a minimum GLFA of 1,300m
more than three (3) Major Department Stores to a maximum GLFA of
with each store having a minimum GLFA of
but excluding a supermarket;
more than four (4) Minor Department Stores to a maximum GLFA of
, with each store having a minimum GLFA of
BUT EXCLUDING a supermarket;
(excluding supermarkets and department stores);
establishments;
facilities;
away food establishments;
Restaurants;
and drinking establishments;
entertainment facility (limited to amusement arcade);
recreation facility (limited to gymnasium and fitness centres);
cinema complex consisting of no more than eight (8) cinemas, with a maximum GLFA
having a maximum seating capacity of 1,979
PROVIDED ALWAYS THAT the maximum combined GLFA for the uses (iv) to
(xv) do not exceed 20,474m
and each individual
occupancy shall not exceed a maximum GLFA of 685m
EXCEPT THAT 1,650m
of the above GLFA shall only be
used for the purposes of financial establishments, business agencies, health
facilities, restaurants,
eating and drinking establishments, public agencies,
offices, indoor entertainment facilities (limited to amusements arcade) and
indoor recreation facility (limited to gymnasium and fitness centres).
(3) The subject land area is 81,280m
(4) Permissible gross floor area (
(5) Permissible GLFA – 70,142m
(6) Car parking – 2,228 car bays;
(7) The subject land is zoned in ‘Town Centres (Commercial B) as
administered by the Territory Plan’. The subject land
is predominately
within ‘Precinct A – Retail Core’ with a component within
‘Precinct D – Car Parking
(8) The highest and best use of the land was as a regional shopping centre,
consistently with the fact that, at the date of valuation,
there was erected on
the land a regional shopping centre of approximately
17. The main areas of disagreement between the parties were as to whether
all of the sales relied upon by their respective valuers
were comparable to the
subject land and whether appropriate adjustments had been made to reflect the
differences between the value
of the subject land and the land which was the
subject of the sales relied upon.
The applicant’s comparable sales
18. Mr Jackson relied upon five sales as indicating the unimproved value of
the subject land which by this method he calculated as
$25,000,000. Those
sales, listed in order of comparability and the adjustments made by him to them,
are set out in the following
Westfield Belconnen
$17,000,000
(incl works & excl GST)
Coles Development
(now Blocks 3,4
(incl works & excl GST)
(originally)
Big W Development
(incl works & excl GST)
Aldi Development
(incl works & excl GST)
Woolworths Marketplace
(incl works & excl GST)
19. As can be seen from the table, Block 21
“Westfield”
) has a GFA of 27,094m
The Crown lease permits the land to be used for retail purposes. It was
purchased by the owner of the adjoining Belconnen Regional
Shopping Centre in
November 2007 for $17M. At the date of sale Westfield provided government
operated open at grade car parking
that provided about one-third of the
centre’s car parking needs. Mr Jackson gave evidence that it was the
intention of the
purchaser to further expand the existing shopping centre at
some time in the future.
20. Mr Jackson adjusted the sale price by $4.8M to remove the estimated
capitalised value of the income from the car park resulting
in a GFA value of
. He also adjusted the comparative value of
the land by 5% to have regard to its substantially smaller size than the subject
by 5% because of what Mr Jackson considered was a special benefit to
Westfield, the purchaser, as owner of the adjoining shopping
centre site; by 30%
to have regard to what he considered to be the preferred location of Westfield
to the subject land; by 10% to
have regard to the later date of sale of
Westfield than the subject land. These adjustments resulted in an overall
reduction of
50%, an adjusted GFA analysis of $225/m
and an indicative unimproved value of the subject land of $19,552,494.
21. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Rowlands and Mr Shephard accepted that
the sale of Westfield was a comparable sale on which the
Tribunal could, subject
to necessary adjustments, place reliance. They also accepted that $4.8M was an
appropriate deduction to
be made in respect of the income component of the
carpark but Mr Shephard considered that the value of the land itself should be
added back as only 4,492m
of Westfield had any retail
development rights associated with it as part of the direct grant. Therefore,
the land granted that
did not have retail development rights associated with it
was 40,056m
. Dr Griffiths, relying upon values
ascribed to the Westfield land by independent valuers, identified the value of
the land that
did not have retail development rights as
. This would increase the figure of $12,182,000
resulting from Mr Jackson’s adjustment to $16,187,600 or
22. The proposition that a land value should be added back in following a
deduction of the capitalised value of the car park income
was not put by Mr
Rowlands in any valuation report prepared by him nor were the valuers whose
reports were relied upon as establishing
a value of the land as
called to give evidence. We do not understand
that their reports attribute a land value in that sum to all of the land in
Some of the land to which the $100/m
was attributed appeared to be an access road to Westfield. We accept Mr
Jackson’s evidence that his approach of stripping
out the capitalised car
park income value shows the amount that was paid for the development rights also
takes account of the land
on which the car park is located and reflects its
value. We also accept, therefore, that after making the necessary adjustment
car parking income a GFA analysis of $450/m
23. Mr Rowlands and Mr Shephard also disagreed with the other adjustments
made by Mr Jackson in respect of special benefits and location
but did not
disagree that an adjustment of 5% pa was appropriate to take account of the
difference in the time of the sale of Westfield
and the date of valuation. We
consider that an adjustment of 9%, which takes account of the 22 months between
the respective dates
is appropriate for the time difference.
24. Nor did the respondent disagree that a discount to the sale price of
Westfield to take account of differences involved in the
greater risks
associated with a larger project of longer duration. We consider that the 5%
reduction adopted by Mr Jackson is acceptable.
25. We consider that the potential for the loss of control of the Westfield
site and the consequent requirement for a replacement
car park to be constructed
for the adjoining shopping centre as well as the potential loss of opportunity
for expansion of the shopping
centre and the prospect of competition from
another purchaser would have impacted upon the price the purchaser would have
been prepared
to pay for the subject land. We consider it inappropriate,
however, to make a -5% adjustment, as Mr Jackson has done, as that consideration
should be offset by the absence of the involvement of a commercial competitor in
the Westfield sale which was negotiated directly
with the purchaser and because
the price paid was consistent with the pre-sale estimates of independent
26. In relation to the question as to whether an adjustment should be made
to take account of the difference in location of Westfield
to that of the
subject land, in his report Mr Rowlands acknowledged that retail rental values
in Belconnen were superior to those
in Tuggeranong. He considered, however,
that rental differentials could be explained by the fact that Belconnen was more
regarded by the retail market, by the mix and type of retailers, as well
as the proportions of space occupied by speciality retail,
majors and mini
majors. He said that it would be more relevant to compare the turnover per
of occupied space. In his opinion, 7% was an
appropriate level of adjustment to be made in respect of location.
27. Mr Jackson relied upon the comparative moving annual turnover levels
achieved in each location in support of the -30% adjustment
made by him.
According to information provided by tenants in shopping centres around
Australia to Shopping Centre News, the speciality
moving annual turnover level
of tenants in Belconnen was $8,473 compared to $5,631 in Tuggeranong, a
difference of about 36%. The
moving annual turnover level of tenants from all
trades excluding speciality tenants in Belconnen was $6,342 compared to $3,434
Tuggeranong, a difference of around 54%.
28. Mr Shephard expressed doubt upon the reliability of the moving annual
turnover schedules relied upon by Mr Jackson by suggesting
that they did not
include a number of items that would be incorporated in a shopping centre. He
also expressed the view that turnover
levels would be affected by the identity
of the operator of a shopping centre.
29. Having regard to Mr Rowlands’ acceptance of the assistance to be
derived from a comparison of turnover levels as an indicator
of difference
attributable to location, the absence of any analysis by the respondent’s
valuers of the data relied upon by
Mr Jackson or any detailed analysis to
explain the 7% adjustment proposed by Mr Rowlands and having regard also to Mr
considerably greater experience in valuing shopping centres than
Mr Shephard, we consider that we should prefer Mr Jackson’s
evidence on
this issue. We note that the adjustment made by Mr Jackson in respect of
location difference (30%) is less than the
figures reflected by the moving
annual turnover data. We consider that we should accept 30% as the appropriate
level of adjustment
to be made on account of that difference.
30. We therefore consider that the total of adjustments to be made to the
GFA analysis after adjustments for income and to isolate
retail value only is
-44% resulting in an adjusted GFA analysis of $252/m
and an indicative unimproved land value of Westfield of $21,883,680.
31. Of the sales of sites in Gungahlin, Mr Jackson placed greatest reliance
on the three sales of vacant land that were most proximate
in time to the
relevant date, that is, Coles, Big W and Aldi.
32. Mr Rowlands and Mr Shephard declined to place any reliance on those
sales because of the mixed use permitted for those three
sales and, in the case
of Woolworths Marketplace, because its date of sale occurred in a different
economic environment before development
of the Gungahlin Town Centre and at a
time when the Territory government was keen to see some commercial development
in Gungahlin.
They also discarded reliance upon them because they were not sold
at auction; there was no evidence available to them of how the
conditions of sale were negotiated; Gungahlin was in its early stages of
development without a significant office support
base; the town centre involved
street-based retail developments each anchored by a single major tenancy, either
supermarkets or discount
department stores but no department stores or a
well-established retail/services component and the population was substantially
than Tuggeranong.
33. That there are significant differences between the style and layout of
operation of the Tuggeranong and Gungahlin town centres
was not disputed by Mr
Jackson. In the view of the Tribunal the Gungahlin sales relied upon by Mr
Jackson afford less reliable evidence
of the unimproved value of the land than
Westfield. On the other hand, we do not consider that they should be
disregarded.
34. Mr Jackson gave evidence that, in analysing the sales he had undertaken
an investigation of the documentation surrounding them
and that he had taken
account of the mixed use of the Gungahlin properties in adjusting upwards by 30%
the differences in location.
In respect of the Coles sale, which he regarded as
the most comparable of the Gungahlin sales, he had attributed the whole of the
purchase price to retail use, thereby maximising the figure for retail
35. Mr Jackson also made adjustments to the Coles sale of -20% to take
account of the difference in size of that site and the subject
land and +30% to
take account of the difference in location. We consider that the making of
these adjustments is a reasonable approach
to the analysis of the Coles sale.
Consistently with the view we have taken of the Westfield sale, we consider that
a +5% adjustment
should be made to take account of the fact that the sale was
made directly with the purchaser rather than by a more competitive process
that a +13% adjustment should be made to take account of the fact that the Coles
sale occurred about 2 years and 8 months in
advance of the relevant date.
36. On this analysis the $233/m
for retail only
reflected by the Coles sale is required to be adjusted by a total of +28%
resulting in an adjusted GFA analysis of
indicative unimproved value of the subject land of $25,899,161.
37. A similar approach taken in relation to the Big W and Aldi sites results
in the following adjusted GFA $/m
and indicative
unimproved land value of the subject land:
$24,766,768
Aldi $213.50/m
$18,540,340
38. We accept the view of both valuers that the sale of Woolworths
Marketplace justifies little reliance being placed on it having
regard to its
date of sale in January 1998.
The respondent’s comparable sales
39. In addition to the sale of Westfield, Mr Rowlands relied upon four site
sales as summarised in the following table:
DFO/Bulky Goods
(incl works & excl GST)
Bulky Goods
Estimate $11,000,000
(incl works & excl GST)
Estimate based on
full 10% GST
Bunnings Warehouse
(incl works & excl GST)
Westfield Belconnen
Block 27 % 25
& Block 4, Part Block 6
$17,000,000
(incl works & excl GST)
40. The sale of Block 8
Fyshwick, known as Epicentre, was a
market auction which occurred relatively close to the date of valuation. It is
proposed by the
purchasers that it contain approximately 52% of its area for the
sale of bulky goods and 48% for direct factory retail sales, both
permitted uses
under the Crown lease. Mr Rowlands relied upon the proportion of retail space
and associated basement car parking
as making it comparable to the subject land.
The difference in GLFA between the Epicentre and the subject land is not
significant
and does not call for an adjustment on account of difference of
41. Mr Jackson did, however, identify a number of matters which he
considered did not enable the Epicentre sale to be regarded as
comparable to the
subject land. Those matters included the following.
42. As agreed by the valuers, the construction and fit-out costs of a
regional shopping centre are ordinarily of a higher standard
than a bulky goods
development or a direct factory outlet and requires greater provision for common
area walkways and amenities,
thereby increasing the costs associated with their
development and a greater reduction of GFA that is lettable. In addition, the
purchaser was required to undertake site works at an estimated cost of
43. The reserve price was fixed by the Land Development Agency for the sale
of the Epicentre land at $13,500,000 following the provision
to it of two
valuations in September 2005 of $12M and $13.5M. An “independent backcast
valuation” commissioned by the
Auditor-General and carried out by an
independent valuer valued the land at $21,000,000 on the basis of equal uses of
direct factory
outlet sales and bulky goods sales. All of the valuations
represent a substantial discount to the sale price of $39,500,000 achieved
44. Prior to the Epicentre sale there had been a monopoly in the market for
factory outlet retailing at the Canberra Airport, the
owner of which was a
competitive bidder at the auction. There was no apparent prospect of a lease
permitting similar use becoming
available for purchase. Based on his enquiries,
Mr Jackson gave evidence that the purchase price was affected by a concern to
a monopoly and for a competitor in a restricted market to break it.
45. Dr Griffiths relied upon the fact that the enquiry commissioned by the
Auditor-General in respect of the sale had concluded that
the auction was
conducted “fairly and with appropriate accountability, separately by the
(Land Development Agency) and by the
ACTPLA, the planning regulator”.
46. The Auditor-General’s audit of the sale was, however, not
concerned to determine whether the auction achieved a sale price
that reflected
the capital amount that might be expected to have been offered on the relevant
date for the Epicentre site. The task
of the audit was to provide independent
opinion as to whether the sale was in accordance with relevant legislation,
policy and accepted
better practice; was conducted fairly and with appropriate
accountability and achieved appropriate financial and planning outcomes
Territory. A sale price which exceeded expectations, as is suggested by the
applicant, would not have failed to achieve
an appropriate financial outcome for
the Territory.
47. It is to be noted also that in the introduction to the audit report
summary, the Auditor-General’s audit was said to have
arisen following
significant community interest and media reporting about it as well as requests
by Members of the Legislative Assembly
to review the pre-sale and sale
processes. It made reference to litigation regarding the sale being undertaken
on the grounds that
the nature of the development permitted on the land was
uncertain. We accept that the circumstances surrounding the sale suggest
caution needs to be taken in relying upon it as evidence of the unimproved value
of the subject land. We also have regard to
the fact that Mr Jackson’s
evidence of the need for caution in applying the Epicentre sale was based upon
enquiries made by
him of the purchaser and the absence of similar enquiries
being made on behalf of the respondent.
48. The Bunning’s hardware store is located at the edge of the
Belconnen retail area. The sale price at auction of the land
on which it is
located equates to $422/m
GFA. The Crown lease
permits it to be used for the sale of bulky goods. Mr Rowlands considered that,
because of its permitted use
restrictions and fringe location, it was inferior
to the subject land and it therefore supported a higher
value for the subject land.
49. In our view, there is greater difficulty in placing reliance upon the
sale of a bulky goods property for the purpose of a comparative
sales analysis
with a shopping centre than is associated a comparison with a direct factory
outlet/bulky goods operation. The type
and range of products sold is
significantly different to that on offer at a shopping centre. The costs
associated with its construction
are substantially less; the lettable area of
the GFA is significantly greater than a shopping centre and arrangements for
are not ordinarily comparable to those available at a shopping centre.
We consider that little reliance should be placed on this
Bulky Goods Homemakers and Services Site
50. Block 1
Gungahlin was sold in December 2005 for a sale price
estimated by Mr Rowlands to be $11,000,000 including site works. Its permitted
uses included a homemaker and services precinct with compatible
commercial/retail uses. Mr Rowlands analysed the GFA of
considered that regard should be had to it as the sale occurred relatively close
to the date of valuation and, as inferior to
the land, supported a higher
valuation to that analysed by Mr Jackson of the land. Mr Jackson noted that the
Crown lease permitted
a range of uses that were different in nature to a
regional shopping centre and prohibited the sale of food or clothing.
51. In our view the same difficulties in making comparisons with the land
that are associated with the Bunning’s site apply
also to this sale.
Tuggeranong Town Centre
52. Although not referred to in Mr Rowlands’ reports, Mr Shephard
introduced information regarding the sale of the subject
land to the original
purchaser in 1985. In cross-examination Mr Shephard explained that he did not
list the sale as comparable sales
evidence but as background information that
should be available to the Tribunal.
53. We consider that for the same reasons both of the parties’ valuers
had for disregarding the Woolworths Marketplace sale
which occurred in January
1998, no reliance should be placed on this sale.
54. We consider that the evidence before us supports Mr Jackson’s
opinion that the unimproved value of the subject land is
indicated to be
Hypothetical Development Method
55. When these proceedings were commenced (5 June 2007) the sale of the
Westfield Belconnen site had not occurred. At that time
both parties were
conscious that the property sales on which they were each relying for the
comparable sales method of valuation
might not be accepted as strictly
comparable, as none of them was for a regional shopping centre site.
Consequently both parties
undertook a second analysis using what is known as the
hypothetical development method of valuation.
56. This method has been described by Sugerman J in
AG Robertson Limited
v The Valuer-General of New South Wales
(1952) 18 LGR 261 (NSW)
the following way:
(the method) erects a hypothetical building upon the subject land,
capitalizing the anticipated net return there from, then subtracts
the estimated
building costs from the capitalization, the balance being treated as the
unimproved capital value (of the land)
57. In his first report (Exhibit 3) undated, but which it was agreed was
prepared on or about 19 October 2007, Mr Jackson derived
an unimproved value for
the land of $20.9M as at 1 January 2006. In arriving at this figure, he relied
on the report prepared by
Mr Tebbatt to establish the design, development and
construction cost, and on his assessment of the capitalised value of the rentals
detailed in the Tuggeranong Tenancy Schedule, and on a range of assumptions set
out in his report.
58. Mr Tebbatt has 28 years’ experience in property valuation,
including having valued numerous regional shopping centres,
but he agreed that
he had no experience in the ACT. In his report of 11 October 2007 he arrived at
a new replacement cost of $265,789,086
for the Tuggeranong Centre. To these Mr
Jackson added a number of additional costs including tenancy contributions,
interest, purchase
costs of the land, stamp duty on sub leases, rates and taxes
and leasing expenses, bringing the total replacement cost to $311,477,930.
59. Mr Jackson’s capitalised value of the Centre, less selling costs
and allowing for a profit and risk factor of 15%, was
$331,879,254 which yielded
an unimproved value of $20,401,323 when the estimated construction costs were
subtracted. This figure
was then adjusted to account for the additional
of GLFA or 3,700 m
GFA able to be developed under the amended Crown lease, to yield the $20.9M
figure cited above.
60. Mr Rowlands undertook the hypothetical development estimate work for the
respondent, assisted by Mr Shephard. He relied on the
estimate of the
development costs developed by Mr Chappé.
61. Mr Chappé, who is based in Canberra, has some 30 years’
experience in the construction industry, the last 10 years
being in Australia
working on a range of projects including major Canberra developments. However,
he had not previously valued a
regional shopping centre.
62. In his first report dated 26 November 2007 Mr Chappé estimated
the construction cost at $204,430,000, some $61M less than
Mr Tebbatt’s
estimate. In his first report dated 11 February 2008 Mr Rowlands added to this
figure allowances for statutory
charges, leasing and selling expenses etc and
came up with an overall replacement cost of $269,094,598, while his estimate of
capitalised value of the Centre was $366.7M. When interest and other costs
were taken into account, he concluded that the “residual
$50M, which he adjusted to $52.3M after taking into account the additional area
available for letting under the
amended lease. In a document tendered at
hearing (Exhibit 23), the figures differed, yielding a residual value of
$54,578,206.
63. In a joint report dated 13 June 2008, prepared by both Messrs Tebbatt
and Chappé in accordance with the Tribunal’s
directions, the
estimated costs had become $233,020,157 for Mr Tebbatt and $223,010,000 for Mr
Chappé. While the difference
between the two estimates had narrowed to
$10,010,157 (a figure which excludes works required on Anketell Street) there
major differences between them in relation to a number of aspects of
the estimates which could not be reconciled, in particular the
cost of external
lighting, external infrastructure, roof, lessor fit-out and other base
variances. Evidence given during the hearing
revealed that the two valuers had
adopted different basic approaches (elemental estimates vs functional areas) to
their estimates
of the construction costs, had worked from inadequate plans, and
had used different trade rates in making their estimates. The respondent
submitted that Mr Tebbatt’s costs figure should be reduced by $8,421,361
in order to adjust for these differences, thus increasing
the residual
64. In a report dated 27 June 2008, jointly signed by Messrs Jackson and
Rowlands, the differences between their unimproved values
derived by the
hypothetical valuation method were considered and revised calculations were
made. However, there remained significant
differences in their estimates of
inputs into the potential net rental calculation, resulting in a value for the
completed centre
of $366,700,000 by Mr Jackson and $362,860,000 by Messrs
Rowland and Shephard – a difference of almost $4M.
65. It is clear from the above brief account of the evidence given that no
agreed estimates of either the construction and development
hypothetical building or the value of the completed centre were available to the
Tribunal and there seemed little prospect
of reaching agreed figures, given the
differences in so many of the variables involved in the calculations.
66. The Tribunal has previously been confronted with determining the utility
of this method in establishing property values. In
Commonwealth Funds
Management Limited & PT Limited and Commissioner for ACT Revenue
, the Tribunal referred to the difficulties attendant upon the
methodology, citing the description of it by Cripps J in
Gwynvill Properties
Pty Ltd v Commissioner for Main Roads
(1983) 50 LGRA 322
The hypothetical development method is normally suspect because it depends
on a number of assumptions and a number of estimates, e.g.
the cost of building,
estimated gross rentals obtainable, probable outgoings, and most significantly,
the rate percentum of return
which could be expected and the profit and risk
factors expressed in percentage terms. It has been said that because many
and assumptions must be made, the hypothetical development method
ought not to be used where some use can be made of comparable
67. In that case, the Tribunal was faced with the absence of any comparable
sales evidence and was obliged to rely on the hypothetical
development model
evidence. As a consequence, it considered the evidence about the assumptions
made in estimating both the construction
costs and the completion value, and
adopted values that it considered appropriate and decided an unimproved capital
68. However, in this case there is comparable sales evidence as outlined
above. Consequently the Tribunal does not place any reliance
on the unimproved
values that were derived using the hypothetical development method. It takes
some comfort from the fact that both
the applicant and the respondent urged that
the hypothetical development model should not be relied upon, given the
availability
of comparable sales evidence.
PUBLICATION DETAILS
TO BE PUBLISHED
To be completed by Member's
________________________________________________________________________
TUGGERANONG TOWN CENTRE PTY
RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER
PARTY JOINED:
COUNSEL APPEARING: APPLICANT:
MR D MILLER
RESPONDENT:
DR J GRIFFITHS SC & MR D MOSSOP
PARTY JOINED:
SOLICITORS: APPLICANT:
GADENS LAWYERS
RESPONDENT:
ACT GOVERNMENT
PARTY JOINED:
OTHER: APPLICANT:
RESPONDENT:
PARTY JOINED:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER/S:
MR M H PEEDOM, PRESIDENT
MS P O’NEIL,
SENIOR MEMBER
DR D MCMICHAEL, SENIOR MEMBER
DATE/S OF HEARING:
DATE OF DECISION:
_______________________________________________________________________
RECOMMENDATION:
FULL REPORT ( ) CASE NOTE (
) UNREPORTED DECISION (X)
RTF format (167 KB)
Signed PDF/A format