In the matter of four deaths by drowning in the Australian Capital Territory [2023] ACTCD 11 (30 June 2023)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
In the matter of four deaths by drowning in
the Australian Capital Territory
The Inquest into the
death of Najeebullah Rafee
The Inquest into the death of
William Spencer Hooley
The Inquest into the death of
Meredith Nancy Hooley
The Inquest into the death of Dinh
[2023] ACTCD 11
Decision Date:
Coroner Russell
See [13], [29], [30], [41], [63] and recommendations at [71], [72]
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– cause and manner of death – matter of
public safety – drowning in inland waterways – water awareness and
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
File Number
CD 287/2020
CD 345/2020
CD 346/2020
CORONER RUSSELL
deaths of Najeebullah Rafee, William Spencer Hooley, Meredith Hooley and Dinh Ta
Nguyen occurred within 16 months of each other.
They each were caused by
drowning in an ACT river, at locations promoted,
, for water
activities. There are matters of similar, but general, application raised in
each case. For those reasons they are being
considered together.
Najeebullah Rafee
Najeebullah
Rafee died on 25 October 2020 at The Canberra Hospital, Woden. The cause of his
death was drowning. Najeebullah was 23
years old at the time of his death. He
was born in Ghazni, Afghanistan on 1 January 1997 and was the oldest child of
Sadeqa Rafee
and Habibullah Rafee and the brother of Farishta and Zainullah. The
family came to Australia in about 2014 as refugees from Afghanistan
the time of his death, Najeebullah was in his final year as a student at the
Australian National University, studying international
relations. He spoke
Farsi, Dari and English. He was clearly greatly loved by his family. He was a
young man of significant promise,
one of a strong group of friends at the
University. Those friends, who called him Najeeb, have described him as a person
‘unconditionally kind’. Najeeb, they said,
selflessly sacrificed so much of his life to support his family and
friends, showing determination that was unparalleled. He had a
gleeful zest for
life and contagious laughter. Najeeb shared that he would have liked to have a
family one day, and we know he would
have been a great father. Najeeb put his
values into action: just before his death he was awarded young Canberra Citizen
of the Year
for his longstanding volunteer work with refugee and migrant support
services. We deeply miss him, and strive to honour his legacy
and friendship
through the Refugee and Migrant Swimming Program. If Najeeb were here today, we
know he would be enthusiastically
Cotter Bend
Bend is part of the Cotter River Recreation Area and is at the junction of
Paddys River and the Cotter River. It has a wide
natural pool and sandy beach.
There are walking tracks, barbeques, picnic areas and public amenities. ACT
Parks describes the area,
in its promotional material, as having ‘plenty
of grassy areas with shade on sunny days’ with electric barbecues and
toilets available. The public is, and was, in October
, encouraged to ‘[e]njoy
a swim, splash and go fishing’ there.
Events of 15
October 2020
his mother, father and sister, Farishta. They were
joined by his uncle and aunt,
Faizullah and Rokshana Rafee, and their children.
his uncle and aunt arrived, Najeebullah and his family were standing in the
shallow part of the river. Faizullah, with his family,
began to enter the
shallows when Najeebullah walked out of the water and collected what Faizullah
described as a “board, possibly
blue in colour, of approximately 1m x
60cm” and re-entered the water. I understand that Najeebullah intended to
use that board
as a flotation device. He asked Faizullah if he wanted to swim
and if he knew how. His uncle said he did not know how to swim and
remained at
the side of the river with his children.
Najeebullah’s
family have confirmed that he could not swim. It is more likely than not that,
in deep water, Najeebullah lost
control of the board. He was observed to get
into difficulties and his father Habibullah, who could not swim, entered the
try to help him but he, too, got into difficulties. Faizullah then
entered the water to try to help but was himself at risk and,
with the aid of
his wife, who extended a stick, pulled himself back to shore. Habibullah had to
be pulled out of the water. He seemed,
to his brother, to be unconscious.
Faizullah pushed on his chest and stomach and a lot of water came out of
Habibullah’s mouth.
could not get mobile reception by the river and went to the road where she
flagged down four men, who were employees of the
Tidbinbilla Tracking Station.
They entered the water to search for Najeebullah, while Farishta went on to the
Cotter campground to
obtain help. A camper offered to help, went to Cotter Bend
and entered the water to assist with the search.
Najeebullah
was located in about 3m of water about 3m from the riverbank, brought back to
the shore and placed in the recovery position.
It was estimated that Najeebullah
had been underwater for about 20 to 25 minutes. Water trickled from his mouth.
CPR was commenced
by his rescuers. The ACT Ambulance Service and ACT Fire and
Rescue arrived at the scene. Ambulance officers took over resuscitation
and transferred Najeebullah to The Canberra Hospital by
the Canberra Hospital, Najeebullah was admitted to the intensive care unit and
remained there for 10 days. He was placed on life
support involving, inter alia,
ventilation, dialysis and inotropic drug support. His injuries, however, were
not survivable. He had
sustained devastating and irreversible brain damage from
the lengthy period without blood flow to his brain. Those injuries were
confirmed by tests, including an electroencephalogram and magnetic resonance
imaging. Life support was discontinued after consultation
with his family and
Najeebullah died a short time later, on the morning of 25 October
Post-mortem
post-mortem examination by Professor Johan Duflou confirmed that the cause of
Najeebullah Rafee’s death was
am satisfied that the manner and cause of the death of Najeebullah Rafee are
sufficiently disclosed and that a hearing is unnecessary
circumstances leading to his death were witnessed by family members and members
of the public who sought to assist. Hospital
and ambulance records and
post-mortem findings are consistent with the statements of eyewitnesses.
to section 52(1) of the Act, I make the following findings:
Najeebullah
Rafee died at The Canberra Hospital, Yamba Drive, Garran, in the Australian
Capital Territory, on 25 October 2020.
cause of his death was drowning.
drowning was accidental.
William Spencer Hooley and
Meredith Hooley
Spencer Hooley was known by his middle name of Spencer. He was happily married
to Kirsty McGovern-Hooley and they had two
daughters, Morgan Vera Hooley and
Meredith Nancy Hooley. Meredith Hooley was their younger daughter. She was 11
years old at the
time of her death. At that time her sister was 13 years
Hooley is described by his family as having been a loving and engaged father and
an intelligent and thoughtful person who enjoyed
sharing his love of reading,
music and science fiction with his daughters. He had a successful career as a
Trademarks Examiner with
IP Australia and was, his family said, recognised by
his colleagues as always supportive and helpful.
Hooley had a long history of medical problems, had been diagnosed with
polymyalgia/fibromyalgia and was quite often in considerable
pain. He was on
medication for his conditions and, in the week of 19 December 2020, had been
taking additional prednisone. He was
said, by his family, to use cannabis
occasionally as pain relief. He was described by them as being active but not
‘the fittest
person in the world’.
and her sister had a history of developmental disorders, autism and attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder, and suffered
from anxiety. They received
assistance through the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS). Mr
Hooley’s family said that
he ‘showed up and actively participated in
all therapy and school’ engagements for his daughters. He was cognisant of
his daughters’ abilities and very protective of their welfare and safety.
Ms McGovern-Hooley said that ‘as a rule neither
of us would undertake new
activities without careful planning, consideration, research and providing the
support that [their daughters]
needed to participate’.
family say that Mr Hooley grew up around, and was experienced swimming in,
country rivers, including the Gwydir River in Bingara
and the Peel River in
Tamworth. Nonetheless, he was not ‘that physically strong’ and had
been encouraged by his doctor
to pursue very light swimming exercise.
and her sister had had swimming lessons when they were younger but did not
continue them as they got older. Arrangements
were in train, at the time of
Meredith’s death, to recommence swimming lessons. The family regularly
attended Tuggeranong Pool
, to work on swimming skills and
water safety. Their mother thought that they were “okay” in the
controlled environment
of the local swimming pool where they could stand up but
did not know that that would be the case in a river where conditions may
suddenly. Mr Hooley had, in the past, taken them to other swimming spots such as
Kambah Pool.
Tharwa Sandwash
Sandwash is on the banks of the Murrumbidgee River, in Gigerline Nature Reserve.
It is, and was in December 2020
described by Parks ACT as a picnic spot having ‘picnic tables and good
access to launch a canoe’ and as a site for nature
observation,
birdwatching, swimming, walking and running, and watercraft.
the afternoon of 19 December 2020 Mr Hooley took his two daughters to Tharwa
Sandwash. Mr Hooley told his wife that he had found
a new spot to try with the
girls. It is for that reason that she believes it was the first time that they
had been there.
was not, Ms McGovern-Hooley said, planned as a swimming excursion but swimming
costumes and towels were taken in the expectation
that the girls might get wet
Tharwa Sandwash, Morgan was collecting pebbles in the river and Meredith was
with her. Their father was sitting on the bank. As
they went further into the
river the water became too deep, and Morgan returned to where she could stand,
but she observed that Meredith
was struggling. Morgan tried to help her but
could not because she, herself, was being dragged down. She said that Meredith
appear to be stuck on anything but was struggling in the deep water.
Their father rushed into the water to get to Meredith. Morgan
observed Meredith
flailing and pushing her father underwater. She said he seemed to pass out and
float back up. Morgan managed to
get out of the water, shouted that she would
get help and tried to phone for assistance but there was no mobile phone
reception at
the river side. She went to the car park where she could get mobile
reception and rang for assistance. She sought the help of a man
in the car park.
He was able to identify the area more precisely for emergency
flagged down a woman who was driving into the Tharwa Sandwash carpark. She
entered the river and pulled Spencer to the edge
of the river. Meredith could
not be located. Police officers arrived at about 2:36pm and commenced
cardiopulmonary resuscitation
on Mr Hooley and searched the river for Meredith.
Ambulance officers arrived shortly thereafter and took over resuscitation
which included advanced airway management to try to maximise
re-oxygenation. Despite those efforts, Mr Hooley could not be revived.
was located, in the river, about 150 to 200m away, and CPR was commenced.
Meredith could not be revived and attempts to
resuscitate her were ceased at
Post-mortem
Post-mortem
examinations were undertaken by Professor Johan Duflou, forensic pathologist,
who confirmed that both Spencer Hooley and
Meredith Hooley died from drowning.
Toxicological testing revealed the presence of hydroxychloroquine, a treatment
for polymyalgia/fibromyalgia,
and evidence of the recent use of cannabis, in Mr
Hooley’s blood. Professor Duflou was of the opinion that Meredith’s
developmental disorders were significant conditions contributing to her death.
is clear that Morgan did all she could to assist her sister and her father. She
had the presence of mind to seek help from the
emergency services and from the
woman driving into the car park. It was fortunate that she did not drown on that
day. Had she remained
in the water, in an attempt to help, that would very
likely have made her father’s attempts to save her sister even more
and would have delayed any call to emergency
Mr Hooley’s knowledge of the
Hooley’s family tell of a man who was careful and who would never
knowingly expose his daughters to danger. It is their firm
belief that Mr Hooley
would not have let his daughters paddle in the water if he had known that the
river at Tharwa Sandwash could
be dangerous for those paddling.
am satisfied that the manner and cause of the deaths of William Spencer Hooley
and Meredith Hooley are sufficiently disclosed and
that a hearing is
unnecessary. Morgan, Meredith’s sister and Mr Hooley’s daughter, was
able to tell police what had happened.
The police arrived to observe Mr Hooley
being brought to the river’s edge. They commenced to search for, and
found, Meredith.
Post-mortem findings are consistent with the statements of
eyewitnesses.
to section 52(1) of the Act, I make the following findings in respect of William
Spencer Hooley:
Spencer Hooley died at Tharwa Sandwash, Tharwa in the Australian Capital
Territory, on 19 December 2020.
cause of his death was drowning.
drowning was accidental.
to section 52(1) of the Act, I make the following findings in respect of
Meredith Hooley:
Nancy Hooley died at Tharwa Sandwash, Tharwa in the Australian Capital
Territory, on 19 December 2020.
cause of her death was drowning.
drowning was accidental.
Dinh Ta Nguyen
Ta Nguyen died on 22 January 2022 at Kambah Pool Recreation Area,
the time of his death, Dinh Ta Nguyen was 75 years old. He was born in Vietnam
and lived in Hanoi with his wife and family.
2020 he travelled to Australia to visit his son, Hung Dinh Nguyen. The advent of
restrictions associated with Covid-19 had the
effect that, by the time of his
death, he had not been able to return to Vietnam. He was staying with his son
and his family in Canberra.
Nguyen’s family believed that he was able to swim and “keep himself
Kambah Pool
Pool is on the Murrumbidgee River in Canberra’s south. It is described by
Parks ACT as a popular swimming and fishing
area and is, and was in January
2022, promoted by Parks ACT as a site for birdwatching, fishing, mountain bike
riding, swimming,
walking and running, and watercraft.
January 2022
Nguyen had been to Kambah Pool two or three times before 22 January 2022. On
that morning he went to Kambah Pool with a number
of people. He and his
associate Nham Do set up fishing lines with Mr Do’s 14 year old
after midday, Mr Nguyen’s fishing rod slid into the water. He stripped to
his underwear and entered the water to retrieve
it. He walked into the water so
far that only his head was visible. Mr Do stripped and waded into the water to
assist. When he was
waist deep in the water, Mr Do realised there was an
undercurrent and became concerned as he was not a strong swimmer and would not
be able to assist. A man kayaking in the area went to Mr Nguyen’s aid. He
tried to extend the paddle of the kayak to Mr Nguyen
so he could pull Mr Nguyen
to safety but Mr Nguyen was already face down in the water and not swimming. He
sank and did not reappear.
The man in the kayak was not a strong enough swimmer
to enter the water after Mr Nguyen. He, Mr Do and Mr Do’s grandson called
out for help from people in the area, and several people called emergency
officers arrived at the river at about 12.28pm but were unable to see Mr Nguyen.
AFP Maritime Search and Rescue Units arrived
at about 1.45pm. It was not until
water about 25 m
from where he was last seen. Police divers estimated the river
temperature to be about 10°C. There had been heavy rain in the
water levels were somewhat higher than
Post-mortem
post-mortem examination was conducted by Professor Johan Duflou, forensic
pathologist, who confirmed that the cause of Dinh Ta Nguyen’s
drowning. Toxicological testing revealed what was described as a modest quantity
of alcohol in the blood (0.020
am satisfied that the manner and cause of the death of Dinh Ta Nguyen are
sufficiently disclosed and that a hearing is unnecessary
circumstances leading to Mr Nguyen’s death were witnessed by those who
were with him and those who sought to assist. Post-mortem
findings are
consistent with the statements of eyewitnesses.
to section 52(1) of the Act, I make the following findings:
Ta Nguyen died at Kambah Pool Recreation Area, Kambah, in the Australian Capital
Territory on 22 January 2022.
cause of his death was drowning.
drowning was accidental.
Matter of Public
am required, by Section 52 (4)(a) of the Act, to state whether a matter of
public safety is found to arise in connection with an
inquest and, if so,
comment on the matter.
locations at which these drownings occurred are promoted by the ACT Government
as places for river-based recreation. It is a part
of their beauty and
attraction that these environments are inherently not as predictable or
regulated as man-made recreational structures.
essential part of the overall management of such sites is an appropriate and
balanced consideration of the risks posed by activities
promoted at
Royal Lifesaving Society – Australia Aquatic
Safety Assessment
Royal Life Saving Society - Australia (RLSSA), a specialist agency in aquatic
risk management, has conducted a 10 year study,
covering the period 2011/12 to
2020/21, entitled
Drowning in Rivers, Creeks, Lakes and Dams.
analysis revealed that 924 people drowned in inland waterways during that
period, that 73% of those drowning deaths occurred in
rivers or creeks, and that
40% of the drowning deaths occurred within 20 km of where the person lived. The
study includes the Murrumbidgee
River in the ACT as one of the five worst
locations for drowning deaths. In the period covered by the study, 15 drowning
deaths occurred
in inland waterways in the ACT. The authors of the report
conclude that
[m]any people are unaware that inland waterways
are a leading location for drowning deaths in Australia
addition to Australia-wide studies on the risks of drowning in inland waterways,
the RLSSA has undertaken an
Aquatic Safety Assessment of the Cotter
Recreation Reserve
. That assessment was done in September 2022. It
specifically includes an assessment of Cotter Bend but many of the observations
are relevant to Tharwa Sandwash and Kambah Pool.
respect to river environments, the assessment notes the general proposition
[t]he flat, still surface of an inland waterway can give a
false sense of security and often hide features and conditions such as
undertows, or submerged objects, making them potentially dangerous. Conditions
in our inland water environments can change
unexpectedly, and ... can lead to
severe consequences for the unprepared.
canvassed by the RLSSA, with respect to the Cotter Recreation Reserve, but with
more general application, and which apply in
the cases of Najeebullah Rafee,
Spencer and Meredith Hooley and Dinh Ta Nguyen, are that people can find
themselves in trouble in
deep water, because they don’t appreciate that
the depth of the water can change suddenly, because they fall and can’t
recover, because they are dragged by strong currents or because they
overestimate their ability. Weak swimmers, in such circumstances,
can be swept
downstream or pulled under the water.
Warnings by Parks
current Parks ACT websites with respect to each of the locations, after
describing the site and potential activities, have a section
you go/How to get there
. It is in the same terms for each site and invites
Prepare by:
understanding
water quality before swimming
and carries a reminder that mobile phone reception may be unreliable. There
is a hyperlink, accessed by clicking on the word safety.
The user is told, then,
Parks and reserves are natural environments that can be unpredictable.
It lists a number of ways ‘to reduce risks and stay safe’
check the water
- check whether swimming is allowed at the
location, check the water quality (in relation to bacteria and blue-green
algae), check
the flow and depths, and do not enter the water if signs advise of
As at 22 January 2022, Parks ACT website warning was relevantly in the
following terms:
swimming conditions signs located at each recreation area.
Do not enter
the water if signs advise that conditions or water quality are unsafe.
flow! Shallow moving water is stronger than you think.
supervise children carefully whenever they are in or near the water.
into any part of the river because there may be rocks or submerged
Information
provided by the relevant ACT Government agencies does not permit me to determine
with precision the content of those warnings
on cognate websites as at 25
October 2020 and 19 December 2020.
website warning as at January 2022, it would appear, was more informative as to
risks of swimming and paddling than the current
Parks ACT website.
each of the locations there is, and was at the relevant times, at least one
clearly visible sign, headed Notice to Swimmers. A
symbolic exclamation mark
introduces a warning message:
that there are no life-saving services, facilities or resources available at
this location.
Visitors are
reminded that although your well-being is our concern, it is your
responsibility.
PLEASE TAKE
sign, in both symbolic and written form, indicates the hazards which may be
encountered. The hazards identified are strong currents,
shallow water,
slippery, uneven ground, steep access, wildlife.
Kambah Pool and at Cotter Bend, there is a further category of sign, headed
‘Public Notice’, containing the following
information:
Rivers may look safe but are often dangerous. Cold
water in rivers can be lethal. Watch the flow! Flowing water is stronger than
may think. Check for submerged objects. Never dive into any part of the
river. Always supervised children
Kambah Pool, a further category of sign advises:
Enter the river
at your own risk. Strong currents, submerged objects and contaminated water may
further notice at Cotter Bend advises that there are no lifesaving
is no basis on which to criticise the number, type or content of the signs on
display at the three locations, but it is difficult
to assess the effect that
those signs might have on people who are already at the river for recreation.
People who have arrived at
a location, set on an activity, may well be difficult
to dissuade from that activity.
Najeebullah Rafee’s case, a family outing had been arranged at the river.
In the cases of Spencer and Meredith Hooley and
Dinh Ta Nguyen the purpose of
the visit to the river was not to swim, but they found themselves in water of a
depth or strength with
which they couldn’t cope. Meredith was wading in
the water, picking up pebbles with her sister. Mr Nguyen was attempting to
retrieve his fishing rod.
Knowledge of the
Najeebullah
Rafee, who could not swim, entered the water with a board used as a flotation
device. For a non-swimmer the use of a flotation
device of that kind, in water
of variable depth, carries significant risk, particularly if the grip on the
board is released. I am
satisfied that Najeebullah very significantly
underestimated the dangers posed by the river.
am satisfied that Spencer Hooley did not sufficiently appreciate the dangers
posed to his paddling daughters by the Murrumbidgee
River at Tharwa
am satisfied that Mr Nguyen did not realise the danger posed by the undercurrent
either alone or in combination with the temperature
of the water at Kambah Pool
when he attempted to retrieve his fishing rod.
those attempting to help
Najeebullah’s father and his uncle entered the water in an attempt to
difficulties. Habibullah
Rafee was at serious risk of drowning.
Hooley entered the water in an attempt to save his daughter and drowned in that
Do entered the water in an attempt to help Mr Nguyen and realised the current
was too strong for him. A kayaker attempted to
not a strong swimmer.
Need for enhanced public awareness
am satisfied that, in each case, despite the signage at the river, there was a
lack of understanding of the danger the river posed,
and that, in connection
with each inquest, a matter of public safety arises. That matter of public
safety concerns the need for enhanced
education and awareness programs aimed at
the general community and at specific groups, including culturally and
linguistically diverse
posed in the ACT waterways, particularly in waterways promoted for recreation,
swimming, fishing and watercraft.
RLSSA considers that ‘water safety awareness and education programs to
local members of the community and user groups have
not been promoted by the ACT
Government’. The report itself does not provide an analysis of ACT
Government water safety awareness
and education programs, or lack thereof. I do
not, therefore, adopt that RLSSA opinion. I note that the ACT Government has
that it ‘facilitates’ an ‘Aqua Safe’ program for
all year 2 students in public schools to teach water safety
knowledge and
awareness and provides funding for swimming programs, to the RLSSA to support
varied refugee and migrant swimming programs
and to Muslim Sister to Action to
support their female swimming programs.
am satisfied that Najeebullah Rafee and his family, Spencer Hooley and Dinh Ta
Nguyen were not, or were not sufficiently, aware
of the risks posed by the
rivers at Cotter Bend, Tharwa Sandwash or Kambah Pool.
RLSSA recommends both general and ‘targeted’ ‘[p]ublic
education and safety awareness program[s] outlining
known and likely to occur
hazards’ and promoting ‘safe behaviour around water within the local
community’.
recommend that the relevant agencies of the ACT Government develop enhanced
general, and targeted, public education and safety awareness
programs which
publicise the risks of river activities and promote an understanding of the
dangers posed by rivers, particularly
for those who are not strong
Publicly accessible rescue equipment
RLSSA notes the absence of publicly accessible rescue equipment located in
proximity to the Cotter Bend swimming area and suggests
that, at a minimum a
life ring/flotation device or throw rope should be available at the location.
There were no such devices at
Tharwa Sandwash or Kambah Pool. While the evidence
does not permit me to find that the absence of a life ring/flotation device or
throw rope at any of the locations contributed to the deaths of Najeebullah
Rafee, Spencer and Meredith Hooley or Dinh Ta Nguyen,
it is possible that the
presence of such a device, if readily accessible, may have led to a different
outcome in one or all cases.
response, the ACT Government has stressed the need for persons to exercise
responsibility for their own safety and that of others
accompanying them,
including children and pointed to, what it says is, ‘the high risk of
vandalism, interference, theft and
misuse’ of such equipment, if
installed. In addition to that, it points to the fact that
Territory is limited by the financial and other resources available to it and
there are significant ancillary costs including
those associated with providing
appropriate storage, the need for additional signage providing instructions as
to the use of the
equipment, regular inspections by Territory employees,
maintaining and (in view of the risks of vandalism, interference theft and
misuse) replacing any equipment which is installed
accept that those are real and significant concerns, which I cannot dismiss and
am not, therefore, in a position to recommend that
the ACT Government install
such equipment at Kambah Pool, Cotter Bend or Tharwa Sandwash, or other places
at which rivers might be
accessed. However, I do recommend that the relevant
agencies of the ACT Government consult with the RLSSA with a view to determining
whether there is any type of rescue equipment which it would be feasible to
place at popular riverside locations.
attempting to assist could not obtain phone coverage at the riverside, at Tharwa
Sandwash or Cotter Bend. Morgan had to walk
to the carpark at Tharwa Sandwash to
call emergency services. Her call commenced at 2.18pm. Police arrived at the
scene some 18 minutes
later and ambulance officers shortly thereafter. The
emergency call with respect to Najeebullah Rafee was received at 5.03pm, was
noted as time critical. Ambulance officers, the first emergency service to
arrive, arrived at the scene at 5.15pm and were with the
patient at 5.18pm.
Given the distances to be covered, it necessarily took some time for emergency
services to arrive at each of those
locations after being notified of the
emergency. In those circumstances, noting the time-critical nature of assistance
to those at
risk of drowning, I cannot conclude that the lack of phone coverage
at the riverside contributed to the deaths of Spencer and Meredith
Najeebullah Rafee.
McGovern-Hooley family have raised the possibility of introducing smart
technology hubs to those environments. This, I understand,
is a reference to,
what is canvassed in the RLSSA’s
Aquatic Safety Assessment of the
Cotter Recreation Reserve
as, one of a range of, what it calls, ‘risk
treatment options’. The ‘smart technology’ described
CCTV, microphone capabilities and artificial intelligence’. As
I understand it, such equipment would enable communication with
services. I have no information about how intrusive such equipment might be into
the natural environment. In the context
of these proceedings and on the evidence
available to me, it is not appropriate for me to make any recommendation that
such equipment
should be installed, and I note that the allocation of resources
is a matter for government. However, consideration of the desirability
feasibility of such equipment could form part of any consultation between the
ACT Government agencies and the RLSSA recommended
at paragraph 75 of these
Recommendations
the relevant agencies of the ACT Government develop enhanced general, and
targeted, public education and safety awareness programs
which publicise the
risks of river activities and promote an understanding of the dangers posed by
rivers, particularly for those
who are not strong swimmers.
the relevant agencies of the ACT Government have discussions with the RLSSA with
a view to determining whether there is any type
of rescue equipment which it
would be feasible to place at popular riverside
Closing remarks
Najeebullah
Rafee was a young man of considerable achievement, at the dawn of his adult
life. He was clearly greatly loved by his
family and loved and admired by his
friends who, have described his kindness, zest for life and contagious laughter.
Inspired by
his memory, his friends have committed themselves to the Refugee and
Migrant Swimming Program.
Hooley was a loving and engaged husband and father, actively involved in his
daughters’ lives. He had a successful career.
His daughter, Meredith, was
only 11 years old at the time of her death. Both are greatly missed by
Spencer’s wife and Meredith’s
mother, Kirsty McGovern-Hooley, and
their daughter and sister, Morgan, as well as by their wider family. Ms
McGovern-Hooley and her
family have been strongly involved in the coronial
process and have thought deeply about, and advocated for, improvements in water
Ta Nguyen was visiting his son in Australia. It is clear that he was loved by
his family in Australia and Vietnam.
loss of these four lives has been immeasurable to their families and friends. I
extend my condolences to all of them.
I certify that the preceding seventy-nine [79] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Decision of her Honour Coroner
Legal Officer: Simone Richards
Date: 30 June 2023
As that observation relates to
October 2020, it is accurate as far as I can determine from the data provided by
the ACT Government
agencies through the ACT Government
As that observation
relates to December 2020, it is accurate as far as I can determine from the data
provided by the ACT Government
agencies through the ACT Government
RTF format (285 KB)
Signed PDF/A format