CARNEY v INSURANCE AUSTRALIA LIMITED ACN 000 016 722 T/AS NRMA (Motor Accident Injuries) [2025] ACAT 50 (14 July 2025)
ACT CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
CARNEY v INSURANCE AUSTRALIA LIMITED
ACN 000 016 722 T/AS NRMA (Motor Accident Injuries)
[2025] ACAT 50
Catchwords: MOTOR ACCIDENT INJURIES –
reviewable decision where
insurer rejected liability for a total right hip replacement procedure in
respect of injuries sustained
by the applicant in a motor accident – where
the matter is remitted to the respondent for reconsideration in accordance with
the MAI Act and the MAI Guidelines.
List of Legislation:
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2019
Subordinate
legislation cited:
Motor Accident Injuries (ACAT Costs Orders)
Regulation 2020
Cases cited:
Bothe v AAI Limited ACN 005 297 807 trading as GIO
[2022] ACAT 12
Kioa v West
1985] HCA 81
159 CLR 550
60 ALJR 113
Neish v Insurance Australia Limited CAN 000 016 722 trading as NRMA
[2022] ACAT 24
Member J Hanton
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons for Decision:
Date of Publication:
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
CIVIL & ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL ) MAI 7/2024
SANDRA CARNEY
INSURANCE AUSTRALIA LIMITED ACN 000 016 722 T/AS NRMA
Member J Hanton
Having found that the reviewable decision of 3 October 2024 was affected by
an error of law, the Tribunal orders that:
internal review decision of 3 October 2024 rejecting liability for defined
benefits is set aside and the matter remitted to the
respondent for
reconsideration in accordance with the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2019
and the relevant Motor Accident Injuries Guidelines.
respondent is to pay the applicant’s costs, as agreed or assessed, in
accordance with section 198 of the MAI Act and the
Motor Accident Injuries (ACAT
Costs Orders) Regulation 2020
the parties provide the Tribunal with proposed consent orders, the beneficiary
of those orders is to give to the Tribunal and the
other party itemised details
of the costs in accordance with clause 6 of the
Motor Accident Injuries (ACAT
Costs Orders) Regulation 2020
, within 14 days of this decision.
Tribunal notifies the parties that it proposes to decide any costs application
on the basis of documents, without the parties,
their representatives or
witnesses appearing at a hearing.
the parties do not reach an agreed position on costs:
(a) An application for costs, including:
and submissions in support,
details of the costs in accordance with clause 6 of the
Motor Accident
Injuries (ACAT Costs Orders) Regulation 2020
amount of costs claimed,
is to be provided to the Tribunal and the other party within 21 days of this
decision, along with any representations about the proposal
to decide any costs
application on the basis of documents;
(b) Any response to an application for costs, including evidence and submissions
in support, is to be provided to the Tribunal and
the other party within 28 days
of this decision, along with any representations about the proposal to decide
any costs application
on the basis of documents.
And the Tribunal notes:
If a costs application is made, the Tribunal will decide whether or not to
determine the application on the basis of documents or
whether to list the
application for a hearing.
..............................
Member J Hanton
REASONS FOR DECISION
application in this matter was made pursuant to
section 193
Accident Injuries Act 2019
) seeking external review of the
respondent’s internal review decision dated 3 October 2024 to reject
liability for a total
right hip replacement procedure in respect of injuries
sustained by the applicant in a motor accident on 2 February 2024.
Background facts
2 February 2024 the applicant was injured in a motor accident when the car she
was driving was hit from behind on the Monaro Highway.
4 March 2024 the applicant lodged a Defined Benefits Application (
respondent.
that application, the applicant stated that she suffered
as a result of the
applicant noted that she was not suffering an illness or injury affecting the
same or similar parts of her body at the time of
applicant’s general practitioner (
), Dr Rudzki, provided a report
dated 6 March 2024 in support of the
DBA. The report:
(a) provided a diagnosis of a disc prolapse at the L4/5 and L5/S1 levels of the
applicant’s spine with clinical findings of
pain in R shin (L5
dermatome). Deep seated central pain. MRI shows damage to L4/5 and
(b) noted the possibility that the accident had rendered a pre-existing
condition symptomatic
but she was asymptomatic prior to the
(c) recommended medium term treatment of 4 to 13 weeks encompassing
oral prednisone
antibiotic treatment for possible discitis
NSAIDs for ache and stiffness
soft tissue therapy
physiology one pain had settled
(d) stated the applicant was not fit for work from 6 to 14 March 2024 as she had
started limping due to right leg pain which he anticipated
would settle over the
22 March 2024 the applicant presented at Canberra Hospital with worsening back
pain. The discharge summary also noted that the
applicant was
complaining of
associated hip and knee pain
8 April 2024 the respondent accepted liability to pay defined benefits under the
18 June 2024 Dr Rudzki referred the applicant to orthopaedic surgeon
Dr Alexander Burns noting she had developed hip pain 24 hours
accident that had progressively worsened.
a request dated 25 July 2024, Dr Burns submitted a request to the respondent for
funding to perform a right hip replacement and
The request was received by
the respondent on 6 August
an independent medical examination report dated 23 August
orthopaedic surgeon Dr
Richard Powell said:
(a) The applicant’s recovery from the accident was complicated by a fall
at work in July 2024 which led to a diagnosis of right
hip osteoarthritis.
(b) The right total hip replacement was required for the management of advanced
end stage osteoarthritis, not on the basis of any
injuries sustained in the
motor vehicle accident.
The dispute between the parties
the respondent
declined the applicant’s request for surgery made on her behalf Dr Burns
on the basis after it determined that
that treatment was not reasonable and
necessary as it was not related to the injuries sustained in the motor vehicle
accident. The
respondent said that the treatment was instead required for the
management of advanced end-stage osteoarthritis of the right
19 September 2024 the applicant sought internal review of the decision dated 10
September 2024.
a supplementary report for the respondent dated 3 October
Dr Powell said:
(a) The medical evidence indicated that the applicant was suffering from severe
right hip osteoarthritis, a long standing pre-existing
(b) Contemporaneous evidence indicated that the accident was at the minor end of
the spectrum and the applicant was not aware of
any symptoms at the time of the
(c) Because the accident was minor the forces involved were minimal. The
applicant’s vehicle was a large 4 wheel drive and
she was appropriately
restrained and the transmission of forces across the right hip were likely to be
extremely minor.
(d) The accident was certainly not the cause of the degenerative changes
identified on a subsequent MRI.
(e) The contemporaneous medical evidence was that the symptoms developed several
months after the accident and while there had been
a deterioration in her
condition, this needed to be considered in the context of multiple concurrent
claims, longstanding musculoskeletal
issues, medication use, and some
significant mental health issues.
(f) There was always a point in time where an advanced asymptomatic degenerative
pathology becomes symptomatic, including in response
to an aggravating or
precipitating incident. However, if that was to be the case there would
generally be a tight temporal relationship
which was not present in the
applicant’s case.
(g) The applicant would have required total hip replacement surgery at or about
the same time irrespective of any contribution from
the motor vehicle accident.
internal review was conducted and a decision issued on 3 October 2024 (
reviewable decision
reviewable decision:
(a) set out that among the information used in the conduct of the review was Dr
Powell’s supplementary report of 3 October
(b) cited the findings of Dr Powell’s 3 October 2024 report, including
that he had concluded the accident had not led to a
deterioration or worsening
of the degenerative right hip osteoarthritis condition given the delayed onset
of symptoms and a marked
degenerative pathology evident on MRI;
(c) found the applicant’s need for the surgery requested was not related
to an injury sustained in the 2 February 2024 accident
and it was therefore not
reasonable and appropriate; and
(d) affirmed the initial decision of 10 September 2024 that the respondent would
not pay for the cost of the applicant’s right
total hip replacement.
7 November 2024 the applicant lodged an application with the Tribunal seeking
external review of the respondent’s reviewable
decision of
3 October 2024 under section 193 of the MAI Act.
Documents and submissions available to the Tribunal
Tribunal had available to it the following documents when considering the
(a) Documents containing all available information to the decision-maker when
the reviewable decision was made by the respondent
MAI documents
(b) Applicant’s submissions dated 26 March 2024.
(c) Respondent’s submissions dated 11 April 2024.
Summary of applicant’s submissions
applicant had reported hip pain during her presentation to Canberra Hospital on
22 March 2024, within two months of the accident.
surgery requested by Dr Burns is a treatment and care expense directly related
to an injury she sustained in the motor accident,
that injury being her
previously asymptomatic right hip osteoarthritis.
that Dr Burns, an appropriately qualified orthopaedic surgeon, had requested the
treatment from the respondent, he must have
had a belief that the source of her
hip pain was the accident.
was not in dispute that the surgery proposed by Dr Burns was entirely
appropriate for the management of the end stage osteoarthritis
the applicant had
been diagnosed with.
reviewable decision of 3 October 2024 made errors of fact in: (a) erroneously
relying on the reports of Dr Powell; (b) misidentifying
the date that treatment
had first been sought for hip symptoms; and (c) failing to properly consider the
medical opinions of the
applicant’s treating medical practitioners.
factual errors lead to legal error through the misapplication of sections 120
and 126 of the MAI Act.
further legal error was a failure to provide procedural fairness in that the
applicant was not given the opportunity to comment
on Dr Powell’s
supplementary report dated 3 October 2024 before the internal review decision
was made, also on 3 October 2024.
applicant sought orders that the respondent’s decision of 3 October 2024
be set aside and that the respondent fund her right
hip total replacement
Summary of respondent’s submissions
respondent confirmed that it relied on the finding of the internal review
decision that the total hip replacement surgery was
not related to personal
injury sustained in the motor accident on 2 February 2024.
Powell had not concluded in his report of 23 August 2024 that the accident had
played a causative role in the applicant’s
advanced end stage
osteoarthritis and the need for a right total hip replacement was not required
on the basis of any injury sustained
in the motor vehicle accident.
internal review decision set out the available evidence and the reasons for the
decision and was conducted with reference to the
MAI Act, the Guidelines, and
the Regulations. No further information had been received since the internal
review was conducted which
would alter the respondent’s prior
determination.
the internal reviewer had given weight to Dr Powell’s supplementary report
dated 3 October 2024, by then the issues were
well traversed and there was
nothing in it that would cause surprise. The reason the supplementary report had
not been provided to
the applicant for comment was because the respondent had
strict statutory timeframes and it was required to make the internal review
decision the same day Dr Powell’s report was received. The respondent
would have been criticised had it not obtained the further
report or made a
decision on 3 October 2025.
respondent sought an order that the internal review decision dated
3 October 2024 be affirmed.
Relevant law
the MAI Act, a person injured in a motor accident is entitled to treatment and
care benefits for treatment and care
Section 113 of the MAI Act provides “treatment and care
(a) means expenses incurred by the injured person in providing for the
person’s treatment and care; but
(b) does not include expenses incurred for treatment and care—
was not reasonable and necessary; or
Note Section 120 deals
with deciding whether treatment and care is reasonable and necessary.
did not relate to a personal injury sustained in the motor
accident...
110(1)(a) of the MAI Act provides that “treatment and care” includes
medical treatment.
188(2) of the MAI Act provides that the conduct of an internal review
with the MAI Guidelines
Accident Injuries (Internal Review) Guidelines 2022
(IR Guidelines)
(at 4.4.1) state that an internal review may include a document review, informal
discussions with an applicant, a
teleconference, a video conference or a
face-to-face meeting.
197 of the MAI Act provides:
In deciding an application for
external review of an ACAT reviewable decision, the ACAT must, by order—
(a) affirm the decision; or
(b) amend the decision; or
(c) set aside the decision and—
(i) make a substitute decision; or
(ii) remit the matter for reconsideration by the insurer that made
decision (the decision-maker) in accordance with any direction of
In deciding the application for external review, the ACAT must only
consider the information that was available to the decision-maker
decision was made.
conducting this review, section 193(1) of the MAI Act provides that the role of
the Tribunal is to determine whether the reviewable
decision is affected by any
errors of law or fact.
reviewable decision can only be set aside or amended if it
was made by
engaging in an error of law or by relying on an error of
The review conducted
by the Tribunal is not a merits review.
Tribunal has previously found that in the context of an internal review under
the MAI Act:
procedural fairness requires that an applicant is
provided with an opportunity to respond to any information relied upon by the
when reviewing the
with reference to
, the Tribunal
Procedural fairness and its requirement of the fair
hearing rule means that if a document is to be relied upon to make a decision
to the person first so that they may comment on the
document before the decision
Was there an error of law?
internal review decision of 3 October 2024 noted that among the information
considered in making the decision was Dr Powell’s
supplementary report
also dated 3 October 2024.
internal review decision cited extracts from Dr Powell’s 3 October 2024
supplementary report about the deterioration or
worsening of the
applicant’s degenerative right hip osteoarthritis.
is no evidence that the respondent provided the applicant with any opportunity
to comment on Dr Powell’s supplementary
report as considered by the
decision-maker during the review, though it contains information which was
relevant to the issue under
is possible that had the applicant been given an opportunity to comment on
Dr Powell’s supplementary report and to provide
comment on the
conclusions the reviewer had drawn from it before the review was finalised, she
would have been able to provide information
herself or from her medical
practitioners which was relevant to the review. For instance, the applicant
could have corrected Dr Powell’s
understanding of when she had first
sought treatment for right hip symptoms.
information provided by the applicant may not have been determinative of whether
the total hip replacement recommended by Dr Burns
was the result of the injury
she sustained in the motor accident on 2 February 2024, but it would have been
information that the
reviewer would have had to consider in reaching the
reviewable decision and it is possible it may have changed the outcome of the
October 2024 decision.
Tribunal acknowledges the respondent’s submission that it had a
legislative obligation to make the internal review decision
the same day it
received Dr Powell’s supplementary report. However, in relying on
that report (that the applicant was unaware
of) without giving her an
opportunity to comment on it or be heard the applicant was denied procedural
fairness during the internal
review process. This breach of the hearing rule
amounts to an error of law.
means the reviewable decision must be set aside.
Tribunal does not have any medical or other evidence before it that addresses Dr
Powell’s supplementary report of 3 October
2024 and therefore cannot make
a substituted decision as to whether the right hip total replacement surgery was
reasonable and necessary
as a result of the motor vehicle accident on
2 February 2024.
being the case, the matter is remitted to the respondent for reconsideration in
accordance with the MAI Act and the MAI Guidelines.
198 of the MAI Act allows the Tribunal to make a costs order with regard to
external review proceedings under that Act. The
basis by which costs may be
recovered are set out in the
Motor Accident Injuries (ACAT Costs Orders)
Regulation 2020
Tribunal has made directions for the parties to confer about costs and provide
the Tribunal with an agreed position, and to make
and respond to any application
for costs if they cannot agree.
Tribunal proposes to decide any costs application on the basis of
documents, without the parties, their representatives or witnesses
appearing at a hearing. The Tribunal has made directions allowing the
parties to make representations about that proposal.
Having found that the reviewable decision of 3
October 2024 was affected by an error of law, the Tribunal orders that:
internal review decision of 3 October 2024 rejecting liability for defined
benefits is set aside and the matter remitted to the
respondent for
reconsideration in accordance with the
Motor Accident Injuries Act 2019
and the relevant Motor Accident Injuries Guidelines.
respondent is to pay the applicant’s costs, as agreed or assessed, in
accordance with section 198 of the MAI Act and the
Motor Accident Injuries (ACAT
Costs Orders) Regulation 2020
the parties provide the Tribunal with proposed consent orders, the beneficiary
of those orders is to give to the Tribunal and the
other party itemised details
of the costs in accordance with clause 6 of the
Motor Accident Injuries (ACAT
Costs Orders) Regulation 2020
, within 14 days of this decision.
Tribunal notifies the parties that it proposes to decide any costs application
on the basis of documents, without the parties,
their representatives or
witnesses appearing at a hearing.
the parties do not reach an agreed position on costs:
(a) An application for costs, including:
and submissions in support,
details of the costs in accordance with clause 6 of the
Motor Accident
Injuries (ACAT Costs Orders) Regulation 2020
amount of costs claimed,
is to be provided to the Tribunal and the other party within 21 days of this
decision, along with any representations about the proposal
to decide any costs
application on the basis of documents;
(b) Any response to an application for costs, including evidence and submissions
in support, is to be provided to the Tribunal and
the other party within 28 days
of this decision, along with any representations about the proposal to decide
any costs application
on the basis of documents.
And the Tribunal notes:
If a costs application is made, the Tribunal will decide whether or not to
determine the application on the basis of documents or
whether to list the
application for a hearing.
......................................
Member J Hanton
Date of hearing:
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Mr S Wolfhagen, Maliganis Edwards Johnson
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr B Wilson
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Mr A Crowe, Hall & Wilcox
MAI documents, page 1
MAI documents, page 3
MAI documents, page 3
MAI documents, page 6
MAI documents, page 7
MAI documents, page 7
MAI documents, page 8
MAI documents, page 17
Paragraph 2.5 of the
applicant’s submissions; paragraph 3 of respondent’s submissions
Paragraph 2.5 of the
applicant’s submissions; paragraph 3 of respondent’s submissions
MAI documents, page 89
The respondent also refused
remedial massage treatment in a separate decision also dated 10 September
2024, MAI documents page 33.
MAI documents, page 27
MAI documents, page 99
MAI documents, page 48
MAI Act section 112(1) and
Neish v Insurance
Australia Limited CAN 000 016 722 trading as NRMA
[2022] ACAT 24
Bothe v AAI Limited ACN
005 297 807 trading as GIO
[2022] ACAT 12
[1985] HCA 81
159 CLR 550
60 ALJR 113
RTF format (218 KB)
Signed PDF/A format