BM and Justice and Community Safety Directorate [2021] ACTOFOI 14 (23 November 2021)
‘BM’ and Justice and Community Safety Directorate
[2021] ACTOFOI 14
(23 November 2021)
Decision and reasons for decision of Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
Symone Andersen
Application number:
AFOI-RR/21/10027
Respondent:
Justice and Community Safety Directorate
Catchwords:
Freedom of Information Act 2016
deciding access – whether disclosure of information is contrary to the
public interest – prejudice an agency’s
ability to obtain
confidential information – prejudice the management function of an agency
or the conduct of industrial relations
by an agency – inform the community
of the government’s operations, including the policies, guidelines and
codes of conduct
followed by the government in its dealings with members of the
community – allow or assist inquiry into possible deficiencies
conduct or administration of an agency or public official – advance the
fair treatment of individuals and other entities
in accordance with the law in
their dealings with the government – personal information of the applicant
– an individual’s
right to privacy under the
Human Rights Act
1. I am a delegate of the ACT Ombudsman for the purposes of s 82 of the
Freedom of Information Act 2016
2. I have decided, under s 82(2)(a) of the FOI Act, to
decision of the
Justice and Community Services Directorate (
dated 10 September 2021.
Background of Ombudsman review
3. On 14 August 2021, the applicant applied to JACS for access to
employment-related information.
4. On 10 September 2021, JACS’ Information Officer decided to give full
access to 22 documents, grant partial access to 4 documents
and refuse access to
5 documents.
5. On 17 September 2021, the applicant applied for Ombudsman review under s
73 of the FOI Act.
6. On 21 October 2021, I provided the parties with my draft consideration. My
draft consideration set out the reasons for my preliminary
view, which was that
JACS’ decision should be confirmed. It also invited the parties to make
additional submissions on the
points it addressed.
7. On 21 October 2021, the applicant wrote to me to provide me with
additional submissions and on 29 October 2021, JACS provided additional
submissions noting that it agreed with the decision to confirm its decision but
had comments with specific relevance to the reasons.
Information at issue
8. The applicant sought review of JACS’ decision to refuse access to
information in documents 20, 26, 27 and 30 only.
9. The issue in this review was whether the decision to refuse access to that
information was the correct and preferable decision,
or whether the applicant
should have been given access to the information were it not, in fact, contrary
to the public interest information.
10. In making my decision, I had regard to:
applicant’s original access application and application for Ombudsman
review, including submissions provided in response
to my draft consideration,
submissions,
the FOI Act, in
particular ss 7, 9, 17, 35, 72 and Schedule 2, ss 2.1 and 2.2,
Rights Act 2004
Human Rights Act
an unedited copy
of the information at issue.
Relevant law
11. Every person enjoys an enforceable right of access to government
information.
However, the FOI Act
creates an exception to this right by allowing for refusal of access to
information that is ‘contrary
to the public interest
information’.
12. Contrary to the public interest information is defined in s 16 of the FOI
information—
(a) that is taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
schedule 1; or
(b) the disclosure of which would be contrary to the public interest under
the test set out in section 17
13. Section 17 then sets out the test that must be applied to determine
whether disclosure of information would be contrary to the
public interest.
14. The party seeking to prevent disclosure of information bears the onus of
establishing that information is contrary to the public
information.
15. Schedule 2 of the FOI Act lists public interest factors favouring
disclosure and non-disclosure respectively, which a decision-maker
must weigh to
determine the public interest according to the balancing test in s 17.
The contentions of the parties
16. JACS’ decision notice said:
I have refused access to some material as the information was provided to
management staff within JACS with the expectation of confidentiality
parties in connection with the management of workplace issues. Release of the
information could be expected to deter individuals
from providing similar
information in the future. Furthermore, the disclosure of some of the
information would be expected to prejudice
the management functions of JACS, as
management of these issues is ongoing.
17. On the other hand, the applicant’s review application contends that
the information should be disclosed to enable them to
have visibility over the
nature of matters raised and the way the matters have been and are being
addressed by JACS.
18. The applicant provided more detail in submissions responding to my draft
consideration. These were summarised by the applicant
in the following
directorate’s failure to meet its duty of care by providing a culturally,
physically, and psychologically safe workplace
for me; and
directorate’s lack of procedural fairness and mismanagement of complaints
processes which has resulted in unnecessary mental
and physical
which I will address in the context of weighing public interest factors
favouring disclosure below.
Considerations
19. I carefully considered unredacted copies of the documents containing the
information at issue in this review.
Information taken to be contrary to the public interest to disclose under
20. Neither party to this Ombudsman review suggested the information sought
contains information that is taken to be contrary to the
public interest to
disclose under Schedule 1 of the FOI Act. Therefore, for the information at
issue to be contrary to the public
interest information disclosure, it must, on
balance, be contrary to the public interest under the test set out in s 17 of
Public interest test
21. To determine whether access should have been refused to the information
at issue, the FOI Act prescribes the following five steps:
identify any
factors favouring disclosure that applies in relation to the information
(a relevant factor favouring disclosure), including
any factor mentioned in
Schedule 2, section 2.1
identify any
factors favouring non-disclosure that applies in relation to the information
(a relevant factor favouring non-disclosure),
including any factor
mentioned in Schedule 2, s 2.2
balance any
relevant factors favouring disclosure against any relevant factors favouring
non-disclosure
decide whether,
on balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public
interest, and
balance, disclosure of the information would be contrary to the public interest,
allow access to the information.
Irrelevant factors
22. I do not consider that any irrelevant factors listed in s 17(2) have
arisen in the submissions of either party.
Factors favouring disclosure
23. The JACS’ Information Officer decided that two public interest
factors favouring disclosure were relevant. I identified
two other factors which
I consider to be relevant as well.
Inform the community of the government’s operations, including the
policies, guidelines and codes of conduct followed by the
government in its
dealings with members of the community
24. A reasonable expectation that disclosure of information could inform the
community of the government’s operations, including
the policies,
guidelines and codes of conduct followed by the government in its dealings with
members of the community, weighs in
favour of disclosure under the FOI
25. JACS’ Information Officer decided that this factor was relevant,
however in my draft consideration I indicated that I was
not inclined to agree
with that finding. This was because the information is about internal
human-resources related issues within
the governmental workforce rather than
‘dealings with members of the community’. I said that, in my view,
of the community’ should not be interpreted to mean
government employees in their capacities as government employees. No party
submissions on this point. Therefore I decided that it was not applicable in
this review.
Allow or assist inquiry into possible deficiencies in the conduct or
administration of an agency or public official
26. A reasonable expectation that disclosure of information could allow or
assist inquiry into possible deficiencies in the conduct
or administration of an
agency or public official favours disclosure under the FOI
27. In my draft consideration, I observed that the information at issue could
reasonably be expected to promote this public interest
factor. Indeed, I
commented that disclosing the information at issue to the applicant would likely
enable the applicant to inquire
into the way JACS’ administered the
processes in question and the conduct of other parties providing information to
observed that, in a general sense, the mere fact that information could
reasonably be expected to enable inquiry into possible deficiencies
much less weight than circumstances in which there is a clear deficiency and
disclosure will enable inquiry that reveals
this. I said that I would welcome
submissions from the parties on this point.
28. In response to my draft consideration, the applicant submitted that:
The reason I request access to the full original complaint which informed the
directorate’s decision... is that I am of the
view that the complaints
were vexatious.
29. I am still not satisfied that I should find that there has been any
specific deficiency in the management of the complaint. Receiving
a vexatious
complaint is not deficient administration. The complainant may be a public
official, but the disclosure of a complaint
made by a public official about
another which is dismissed and not acted upon does not, in this case, seem to me
to be likely to
serve the public interest.
30. In relation to Document 30, the applicant’s response to my draft
consideration essentially alleged that a JACS official
committed to registering
a risk management document on
8 July 2021 but that this did not happen until
21 July 2021. The applicant knows this because it is on the schedule of
documents which
JACS provided. I do not consider that disclosing the substance
of Document 30 could reasonably be expected to further the public
according to this line of argument because JACS has effectively confirmed that
the risk management document was entered
on 21 July 2021.
Advance the fair treatment of individuals and other entities in accordance
with the law in their dealings with the government
31. A reasonable expectation that disclosure of information could advance the
fair treatment of individuals and other entities in
accordance with the law in
their dealings with the government weighs in favour of disclosure under the FOI
32. The applicant’s submission is essentially that the information at
issue may contribute to enhanced fairness for her in her
dealings with JACS.
33. I considered this submission carefully. Ultimately, I decided not to
accept that the complaints themselves in documents 25-26
could reasonably be
expected to advance the fair treatment of individuals in accordance with the law
in their dealings with the government.
On the contrary, disclosing the
complaints could reasonably be expected to undermine the fair treatment of the
complainant(s) involved.
34. Document 20 is a final report about mediation processes in which the
applicant was involved. It was difficult for me to see how
disclosing this
report to the applicant could reasonably be expected to advance this public
interest factor. The mediation was conducted
by a private company. This private
company’s report on the mediation it ran did not seem likely to advance
the applicant’s
fair treatment according to law in their dealings with
35. Document 30 is the risk management document entered on 21 July 2021, I do
not consider that disclosing the information at issue
it contains could
reasonably be expected to promote this public interest factor. Insofar as it is
relevant to fair treatment of the
applicant it seems solely to relate to the
issue about the date on which it was filed, and the applicant has this
information already.
I am not satisfied the remainder of the document advances
the public interest further.
Personal information of the applicant
36. The FOI Act recognises a public interest in disclosing information to an
applicant where the information is personal information
37. The JACS’ Information Officer identified this factor as relevant. I
agree that much of the information at issue is personal
information of the
Pro-disclosure bias
38. The FOI Act also requires the adoption of a pro-disclosure bias when
administering the Act. The bias reflects the importance of
public access to
government information for the proper working of representative democracy. This
concept is promoted through the
objects of the FOI
Factors favouring non-disclosure
39. Three factors favouring non-disclosure are relevant in this review.
An individual’s right to privacy
40. A reasonable expectation that disclosure could prejudice an
individual’s right to privacy under the
Human Rights Act
weighs against
disclosure under the FOI Act.
Human Rights Act
provides that:
Everyone has the right—
(a) Not to have his or her privacy, family, home or correspondence interfered
with unlawfully or arbitrarily; and
(b) Not to have his or her reputation unlawfully attacked.
42. The JACS’ Information Officer decided this factor was relevant. The
reasons given in JACS’ decision letter did not
clearly explain how
disclosing the information at issue could reasonably be expected to prejudice
the right to privacy enjoyed by
any individual under the
Human Rights Act
43. In my draft consideration, I said that I was not satisfied that
disclosing the information in documents 20, 26, 27 and 30 could
reasonably be
expected to prejudice the right to privacy of any individual under the
. I observed that JACS’ decision letter had not adequately
disclosing the information at issue could reasonably be
expected to prejudice the right to privacy enjoyed under the
Human Rights
44. JACS provided submissions in response to my draft consideration which
addressed this point:
Document 20
JACS submitted that Document 20 contains information revealed privately in
the context of mediation.
Documents 26 and 27
JACS submitted that Document 26 and Document 27 contain information about
reported feelings and experiences included as part of confidential
complaints.
Document 30
JACS submitted that Document 30 contains confidential information about a
private mediation session.
45. I am persuaded by JACS’ submissions that the matters the documents
relate to are of a genuinely private nature notwithstanding
the fact that the
persons whom they are about happened to be public servants. Accordingly, I
consider I should afford this factor
considerable weight.
Prejudice an agency’s ability to obtain confidential
information
46. A reasonable expectation that disclosure of information could prejudice
an agency’s ability to obtain confidential information
weighs against
disclosure under the FOI
47. The JACS’ Information Officer decided that this factor was
applicable. My preliminary view was that it would be reasonable
to expect that
disclosing the information at issue would risk prejudice to JACS’ ability
to obtain confidential information
in a real sense. My preliminary view was that
I should afford this factor considerable weight.
48. The applicant submitted that:
Complaints I made... were shared... during a discussion... following
mediation... I have not raised an issue with this, as part of
submitting the
complaint involves a commitment to stand by the allegations made and to provide
the other party with a right to adequately
respond to the allegations.
I am of the view that I have not been treated fairly throughout the
complaints process... receiving unequal support, protections,
and access to
information...
49. The problem with the applicant’s submission on this point is that
it goes well beyond the scope of what I can consider in
an FOI review. Simply, I
accept that it is reasonable to expect that JACS’ ability to obtain
confidential information, in the
form of workplace complaints or information
provided in a confidential mediation context, would be prejudiced by the
disclosure of
the substance of those complaints. Accordingly, consistent with my
draft consideration, I decided to afford this factor considerable
Prejudice the management function of an agency
50. A reasonable expectation that disclosure of information could prejudice
the management function of an agency weighs against disclosure
under the FOI
51. The JACS’ Information Officer decided that this factor was
applicable because disclosing the information in documents 20,
26, 27 and 30
could reasonably be expected to prevent management at the agency from
controlling the handling of the information provided
and dealing with the
information in a way that is procedurally fair.
52. In my draft consideration, I accepted that this factor was strongly
applicable. For instance, even where the information is sought
by the subject of
a disclosure, it is also information about the person who made the disclosure.
53. Giving access to the information to the subject of the disclosure, who
may be able to divulge it to any third person and so on,
inherently risks
detriment to the person making the disclosure in a way that is prejudicial to
the ability of the agency to conduct
its own autonomous management function. I
decided to afford this factor considerable weight.
Balancing the factors
54. Taking into account all the relevant factors I decided that the
information at issue is contrary to the public interest to disclose.
55. The public interest may be promoted in a general sense by disclosure of
the information enabling inquiry into possible deficiencies
in the conduct or
administration of JACS, enabling a person to access personal information about
themselves and, in relation to Document
30, advancing the fair treatment of
persons in their dealings with the government. However, the weight I am inclined
to give to each
factor in this review is low given their general rather than
specific applicability.
56. Disclosing the information could, on the other hand, reasonably be
expected to produce real prejudice vis-à-vis an agency’s
obtain confidential information and perform its management function. I also
ultimately accepted that it could prejudice
an individual’s right to
Human Rights Act
. I afforded considerable weight to all the
factors favouring non-disclosure.
57. Accordingly, I was inclined to accept that the onus under s 72 has been
discharged by JACS and I decided that the information
is contrary to the public
interest to disclose.
58. For these reasons, I decided to confirm JACS’ decision under s
82(2)(a) of the FOI Act.
Symone Andersen
Acting Senior Assistant Ombudsman
Section 7 of the FOI
Section 35(1)(c) of the
Section 72 of the FOI
Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(iii)
of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s
2.1(a)(v) of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s 2.1(a)(vii) of the FOI
Schedule 2, s 2.1(b)(i) of
the FOI Act.
Section 9 of the
Schedule 2, s
2.2(a)(ii) of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(xiii) of the FOI Act.
Schedule 2, s 2.2(a)(xv) of
the FOI Act.
RTF format (697 KB)
Signed PDF/A format