Concrete Menders Pty Ltd v Ghiasvand & Ghiasvand; Ghiasvand & Ghiasvand v Flexible Constructions Pty Ltd (No 3) [2025] ACTMC 6 (21 March 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Concrete Menders Pty Ltd v Ghiasvand & Ghiasvand; Ghiasvand &
Ghiasvand v Flexible Constructions Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2025] ACTMC 6
Hearing Dates:
On the papers
Decision Date:
Special Magistrate Hassall
Catchwords:
– application by plaintiff and third party for indemnity
costs – defence case said to have been based upon a falsehood
defendants’ case more nuanced – aspects of defendants’ conduct
also taken into account on earlier occasion
– offer of compromise –
defendants’ rejection of offer said to have been unreasonable – case
run by plaintiff
and third party at trial different – application for
indemnity costs order refused.
Legislation Cited:
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), rr 1002, 1010
Cases Cited:
Ugly Tribe Co Pty Ltd v Sikola
[2001] VSC 189
Pham v Enterprise ICT Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2017] NSWSC 583
Concrete Menders Pty Ltd v Ghiasvand
[2024] ACTSC 23
Concrete Menders Pty Ltd v Ghiasvand (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 25
Calderbank v Calderbank
[1976] Fam 93
Fowdh v Fowdh
[1993] NSWCA 100
Concrete Menders Pty Ltd (Plaintiff)
Kobra Ghiasvand (First Defendant)
Ali Ghiasvand (Second Defendant)
Flexible Constructions Pty Ltd (Third Party)
Representation:
B Buckland (Plaintiff and Third Party)
J Moffett (First and Second Defendants )
File Numbers:
CS 60 of 2023
Introduction
to paragraph 5 of the orders made by me in these proceedings on 10 October 2024,
on 17 October 2024 the solicitor for the
plaintiff and third party advised that
the plaintiff would seek a special costs order. On that basis, I formally
vacated the ordinary
costs order made on 10 October 2024 and set a timetable for
the filing of submissions and evidence by the plaintiff and defendants,
basis that the plaintiff’s application would be determined on the papers.
submissions received on 31 October 2024, the ‘plaintiff and third
party’ outlined a basis on which they submitted the
court should make an
order that the defendants pay their costs (i.e., the costs of the plaintiff and
of the third party) of the whole
of the proceedings on an indemnity basis.
Briefly, the basis was that defendants’ case ‘was based upon a
which the defendants knew ‘to be false and yet persisted
in maintaining it for the entire case’.
plaintiff and third party articulated an alternative position, which was that
the defendants should pay their respective costs,
on an indemnity basis, from 14
February 2024 onwards, that being the date that an offer of settlement was
communicated to the defendants’
legal representatives which the defendants
then unreasonably failed to accept.
plaintiff’s and third party’s submissions were supported by an
affidavit of Ms Jaleh Johannessen, solicitor, affirmed
on 31 October 2024. Ms
Johannessen deposed that she has daily carriage ‘of the matter of the
plaintiff’ in these proceedings.
No reference was made to third party.
Nonetheless, it appears that from about 21 September 2023 onwards, Ms
Johannessen also had
carriage of the proceedings for the third party. The
plaintiff and third party were represented by the same solicitor and barrister
at the hearing.
defendants provided submissions dated 25 November 2024, proposing amongst other
things that the application for a special costs
order ‘by the plaintiff
and third party’ be dismissed (although at various points the submissions
also referred only
to the application brought by ‘the plaintiff’).
The defendants’ submissions were supported by an affidavit of Kunal
Agrawal, solicitor, affirmed on 25 November 2024.
short written submissions in reply dated 6 December 2024 were made on behalf of
the plaintiff and third party.
First preliminary issue: who
applied for the special costs order?
will be apparent from what I have set out above, there is a lack of clarity as
to whether the application for a special costs order
was being agitated on
behalf of the plaintiff alone, or on behalf of both the plaintiff and the third
party. Initially, the court
was notified that the application was made by
‘the plaintiff’. Scheduling orders were drafted and made on the
that the plaintiff, only, was seeking a special costs order.
Thereafter,
the legal representatives for all the parties appear to have approached the
matter, at least at times, on the basis that
the application had been made
jointly by the plaintiff and third party.
the positions of the plaintiff and third party are not the same. For example,
whilst the defendants’ alleged liability
to the plaintiffs had a clear
legal foundation and necessitated an evaluative assessment of the evidence
relied upon by those parties,
that was not the case in respect of the
defendants’ claim ‘for contribution’ from the third party.
Ultimately,
I found that that the contribution claim could never have succeeded
because it was based on a misconception as to the breadth of
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
(ACT). In these circumstances, one might
think there was a stronger starting point for an indemnity costs order in favour
of the third
Ultimately,
at the substantive hearing itself, the plaintiff and third party chose to rely
on the same evidence and submissions in
respect of their application for a
special costs order. I will adopt the same approach as the parties. The
application either succeeds
or fails in relation to both.
Second preliminary issue: is it too soon for the Court to
determine the special costs order application?
defendants’ submissions argue that it is premature for the Court to
determine the special costs order application. The premise
is that the
defendants have appealed the primary decision in this matter to the Supreme
Court, and on 5 November 2024 were successful
in obtaining a stay of the primary
orders. The stay order was refined by McWilliam J in the Supreme Court on 23
December 2024, with
Her Honour ordering that it was conditional upon the payment
into Court, by the defendants, of the sum of $40,000 by way of security
judgment obtained in favour of the plaintiff and third party in this Court.
do not know whether the defendants have paid the above sum into Court. As a
result, I do not know whether the stay ordered by McWilliam
J on 5 November 2024
has come into effect.
defendants argue, amongst other things, that a determination by me of the
special costs application may, if their appeal is successful,
end up as a
pointless exercise. They argue that application for a special costs order
should be dismissed or alternatively its determination
should await resolution
of the appeal.
I was initially of the same view, ultimately, I disagree. Deferral of
determination of the application will result in an
undesirable fragmentation of
the proceedings and may in due course require consideration of the relevant
issues when they are no
longer fresh in my nor the parties’ minds.
addition, the parties have now fully argued the question of whether any special
costs order should be made (even though the defendants
only did so
‘protectively’ and in the alternative). There is accordingly no
reason not to proceed.
First proposed basis for special costs
order – defendants’ case based on a known falsehood
primary position of the plaintiff and third party is that the defendants should
pay their costs of the whole of the proceedings
on an indemnity basis because
the defence relied upon was ‘based upon a falsehood, being that there was
no contract between
the [p]laintiff and the [d]efendants for the provision of
concreting services at their property’, a position which the defendants
‘knew ... to be false, and yet persisted in maintaining ... for the entire
authorities support the proposition that indemnity costs orders may be
appropriate if a defendant engages in a deliberate
attempt to frustrate
proceedings by fraud or deception (see e.g.
Ugly Tribe Co Pty Ltd v Sikola
[2001] VSC 189
per Harper J at [12]) and/or whose dishonesty gives rise to
litigation which should never have occurred (see e.g.
Pham v Enterprise ICT
Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2017] NSWSC 583
per Pembroke J at [9]).
is an argument the above principles should be applied here. As I noted in my
previous judgments in these proceedings, the involvement
of Mr Ali Masoumi in
the defendants’ case was particularly troubling. In my assessment, Mr
Masoumi fabricated a “quote”
supposedly sent by him on behalf of the
plaintiff to the third party, and contrived evidence of a supposed confession of
cash payment from the third party to the plaintiff: see
Menders Pty Ltd v Ghiasvand
[2024] ACTSC 23
at [172]-[184]. At least at the start of the trial,
the defendants initially sought to rely on these aspects of Mr Masoumi’s
proposed evidence.
with respect to Mr Masoumi, Ms Johannessen deposes that his witness statement
was served on her on 8 December 2023 and with
its exhibit ran to some 565 pages.
Her affidavit was to the effect that extensive time and resources were expended
considering and
responding to the foreshadowed evidence of Mr Masoumi.
is no doubt true. Ultimately, however, and notwithstanding this, in my view it
is an over-simplification to say that the defendants’
‘based on a knowingly false position’ maintained ‘for the
entire proceedings’.
it can be noted that at the same time as resisting the plaintiff’s claim,
the defendants pursued, in the alternative,
a claim for contribution from the
third party. This necessarily involved an acceptance by the defendants, at
least in the alternative,
that the plaintiff’s claim against them might
succeed. At least to this extent, the defendants simply deny the existence of
contract between themselves and the plaintiff.
as recounted in my decision on the defendants’ application for a special
costs order, there were aspects of the case
foreshadowed by them (through
service of witness statements) which were not ultimately asserted at the
hearing, were initially asserted
but then abandoned, or were inconsistent with
the case actually run by the defendants at the hearing: see
Concrete Menders
Pty Ltd v Ghiasvand (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 25
First Costs Judgment
at [13]-[20]. There was, to some extent, a gradual tactical retreat from
some of the more patently dubious aspects of the case posited
defendants’ witness statements.
putting to one side the defendants’ response to the case of the plaintiff,
the assertion which formed the basis for
the third party claim – that the
defendants had paid the third party for the work carried out by the plaintiff
not without at least some evidentiary foundation. As noted in the
Principal Judgment
, at one point the defendants made a bank transfer of
$10,000 from to the third party accompanied by the narration ‘slab
Principal Judgment
, [55]. Although this was the only
payment made by the defendants which referred expressly to concreting work, and
the basis for the
payment, conspicuously, was not explored by
at the hearing, it provides a basis for saying the defendants’ case may
have been based on a germ of truth.
I must bear in mind that I have already taken into account some of the dubious
aspects of the defendants’ case, including
the role of Mr Masoumi, as a
factor which in part justified the dismissal of the defendants’
application for an indemnity costs
order connected to the vacation of the
original hearing dates. I need to be careful not to
count”, against the defendants, this consideration.
balance, notwithstanding that I hold grave concerns about the integrity with
which the defendants approached some aspects of the
conduct of their case (a
comment directed solely towards the defendants themselves and not their legal
representatives), in my assessment
there is insufficient justification for an
award of indemnity costs of the whole of the proceedings in favour of the
defendants.
Second proposed basis for special costs
order – unreasonable rejection of offer of compromise
second limb of the plaintiff and third party’s application, relating to
costs incurred from 14 February 2024, is what they
assert was the
defendants’ unreasonable rejection of a settlement
offer made on
that date. The plaintiff and third party contend that, having regard to the
principles espoused in
Calderbank v Calderbank
[1976] Fam 93
Calderbank’
), indemnity costs should be paid by the
defendants from the date on which the offer was communicated.
background is that, by letter dated 14 February 2024, expressed to be
‘Without Prejudice Save as to Costs’, the solicitor
plaintiff and third party proposed that the proceedings be resolved by a payment
by the defendants of ‘$55,000 plus
costs as agreed or assessed’, to
be paid within 7 days of execution of a deed of settlement and release
(‘settlement
Ms Johannessen was solicitor for both the plaintiff and the third party at the
relevant time, and parts of the settlement
letter referred to ‘our
clients’, the letter requested that the sum of $55,000 be paid to
‘our client’ (singular
– presumably a reference to the
plaintiff only). The settlement letter made no reference to the
defendants’ third party
claim, nor did it propose any particular
resolution of the proceedings as they related to the third party.
the settlement letter noted, entirely appropriately, that:
proposed payment of $55,000 represented a compromise on the amount claimed in
the plaintiff’s Statement of Claim, being
$78,988.79;
Significant
and disproportionate costs would be incurred if the matter did not resolve by
settlement (Ms Johannessen noted that her
‘clients’ legal
costs’ at the time were in the vicinity of $35,000, but anticipated that
if the matter continued
those costs could rise to as much as $100,000 ‘for
our client’ – a prediction which no doubt turned out to be correct);
settlement offer was open for acceptance for a period of 28 days.
least in so far as it related to the plaintiff, on the face of it the settlement
offer was reasonable. Parties should be encouraged
to compromise and to resolve
matters, where possible, at an early stage, even more so where the quantum in
dispute is relatively
low as in the present matter.
problem for the plaintiff, however, is that at the time the settlement offer was
made, and throughout the period when it was available
for acceptance, the
plaintiff’s Statement of Claim contended that its contract with the
defendants arose from an approach by
‘the First and Second
Defendant’ [sic] which took place ‘[o]n or around September
2021’. Although witness
statements of Mr Kehrig (the sole director of the
plaintiff company) had been served which referred to communications with the
in the first half of 2021, including a meeting with the second
defendant (only) in March 2021, one of Mr Kehrig’s witness statements
referred to the whole of the concreting work having ‘commenced and
concluded in November 2021’, while a witness statement
of Mr Shahbaz (the
sole director of the third party company) asserted that he had met Mr Kehrig for
the first time ‘in any
capacity’ shortly after November 2021. These
assertions are inconsistent with the case run by the plaintiff and third party
at trial and inconsistent with the findings made by me at its conclusion (in
fact, for example, the bulk of the concreting work was
done in July 2021 and
only some rectification work was done in November 2021).
appears to have been no communication from the plaintiff foreshadowing an
intention to amend its Statement of Claim (the amendment
was not ultimately
sought until July 2024) and no clarification of which of the inconsistent
details contained in the witness statements
served on behalf of the plaintiff
and third party were correct. It can legitimately be said that aspects of the
case of the plaintiff
and third party, at this stage, were chaotic.
the plaintiff and third party were truly contending was not readily apparent
until the final batch of witness statements –
including further statements
from Mr Kehrig and Mr Shahbaz, as well as statements from other employees of the
plaintiff – was
served by on the defendants in late March 2024. By that
stage the settlement offer had expired. (It would of course have been open
sensible to renew a settlement offer at this stage, but that did not occur.)
Fowdh v Fowdh
[1993] NSWCA 100
at p 10, Mahoney JA observed:
It is one thing for a plaintiff to present her evidence, make an
offer of compromise, and to succeed at the trial on that evidence.
case, indemnity costs may be warranted. It is another thing for the plaintiff
to present a case and make an offer of
settlement, and then to succeed at the
trial upon a relevant different case. A plaintiff who has done that may not
readily receive
indemnity costs.
above observations are apposite in the present case. At the time the settlement
offer was available for acceptance, regardless
of the merit of the
plaintiff’s underlying claim, it was legitimate for the defendants (and
even more so for those advising
them) to consider that the plaintiff and third
party had not advanced a coherent set of contentions.
the circumstances, the plaintiff and third party have not shown that the
defendants’ rejection of the settlement offer was
reasonable. Accordingly,
there is insufficient justification for ordering the defendants to pay the costs
of the plaintiff and third
party on an indemnity basis from the date of the
settlement offer.
a final matter, I note that the settlement letter stated that, in addition to
principles, the offer which it contained was made
pursuant to Part 2.10 of the
Court Procedure Rules 2006
of the parties addressed the question of whether the indemnity costs order
sought by the plaintiff and third party could be made
pursuant to the provisions
of Part 2.10 of the
1010 provides that, in circumstances where an offer of compromise complying with
the rules has been made by the plaintiff but
not accepted by the defendant, and
the plaintiff ultimately obtains a ‘no less favourable’ judgment,
the plaintiff is
entitled to an order for costs assessed on a solicitor and
client basis from the day the period for acceptance of the offer ended
‘[u]nless the court otherwise orders’.
the present case, assuming the settlement offer complied with the requirements
set out in r 1002 (which I do not need to decide),
in the circumstances which I
have described above, this is a case where it is appropriate to order otherwise
than that the plaintiff
is entitled to an order for costs assessed on the basis
set out in r 1010.
Who should pay the costs of the application
for a special costs order?
defendants submitted that, in the event that I dismissed the application for a
special costs order, ‘no costs should be
allowed for the application for
indemnity costs being made’.
defendants have been successful in resisting the application for a special costs
order. On the other hand, there was a proper
basis for the application to have
been brought. In the circumstances, the appropriate order is that the parties
each bear their own
costs of the application for a special costs order.
43. The Court’s orders will be as follows:
(1) The application by the plaintiff and third party for an order requiring
the defendants to pay their costs on an indemnity basis
is dismissed.
(2) Save as indicated by order 3, the defendants are to pay the costs of the
proceedings of the plaintiff and third party as agreed
or assessed on an
ordinary basis.
(3) Each party is to pay its own costs incurred in connection with the
application referred to in order 1 above.
(4) Orders 1 to 3 above are stayed, subject to the same condition as the
order made by McWilliam J in Supreme Court proceedings SCA
55 of 2024 on 23
December 2024 and for as long as that order remains in force.
I certify that the preceding [43] numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Judgment of his Honour Special Magistrate
Associates: Vishanee Allaire & Lucy James
Date: 21/03/2025
RTF format (135 KB)
Signed PDF/A format