Inquest into the death of Merren Elizabeth Bartley [2023] ACTCD 9 (27 June 2023)
CORONER’S COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
Inquest into the death of MERREN ELIZABETH
[2023] ACTCD 9
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
Coroner Russell
Catchwords:
CORONIAL LAW
– death in care – cause and manner of death
– whether issue with quality of care, treatment or supervision –
whether matter of public safety arises.
Legislation Cited:
Coroners Act 1997
sections s3BB
Mental Health Act 2015
Counsel Assisting:
Ms Rebecca Evans
File Number
CD 332/2021
CORONER RUSSELL
Elizabeth Bartley died at the Adult Mental Health Rehabilitation Unit of the
University of Canberra Hospital in the early morning
of 5 November 2021. At the
time of her death she was subject to a Psychiatric Treatment Order made on 17
May 2021 for a period of
six months.
functions of the Coroner
inquest, including a hearing, is mandatory in relation to Ms Bartley’s
death. The death of a person subject to a Psychiatric
Treatment Order is a
death in care
Coroners Act 1997
). A Coroner must hold an
inquest into the manner and cause of death of a person who dies in care
of the Act) and, in such circumstances, a Coroner must not dispense
with a hearing
of the Act sets out, relevantly, the principal functions of a Coroner
conducting an inquest. Those are to record the identity of
the person who has
died, the date and place of her death and the manner and cause of that death.
The Coroner must also state whether
a matter of public safety is found to arise
in connection with the inquest and, if so, comment on the
relation to a death in care,
of the Act requires that findings also
be made about the quality of care, treatment and supervision of the deceased
person that,
in the opinion of the Coroner, contributed to the cause of
Bartley was 67 years old at the time of her death. She grew up on a family farm
in Narrandera, New South Wales with her parents,
Muriel and George Bartley, and
her brothers Glen and Maurice. In 1970 she married and moved to Canberra, where
she lived, with her
husband, in Torrens.
the 1990s Ms Bartley’s mental health became significantly worse and she
began experiencing paranoid delusions. In 1999, she
and her husband divorced and
she remained living in the Torrens residence.
October 2013, a deterioration in Ms Bartley’s mental health necessitated
an involuntary detention order followed by a Psychiatric
Treatment Order for a
period of six months, under the
Mental Health (Treatment and Care) Act
. From that time, in order to manage her mental health, Ms Bartley was
subject to a succession of Psychiatric Treatment Orders. The
records indicate
that she had been on clozapine, at times combined with other antipsychotic
medication, since the late 1990s, to
manage, what was diagnosed as,
schizophrenia. Despite that treatment regime she required frequent admissions to
hospital to manage
psychotic symptoms and, in the community, ongoing monitoring
of her compliance with the requirement to take clozapine in the quantity,
with the frequency, required. Side effects of clozapine were monitored through
regular blood tests.
addition to her mental health problems, Ms Bartley suffered from significant
physical health problems. Those included atrial bigeminy,
hypertension, systemic hypertension, dyslipidaemia, hepatic steatosis and
clozapine-related recurrent constipation.
Admission to
hospital 2021
March 2021, she was admitted to The Canberra Hospital in hypovolaemic shock with
intra-abdominal sepsis and ileus.
Bartley underwent surgery at The Canberra Hospital in March 2021. She was
discharged from the surgical unit to the Adult Mental
Health Unit of that
hospital and then to the Older Person’s Mental Health Unit at Calvary
Hospital. On 9 August 2021, she was
discharged from the Older Person’s
Mental Health Unit and admitted to the Adult Mental Health Rehabilitation Unit
of the University
of Canberra Hospital. At the time of her death, she was in
that unit awaiting suitable supported accommodation in the community because
was the opinion of clinicians, supported, the records suggest, by Maurice
Bartley, that she could no longer cope living on her
own. A functional
assessment of Ms Bartley, together with a home visit, had led those treating her
to conclude that she could not
safely return to her home and live on her own. On
application, the ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal (ACAT) appointed Ms
brother, Maurice, as her guardian.
autopsy was conducted by Professor Johan Duflou, forensic pathologist, on 9
November 2021. Professor Duflou noted
heart disease, with advanced coronary arthrosclerosis, a benign tumour in the
atrial wall and dilation of the heart (dilated
cardiomyopathy) – the
coronary artery disease additionally showed perimortem plaque haemorrhage,
typical of a ‘heart
attack’ immediately preceding
his opinion, Ms Bartley’s death was caused by ischaemic heart
find that the cause of death was ischaemic heart
Manner of death
the time of her death, Ms Bartley was an inpatient at the Adult Mental Health
Rehabilitation Unit of the University of Canberra
progress notes record that, about 6:30pm on Thursday, 4 November 2021, she had a
minor fall onto her knees while she was putting
her food tray on a trolley. She
was observed to use the wall and the trolley to break her fall. Small, reddened
areas were noticed
on her knees but there was no bony tenderness. She was
assisted to her feet by staff members and vital observations were
his autopsy report, Professor Duflou identified no injuries on Ms
Bartley’s body. The evidence establishes that that minor
fall had no
impact on her death.
records note that Ms Bartley went to bed as usual and was to be monitored two
hourly. Overnight observations on 4/5 November
are recorded at 9:40pm, 11:30pm
and 1:30am. At 1:30am, it was confirmed that she was asleep. The rise and fall
of her chest was observed,
as was the fact that she had changed position from
that observed at 11:30pm. Those observations were done remotely. At the next
observation,
recorded at 3:40am, it was noted that her leg was off the bed. A
member of the nursing staff entered the room and found Ms Bartley
unresponsive.
Resuscitation was started and the Medical Emergency Team were called. However,
Ms Bartley’s body was cold and
rigid. She was pronounced life extinct at
evidence establishes, and I find, that Ms Bartley died of natural
Date of death
Bartley died in the early morning of 5 November, 2021.
find that Ms Bartley died at the Adult Mental Health Rehabilitation Unit of the
University of Canberra Hospital, 20 Guraguma Street,
Bruce, in the Australian
Capital Territory.
Quality of care, treatment and supervision
Bartley died, at the age of 67, as a result of ischaemic heart disease. An
examination of her medical records provides no basis
for any finding that the
quality of care, treatment and supervision provided to Ms Bartley at The
Canberra Hospital or at the Adult
Mental Health Units at Calvary Hospital or the
University of Canberra Hospital or that provided by the mental health services
the community, contributed to that ischaemic heart disease, the cause of her
Matter of public safety
do not find that any matter of public safety arises in connection with the
make the following findings:
of death: Merren Elizabeth Bartley died at the Adult Mental Health
Rehabilitation Unit of the University of Canberra Hospital,
20 Guraguma Street,
Bruce, in the Australian Capital Territory.
of death: 5 November, 2021.
of death: ischaemic heart disease
of death: Natural causes
Concluding remarks
extend my condolences to Ms Bartley’s family.
close this inquest.
I certify that the preceding twentyfive [25] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Decision of her Honour Coroner
Counsel Assisting: Rebecca Evans
Date: 27 June 2023
RTF format (160 KB)
Signed PDF/A format