Dimov v The Owners, Units Plan 2225 (No 3) [2025] ACTSC 502 (14 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Dimov v The Owners, Units Plan 2225 (No 3)
[2025] ACTSC 502
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
McWilliam J
(1) The application in proceeding dated 6 November 2024 is dismissed.
(2) The plaintiff is to pay the defendants’ costs and the former
solicitors’ costs of the application.
(3) The former barrister is to bear his own costs of the application.
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– r 1753 of the
Court Procedures Rules 2006
– application for a personal costs
order against plaintiff’s previous solicitor – timing of application
where legal privilege claimed – whether delay or negligence by
solicitors caused adjournment of hearing – whether conduct
exercise of court’s discretion – whether indemnity costs order
against plaintiff for costs thrown away by vacation
of hearing should be set
Legislation Cited:
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Civil Procedure Act 2010
Court Procedures Act 2004
, sch 1 item 26
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) rr 1753
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) r 40.07
Legal Profession Act 2006
Uniform Civil Procedures Rules 1999
(Qld) r 690
Cases Cited:
Break Fast Investments Pty Ltd v PCH Melbourne Pty Ltd
[2007] VSCA
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR
De Sousa v Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic
[1993] FCA 146
(1993) 41 FCR 544
Dimov v The Owners – Units Plan No 2225 (No 2)
[2025] ACTSC
Gippsreal Ltd v Kenny
[2016] VSCA 319
Harley v McDonald
[2001] UKPC 18
[2001] 2 AC 678
Holman v Campbell (No 2)
[2024] QCA 259
Kelly v Jowett
[2009] NSWCA 278
76 NSWLR 405
Lemoto v Able Technical Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWCA 153
63 NSWLR 300
Medcalf v Mardell
[2002] UKHL 27
[2003] 1 AC 120
Myers v Elman
[1940] AC 282
Orchard v South Eastern Electricity Board
[1987] QB 565
Quach v Butt
[2017] ACTCA 4
Re JJT; Ex parte Victoria Legal Aid
[1998] HCA 44
195 CLR 184
Re The Black Stump Enterprises Pty Ltd and Associated Companies (No
[2006] NSWCA 60
Reliance Finance Corporation Pty Ltd v Orwin Walshe & Ward
[1964-5] NSWR 970
Ridehalgh v Horsfield
[1994] Ch 205
White Industries (Qld) Pty Ltd v Flower & Hart (a firm)
156 ALR 169
Philip Dimov (Plaintiff)
The Owners, Units Plan 2225 (First Defendant)
The Owners, Units Plan 2204 (Second Defendant)
[The plaintiff’s former solicitor] (Respondent on the
Application)
[The plaintiff’s former barrister] (Third Party)
Representation:
D Robens (Plaintiff)
J Moffett (Defendants)
A Avery-Williams (Respondent on the Application)
P M Morris SC (Third Party)
Eastwoods Legal (Plaintiff)
BDN Lawyers (Defendants)
Wotton & Kearney (Respondent on the Application)
DLA Piper (Third Party)
File Number:
SC 462 of 2022
McWILLIAM J:
Overview of the parties’ dispute
proceeding concerned a dispute about encroachments on land owned by Philip Dimov
), which he is seeking to develop. Essentially, the
encroachments were concrete footings of neighbouring properties which were said
to have crossed the boundary of the site into the plaintiff’s land. The
plaintiff brought an action in trespass, alleging
that the encroachments limited
the number of units that could be developed on the land, causing him loss. The
plaintiff sought injunctive
relief against the owners of the neighbouring
blocks, who were alleged to be responsible for the encroachments,
(a) the Owners, Units Plan 2225; and
(b) the Owners, Units Plan 2204 (collectively, the defendants).
the encroachments nor the trespass was admitted by the defendants. The matter
was heard in May 2025 by Mossop J and judgment
has now been delivered:
Dimov v The Owners – Units Plan No 2225 (No
[2025] ACTSC 446
Dimov (No 2)
The costs application for
determination
application for determination concerns the costs thrown away by the adjournment
of the substantive hearing and whether the plaintiff
is entitled to recovery of
those costs from his former solicitors. The circumstances were that hearing was
listed to commence on
15 April 2024.
an application filed on 3 April 2024 and heard on 11 April 2024, the plaintiff
sought to adjourn the hearing. The basis for the
adjournment was said to be a
failure of the plaintiff’s then solicitors to properly prepare the case.
application was granted by Balla AJ on 12 April 2024. In adjourning the
hearing, Balla AJ ordered that the plaintiff pay the
defendants’ costs
thrown away by the vacation of the hearing date forthwith and on an indemnity
basis, with a further order
requiring “the plaintiff’s legal
advisers” to “file affidavits addressing whether they should
pay the costs order made today by 10 May 2024”. That then
caused a parting of ways between the plaintiff and his solicitors
and brought
on 6 November 2024 (
personal costs application
plaintiff seeks the following orders:
(a) That the order made by Balla AJ that the plaintiff pay the defendants’
costs on an indemnity basis be vacated;
(b) That the former solicitors pay the defendants’ costs thrown away by
the vacation of the hearing date on an indemnity basis;
(c) That the former solicitors not charge the plaintiff for any costs or
disbursements associated with the vacation of the hearing
(including the fees of
counsel who appeared on that application); and
(d) That the former solicitors pay the plaintiff’s costs associated with
the application to vacate the hearing date of 15 April
2024 and the hearing on
27 November 2024.
application named an individual, but it may be that the proper respondent was
either the partnership or the corporate entity of
which the individual was a
principal lawyer. For dealing with the application, it suffices to refer to the
respondent as the plaintiff’s
former solicitors.
application relied on r 1753 of the
Court Procedures
), the terms of which are set out
below. Briefly, the rule permits the court to make legal practitioners
personally responsible for
costs incurred in a proceeding in certain
circumstances, including where the court forms the view the practitioner’s
has caused delay or was negligent.
have decided that what occurred by way of the preparation for hearing was not
conduct warranting a personal costs order against
the plaintiff’s former
solicitors. As a consequence, the order that the plaintiff pay the
defendants’ costs thrown away
on an indemnity basis will remain.
(a) Explain the nature of the complaint regarding what the plaintiff’s
former legal advisers did or failed to do by setting
out what happened leading
up to the adjournment of the hearing;
(b) Explain the applicable power and principles where a party seeks a personal
costs order against solicitors involved in the proceeding;
(c) Explain why the solicitors’ conduct here did not constitute
circumstances where a costs order should be made against them.
The conduct that is the subject of
complaint here
to the history of the proceeding, comments made in the reasons given by the
judge who determined the adjournment application,
the way the present
application unfolded before me and the outcome of the substantive judgment, it
is important to identify with
precision the conduct that is the subject of
complaint, so that there is no confusion.
application identified delay, caused by a failure to prepare the case, as the
primary ground of application, with negligence being
sought in the alternative.
Dimov (No 2)
, Mossop J determined that an encroachment of the kind in
dispute between the parties was not a trespass at common law:
Dimov (No 2)
at [93]. That legal question formed no part of the subject matter that was
said to be negligent on the present application. Further,
as at the date of the
adjournment application and the hearing of the present application, the
plaintiff was pursuing an alternative
claim in nuisance. After the adjournment
was granted and after the application was heard, the plaintiff appears to have
his claim and did not pursue a cause of action in nuisance at trial: see
Dimov (No 2)
application turns on the evidence that was or was not obtained relating to the
encroachments and on the plaintiff’s alternative
remedy seeking
genesis for the ‘failure to prepare’ complaint was really the
termination of the former barrister’s retainer
on 18 March 2024, by the
former solicitors on instructions from the plaintiff. New counsel was briefed.
He formed the view that
it was necessary for the plaintiff to obtain further
expert and lay affidavit evidence before proceeding to the final hearing. That
led to the application seeking the adjournment being filed on 3 April 2024. It
is the adjournment of the hearing that founds the
complaint of the former
solicitors causing “delay”.
to the conduct said to have caused the delay or to have been otherwise
negligent, the material disclosing the conduct came primarily
from the affidavit
that was read in support of the adjournment application, prepared by the
solicitor who had carriage of the matter.
In it the solicitor deposed to not
appreciating until about a month before the hearing that he had not done what
was required to
file evidence necessary to prove the plaintiff’s case or
meet the defendants’ case. There were two main reasons relied
upon by the
solicitor as necessitating the adjournment of the hearing for the benefit of his
(a) The plaintiff had not obtained a report from a structural engineer in
response to the report of the defendants’ expert
dealing with the
encroachments; and
(b) The former solicitors did not appreciate that certain defences or arguments
would be raised at trial and had not obtained the
evidence necessary to meet
those defences.
defences were firstly, that the encroachments were the result of an
“overpour” of concrete during construction of
the wing walls in
2000-2001. Because the defendants were not in existence at that time, they
could not be held responsible for them.
That argument or defence was not
explicit in the defence filed. The defence did not admit the encroachments. It
said nothing about
the alternative argument that if the encroachments were
proven, the defendants were not responsible. The plaintiff learned that
was part of the defendants’ case for the first time during the hearing of
the summary judgment application in March 2024.
The plaintiff formed the view
that further evidence was required to establish that the defendants had adopted
the trespass.
second defence was that the encroachments were relatively minor in nature and
would easily be removed during the course of any
works undertaken by the
plaintiff, such that damages were an adequate remedy rather than a mandatory
injunction. This required the
plaintiff to lead expert evidence as to the
likely damage suffered. The plaintiff sought to claim damages not just for the
of the encroachments but for losses suffered as a result of delay in the
development of his land. The solicitor deposed to there
being no affidavit from
the plaintiff on the question of damages, and that further expert evidence was
also required on that point.
professed deficiencies define the scope of the complaint now articulated by the
plaintiff on the personal costs application.
However, there are three matters
that require specific clarification relevant to the content of the complaint and
the respondent
to the complaint.
in oral submissions, the plaintiff also submitted, in the alternative, that if
the conduct that was relied upon to vacate the
hearing in 2024 did not
constitute conduct that caused delay or was otherwise negligent under r 1753 it
was an incorrect decision
to seek to vacate the hearing and that also should be
sheeted home to the former solicitors. This alternative position was not
in the application, nor in the plaintiff’s written submissions.
Procedural fairness concerns were discussed during the hearing,
both in respect
of the former solicitors having fair notice of the argument and with regard to
any criticism sought to be made of
the application to vacate in circumstances
where the counsel appearing on the application was not involved in the present
costs dispute.
hearing from the parties, I arrived at the position that I could consider the
plaintiff’s alternative argument within
certain parameters. The first was
the express basis that findings would not be made in respect of a counsel who
did not appear on
the present application. The second was based on an
indication from the former solicitors that they would not suffer practical
if the position were considered on the existing evidence before court
and the outcome did not adversely affect them. However, if,
having considered
the existing material, the court formed the view that there may be a concern
decision to seek an adjournment and whether
that should sound in a personal costs order, then they may seek an opportunity
further evidence (for example, an affidavit from the counsel who
appeared on the adjournment application). Accordingly, this third
aspect of the
argument was within the court’s consideration, although my findings below
mean that affording further procedural
fairness to any party is unnecessary.
second matter is that the application was only brought against the
plaintiff’s former solicitor. No orders were sought
against the
plaintiff’s former barrister, and his conduct was not the subject of the
application. He appeared on the application
as a third party because he was one
of the plaintiff’s “legal advisers” and was therefore included
in the orders
made by Balla AJ when the substantive hearing was initially
vacated. This consequence provides a ready example of why particular
should be exercised before making any orders requiring practitioners to address
whether they should personally be responsible
for costs incurred mid-trial,
particularly in the absence of one of the practitioners subject to that order
(the former barrister
was not the counsel who appeared at the adjournment
application). It is regrettable that costs were incurred by the former
involved in those circumstances. I will return to this aspect below
when discussing the timing of these types of applications for
personal costs
third matter is that there is no complaint about an application for summary
judgment brought by the plaintiff, which was filed
on 31 January 2024. It was
heard on 15 March 2024 and ultimately abandoned during that hearing when it
became clear that the matter
was not one that was appropriate for determination
on a summary basis, and the substantive hearing was listed to occur the
month. As discussed next, Balla AJ made comments that were critical
of the plaintiff’s former solicitors in respect of that
application for
summary judgment and what the former solicitors should have appreciated about
the case prior to that time. However,
the plaintiff did not raise issues on
this application about the costs thrown away by the application for summary
judgment. The
question of those costs was expressly reserved for consideration
as part of the substantive litigation. Accordingly, notwithstanding
comments, the summary judgment application does not form part of the conduct
said to have caused delay or to have been negligent.
Reference to that aspect
of the conduct of the case is only to provide context for the reasons given at
the time of the adjournment.
The adjournment of the
hearing and the court’s criticisms of the former solicitors’
hearing was adjourned by Balla AJ on 12 April 2024. Her Honour took the view
(urged upon her by the plaintiff’s counsel
and former solicitors) that the
plaintiff had failed to obtain evidence of matters which were essential for him
to succeed. In adjourning
the hearing, the court noted the following
deficiencies:
(a) The plaintiff should not have proceeded on the basis that the encroachments
were admitted, as the encroachments were not admitted
in the defences and the
expert evidence did not rise as high as an admission.
(b) The plaintiff should have appreciated that it was his onus to establish,
through lay evidence, that the defendants had adopted
rather than created a
trespass or nuisance.
(c) The solicitors had not obtained any evidence in relation to the
(alternative) claim that damages were appropriate, nor to deal
defendants’ expert evidence that the encroachments were minor and easily
Honour took the view that there had been an “egregious history of
default”. The reasons for that view included first,
plaintiff’s former solicitors had misunderstood the defendants’ case
until March 2024. Second, the plaintiff’s
former solicitors had
corresponded with the defendants’ lawyers, seeking consent to lay evidence
being given by affidavit but
never followed up that request. Third, the
plaintiff’s former solicitors prepared the application for summary
judgment without
filing an affidavit in support, which was contrary to the
Rules. Fourth, no explanation was given for the failure to obtain evidence
relation to the claim for damages, other than the former solicitors’
belief that the plaintiff would succeed on the primary
claim for a summary
Honour determined it was in the interests of justice for the hearing to be
adjourned and made the indemnity costs order in relation
to the costs thrown
away as a result, noting that there was no opposition to such a costs order
being made (the only dispute in that
regard was whether those costs should be
paid forthwith).
The court’s power and applicable
is no general power at common law to order costs (whether against parties or
non-parties):
Re JJT; Ex parte Victoria Legal
[1998] HCA 44
195 CLR 184
Quach v Butt
[2017] ACTCA 4
the Territory, the court’s power to make an order entitling the plaintiff
to recover costs against his solicitors, or to
make an order for costs against a
non-party to the proceeding, arises from the
Court Procedures Act 2004
(ACT), where sch 1,
item 26 permits rules to be made about costs as follows (emphasis added):
including, for example, the following:
(a) security for costs;
(b) entitlement to recover costs;
(c) costs of parties in proceedings;
(d) costs against non-parties to proceedings;
(e) assessment of costs
emphasised words provide the power here.
has been made in cases in other jurisdictions to the ancient supervisory
Orchard v South Eastern Electricity Board
[1987] QB 565
) (at 569), cited in
Kelly v Jowett
[2009] NSWCA 278
76 NSWLR 405
. However, rather than descend into the existence of any similar power
in a superior court of record created by statute, and the
metes and bounds of
any such power, it suffices to proceed on the basis that the statutory power is
sufficient to enliven the power
in the Territory.
1753 of the Rules then governs the circumstances in which costs may be recovered
against a legal practitioner (emphasis added):
Costs—legal
practitioner’s delay etc
(1) This rule applies
to a legal practitioner acting for a party to a proceeding if—
(a) the hearing of the proceeding, or an application in the proceeding, did not
proceed, and a party to the proceeding incurred costs,
because the
practitioner—
(i) failed to attend the hearing either personally or by someone on his or her
(ii) failed to file a document; or
(iii) failed to deliver a document or thing necessary for use in the hearing;
(iv) failed to do anything else required to be done under these rules or in
accordance with the practice of the court; or
(b) a party to the proceeding incurred costs because of the delay, misconduct
or negligence of the practitioner.
(2) The court may order the legal practitioner—
(a) to repay to a party all or part of any costs ordered to be paid by the party
to another party because of the practitioner’s
conduct; or
(b) to pay the costs incurred by any party because of the practitioner’s
(Applications in proceedings) applies to an application
for an order under this rule.
(3) The court may, on its own initiative, order the legal practitioner not to
charge the practitioner’s client costs in relation
to all or any part of
the proceeding if justice requires it.
plaintiff relied on the emphasised words in seeking costs against his former
solicitors. Before considering their application
here, it is important to note
the words of r 1753(2), which provide that the court’s power is
discretionary. Even if a failure
of the kind contemplated by the rule or
“delay, misconduct or negligence” is established against the
practitioner, the
court retains discretion whether to make a personal costs
rule was based on what is now r 690 of the
Uniform Civil Procedures Rules 1999
(previously r 708), which states (emphasis added):
delay or neglect
The court may order a lawyer to repay
to the lawyer’s client all or part of any costs ordered to be paid by the
client to another
party if the party incurred the costs
because of the
lawyer’s delay, misconduct or negligence
constitutes misconduct or negligence is not defined in the Rules.
Principles guiding the
exercise of the discretion
parties assisted the court by providing fulsome submissions, referring to a
number of authorities in other jurisdictions discussing
principles that guide
the exercise of the discretion where similar provision has been made for the
court to make a personal costs
order against a solicitor. Among them were
Lemoto v Able Technical Pty Ltd
[2005] NSWCA
63 NSWLR 300
De Sousa v Minister for
Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
[1993] FCA 146
(1993) 41 FCR 544
) at 547-548; and
Myers v Elman
[1940] AC 282
should be exercised when reviewing the authorities across different
is not precisely
the same. For example, in NSW, what is required is “serious neglect,
serious incompetence or serious misconduct”:
Civil Procedure Act 2005
s 99(1)(a).
In Victoria, the court is permitted to make a variety of orders against legal
practitioners for breaching an “overarching
obligation”, which
includes minimising delay:
Civil Procedure Act
that caution in mind, there are nevertheless common principles that guide when
the court will intervene to make a legal practitioner
responsible for an adverse
costs order, or to prevent a legal practitioner from recovering their costs of
part or all of a proceeding:
(a) The jurisdiction should be exercised sparingly
: The power to
order a legal practitioner to pay the costs of legal proceedings in respect of
which he or she provided legal services
must be exercised “with care and
discretion and only in clear cases”:
at [92(a)];
at 547-548.
(b) Lack of success by itself is not a sufficient basis
representative is not to be held to have acted improperly, unreasonably or
negligently simply because he or she acts for
a party who pursues a claim or a
defence which is plainly doomed to fail:
at [92(b)];
White Industries (Qld) Pty Ltd v Flower &
Hart (a firm)
[1998] FCA 805
156 ALR 169
(c) The assessment includes making allowance for the environment in which
litigation occurs
: It is only appropriate to make a personal costs order
such as a wasted costs order when, making full allowance for the exigencies
acting in court proceedings, a legal practitioner’s conduct of court
proceedings is quite plainly unjustifiable:
at [92(d)], citing
Ridehalgh v Horsfield
[1994] Ch 205
) at 236-237.
are also principles commonly applied in the procedure of hearing an application
for a personal costs order or a wasted costs
(a) The procedure should be “as simple and summary as fairness
permits”, lest the costs dispute itself become a costly
form of satellite
litigation:
at [92(g)], citing
at 238-289 (among
other authorities). See also
Gippsreal Ltd v
[2016] VSCA 319
) at [102].
(b) “A legal practitioner against whom a claim for a costs order is made
must have full and sufficient notice of the complaint
and full and sufficient
opportunity of answering it”:
at [92(e)] and the cases
there-cited.
reference to a sufficient opportunity includes making allowance for issues of
legal privilege that may arise. When the court
is considering the conduct of a
legal practitioner during litigation, there may be advice given or decisions
made which would ordinarily
be privileged from scrutiny by the court. Due
allowance should thus be made for the difficulties a legal practitioner may have
responding to the application due to the client’s maintenance of legal
privilege. As stated by Young CJ in Eq (Santow and
Bryson JJA agreeing) in
Re The Black Stump Enterprises Pty Ltd and
Associated Companies (No 2)
[2006] NSWCA 60
One of the difficulties for a court ... is in making an assessment as to whether
it is the solicitor or the client that is the real
cause of the problem. This is
exacerbated in that legal professional privilege may prevent the lawyer from
informing the Court of
what truly happened. Without the client's release, the
lawyer may well be unable to give the Court full information; see eg
[2004] FCA 18
(2004) 133 FCR 582.
Accordingly,
where a legal practitioner’s ability to rebut the complaint is hampered by
the duty of confidentiality to the client,
the practitioner should be given the
benefit of the doubt:
at [92(f)], citing
(at 229). In circumstances where legal professional
privilege precludes a practitioner by from advancing a full answer to the
made, the court should not make an order against the practitioner
without satisfying itself that it is in all the circumstances fair
[2002] UKHL 27
[2003] 1 AC 120
(at [23] per Lord Bingham), cited in
at [92(f)].
The operation of rule 1753
of the Rules – the meaning of “delay, misconduct or
negligence”
is uncertain precisely what is meant by “delay, misconduct or
negligence”. Clearly, the conduct must be more than
minor oversight,
having regard to the principles set out above. That is supported by cases such
Holman v Campbell (No 2)
[2024] QCA 259
when discussing the application of the similarly worded r 690, in stating at
[20] “legal error does not of itself bespeak
misconduct or support the
serious finding of negligence”.
contrast, in the federal jurisdiction, misconduct is defined as part of the
relevant rule (40.07) of the
Federal Court Rules
(Cth), which is in the following terms:
40.07 Liability
of lawyer to their client for misconduct
(1) A party who has reasonable cause to believe that additional costs have
been incurred because of the party’s lawyer’s
misconduct, may apply
to the Court for an order:
(a) that the whole or part of the costs as between the lawyer and the party be
disallowed; or
(b) if the lawyer is a barrister—that the whole or part of the costs as
between the barrister and the barrister’s instructing
disallowed; or
(c) that the lawyer pay to the party costs that the party has been ordered to
pay to another party; or
(d) that the lawyer indemnify any other party against any costs payable by that
(2) For this rule, a lawyer has engaged in misconduct if:
(a) a proceeding or an application is delayed, adjourned or abandoned because of
the lawyer’s failure:
(i) to attend or make arrangements for a proper representative to attend a
hearing; or
(ii) to file a relevant document; or
(iii) to provide the Court or another party with a relevant document; or
(iv) to be prepared for a hearing; or
(v) to comply with these rules or an order of the Court; or
(b) the lawyer:
(i) incurs costs improperly or without reasonable cause; or
(ii) incurs costs that are unnecessary or wasteful; or
(iii) is guilty of undue delay.
it is not appropriate to import into r 1753 of the Rules concepts of misconduct
from the rules of court operating in other jurisdictions,
I have included the
definition to help explain why the courts is not concerned here with any form or
delay or negligence. Words such
as “delay”, “misconduct”
and “negligence” do not sit in a vacuum. They sit in a particular
informed by the existing common law:
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown
Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384
is a fine line between supervising compliance with professional duties and
seeking costs otherwise not recoverable. The court
must be astute to safeguard
the possible abuse of process arising from costs applications seeking recovery
of costs from legal advisers.
(at 238– 239) the Court
of Appeal in England was concerned with an application to recover costs against
the solicitors where
the plaintiff was a legally aided or impoverished litigant.
same vigilance is required to ensure that an application for wasted costs
against a solicitor is not used as an alternate costs
recovery mechanism in
circumstances which would otherwise prevent recovery by the advocate’s
immunity from suit. The authorities
make it clear that the exercise of the
disposal by the
[2001] UKPC 18
[2001] 2 AC 678
(at [24]). Where circumstances involve serious
breaches of the practitioner’s duty to the client which involve
allegations
of professional misconduct or negligence, it is not appropriate for
the court to intervene and there are other avenues for redress.
those reasons, I do not understand r 1753 to be intended to necessarily import
definitions of misconduct under the
Profession Act 2006
or negligence under the
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
that would be contrary to the principled admonition that the consideration of
whether this type of costs order should be made
is as simple as fairness
Nevertheless,
there has to be something which amounts to a clear failure of a
solicitor’s professional duty. Words such as
substantial, significant,
weighty and so forth are all adjectives that may capture the type of conduct,
but such words are also apt
to skew the court’s assessment because of
their potential to create a legal test. The parties here engaged in submissions
obviously would entitle the exercise of the discretion,
r 1753 is not directed
solely to that level of conduct. It suffices that for such an order (that is
made sparingly) to be warranted,
there must be something improper about the
conduct, in the nature of a clear substantial failure for reasons unconnected
ultimate success of the litigation.
although delay enlivens the power, it is not any delay that warrants the
exercise of the discretion. The sanction for
delay should ordinarily be
understood as requiring an assessment that there has been a dereliction of the
solicitor’s professional
duties before a solicitor’s delay will
sound in a personal costs order. There is a point where delay becomes undue and
is more likely to be the sphere of conduct warranting close scrutiny by the
Timing of applications
under r 1753: generally after the substantive hearing
further aspect of r 1753 is that there is no temporal requirement for the
consideration of the conduct. In my view, in circumstances
such as those that
arose here, it was preferable to reserve the question of any personal costs
orders until after the conclusion
of any substantive proceeding. The delayed
delivery of this judgment reflects that view.
are many disadvantages in seeking to address potentially unreasonable solicitor
conduct in the middle of contested litigation.
first has already been discussed, in that the solicitor will be in a position
where it may be necessary to divulge legal advice
in order to properly answer
the criticisms levelled at the solicitor. Any questions of privilege and
whether a claim for privilege
is maintained are plainly going to be different
while the substantive dispute itself is yet to be resolved.
second is that embarking upon a consideration of whether a legal representative
should be the subject of a personal costs order
prior to the conclusion of the
litigation when costs issues are ordinarily determined will immediately put the
solicitor in a conflict
of interest with their client and likely have the effect
of causing the solicitor to cease acting for the client, thereby occasioning
additional costs and further delay of the substantive hearing by a change in
legal representation. Whether the client may decide
to change legal
representation anyway is not to the point.
and as is apparent from what occurred in the present litigation, it diverts the
attention of the parties from pursuing the
just resolution of the issues
genuinely in dispute and is therefore a procedural step that runs entirely
contrary to
Court Procedures Act 2004
focus of the parties should generally be directed to resolving the substantive
issues in dispute first in as efficient a manner
as possible, which includes
taking the most efficient path to a substantive hearing and not engaging in
satellite litigation against
solicitors. There are always exceptions, and some
instances of contempt are an example, but there was no suggestion of that type
of conduct here. All that occurred in this proceeding was an increase of legal
costs for the parties involved and now also for the
plaintiff’s former
legal representatives, without apparently bringing the parties any closer to the
resolution of their dispute.
considerations are in part reflected in the observations made in
, where the Victorian Court of Appeal stated at [101] (emphasis
...a number of considerations indicate that such an application should be made
no later than the time the parties seek final orders
for costs in a proceeding,
which is usually at the end of a trial when the Court publishes its reasons for
judgment. An important
consideration is the nature of the finding that a judge
must make in order to engage r 63.23, namely, that a legal practitioner has
caused costs to be incurred improperly or without reasonable cause or to be
wasted by a failure to act with reasonable competence
and expedition.
Court is best placed to hear submissions on this when the conduct of the
litigation by the parties and their lawyers is fresh
in the trial judge’s
mind, which is usually when the judge determines costs issues in the light of
his or her substantive findings
in the proceeding.
against whom allegations are made
under r 63.23 — which have the
potential to seriously damage his or her professional reputation —
best able to defend him or herself, and assist the Court, at the time that costs
issues are determined, rather than after final
orders are made
was dealing with circumstances where an application for a personal costs
order was made well after the finalisation of the proceeding.
In this case, the
application was pressed to be heard before the substantive hearing and was heard
by a different judicial officer
than the trial judge. That was because the
court vacating the hearing made the costs order payable by the plaintiff
forthwith on
an indemnity basis. When making that order, it appears that weight
was given to the fact that this was commercial litigation, without
appreciating
the complexities arising when a judicial officer also contemplates those adverse
costs consequences being ultimately
visited upon the plaintiff’s legal
advisers. Even the step of requiring affidavits to be prepared by the
practitioners involved
addressing whether they should personally pay the costs
thrown away by the adjournment will likely give rise to the disadvantages
discussed above. A preferable course would have been to defer the entire
question until the point at which the merit of the case
had been determined,
notwithstanding the nature of the litigation being commercial.
The circumstances do not warrant
personal costs orders against the former solicitors
the principles above, I am not persuaded that any conduct by the former
solicitors was of such significance as to cause the
court to make a personal
costs order under r 1753.
will not make the order sought because of the following:
(a) The factual evidence was not objectively deficient:
Assuming that the
legal question of what constitutes trespass fell in the plaintiff’s favour
(ultimately it did not), there
was a path to success on the evidence that had
been filed. The plaintiff was not “foredoomed to fail” on the
evidence available.
(b) The maintenance of legal privilege impacts upon the level of scrutiny
that can be achieved by the court and the findings that
can be made:
former barrister and the former solicitors were precluded from advancing a full
answer to the plaintiff’s complaint by
the maintenance of legal privilege
on the application. In those circumstances, the court cannot find that the
initial position taken
by the former solicitors as to the required evidence was
unreasonable.
(c) The adjournment itself may have been inappropriate but was not
unreasonable for the same reasons:
Seeking an adjournment was a course that
may have been viewed by some as inappropriate or unnecessary, but without full
of what advice passed from the newly retained counsel to the former
solicitors, no finding that the decision was unreasonable ought
to be made.
on the first of those reasons, I do not share the view that there was any
egregious history of default. The deficiencies
that were identified as
necessitating the adjournment were a failure to obtain expert evidence in reply,
failure to obtain lay affidavit
evidence and failure to obtain evidence on
damages. During the hearing of the adjournment application, there was no mention
legal argument that ultimately succeeded, which was whether the
encroachment constituted a trespass at all because of its nature
affixed to the land. The defence or argument that was the concern of the
adjournment application was that if there was
an encroachment, a proprietary
trespass was assumed, but the defendants did not adopt or could not be held
responsible for that trespass.
Alternatively, it was argued that damages for
shaving the encroachments from the wing walls was an appropriate remedy rather
a mandatory injunction.
was not the case that the former solicitors failed to obtain any expert evidence
at all. The plaintiff’s expert evidence
established an encroachment. The
issue was that the defendants’ structural engineer identified a different
solution that required
the plaintiff to then consult a structural engineer.
Although the plaintiff knew about that evidence well in advance, the pleaded
defence did not assist in making it clear what the import of that evidence was.
The defence did not admit any encroachment and denied
that the plaintiff was
entitled to any relief. It did not contend that any encroachment was minor and
could be easily remedied.
While better communication between the lawyers would
have revealed the more nuanced position that had developed as a result of the
expert engineering report, the delay in getting to the heart of the dispute does
not lie entirely at the feet of the plaintiff’s
former solicitors.
to the newly arising or recently appreciated understanding of the
defendants’ case, that was entirely understandable given
the defence that
had been filed. The fact that the defendants were not in existence and
therefore not responsible for any encroachment
proven was not pleaded in the
defence. The defence was evasive and opaque on that point. It is no answer to
say that the plaintiff
should have asked for particulars of the defence.
Because that fact was a positive defence to any factual finding of an
encroachment,
it was required to be included from the outset in accordance with
the Rules. There is an appreciable difference between admitting
an encroachment
and admitting the encroachment but denying that it constituted a trespass at
law. A defence that simply did not
admit an encroachment and denied the
ultimate relief claimed did not go far enough in exposing the defence of the
claim. The belated
understanding by the plaintiff’s former solicitors of
that aspect of the defendants’ case was not unreasonable.
regard to what was required to meet this aspect of the defendants’ case,
all that was required to be established was that
the defendants had notice of
the encroachment and failed to take action over an extended period of time.
That was capable of being
established by the existing expert evidence and some
short additional lay evidence. The plaintiff was available to give that
at the hearing. In the Territory, as acknowledged by the court
vacating the application, r 6700 of the Rules provides that evidence
trial of a proceeding started by original claim must be given
(orally in open court) rather than by way of affidavit. Indeed, when such an
order for lay affidavit evidence was sought from the
judge hearing the
adjournment application, it was declined on the basis of r 6700. Accordingly,
the fact that there was no lay affidavit
evidence from the plaintiff was
irrelevant. It did not cause the adjournment and did not create undue delay.
the hearing of the adjournment application, what was being agitated was that the
plaintiff also wanted to lead evidence about
the economic cost of the delay in
relation to the development of the property, resulting from the need to have the
encroachments
removed. That evidence was able to be given by the plaintiff in
the same manner and there was no deficiency in not serving an affidavit
because the parties were proceeding under the usual course provided for by r
6700 of the Rules.
leaves the perceived failure to obtain separate expert evidence on damages. In
the event that the plaintiff succeeded in establishing
that the encroachments
constituted a trespass, there is a real question whether it was the
plaintiff’s onus to establish any
case for damages confined to trespass
itself. Where trespass to a proprietary right of a continuing nature is
established, the court
will generally interfere by
injunction:
Reliance Finance
Corporation Pty Ltd v Orwin Walshe & Ward
[1964-5] NSWR 970
per McLelland CJ in Eq. It is then the onus of the defendant to establish
hardship by a specific remedy such that damages
becomes appropriate. The
plaintiff should not be compelled to exchange or suffer continuing invasion of
its proprietary right for
a money payment at the behest of the
Break Fast Investments Pty Ltd v
PCH Melbourne Pty Ltd
[2007] VSCA 311.
if liability in trespass was established, the remedy that may have followed was
that the defendants were required to carry out
the remedial work at their cost.
Commonly there will be a subsequent implementation of a detailed scheme because
whatever solution
is developed will require planning approval. That would
undoubtedly have been the position here where the encroachments involved
footings to buildings. It is up to the defendants to establish that any
appropriate remedy is disproportionate. It is thus not
as simple as saying that
it is up to the plaintiff to prove his case for a particular remedy. In light of
the law as to the appropriate
primary remedy in this type of case being
injunctive relief, the conduct of the plaintiff’s solicitors in not
obtaining evidence
directed to damages or the cost of removing the encroachments
on the wing walls was not unreasonable.
the extent that the plaintiff sought to make a case beyond that (being losses
associated with delay in development) that may have
been a separate component
that did require additional evidence from the plaintiff. However, as I have
said above, this was able
to be led at the hearing without an affidavit and even
if that were not the case, the lack of evidence on one component did not mean
that the plaintiff’s entitlement to damages entirely was “foredoomed
to fail”, for the reasons just explained.
occurred was that the plaintiff was understandably unhappy about running an
application for summary judgment that was withdrawn
at the heel of the hunt in
circumstances where it was highly unlikely to have succeeded in the first place.
He brought in fresh counsel,
who took a different view about the case. The mere
fact that one counsel has a different perspective about what was required to
best present the case at trial does not necessarily mean that the previous
conduct of the matter and preparations for the substantive
hearing was
inadequate, let alone deficient in a manner that would enliven the application
of this is fortified by the former legal advisers being prevented from
disclosing what advice was given on these matters, due
to the timing of the
personal costs application being brought before the substantive hearing and
judgment. In finding that the conduct
in preparing for the substantive hearing
was not unreasonable, I have proceeded on the law applying to each of the
identified deficiencies
and the Rules concerning expert and lay evidence. The
true position may have been significantly different if the forensic and
decisions were able to be disclosed. However, the above is sufficient
to give the practitioners involved the benefit of the doubt.
It would be unfair
on the present state of the evidence to determine that the former solicitors
caused the delay or were negligent
by their failure to properly prepare the
Conversely,
and for the same reasons, the fact that it is far from clear that the matter was
unable to run does not mean that the
adjournment application, which directly
delayed the hearing, was itself conduct that was improper or negligent in the
warrants an order under r 1753.
that regard, the former solicitors’ advice that an adjournment was
required was made in circumstances where new counsel had
come into the matter,
and his advice similarly was not disclosed on the personal costs application.
It might be inferred that the
advice was what was communicated to the court,
which was that the plaintiff’s case would not succeed without an
adjournment
to obtain the further evidence. The court constituted on that day
accepted that submission, albeit without the benefit of the extensive
submissions and evidence that have since been presented by the parties and
without the benefit of time to consider the law on nuisance
and trespass.
However, the same principle applying when legal privilege is maintained applies
equally to the former solicitors’
advice to make an application to adjourn
the case. The high bar for establishing a basis for a personal costs order
against a former
legal adviser in the conduct of the case has not been met.
The indemnity costs order should not
plaintiff sought an order vacating the order made against him for the payment of
the defendants’ costs thrown away on an
indemnity basis. As I understood
the submissions, the plaintiff did not dispute that the defendants’ wasted
costs should be
paid on an indemnity basis; simply that it was the former
solicitors and not him who should have to pay them.
case I am wrong about that, for completeness I have dealt briefly with whether
the order for indemnity costs should be vacated
and an order for the wasted
costs to be paid on an ordinary basis should be substituted in its place.
the application for the adjournment, the plaintiff’s counsel accepted that
the costs thrown away by the vacation of the hearing
should be paid by the
plaintiff. He sought that those costs be paid on the ordinary basis. The court
pressed him on whether the
costs should in fact be paid on an indemnity basis.
The plaintiff’s counsel indicated that he did not seek to be heard on
that. In effect, while not consented to, there was no opposition to the court
making such an order and the court took this into
account when determining the
basis on which the costs thrown away should be paid.
order for indemnity costs was discretionary. It was made on the basis that it
was appropriate to compensate the defendants for
the belated adjournment of the
hearing in circumstances where the matter was listed to run the following
Monday. The judicial officer
hearing the application was best placed to
exercise the discretion based on the findings that her Honour made at the time.
a different judicial officer may later form a different view about whether
a particular interlocutory order should have been made
is not the test. The
court must be careful to guard against a costs application of this type becoming
a de facto appeal of the earlier
costs order.
circumstances where there was no opposition, and no changed circumstances in
terms of what occurred as between the plaintiff and
defendants, it would be
inappropriate to disturb the interlocutory costs order made by the court. There
was material put before
the court on this application as to the quantum of such
an order. However, that will be a matter for assessment if it has not already
the above reasons, the application will be dismissed. The plaintiff
resisted an order for costs on the basis that he was simply
giving effect to
what Balla AJ had put in motion.
as the defendants are concerned, they were not seeking a personal costs order.
The filing of the application is what brought
the parties to court at this point
and the defendants were affected because one of the orders sought was vacation
of the indemnity
costs order in their favour. They are entitled to be
compensated.
as the former solicitors are concerned, again, the filing of the application is
what brought about their personal involvement
in the proceeding at this
stage. Costs are compensatory. The former solicitors have succeeded
in answering the claim for personal
costs orders. Costs should follow the
position is different insofar as it relates to the former barrister. The
plaintiff did not seek orders against him. His involvement
in the proceedings
is a result of an ambiguous order made by the court and was possibly unintended
by the court. It is regrettable
that the extent of the order was not clarified
at an earlier point. It resulted in the former barrister incurring costs that
ultimately unnecessary. However, those costs should not be borne by the
plaintiff when he expressly did not pursue the former barrister.
orders of the Court are:
(1) The application in proceeding dated 6 November 2024 is dismissed.
(2) The plaintiff is to pay the defendants’ costs and the former
solicitors’ costs of the application.
(3) The former barrister is to bear his own costs of the application.
I certify that the preceding eighty [80] numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of her Honour Justice
RTF format (296 KB)
Signed PDF/A format