McIver v ACT (No 2) [2025] ACTCA 7 (26 February 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
McIver v ACT (No 2)
[2025] ACTCA 7
Hearing Date:
On the papers
Decision Date:
Mossop, Loukas-Karlsson and Rangiah JJ
Proceedings ACTCA 9 of 2024 (McIver)
(1) The applicant/appellant is to pay the respondent’s costs of the
Proceedings ACTCA 10 of 2024 (Williams)
(1) The applicant/appellant is to pay the respondent’s costs of the
Catchwords:
CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS
– HUMAN RIGHTS – Costs
– whether proceedings a matter of public importance, involving conduct of
Territory previously
found to be unlawful – whether “mixed
outcome” in proceedings – whether commonality of work involved in
claims together – whether judgment assisting in the resolution of
other claims ought to have positive costs consequences –
outcome of appeal
not mixed – matter of public importance raised but brought for pecuniary
gain – no departure from the
usual rule as to costs
Legislation Cited:
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT), rr 1721, 5001
Human Rights Act 2004
Cases Cited:
Davidson v Director-General Justice and Community Safety Directorate
[2022] ACTSC 83
Johnson v Kent
[1975] HCA 4
(1975) 132 CLR
Kent v Cavanagh
(1973) 1 ACTR 43
Kent v Johnson
Lewis v Australian Capital Territory
[2018] ACTSC 19
McIver v Australian Capital Territory
[2024] ACTCA 36
[2022] ACTSC 206
Anthony Daniel McIver (Applicant)
Derek Joseph Williams (Applicant)
Australian Capital Territory (Respondent)
Representation:
K Foley SC with J McComish (Applicants)
P Bindon (Respondent)
Ken Cush and Associates (Applicants)
ACT Government Solicitor (Respondent)
File Numbers:
ACTCA 9 of 2024
ACTCA 10 of 2024
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: ACT Supreme Court
Before: Curtin AJ
Date of Decision: 17 April 2024
Case Title: McIver v Australian Capital Territory; Williams v Australian
Capital Territory
[2024] ACTSC 112
Introduction
these two proceedings,
McIver v Australian Capital Territory
Williams v Australian Capital Territory
, the court granted leave to
appeal but dismissed each appeal: see
McIver v Australian Capital
[2024] ACTCA 36.
There was no agreement between the parties in
relation to costs and they made written submissions on costs.
applicants sought that there be no order as to costs in each appeal. The
respondent submitted that costs should follow the event.
Applicants’
submissions
applicants identified five reasons which, in combination, were said to justify a
departure from the usual rule as to costs. In
summary, those reasons were as
the proceedings raised matters of public importance. They referred to the
decision of Fox J in
Kent v Cavanagh
(1973) 1 ACTR 43
It seems to me undesirable that responsible citizens with a reasonable grievance
who wish to challenge Government action should only
be able to do so at risk of
paying costs to the Government if they fail. They find themselves opposed to
parties who are not personally
at risk as to costs and have available to them
almost unlimited public funds. The inhibiting effect of the risk of paying costs
excessive and not in the public interest. Once, not so long ago, litigation
was more of a luxury than it now is and for the most
part only wealthy people
could engage in it.
also submitted that the cases involved conduct on the part of the Territory that
had been found to be contrary to law in previous
cases, namely
Director-General Justice and Community Safety Directorate
[2022] ACTSC 83
[2022] ACTSC 206
the proceedings had the effect of clarifying the law as to the operation of the
Human Rights Act 2004
(ACT) (HR Act).
the proceedings will have the effect of resolving a significant number of other
claims in an efficient and cost-effective way
for the Territory.
there was in fact a mixed outcome in the proceedings as a whole because
significant aspects of Mr Williams’ claim will
now proceed.
the proceedings were heard and determined together and, as a consequence, there
was substantial commonality of work which should
be recognised and costs
apportioned.
Respondent’s
submissions
respondent submitted that there were no special features warranting a departure
from the usual rule that costs follow the event.
The respondent made four
principal points.
the fact that the case has raised valuable questions as to the interpretation of
did not render the proceedings test cases in the relevant sense,
even if they warranted a grant of leave to appeal. The respondent
pointed to the
earlier rejection of the argument that
provided a standalone right
to compensation in
Lewis v Australian Capital Territory
[2018] ACTSC 19
329 FLR 267
, which was followed by the primary judge. In relation to the
unlawful detention argument, the respondent submitted that the applicants’
argument was not supported by any authority or anything in the text or context
of the HR Act.
while it might be said to have been necessary for the applicants to incur the
costs risk of making the application before
the primary judge — where they
received a favourable costs outcome — the appeals were not necessary but
rather involved
a forensic choice by the applicants to pursue them.
there was a prospect that the appeals would not have succeeded even if the
applicants succeeded on their s 18(7) arguments
because there were other
discretionary factors required to be considered under s 40C of the HR
that the applicants’ claims concerned rights under the HR Act does not
itself qualify the proceedings as “public
interest litigation” or
warrant a departure from the usual rule. No provision of the HR Act establishes
those propositions,
and the applicants pursued the applications for their own
pecuniary benefit.
response to the applicants’ submissions, the Territory emphasised three
additional points.
because the applications involved interlocutory applications for leave to
proceed, no facts had been found and conclusions
could not be drawn for present
purposes from the fact that a different plaintiff had succeeded in proceedings
against the Territory
it remains to be seen whether or not the other proceedings concerning similar
claims will be resolved in an “efficient
and cost-effective way for the
Territory” as submitted by the applicants.
contrary to the applicants’ submissions, there was not a mixed outcome in
circumstances where the costs orders made by
the primary judge reflected the
applicants’ level of success and those orders have not been disturbed on
Consideration and
costs of the appeal are in the discretion of the court.
Court Procedures Rules 2006
(ACT) is applied to appeal proceedings by r
usual rule is that costs follow the event.
the present case, it is clear that the issues raised on the appeal included, in
relation to s 18(7), an issue which had existed
for some time in relation
to the operation of the HR Act and hence was of some public importance. It is
not uncommon for proceedings
to involve questions of statutory interpretation of
considerable significance.
it is also relevant that the proceedings were proceedings brought for the
purpose of pecuniary gain. Each applicant was seeking
to monetise a breach of
the HR Act in circumstances where the primary judge found such a course was not
open. The motivation of Mr
McIver is reflected in the statement quoted in the
court’s judgment at [143] “I liked the idea that I could get some
compensation”. In Mr Williams’ case, the human rights claim was an
adjunct to a claim for false imprisonment, the purpose
of which was the seeking
of damages.
is also of significance that the proceedings involve appeals rather than
proceedings at first instance. The applicants were refused
leave by a judge of
the court largely on the basis of his interpretation of the law which has been
found to be correct. Before the
primary judge, notwithstanding their loss, each
applicant was the subject of costs orders which were favourable in their
circumstances. Each applicant made a forensic choice to appeal from
that decision.
the extent to which the applicants relied upon the statement of Fox J in
, the case was not comparable. The statement quoted above was made
in the context of an unsuccessful application for an interlocutory
injunction to
restrain works for the erection of the Black Mountain Tower in Canberra on the
grounds that its construction was beyond
power and constituted a public
nuisance. The action was brought with the fiat of the Attorney-General. It was
brought by a number
of prominent citizens who were residents of Canberra and who
had no pecuniary interest in the outcome: see the list at
Johnson v Kent
[1975] HCA 4
(1975) 132 CLR 164
at 165. The nature of the dispute was, as described by Jacobs
J when the matter reached the High Court, “essentially ... an
environmental dispute, the proposal being criticized by many on aesthetic
grounds, visual and architectural, and on ecological grounds
because of the
proximity of the proposed tower to the natural reserve on Black Mountain”.
Although in the Supreme Court an
interlocutory injunction was refused, Fox J
recorded in relation to costs that “the plaintiffs have succeeded on one
and have brought to notice a serious defect in compliance with statutory
procedures”. He noted that he was also “to some
extent influenced by
broader considerations” and then made the statement quoted above.
the matter came on for trial, the plaintiffs were successful:
(1973) 21 FLR 177
, but there was an agreement that neither party
would seek an order in relation to costs: at 227. Following the Supreme
judgment, the Commonwealth took steps to remedy the legal defect
identified at trial by having the National Capital Development Commission
approve the erection of the tower. By the time the matter was heard in the High
Court, the issue was confined to a question about
the extent of the
Commonwealth’s executive power in the Territory, undoubtedly a question of
public importance. On that issue,
the plaintiffs were unsuccessful in their
cross-appeal and ordered to pay the Commonwealth’s costs: 132 CLR at 174.
there is much to be said for the general sentiments expressed in Fox
J’s quoted statement, it is not possible to divorce it
from the context in
which it was made and apply it generally to individuals bringing proceedings
against governments.
is wrong to characterise the outcome of the case as being a mixed one. The
relevant proceedings are the proceedings in the Court
of Appeal. In those
proceedings, both applicants were unsuccessful. It is not appropriate to
characterise the proceedings by reference
to the limited success that Mr
Williams had before the primary judge in circumstances where, on the issues in
the appeal, he was
wholly unsuccessful.
as the applicants submitted that costs should be apportioned between the two
appeals to recognise that there was an overlap
between the two cases, that is a
matter appropriately determined by the Registrar on any necessary assessment of
those costs.
orders of the Court are:
Proceedings ACTCA 9 of 2024
(1) The applicant/appellant is to pay the respondent’s costs of the
Proceedings ACTCA 10 of 2024 (Williams)
(1) The applicant/appellant is to pay the respondent’s costs of the
I certify that the preceding twenty-eight [28] numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Court.
Date: 26 February 2025
RTF format (154 KB)
Signed PDF/A format