Gino Bartone v Courtenay Hollis and Amanda Downes [2008] ACTRTT 16 (26 September 2008)
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
CITATION: Gino Bartone v Courtenay Hollis and Amanda Downes [2008] ACTRTT
449 of 2008
Catchwords:
No point of principle.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES
TRIBUNAL ) NO: RT 449
GINA BARTONE
(Applicant/Lessor)
COURTENAY HOLLIS and AMANDA DOWNES
(Respondent/Tenant)
Tribunal :A. Anforth
Date :31 July 2008
1. The Tenants counter claim is adjourned until Monday the
day of August 2008 at 10.00am
2. The Lessor’s application is dismissed
3. The Office of Rental Bonds is ordered to release the whole of the bond to
the Tenants
4. The Tenants are to serve on the Lessor a copy of their counter claim.
..................................
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY )
RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL
) NO: RT449
GINA BARTONE
(Applicant/Lessor)
COURTENAY HOLLIS and AMANDA DOWNES
(Respondent/Tenant)
REASONS FOR DECISION
matter is a rental bond dispute in relation to premises at 53 Boronia Drive,
O’Connor in the ACT. The tenancy commenced
on 13 December 2006 for a fixed
term of 12 months at a rent of $535.00 per week. The premises were new and the
tenants were the first
occupants. The landscaping of the premises had not been
completed at the commencement of the tenancy.
tenants served notice on the lessor dated 12 June of their intention to vacate
the premise by reason of the lessor’s breaches
of their privacy. The
tenants in fact vacated the premises and paid rent to 10 July 2007 which was
part way through the fixed term.
A new tenant was found and the new tenancy
commenced on 14 July 2008.
Office of Rental Bonds (ORB) paid $1662.11 of the original bond to the tenants
and retained the balance of $477.89. The
matter was referred to the Tribunal by the ORB.
30 June 2008 the lessor filed a statement with the Tribunal setting out his
case. The lessor claimed:
(a) rent for
the 11-13 July inclusive being $229.28
(b) outstanding
water consumed by the tenants during the tenancy of $27.09
(c) the costs
of replacing garden plants of $221.00 said to have died due to the
tenants’ failure to water them.
matter was listed before the Tribunal on 1 July 2008. There was no appearance of
the lessor and the tenants appeared in person.
The application was adjourned to
31 July 2008.
tenants filed a statutory declaration setting out their response to the
lessor’s claim which read as follows:
We, Mr. Courtenay Hollis, Ms. Amanda Downes and Ms. Meagan Downes
make the following declaration under the
Statutory Declarations Act
(a) Mr. Courtenay Hollis and Ms. Amanda Downes undertook a 12 month lease of
53 Boronia Drive O'Connor ACT 2602 through the property
manager (Place Real
Estate) Mr. Brian Nancarrow on 8
December 2006.
(b) A Ms. Meagan Downes joined this lease shortly after.
(c) This lease was signed under the conditions that:
(i) The landlord, Mr. Gino Bartone, will be landscaping the property, and as
such we, then tenants, were not responsible for removing
the current weeds in
the garden beds and lawn.
(ii) The landlord, Mr. Gino Bartone, has provided a telephone line
connection,
(iii) The landlord, Mr. Gino Bartone, will construct a pergola for the
(iv) The tenants, Mr. Courtenay Hollis, Ms. Amanda Downes and Ms. Meagan
Downes, are to water the plants to the best of their ability
with consideration
to water restrictions.
(d) The landlord, Mr. Gino Bartone, never met items (i), (ii) and (iii) as
agreed in the lease, and we, the tenants, met item (iv).
There was no phone line
installed and our request for a line was rejected by the landlord. This meant
that our alarm system did not
work to its full ability and we had to rely on the
excessive use of our mobile phones. (See section 47 of Tenancy Agreement.)
of a pergola an umbrella was assembled in the back yard. The plants were
brand new, planted on top of building materials and in need
of water before we
moved in, we were also in drought and under strict water restrictions.
(e) The tenants, Mr. Courtenay Hollis, Ms. Amanda Downes and Ms. Meagan
Downes reported the following defects to the property manager,
(i) The weeds in the garden beds and lawn were getting out of control.
(ii) Every second plant is dying as they have been planted to close together,
and that we are
watering them on the assigned watering days,
(iii) the dishwasher is not bolted to the wall correctly and has fallen over
on the tenants on several occasions,
(iv) There are several bee and wasp nests around the property and one of the
highly allergic to bee/wasp stings.
(v) The letter box is not fixed to the ground correctly and could easily fall
over on someone,
(vi) The gate does not open/close correctly, and we, the tenants, felt our
to the street.
(f) The landlord, Mr. Gino Bartone, never made an effort to rectify items
(i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v) and (vi). (See section 57 and
60m of tenancy
Agreement.)
(g) We, the tenants, were instructed to purchase a significant amount of weed
killer at our own expense, and spray onto all weed infected
areas of the
property, as the property manager, Mr. Brian Nancarrow, insisted this would
ensure the landlord, Mr. Gino Bartone, would
landscape the property as agreed
upon in the lease. Furthermore, we informed the property manager when we
completed the weed treatment
ready for landscaping, and the landlord still
refused to landscape the property. We were then instructed to manually remove
weeds. These were the weeds that we were told to leave when we signed
the lease as we were told the garden was being landscaped.
(See section 65 of
Tenancy Agreement.)
(h) We, the tenants, sited Mr. Gino Bartone, parked opposite the property on
several occasions. This made us feel intimidated so we
reported this to the
property manager, Mr. Brian Nancarrow as we felt our privacy and safety was
being jeopardized by the landlord.
After speaking with our neighbours who were
also renting one of Mr. Bartone's properties, they informed us that they were
the same problems, (see section 52 of Tenancy Agreement.) They also
informed us that they had requested that a phone line be connected
and they were
granted this, we however, were not. Their plants had also died through no fault
of their own.
(i) A Ms. Meagan Downes and Ms. Amanda Downes took a day off work and sited
the landlord, Mr. Gino Bartone, in the backyard of the
property on Friday
June 2007 without the prior permission from the
tenants or the property manager. (See section 75 of Tenancy Agreement.)
Furthermore
Mr. Gino Bartone verbally abused Ms. Meagan Downes and Ms. Amanda
Downes. At this time
verbal agreement was made between Ms. Amanda
Downes and Mr. Gino Bartone that both parties were happy to terminate the lease
A Ms. Amanda Downes reported this immediately to Brain Nancarrow, the
property manager and informed him of our intentions to terminate
the lease after
Mr. Bartone breached the contract.
(j) We, the tenants, sent a written notice dated
June 2007 to vacate the property on
June 2007 to the property manager, Mr. Brian
Nancarrow, as we were concerned about our privacy and safety at the property and
no longer live under these conditions. (See section 90 of Tenancy
Agreement.)
(k) We, the tenants received an email dated 12
June from the property manager, Mr. Brian Nancarrow, stating that the landlord
had said it was acceptable to terminate the lease
on the condition that
replacement tenants move in.
(l) We, the tenants, were told that if we did not manually remove the weeds
and have the garden prepared for landscaping prior to
the final inspection, that
our bond money would be withheld.
(m) We, the tenants, during the hours of 10.30am to 5:00pm on Saturday 23rd
June 2007 and Sunday 24th June 2007 manually removed all
weeds and building
waste from the garden beds and lawn as we could not afford to be without bond
money. Furthermore, Mrs. Karen Downes
and Mrs. Shirley Janson assisted us during
these days. Additionally this provided us, the tenants, less time to find a new
organise moving arrangements. Time from work was taken off to achieve
this. The waste was disposed of at the tip at our expense.
(n) We, the tenants, vacated the property on Friday
July 2007 after replacement tenants were found.
Rent was paid up until 10 July 2007. Ms. Amanda Downes and Ms. Meagan Downes
a final inspection with the property manager, Mr. Brian Nancarrow on
July 2007. the property manager agreed the property
was left in an excellent condition and did not believe we were responsible for
the dead plants under the circumstances. Furthermore, the property manager
stated that he was instructed by the landlord, Mr. Gino
Bartone, to withhold a
portion of the bond money to recover costs for plants that had died. $27.09 was
also held for water consumption,
we were not disputing this cost and agreed to
pay it. Bond was also held for 3 days rent for the period
July 2007 which was
the period of time the house was vacant before the new tenants moved in on
July 2007. This period was not within 2 weeks of
us giving notice and receiving approval to vacate. See section 84 and 91c,d
e of Tenancy Agreement. Had we of known our full rights we would have
vacated with or without new tenants on the 27
stated in our notice to vacate. [6]
(o) ActewAGL conducted significant work in the O'Connor area to improve the
sewerage system, resulting in a large portion of the backyard
being dug up. Upon
completion they returned the backyard to exactly the same state as they found
it. However, the landlord, Mr. Bartone,
complained to ActewAGL and said they had
removed several plants from the backyard, and they must provide him with new
ones. ActewAGL
took his word on this matter, and in fact delivered approximately
20 plants which the landlord then landscaped the garden with. This
was in fact a
blatant lie, as there were no plants in the section of the backyard that was dug
tenants also filed a cross claim which read as follows:
Due to the circumstances outlined in the Statutory Declaration, we
believe we are entitled to the following compensation:
• Compensation for Breach of Section 47 of the RTA: No telephone line
For further
details refer to item (c)(ii) and (d) of the Statutory Declaration
The tenants were
forced to use their mobile phone for all personal calls to friends
and family both
locally and interstate
The tenants
could not get internet access
The tenants were
told there was a phone line provided when signing the lease and a request for a
line was then rejected by the lessor.
•Compensation for Breach
of Section 52 of RTA: Continuous interference with reasonable peace, comfort and
For further
details refer to items (h) and (h)(i) of the Statutory Declaration.
The tenants were
forced to keep their blinds closed and avoid use of the yard
The tenants
never felt comfortable or relaxed during the entire lease after having spotted
the lessor sitting in his car outside the
house on several occasions.
Tenants were
told by their property manager that the lessor had told him that it looked as
though we took good care of the inside
of the house. The lessor was never given
permission to enter the house.
• Compensation for Breach of
Section 57 and 60(m) of the RTA: Failure to undertake emergency repairs that led
to the property
being unsafe and insecure. Failure to landscape garden and
construct a pergola as promised at the start of the lease.
For further
details refer to items (d) of the Statutory Declaration
The tenants were
unable to make use of the yard for both pleasure and drying of washing, due to
high amounts of dust in the air, several
wasp nests, and an insecure gate that
could not be closed.
The tenants were
unable to completely set up the alarm system due to the lack of a telephone
The tenants had
the dishwasher fall on top of them on numerous occasions because the lessor
failed to securely fit the dishwasher
after being advised of the
• Compensation for Breach of Section 65 of the
For further
details refer to items (c)(i) and (g) of the Statutory Declaration
The tenants were
blackmailed into improving the property by removing weeds and waste material to
prepare the garden for landscaping
to ensure we would be given a full bond
This resulted in
13 hours of manual labour by 5 people.
Claiming 13
hours of work completed by 5 people
Claiming cost of
weed killer-$35
Claiming cost of
tip fees for the disposal of weeds and waste material - $30
Compensation for Breach of Section 75 of the RTA:
For further
details refer to items (h) and (i) of the Statutory Declaration.
The tenants were
severely stressed and traumatised by the verbal abuse received by Mr. Bartone
the day he trespassed. Tenants feared
for their safety while at the premises and
never felt at home.
Compensation for
Breach of Section 91(c) and 91(d) of the RTA
For further
details refer to item (j) of the Statutory Declaration.
Tenants were
blackmailed into staying on until new tenants were found to ensure we would be
given all bond money back.
Claiming rent
paid from the notice to vacate date provided in a letter dated on the
June 2007 to the property manager. This is the
period between 27
June 2007 to
July 2007, a total of 2 weeks rent =
Compensation
for relocation costs resulting from being forced to leave the tenancy early
Time taken off
work to find alternative accommodation and move house-1 day for each tenant
removalist fee's $470
Time taken to be
available and prepare for court hearing
Claim 2 working
days for each tenant
Unpaid bond
31 July 2008 the lessor appeared by phone and the tenants both appeared in
tenants accepted responsibility for the water account of $27.09 and said that
had since paid that sum to the lessor. The tenants
gave evidence that they did
in fact carry out some weeding in the back yard as described in the statutory
declaration.
lessor’s managing real estate agent, Mr Nancarrow, gave evidence by phone.
He admitted that he informed the tenants that:
(a) the lessor
intended to carry out landscaping during the tenancy which never occurred
(b) the lessor
promised to erect a pergola during the tenancy which did not occur
(c) the urgent
repairs to the dishwasher were notified to the lessor but the repairs were not
(d) the problem
with the letter box was notified to the lessor but not fixed
lessor admitted that he entered the back yard of the premises on 8 June 2008
without the permission of the tenants. He said he
was there to inspect the work
of ACTEWAGL on the sewer lines. The lessor said he thought Mr Nancarrow had
arranged for him to access
to the back yard. Mr Nancarrow described this as
being “new to me”. The lessor denied that he had regularly parked on
the road outside the premises to watch the premises. He said he had occasionally
done so when visiting the premises.
lessor said that he had a phone line installed to the premises and it was a
matter for the tenants to pay for the connection of
the phone to the network if
they wanted a phone. At no stage did he promises to supply a phone.
was no evidence from either party concerning the cause of the death of the
plants in question other than the existence of the
drought and the fact the
plants were newly planted.
Tribunal accepted the evidence of the tenants and Mr Nancarrow and to the extent
that this evidence conflicted with that of the
lessor, the Tribunal preferred
the evidence of the tenants and Mr Nancarrow.
hearing the evidence the Tribunal gave the decision recorded above. On that
occasion the Tribunal announced its finding of fact
(a) The lessors
attendance at the premises uninvited constituted a breach of the tenants’
right to quiet enjoyment (prescribed
term 52) which caused the female tenant
considerable consternation:
(b) The lessors
failure to provide the promises pergola and landscaping both constituted a
breach of prescribed term 54(1)(c) of the
Act in that a non-existed pergola and
non-existent landscaping do not constitute a pergola and landscaping in a
reasonable state
lessor’s failure to repair the dishwasher was a breach of prescribed term
55 of the Act
(d) The tenants
had undertaken weeding as they described.
(e) The failure
of the lessor to pay for the tennants’ connection to the phone network was
not a breach on the lessor’s
(f) The act of
the lessor parking on the road outside the house was not a breach of quiet
enjoyment on the lessor’s part.
(g) The above
breaches by the lessor justified the tenants in serving notice to terminate the
tenancy. Accordingly no rent was due
after 10 July 2007.
(h) There was
no evidence to account for why the plants died. They may have died due to the
drought or simply because the natural
attrition rate for new planted plants. In
any event it was the lessor to show that the plants died due to the tenants
water them and there was simply no evidence to support this
15 August the tenants advised the Tribunal that they wished to withdraw their
counter claim.
lessors have subsequently sought reasons for the Tribunal’s decision of 31
September 2008
RTF format (146 KB)
Signed PDF/A format