Umunakwe v DPP [2025] ACTCA 34 (19 August 2025)
Umunakwe v DPP [2025] ACTCA 34 (19 August 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
COURT OF APPEAL
Case Title:
Umunakwe v DPP
[2025] ACTCA 34
Hearing Date:
Decision Date:
McCallum CJ, Mossop and Taylor JJ
The appeal is dismissed.
Catchwords:
– Appeal against conviction – verdict by jury
– whether verdict unreasonable or unable to be supported by
the evidence
– assessment of the reliability of the complainant –
role of appellate court – appeal dismissed
Legislation Cited:
Crimes Act 1900
Evidence Act 2011
Supreme Court Act 1933
s 37O(2)(a)(i)
Cases Cited:
DPP v Umunakwe
[2025] ACTSC 139
Garay v The Queen (No 3)
[2023] ACTCA 2
Hudson v DPP
[2024] ACTCA 28
Incandela v The Queen
[2023] ACTCA 41
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
Marshall v The King
[2023] ACTCA 11
MFA v The Queen
[2002] HCA 53
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
268 CLR 123
R v Baden-Clay
[2016] HCA 35
258 CLR 308
The King v ZT
[2025] HCA 9
99 ALJR 676
Emmanuel Umunakwe (Appellant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
Representation:
C Akthar (Appellant)
V Engel SC with C Muthurajah (Respondent)
Kamy Saeedi Law (Appellant)
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions (Respondent)
File Number:
AC 26 of 2024
Decision Under Appeal:
Court/Tribunal: Supreme Court of the ACT
Before: Baker J
Date of Decision: 22 July 2024
Case Title:
DPP v Umunakwe
Court File Numbers: SCC 187 of 2023
Introduction
15 July 2024 and 19 July 2024, the appellant Mr Emmanuel Umunakwe was tried
before a jury. On 22 July 2024, the jury found
the appellant guilty of count 2
being an offence of sexual intercourse without consent, contrary to
Crimes Act 1900
appellant was found not guilty of count 1 and count 3 which were also offences
contrary to
Notice of Appeal filed on 19 August 2024, the appellant appealed against his
conviction on count 2. The appellant relied on a single
ground, namely, that the
jury’s verdict was unreasonable, or cannot be supported, having regard to
the evidence:
s 37O(2)(a)(i)
Supreme Court Act 1933
the reasons that follow, the ground of appeal has not been established.
The appeal: legal
appeal is brought pursuant to
s 37O(2)(a)(i)
Supreme Court Act
which provides that on an appeal against conviction this Court must allow
the appeal if it concludes that the verdict of the jury
must be set aside on the
ground that it is unreasonable, or cannot be supported, having regard to the
legal principles governing a ground of appeal asserting that a jury verdict is
unreasonable are well established. As this Court
Marshall v The King
[2023] ACTCA 11
...The question is whether an independent examination of the evidence
establishes that it was open to the jury to be satisfied of
the guilt of the
appellant beyond reasonable doubt:
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
181 CLR 487
at 492-493, 494-495 (
M v The Queen
[65]-[66]. In conducting that examination, regard must be had to the advantage
the jury had in seeing and hearing the witnesses.
Finding that a verdict is
unreasonable requires that the appellate court be satisfied that the jury must,
as opposed to might, have
entertained a reasonable doubt as to the
accused’s guilt:
Libke v The Queen
[2007] HCA 30
(2007) 230 CLR
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 94 ALJR 394
The principles were recently summarised in
Dansie v The Queen
(2022) 96 ALJR 728
, accepting that
M v The Queen
represents the correct approach. In applying that test, it was said that the
court is to determine for itself whether the evidence
was sufficient in nature
and quality to eliminate any reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty of the
offence. In answering that
question, the court must take into account that the
jury is the body entrusted with the primary responsibility of determining guilt
or innocence, and that it has had the benefit of seeing and hearing the
witnesses. However, it is only where a jury’s advantage
in seeing and
hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by the appeal
court that the court may conclude that
no relevant miscarriage of justice has
occurred...
the verdict challenged rests on the evidence of a single witness as is the case
in this appeal, an appellate court must proceed
on the basis that the jury
accepted the evidence of that witness to be credible and reliable. The High
Court explained in
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
268 CLR 123
function of an appellate court called upon to assess whether a jury verdict is
unreasonable in such a case at [39]:
The function of the court of criminal appeal in determining a ground that
contends that the verdict of the jury is unreasonable or
cannot be supported
having regard to the evidence, in a case such as the present, proceeds upon the
assumption that the evidence
of the complainant was assessed by the jury to be
credible and reliable. The court examines the record to see whether,
notwithstanding
that assessment – either by reason of inconsistencies,
discrepancies, or other inadequacy; or in light of other evidence –
court is satisfied that the jury, acting rationally, ought nonetheless to have
entertained a reasonable doubt as to proof of
(Citations omitted.)
recently, the High Court in
The King v ZT
[2025] HCA 9
99 ALJR 676
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
observed with
respect to the nature of the advantage of a jury:
...The advantages spoken of are the advantages the jury had, including by the
application of the jurors’ collective wisdom
and experience of ordinary
affairs, from seeing and hearing the evidence as it unfolds when evaluating
factual matters, especially
witness credibility. The existence, nature and scope
of those advantages will vary from case to case depending on the form in which
the evidence was adduced and the nature of the issues that arose at the trial...
(Citations omitted.)
is a “serious step” to set aside the verdict of a jury and is one
which should not be taken without due regard to the
particular advantage of a
jury over a court of appeal:
R v Baden-Clay
[2016] HCA 35
. The High Court reiterated in
at [10] that an appellate
court is required to give “full allowance” to the jury’s
advantage in considering whether
it can resolve a doubt experienced on appellate
review after an independent assessment of the sufficiency and quality of the
of the evidence.
principles underscore the significance of the opportunity for the jury to assess
the witnesses and the evidence in the environment
of the trial. To
establish that a verdict which relied on the evidence of one critical witness is
unreasonable, or cannot be supported,
the appellant must demonstrate that any
inconsistency, discrepancy or some other inadequacy demonstrates that
notwithstanding the
jury’s advantage, acting reasonably they ought to have
entertained a reasonable doubt.
will become clear, the appellant has not demonstrated that the identifiable
discrepancies in the complainant’s account were
such as to have
necessarily resulted in reasonable doubt as to her reliability on the vital
aspects of her evidence.
Overview of the prosecution
prosecution case was that the appellant and the complainant were unknown to each
other prior to the incident subject of all three
counts on the indictment.
complainant was out for the evening in the Canberra central business district
with some friends. So too, the appellant. They were
both socialising at the
venue known as Mooseheads, and it is here that they first interacted.
first interaction between the appellant and the complainant was captured on
closed-circuit television (‘CCTV’) footage
taken inside Mooseheads
from various vantage points. The footage was played in the trial for the jury
but it was not played to the
complainant during her evidence, a matter to which
we will return. The CCTV footage was, by agreement, played in the hearing of
was additional CCTV footage taken from outdoor CCTV cameras which captured the
complainant at various moments over the course
of the evening walking between
venues as well as in the immediate aftermath of the acts subject to the counts
on the indictment.
CCTV footage was good quality and enabled identification and observation of the
appellant and the complainant. The CCTV footage
from Mooseheads captured an
interaction with the appellant and complainant during which the appellant
appeared to use his mobile
phone. The CCTV footage also captured a kiss the
appellant initiated with the complainant proximate to the first interaction and
while she was standing with friends near the bar. Finally, the CCTV footage from
Mooseheads captured the appellant and the complainant
dancing together and
kissing on the dancefloor area.
complainant gave evidence about the appellant kissing her near the bar. She did
not recall meeting the appellant or engaging with
him in relation to his mobile
phone. She also did not recall dancing with the appellant and kissing him on the
dancefloor at Mooseheads.
allegations of sexual intercourse without consent arose from an interaction
between the complainant and the appellant at a second
venue, One22. The
complainant recalled finding herself in the male toilets of that venue with the
appellant. The three counts on
the indictment reflected conduct the appellant
was said to have engaged in while in a cubicle with the complainant. There was
CCTV footage from One22.
complainant fled One22 after the interaction with the appellant in the toilet
cubicle at One22 and almost immediately complained
conduct to a stranger who rendered her assistance.
Evidence in the
statement of agreed facts was tendered (‘the Agreed Facts’) as
7. At Mollys, the complainant had a cocktail. The group
sat at the table consuming their drinks and eating pretzels that were provided
by the bar.
8. The complainant, Ms G and Ms P then walked to One22 again. On the way, at
complainant.
9. The CCTV footage shows that at about 11:56, the complainant, Ms G and Ms P
arrived at One22 and went together to the bathroom.
The complainant and Ms G
then went to the bar and each had a tequila shot. At about 12:30am the
complainant, Ms G and Ms P left One
10. The CCTV footage shows that the group then walked to Mooseheads, arriving
at about 12:33am on 28 January 2023. They walked to
an upstairs section of the
night club. Ms G went to use the bathroom. The complainant went to the dance
11. The CCTV footage shows that the group spent a period of time dancing on
the raised dancefloor at Mooseheads.
12. The CCTV footage shows that at about 12:52am, the complainant, Ms G and
Ms P left the dancefloor and entered the bar area of the
venue. During this time
the complainant was photographed with her friends.
13. The CCTV footage shows that at about 12:54, the complainant approached
the bar. The complainant and the accused were standing
with their respective
groups of friends. The complainant and the accused conversed for approximately
one minute and during this time
the accused gave the complainant his phone. Ms P
spoke to the complainant. Ms P and the accused shook hands. The complainant gave
the phone back to the accused.
14. The CCTV footage shows that the accused and complainant then separated
and went back to their individual groups of friends.
15. The complainant ordered a round of tequila shots. The CCTV footage shows
that Ms P the complainant and a friend, Ms I, hugged.
16. The accused approached the bar and ordered a round of drinks which he
gave to his friends. The accused then approached the complainant
touched her arm
with his hand and, stated 'you're the most beautiful girl', and began to kiss
her. The CCTV footage shows that she
kissed him back and wrapped her arms around
17. The CCTV shows that after a few seconds, Ms I tapped the complainant's
arm and she stopped kissing the accused.
18. Following the kiss, the accused stayed in the area and Ms I had a brief
conversation with the accused. Ms I wanted the accused
to leave the area and
told him 'she is my girlfriend’ and said to the complainant 'let's kiss'.
They then kissed in front of
the accused.
19. The CCTV footage shows that the two friendship groups then conversed with
each other briefly at the bar.
20. The complainant's group, including Ms I, after drinking their drinks
began looking for a flask lid that Ms I had dropped.
21. The CCTV footage shows that shortly after 1am, the complainant and Ms G
returned to the dancefloor, Ms P and Ms I had left the
group at this stage.
22. The CCTV footage shows the complainant and Ms G move between different
parts of the dancefloor.
23. The CCTV footage shows that at about 1:12, the complainant and Ms G
entered another part of the dancefloor. The accused was dancing
with his friends
in this area. The accused and the complainant were not directly in contact or
interacting.
24. The accused moved up to a further raised area of the dancefloor near
poles with his group.
25. At about 1:13 the accused’s friends moved across the dancefloor.
The accused followed them. The CCTV footage shows that
Ms G talked to one of the
accused's friends, Mr White, and commenced dancing with him. The complainant,
the accused and the accused's
friend Mr Johnston commenced talking.
26. The CCTV footage shows that at about 1:14 Ms G kissed Mr White and the
complainant and the accused kissed on the dancefloor, during
which time the
complainant wrapped her arms around the accused’s neck.
27. The CCTV footage shows that Ms G and Mr White approached the complainant
and the accused and the groups commenced dancing together.
The accused spun the
complainant around on the dancefloor whilst they held hands.
28. The CCTV footage shows that at about 1:15 Ms G and Mr White kissed. The
complainant and the accused kissed. The complainant and
the accused continued
dancing together. The complainant had her arm around the accused’s neck.
The complainant and the accused
kissed. The accused then kissed the
complainant's neck.
29. The CCTV footage shows that the complainant and the accused kissed and
the complainant touched the accused's face with one hand
and had her other arm
around his neck. The complainant and accused then talked with Ms G and Mr
30. The CCTV footage shows that at about 1:17 the accused and the complainant
resumed dancing and they kissed. The accused spun the
complainant around whilst
holding hands and then they kissed again.
31. The CCTV footage shows that at about 1:18, Mr White pulled on the
accused's shirt. The groups then separated. Ms G and the complainant
remained on
the dancefloor for a short period.
32. The CCTV footage shows that at about 1:19, Ms G and the complainant left
the upstairs area of Mooseheads and stood outside the
venue. At about 1:20 Ms G
and the complainant entered the downstairs venue of Mooseheads. They pointed to
a staff member who is behind
the bar. Ms G and the complainant then danced by
the bar area. At about 1:22, Ms G and the complainant left the venue. The
complainant
waved goodbye to the door staff member.
Ms G and the complainant ran through part of Verity lane. They return to the
venue One22.
33. At One 22, Ms G saw Mr White again and the complainant spoke with the
34. The accused and complainant went to the male bathrooms of One22.
35. The complainant left One22 and walked to Verity Lane, arriving there at
approximately 1:55am.
36. The complainant then walked to and sat down in an alleyway near
Mooseheads where she was approached by Ms L. Ms L was with her
boyfriend Mr
37. Mr C recognised the complainant as a friend of Ms G and attempted to
the request of Ms L.
Mr C ran to the front door of the pub and to the bar upstairs and told them to
get security to the milk crates
downstairs because there was a female there that
needed help. Mr C went back to the alleyway.
38. Joseph Truscott, who was the rostered general manager of the Mooseheads
night club that night saw the complainant and Ms L in
the alleyway as part of a
lap he was doing of the night club as part of his duties. The complainant told
him she had been 'raped',
mentioned something about One22 and said she was
waiting for Mr X, a staff member of the club.
complainant
Evidence in Chief Interview (EICI)
complainant’s EICI conducted on 9 February 2023 was played to the jury as
part of her evidence-in-chief. A transcript of
the EICI was provided to the
jury. In the EICI, the complainant gave the following account of the night of
the incident.
around 8:30pm on 27 January 2023, the complainant was dropped off by her friend
at the home of another friend, Ms G. After consuming
a few alcoholic beverages,
the complainant and Ms G were picked up by Mr X and Ms P. The group then
travelled into the city. By the
time she arrived in the city the complainant
estimated she had consumed two cans, and a quarter of a third can, of alcoholic
they arrived in the city, the complainant, Ms G and Ms P briefly went to One22
for approximately 5 or 10 minutes where the complainant
consumed another
alcoholic drink. The group then went to Molly’s bar. The complainant
explained that after consuming a cocktail
at Molly’s bar this period of
the evening was “probably” her “drunkest point” and that
she felt “a
lot more drunk” than when she had first walked into
Molly’s bar.
around 11:00pm, the complainant, Ms G and Ms P went to Mooseheads. Mr X was
working a shift at Mooseheads at the time.
complainant recalled that she first met the appellant whilst waiting at the bar
at Mooseheads for drinks with Ms G, Ms P and a
school friend, Ms I. When
describing how she met the appellant, the complainant said she was standing
facing the bar. The complainant
told police, “I’ve just kind of
turned my head and this guy just started kissing me”. The complainant
that she was “just very shocked and confused, because I felt
like I literally just turned my head”. The appellant, she
said, told her
immediately after the kiss that she was “the most beautiful girl”.
The kiss came from her right-hand side.
complainant described the kiss on her mouth as “probably” lasting a
few seconds and she was not sure whether the appellant
put his tongue in her
mouth saying she thought “it was just his lips”. When asked
“how did the kiss stop”,
the complainant replied “I think I
just kind of pulled away a bit and just – because I thought it was really
complainant went onto explain that she “didn’t think a whole lot of
it. Like, I wasn’t into it, but I wasn’t,
like, totally against it,
but just, I mean it just happened”. The complainant said she did not
“consent” to the
kiss. The complainant said that she danced at
Mooseheads and estimated that she was at Mooseheads for an hour or two.
complainant then stated that she went back to One22 with Ms G.
she and Ms G were at the bar in One22, the complainant recalled that one of her
friends was talking to one of the appellant’s
friends. The appellant
walked over to her at the bar and began conversing with her saying “oh,
it’s you again”.
The complainant said she replied “oh,
it’s you” and asked the appellant his name. The complainant could
if she had anything to drink at One22.
complainant said that the “next thing” she recalled was being in
front of the bathrooms at One22 with the appellant.
She said she
“assumed” she walked there and could not remember requiring any
assistance to do so. She recalled that they
“paused for a second”
out the front of the bathrooms and “then, I don’t know, we were in
the male bathroom”.
She remembered going through the door of the bathroom
saying she had “never been into a male bathroom” so she was
kind of looking around, like, kind of shocked what it looked
like”. The complainant described walking to the disabled cubicle
male toilet and the appellant telling a man who she thought “had red
on” who was using the disabled cubicle to
“get out”. The
complainant said the man got out after he finished using the toilet and the
appellant locked the cubicle.
complainant described her position as facing the appellant and the appellant put
his hand on her shoulder “trying to push
[her] down to give him
head” and asked her to “give him a head”. The complainant
replied that she “would
not do that”. The appellant told the
complainant to “get up against the wall” and she had to “lean
the toilet”.
appellant put his penis into her vagina and thrusted in and out. His hands were
on her waist. The complainant said she felt shocked,
the act was painful and
went on for a couple of minutes. This act of sexual intercourse was count 1.
appellant then turned the complainant around to face him and asked her to give
him a ‘blowjob’ and “did the
whole shoulder thing again”
applying pressure to her left shoulder as if to push her down. She again refused
telling the appellant
“I’m not doing that”. The appellant
turned the complainant back around and continued to have sex with her by putting
his penis into her vagina. The complainant said she was “trying to get
away at this point” and she told the appellant
“It’s hurting,
stop, this is not – just get off me”. The complainant said she
started to cry telling the
appellant to “stop, it hurts”. The
complainant described the appellant “picked up the pace, I guess”.
act of sexual intercourse was count 2.
complainant said she pushed herself off the toilet and opened the door of the
toilet cubicle. She turned toward the appellant.
She described him as appearing
“all confused” and he said to her “where are you going,
what’s happened?”.
The complainant said she was crying. She did not
recall any other detail until she stopped in the alley outside of Mooseheads.
complainant described, during the act relied upon for count 2, that the
appellant’s penis may have entered her anus. She
believed this to have
occurred because the act became “way more painful” which lasted for
anal penetration was relied upon for count 3.
complainant stated that another woman found her in the alley and asked her what
had happened. The woman then called the police.
The complainant recalled talking
to a few of the police as well as an employee of Mooseheads, who she asked to
retrieve Mr X. The
woman assisted the complainant to call Ms G. The complainant
stated that Ms G could not understand what she was saying on the phone
she was crying and inconsolable.
complainant went to the hospital for a medical examination. During her EICI, the
complainant drew pictures depicting the layout
Further evidence of the complainant in the trial
further evidence adduced in examination-in-chief, the complainant clarified her
own position and the appellant’s position
by reference to her drawings of
One 22 and photographs of the One22 bathrooms.
cross-examination the complainant confirmed that when she spoke with police, she
understood the importance of giving a detailed
account of the events. She
confirmed that she first met the appellant when he kissed her near the bar in
Mooseheads. The complainant
did not deny that she would have kissed the
appellant back. The following proposition was put to the complainant in respect
kiss at the bar at Mooseheads:
Counsel: I’m going to suggest to you that rather than pull away, what you
did was wrap your arm around his neck whilst kissing
Complainant: I do not recall that.
Counsel: And you kissed him back?
Complainant: I would have kissed him back, yes.
complainant did not recall kissing the appellant “multiple times”
over the course of the night and agreed that apart
from the kiss at the bar at
Mooseheads she did not tell police of any other occasion where she kissed the
appellant. The complainant
could not recall that she had met the appellant
earlier in the night and had a conversation with him, which included putting her
mobile phone number into his mobile phone. She agreed with the characterisation
of the appellant as a “random guy” who
kissed her at the bar at
Mooseheads. The complainant agreed that she told police that she had not seen
the man who kissed her at
the Mooseheads bar before the kiss occurred.
complainant could not recall encountering the appellant on the dancefloor at
Mooseheads or that they had kissed while dancing
there together. The complainant
disagreed that she and the appellant had danced together. The complainant stated
that she was not
aware one of her friends had kissed one of the
appellant’s friends and she was not aware of the appellant being with his
at Mooseheads. She did recall that the appellant was with friends when
he was at One22.
complainant could not recall kissing the appellant at One22. She disagreed with
the suggestion that she entered the male toilets
with the appellant to engage in
further intimate acts with him. She explained that she could not recall the
reason “they”
went to the bathroom.
complainant agreed that the appellant had accepted her refusal to engage in oral
sex with him.
complainant agreed that neither she nor the appellant said anything during the
first act of penile-vaginal intercourse. The complainant
accepted that the
toilets were dark, that she was facing away from the appellant and that music
from the venue could be heard inside
the toilet cubicle at One22. She said that
she was speaking to the appellant “at a reasonable volume where [she]
could be heard”.
The complainant agreed that it was “possible”
that it would have been “very hard” for the appellant to see
facial expression even if she was facing him but maintained that there was
“reasonable light to see faces”. The complainant
gave the following
evidence in cross-examination:
Counsel: What I am suggesting to you is him being confused and saying those
things is consistent with the possibility I have put
to you that he didn’t
hear you say anything; do you agree or disagree?
Complainant: It is a possibility.
Counsel: He didn’t see you saying anything or crying or anything?
Complainant: I believe I would have very clearly been heard and seen. The
– it is not pitch black in those bathrooms. It is
dark but facial
expressions were still visible.
complainant agreed that when she was facing the appellant and refused to give
him a “head job” that the appellant
heard her and respected her
complainant rejected the proposition that she had changed her mind about having
sex with the appellant during the second act of
sexual intercourse and became
upset because of what she perceived to be an attempt at anal penetration.
complainant readily conceded that she could not be certain that anal penetration
had in fact occurred and agreed that the sensation
she perceived as anal
penetration could have been because of the appellant’s penis making
L gave evidence that in the early hours of 28 January 2023, whilst she was with
her boyfriend in Verity Lane behind the Mooseheads
alley back door, she found
the complainant crying. Ms L approached the complainant and asked if she was
okay and if she needed her
to call anyone.
complainant told Ms L that she had been raped. Ms L recalled that the
complainant was hysterical, crying a lot and repeating it
over and over again.
Ms L asked the complainant if she could call the police and an ambulance.
L then recalled a security guard from Mooseheads came out of a back door and
asked them to leave as they were not allowed to be
there. The security guard
then called the police whilst Ms L stayed with the complainant.
complainant told Ms L that she had a friend working in Mooseheads. Ms L’s
boyfriend went to look for the friend. Ms L then
called Ms G and went to look
for her. After finding Ms G at the end of Verity Lane, Ms L brought Ms G to the
complainant.
G, the complainant’s friend, recalled kissing and dancing with a friend of
the appellant whilst they were at Mooseheads.
She stated that the complainant
was kissing the appellant whilst at Mooseheads.
G stated that approximately 10 to 15 minutes after arriving at One22, she
realised the complainant and the appellant were not present.
She stated she did
not see the complainant and the appellant kissing at One22. Ms G gave evidence
that the appellant returned without
the complainant which caused her to go
looking for the complainant.
G called the complainant who was crying. Ms G had difficulty understanding what
the complainant was saying. Ms G went to the alleyway
between One22 and
Mooseheads to find the complainant. She was approached by Ms L who asked if she
was looking for the complainant.
Ms G went to the complainant and described her
as “hysterical. She was crying a lot. She couldn’t really get her
out ‘cause she was just panicking”. She recalled the
complainant saying, “He took me to the bathroom, and I kept
G went with the complainant to the hospital and remained with her until 6am the
Leigh Michelle
Sergeant Burton was the police officer on duty from the Sexual Assault and Child
Abuse Team of ACT Policing on the night of
the incident.
Sergeant Burton explained that on the night of the incident, she met the
appellant in the police interview rooms. The informant
then requested a forensic
procedure from the appellant, which included photographs, fingernail scrapings
and a buccal swab.
Sergeant Burton contacted the complainant the following day and interviewed her
on 9 February 2023.
Sergeant Burton obtained footage from Ms P’s mobile phone and CCTV footage
from Mooseheads, One22 and Sierra10, which
are public safety cameras owned by
the ACT Government. The Sierra10 camera is monitored by ACT policing on
Thursday, Friday and Saturday
night. Acting Sergeant Burton gave evidence that
they obtained the Sierra10 camera footage from the camera located on the corner
of London Circuit and Verity Lane, where Mooseheads is located.
reviewing the CCTV footage, the informant explained that he discovered that the
footage from One22 did not capture the period
over which the appellant and the
complainant were at the venue together. By the time of his discovery, the
relevant One22 CCTV footage
no longer existed.
informant also obtained the body-worn camera (‘BWC’) footage from
the police who attended the incident.
obtained from Ms P’s mobile phone, the CCTV footage as well as the BWC
footage was played to the jury during Acting
Sergeant Burton’s evidence.
The timestamp on the CCTV footage from Mooseheads was identified as one hour
behind the actual
time the footage was recorded.
Barry was the doctor who examined the complainant at Canberra Hospital in the
early morning of 28 January 2023.
Barry gave evidence as to the medical examination record, which stated that:
'Male bathroom at One22. His friend was in the stall. He told him to get out.
Occurred - query disabled toilet,' and in brackets,
I've written, '(Larger than
normal stall). Door was closed. He made me bend over. He made me have sex with
me.' And then I've written,
'Penis-vagina (from behind). Thinks penis-anal
("Felt different, not sure"). "Kept asking me to give him head. I said no." And
brackets, I've written, '(This was before penile-vaginal). No cunnilingus.
Kissed my mouth at the bar. "I told him stop, stop. I
screamed 'Stop.'"'
Barry recorded that the complainant was upset and tearful during the
history-taking process. Dr Barry gave evidence that she did
not find any
anogenital injuries on the complainant and that up to 80 or 90% of the time, she
will not see any anogenital injuries.
Barry collected a number of samples from the complainant during her examination.
Joshua Abraham
Schwartz is a Senior Forensic Biologist with the AFP who conducted the forensic
biology examination and analysis of the swabs
that were collected. A Biology
Court Report authored by Mr Schwartz was tendered.
Schwartz stated semen was not detected in any of the samples. However, both the
complainant and the appellant could not be excluded
as contributors to the mixed
DNA profile in the following four swabs obtained from the complainant:
(a) Labial/perineal swab;
(b) Low vagina swab;
(c) High vagina swab; and
(d) Endo-cervical swab.
Schwartz gave evidence that in these swabs, the DNA evidence indicated it was
more likely that the complainant and the appellant
were the two contributors to
the mixed DNA profile as opposed to the complainant and some unknown and
unrelated individual.
relation to the wet/dry perianal swab obtained from the complainant, Mr Schwartz
gave evidence that analysis of the sample provided
strong support for the
proposition that the appellant was the source of the profile.
Schwartz confirmed that it would be reasonable for the appellant’s DNA to
appear in the samples if the appellant and complainant
had been kissing and
holding hands throughout the night.
Schwartz gave evidence that there was extremely strong support that the
complainant was a contributor to the DNA present in the
swaps and fingernail
scrapings taken from the appellant’s hands.
appellant did not give evidence in the trial.
the heart of the appellant’s assertion that the jury’s verdict was
unreasonable sits the reliability of the complainant’s
evidence. The
appellant identified four aspects of the complainant’s evidence to
demonstrate that her evidence was incapable
of being relied upon and in turn
that the verdict of the jury was unreasonable:
(a) The circumstances in which the complainant met the appellant;
(b) The degree of interaction between the complainant and the appellant
throughout the evening;
(c) The contextual social engagement surrounding the complainant and
appellant’s interaction; and
(d) The complainant’s role in intimate activities that occurred outside
the bathroom.
appellant submitted that the “central issue” in the appeal was
whether it was open to the jury to find the complainant
reliable “when a
comparison between the complainant’s account and the available objective
evidence showed the complainant’s
recollections to be unreliable in a
substantial and material way”.
appellant characterised the complainant’s evidence, after comparison with
the Agreed Facts which were largely taken from
what was captured in CCTV
footage, as “glaringly lacking in accuracy”. Counsel for the
appellant argued that the complainant’s
recollection of the events that
led up to the interaction subject of the counts on the indictment was
objectively unreliable to such
an extent that it should have cast doubt on the
reliability of her account generally and in relation to what happened in the
cubicle at One22. Put another way, the complainant’s recollection
was so measurably inaccurate it necessarily created doubt
as to the accuracy of
her version of events in the toilet cubicle at One22.
appellant identified that the “most important” aspect of the
complainant’s evidence which demonstrated the “stark
between the complainant’s recollection and the objective evidence, was the
kiss between them captured by the
CCTV footage near the bar area at Mooseheads.
her evidence the complainant disagreed that she and the appellant had met
earlier in the night before their first kiss. She disagreed
that she had put her
phone number into the accused’s mobile phone. This interaction was
included in the Agreed Facts. The complainant
did not recall the further
encounter with the appellant at Mooseheads also captured on CCTV where they
danced together and kissed
on the dance floor.
appellant submitted that on the complainant’s version of her interaction
with the appellant prior to the incident subject
of the charges contact between
them was limited to a kiss that she pulled away from. The appellant contended
that the complainant’s
characterisation of the appellant as a
“random guy” who kissed her was at odds with her having interacted
with him minutes
before the kiss. The Agreed Facts and the CCTV footage were
said to demonstrate that the complainant’s account was inaccurate
further established that she had actively participated in “intimate”
activity with the appellant prior to the interaction
in the bathroom at One22.
appellant invoked additional inconsistencies in the complainant’s
recollection of surrounding interactions between the appellant
and her friends
in further support of the unreliability of her version. The complainant’s
version of events was that there
was no interaction between her friends and the
appellant other than one of her friends telling him to “get away”
their first interaction, namely the kiss at the bar at Mooseheads. Ms
G’s evidence and the Agreed Facts established that she
and a friend of the
appellant’s had been kissing and dancing throughout the night and Ms P and
Ms I had also spoken to the
Consideration
appellant submitted that the reliability of the complainant’s evidence
fatally undermined by both the
absence and inaccurate description of material interactions with the appellant
in her account. Counsel
for the appellant was sensibly careful to make clear
that the complainant’s response to the first kiss at the Mooseheads bar,
was not significant because it founded an inference that by her
‘active’ engagement in the kiss the complainant communicated
consent to sexual intercourse later in the toilet cubicle of One22. Rather, it
was said to demonstrate that her recollection
of the kiss at the bar was so
demonstrably inaccurate that her account of what occurred in the toilet cubicle
at One22 could not
reasonably be relied upon.
first point to observe is that whilst the CCTV footage demonstrated that the
complainant’s recollection of matters prior
to the acts reflected in the
counts on the indictment was inaccurate, the CCTV footage did not depict any
matter which went directly
to the accuracy of her account of what occurred in
the cubicle of the male toilet at One22. There was no CCTV footage from One22
that point in the evening and no eyewitness account of their engagement
immediately outside or once inside the toilet cubicle.
complainant was not ever shown the Mooseheads CCTV footage. This was, it would
seem, the result of a forensic decision made by
counsel for the appellant and
the prosecution. Whether or not there was an obligation on the appellant to put
the aspects of the
CCTV footage inconsistent with the complainant’s
version to her in cross-examination is a matter to which we will turn, but
the present purposes we note the jury were deprived of the opportunity to
consider any explanation by the complainant for the
inaccuracies or to observe
the complainant being confronted with the evidence which demonstrated
inaccuracy.
can be accepted that the accuracy of the complainant’s recollection of
what occurred in the One22 toilet cubicle was vital
notwithstanding how honest
she may have appeared. In making an assessment of her evidence, we would
respectfully adopt the observations
of McHugh J in
M v The Queen
The fact that his Honour was in dissent in that case does not derogate from the
force of those remarks, which accord with
the everyday experience of courts in
the Territory:
It is the everyday experience of the courts that honest witnesses are frequently
in error about the details of events. The more accounts
that they are asked to
give the greater is the chance that there will be discrepancies about details
and even inconsistencies in
the various accounts. Of course, it is legitimate to
test the honesty or accuracy of a witness's evidence by analysing the
discrepancies
and inconsistencies in his or her accounts of an incident. In a
case where accuracy of recollection is vital - such as the account
conversation in a fraud case or the description of a person where identity is
the issue - discrepancies and inconsistencies
in the witness's account may make
it impossible to accept that person's evidence, no matter how honest he or she
appears to be. But
in other cases, discrepancies and inconsistencies may be of
far less importance if the honesty of the witness, as opposed to the
accuracy of
the detail, is the crucial issue. If a jury thinks that the demeanour of the
witness or the probability of occurrence
of the witness's general account is
persuasive, they may reasonably think that discrepancies or even inconsistencies
concerning details
are of little moment.
our view the inconsistencies in the complainant’s account were not such as
to render her evidence as to the vital aspects
of it incapable of being relied
upon beyond reasonable doubt.
have concluded after an independent review of the evidence that it was well open
to the jury to consider that the failure by the
complainant to recall her first
meeting with the appellant, their dancefloor interactions at Mooseheads and
other “contextual
social engagement” as well as her description of
their first kiss at the Mooseheads bar, were not matters which fatally
her reliability as to the vital detail of the interaction with the
appellant in the One22 toilet cubicle. In circumstances where
the complainant
was not shown the Mooseheads CCTV footage before she gave evidence, there were
several matters for the jury to contemplate
in coming to consider the effect on
her overall reliability of any inconsistency in her version demonstrated by the
Mooseheads CCTV
footage and other evidence.
the complainant’s level of intoxication. It is trite to observe that the
jury were entitled to accept some of the complainant’s
evidence and reject
other parts of it. Common sense and human experience dictated that the
complainant’s state of intoxication
was a factor which could have
influenced her ability to recall details from the evening. Indeed, early on in
her evidence in chief
interview with police, the complainant said “Um the
next – like, I won’t lie. I had a fair bit to drink, so ---
don’t know about that or, like what happened, but I can’t remember a
lot of (indistinct).”
evidence demonstrated the complainant’s level of intoxication to be
highest before she attended One22 on the occasion the
acts in the toilet cubicle
took place. This was a consideration which influenced an assessment of the
accuracy of her overall recollection
of the evening and of the events proximate
to the time she was most intoxicated.
evidence established that the complainant arrived at Molly Bar with her friends
around 11pm. The complainant stated that she consumed
a cocktail at Molly Bar
after which described she felt “a lot more drunk” which made her
feel “slightly more unaware
of what was happening”. The complainant
said that this time at Molly Bar was her “drunkest point” explaining
she was drinking quickly and that she felt unstable which she clarified to
mean “like, not dizzy, but, like, I don’t
know. You can’t,
like, sense things as much”. The complainant said that she and her friends
stayed at Molly Bar for about
half an hour and then the group went to Mooseheads
which was where she first encountered the appellant. The complainant met the
while she was waiting at the bar for three ‘shot’ drinks
that she ordered. The complainant did not recall whether she
consumed any
alcohol at One22 after the ‘shot’ at Mooseheads. The complainant
said that at One22 she “didn’t
feel super drunk. Like, I felt like
I’d been drinking, like --- but nothing major”.
Agreed Facts presented the chronology of events to the jury as the complainant,
Ms G and Ms P attending One22 at 11:56pm after
they had finished at Molly Bar
but before they went to Mooseheads. The Agreed Facts included the complainant
and Ms G consuming a
shot of tequila at the One22 bar during this visit. The
Agreed Facts detailed that the complainant, Ms G and Ms P left One22 at 12:30am
before arriving at Mooseheads at 12:33am. Ms G and the complainant left
Mooseheads at 1:22am and ran through Verity Lane to return
observe that neither the complainant nor Ms G included the visit to One22 after
Molly Bar but before Mooseheads in their account
of their movements on the
evening. This visit to One22 accounted for an additional ‘shot’ of
alcohol that the complainant
did not refer to in her evidence. The appellant did
not identify the difference between the complainant’s chronology and the
chronology outlined in the Agreed Facts as an inconsistency which demonstrated
her to be unreliable. We do not consider it to be
of any real moment either on
its own or in combination with other inaccuracies in the complainant’s
effect of the evidence was that the time at Mooseheads was the last occasion in
the evening that the complainant recalled consuming
alcohol. The evidence
demonstrated the complainant spent around an hour at Mooseheads socialising and
dancing before moving back
to One22 after 1:22am. It was during this visit to
One22 that the events in the toilet cubicle with the appellant occurred. The
complainant’s
evidence was that her level of intoxication was highest at
Molly Bar and by the time she returned to One22 she did not feel “super
the effect of the complainant’s evidence with respect to the first kiss
with the appellant at the bar at Mooseheads
did not support a conclusion that
her recall of it was substantially inaccurate or that she substantially
misrepresented the nature
of the kiss or her participation in it, in her
account. The appellant submitted that the significance of her inaccurate recall
the kiss at the bar raised the prospect that her recall of the events in the
One22 toilet cubicle was similarly inaccurate. This
is a submission which ought
to be rejected after review of the CCTV footage and of the entirety of the
complainant’s evidence
complainant readily accepted that she had likely kissed the appellant back
despite the “random” nature of the kiss.
Her description of the
circumstances of its occurrence was not inconsistent with the Mooseheads CCTV
complainant said of the kiss, “I just turned around and he started kissing
me...I kind of just pulled away. And my friend
kept, one of my friends just kept
telling me, like ‘just get away’, you know but I was waiting for my
CCTV footage captured the appellant standing very close behind the complainant
near the bar at Mooseheads without drawing the
complainant’s attention to
his presence. After a number of seconds, the appellant moved around the
complainant to her right
before touching her right arm briefing and quickly
moving his body very close to her body with his face very near her face. As the
appellant moved towards the complainant, she appeared to move, or at least lean,
back. The interaction had the appearance of the
appellant ‘walking’
the complainant back a few steps by moving his body toward her body. The
complainant turned her head
in response to the appellant touching her arm and
after moving very close to the complainant, the appellant kissed her directly on
the mouth. The complainant put her right arm around the appellant’s neck
and appeared to engage in the kiss with the appellant.
The kiss went on for
around 9 seconds before the complainant’s friend appeared to notice and
touched the complainant on her
arm at which point the complainant pulled away
from the kiss.
is plain from the footage is that the complainant was accurate when she
described the kiss as “random” in the sense
that there was a very
short period between the appellant touching her right arm and kissing her. The
appellant appeared to move
swiftly to bring his body and his face very close to
the complainant. The action had the appearance of the appellant being determined
to effect physical contact with the complainant and the complainant appeared
taken by surprise, at least initially. There was no
real ‘lead up’
to the kiss, it having occurred broken in time, albeit minutes, from their first
interaction reflected
in the Agreed Facts which involved the appellant’s
mobile phone.
for the appellant submitted that the effect of the complainant’s evidence
was to inaccurately characterise the first
kiss as an “ambush” by
the appellant that she did not participate in “actively or
consensually”. Further,
the appellant submitted that the
complainant’s description of pulling back from the kiss was incompatible
with the CCTV footage.
review of the CCTV footage demonstrated that a characterisation of the kiss as
an “ambush” was not inaccurate in terms
of the initiation and the
determined pursuit of it apparent from the appellant’s physical conduct.
The physical action engaged
in by the appellant did not offer the complainant
any substantial opportunity to protest or to agree, before he placed his lips on
her lips. Notwithstanding that the appellant “touched her arm” and
said “you’re the most beautiful girl”,
the complainant’s
evidence that she did not “consent” to the kiss in the sense that
she did not agree to its initiation,
on viewing the CCTV footage which did not
include sound, was not completely at odds with what the CCTV footage revealed.
To characterise
the kiss as an ‘ambush’, that is physical contact by
the appellant which took the complainant by surprise, if that was
the effect of
the complainant’s evidence, was not an exaggeration or entirely
inconsistent with the CCTV footage.
response to and participation in the kiss as well as her evidence that
“she just kind of pulled away” fell to be assessed
in the entirety
of her evidence which included ready acceptance that she likely kissed the
appellant back and that she “didn’t
think a whole lot of it”
[the kiss] and further, she “wasn’t, like, totally against it, but
just, I mean it just
happened”. When it was suggested to the complainant
she did not “pull away” from the kiss, she responded “I
disagree. I was part of it for a while but not for long and I pulled away as the
kiss ends”.
CCTV footage revealed that this was not inconsistent with the CCTV footage. The
kiss which lasted for around 9 seconds ended when
the complainant pulled away
after her friend appeared to notice the kiss and make physical contact with the
complainant.
should also be observed that the complainant not being shown the CCTV footage
and not recalling the interaction minutes before
the kiss with the appellant
using his mobile phone, there was no evidence that the complainant realised or
appreciated that the “random
guy” who kissed her at the bar was in
fact a person she had interacted with minutes earlier. The CCTV footage is clear
in black and white. There was no evidence about the lighting in the bar area
where the complainant and the appellant first met and
the complainant’s description of the appellant as a “random
guy” was not inconsistent with her having only
met him that night in the
minutes preceding the kiss. The Agreed Facts established that the first
interaction between the complainant
and the appellant at the bar where the
appellant gave her his mobile phone went for “approximately one
minute” and there
was no evidence as to the detail of any conversation
between them. This brief interaction with the appellant’s mobile phone
minutes before, did not render the complainant’s description of the kiss
and the appellant as “random” inaccurate
or inconsistent with the
circumstances.
were other details of the first kiss at the bar which supported the
complainant’s account of it. In cross-examination
the complainant
clarified that when she described that the appellant “hung around”
her after the kiss at the Mooseheads
bar “the hung around was more in the
general area where I was. He wasn’t specifically hanging, like, off me but
within that, like, vicinity”. The footage demonstrated this to be
entirely accurate.
the complainant specifically described after the kiss at the bar with the
appellant she “just kept waiting for the shots”
and that her friends
dropped the lid to a flask that they had been “playing around with”.
The complainant said that when
the drinks arrived, they took them and then went
“searching for the lid” on the floor. Again, a review of the
revealed this description to be accurate.
the complainant’s version did not account for kissing the appellant on the
dancefloor at Mooseheads, her response to
the suggestion that she had kissed him
on other occasions was not unequivocal. Her response in cross-examination to
questions which
sought to confirm her version that the only occasion they kissed
was at the bar at Mooseheads included “I do not remember.
I’m aware, yes, but I do not remember otherwise” and to the
suggestion that they had kissed on the dancefloor
she responded,
“I’d disagree” as well as, “I do not remember” and
“I do not recall that”.
She was also asked whether she had put her
arms around the appellant’s neck when they did kiss at the Mooseheads bar
she responded “I do not recall that” and later to that same
suggestion she responded, “I’m unsure”
and “[t]o my
knowledge I did not”.
point being that the complainant did not entirely reject the suggestion that she
had kissed the appellant on other occasions or
that she had put her arms around
his neck. The complainant’s responses to those propositions came absent
the knowledge that
there was CCTV footage which contradicted some of her
assertions and without being confronted with the footage. Whilst she agreed
in her initial interview with police two weeks after the event, she described
the kiss at the bar as the only time they kissed,
the effect of her evidence was
that she did not recall any other occasion where they kissed.
CCTV footage of the kiss at the bar at Mooseheads did not in our view,
substantially damage the reliability of the complainant’s
evidence to such
an extent that the entirety of her evidence was necessarily rendered unreliable.
the complainant’s response to the interaction in the toilet cubicle of
One22 was compelling evidence. As was confirmed
by this Court in
Incandela v
[2023] ACTCA 41
Garay v The Queen (No 3)
[2023] ACTCA
at [53]) and by now should be well accepted,
corroboration of a single complainant is not necessary for a finding of guilt in
prosecution of sexual offences.
so, in this matter the complainant’s recollection of what she did and said
immediately after the interaction with the appellant
in the toilet at One22 was
corroborated by CCTV footage from the alley and by witnesses who directly
engaged with her. In addition,
the complainant’s immediate complaint and
demeanour, which included hysterically crying, were consistent with what she
as having occurred in the toilet cubicle with the appellant.
we observe that the approach of the appellant in the trial did not challenge the
reliability of the complainant’s
assertion that there had been penile
vaginal sexual intercourse between them in the male toilet at One22. In her
closing address
to the jury, counsel for the appellant said, “you can see
by now that there's not really any issue about the fact of penile
intercourse occurring. That's not something that you're going to have to spend
much time deliberating upon, whether that
element's been satisfied”.
were three central factual disputes. First, for count 3, whether anal
penetration had occurred at all. Secondly, for all three
counts, whether the
complainant consented to the sexual acts and finally, the appellant’s
state of mind with respect to consent.
The strategy adopted by the appellant to
the complainant’s evidence as to consent, challenged the absence of it
though did not directly challenge her version that by the time the
act for count 2 occurred she had asked the appellant to stop and
was crying.
approach in cross-examination of the complainant was to contest his capacity to
have observed her face, to have noticed
that she was trying to move away and to
have heard any protest. This was of particular relevance for count 2 given the
of the acts. The lighting, music and the complainant’s position
faced away from the appellant were suggested to have obstructed
his ability to
perceive that she was not consenting. The complainant accepted that it was
“possible” that the appellant’s
response in becoming confused
and asking, “where are you going?” was consistent with him not
hearing her say “stop”,
though she maintained that the environment
in the toilet cubicle was such that her face could be seen and her voice could
complainant rejected entirely the suggestion that she had “changed her
mind midway through the second penile-vaginal sex
light of the approach taken to the appellant’s defence, critical to the
finding of guilt on count 2 was acceptance by the
jury of the
complainant’s account that she repeatedly said “stop” and
began to cry when count 2 occurred as well
as her description of the environment
of the toilet cubicle. In this regard the complainant was unequivocal and
consistent in her
is useful to record the basis upon which the appellant was sentenced by Baker J
on 10 April 2025:
DPP v Umunakwe
[2025] ACTSC 139.
There was no
challenge in this appeal to the verdicts of the jury based on any inconsistency
between them. Nor could there be in
our view. Baker J made factual findings as
to the basis in evidence for the jury verdicts at [22]-[24]:
With respect to count 3, the victim herself acknowledged in cross-examination
that the pain she experienced may have been caused
by the appellant’s
penis touching her perianal area. A readily apparent explanation for the
jury’s verdict of not guilty
with respect to count 3 was that the jury may
have had a doubt as to whether anal penetration in fact occurred: see
DPP v Umunakwe
[2024] ACTSC 229.
Such a verdict says
nothing about the credibility or the reliability of the victim’s
The difference in verdicts between counts 1 and 2 are also readily explained. As
outlined above, at the time of count 1, the victim
had followed the offender
into the disabled toilet stall. The offender asked her for oral sex, which she
refused. The victim’s
evidence was that she did not say anything further
to him at that stage. The jury heard that the toilet stall was not well lit and
the victim was facing away from the offender. The jury may have been prepared to
give the offender the benefit of a reasonable doubt
as to whether the offender
knew that the victim was not consenting or was reckless as to whether the victim
was not consenting at
the time of this intercourse. The jury may also
have been prepared to give the offender the benefit of a reasonable doubt, by
that the accused’s actions (the earlier kissing, entering into the
toilet stall, asking the victim for oral sex, and then asking
the victim to turn
around) amounted to a reasonable attempt to ascertain her consent.
In contrast to count 1, the victim’s evidence was that, during the course
of count 2, she repeatedly told the accused to stop,
she tried to get away and
she was crying. In these circumstances, the jury may well have been satisfied
that although the offender
had an honest belief as to consent during
count 1, he could not have had an honest belief as to her consent after she
made her lack
of consent apparent during the acts constituting count 2.
respectfully adopt that analysis. In finding the appellant guilty of count 2,
the jury must have rejected the possibility that
he held an honest belief as to
consent once the complainant verbally and physically demonstrated that she was
not consenting. That
is, the outcome on count 2 turned on the
complainant’s evidence about the physical and verbal manifestation of her
consent to the act and the appellant’s appreciation of her
this regard, the complainant’s immediate reaction to the acts in the
cubicle at One22 went to the credibility and reliability
of her account about
that critical aspect of her evidence. The complainant’s account that she
did not consent was consistent
with her demeanour and with her immediate and
spontaneous complaint. Her account of what she did and said in the immediate
was corroborated by direct eyewitness evidence.
the moment that the complainant was first engaged by Ms L in the alleyway, a
stranger to her, she complained of having been sexually
assaulted. Ms L observed
the complainant to be by herself in the alley and crying hysterically. The
initial disclosure made by the
complainant to Ms L was consistently repeated to
Ms G, to attending police, to medical professionals and ultimately, to the jury.
The detail of the complainant’s account of what occurred in the toilet
cubicle in One22 did not alter in any substantial way
on each occasion that she
complaint evidence and the evidence about the complainant’s
contemporaneous presentation in the alley was a powerful body
of evidence with
respect to the critical issue of her lack of consent and the reliability of her
account of the sexual contact in
the One22 toilet cubicle. This evidence was
substantial, compelling and corroborated by CCTV footage and eyewitnesses.
absence from the complainant’s account of interactions with the appellant
earlier in the evening and her failure to recall
the detail of interactions her
friends had with the appellant and with his friends, did not necessarily
undermine, or even detract
from, the significant body of evidence which went to
the reliability of her account in vital respects.
the inconsistencies in the complainant’s version were of the kind that
might be accepted to feature in an account
with a commonsense explanation for a
point in time where the account was less accurate. In this case, there were two
factors which
explained the absence of earlier interactions with the appellant
in the complainant’s account; her level of intoxication to
which we have
already referred and the nature of the interactions.
is consistent with human experience and the experience of courts, that the
“random” first kiss and the acts in the
One22 toilet cubicle
implanted in the complainant’s memory, whilst other interactions with the
appellant at Mooseheads did
not. This was reasoning which also applied to
matters even further detached from the serious conduct she went on to complain
namely the “contextual social engagement” being interactions
between the complainant’s friends and the appellant
and his friends. Those
contextual matters might reasonably have taken on less or little significance in
the complainant’s recollection
of the evening in the scheme of the much
more serious conduct about which she went on to complain.
nature of the interactions that the complainant was able to recall with the
appellant and their emotional effect upon her, was
a reasonable explanation for
why she might recall them and not recall other interactions with the appellant.
The first kiss involved
her feeling shocked and the interaction in the toilet
cubicle at One 22 included physical pain and fear. The complainant’s
response in kissing the appellant back did not take away from what the CCTV
footage confirmed; the first kiss
random in the sense it was not
solicited by her and took her by surprise. That first kiss and the acts in the
cubicle at One22 represented
conduct that the complainant described,
effectively, as foisted upon her by the appellant. It was unsurprising then that
the “random”
first kiss and the interaction in the toilet cubicle at
One22 were the two interactions with the appellant that the complainant recalled
with some detail, particularly when viewed in the context of her level of
intoxication and the point in time it was highest.
note that the complainant’s evidence about the events in the One22 toilet
cubicle included surrounding detail supportive
of her capacity to have
appreciated the environment and the interaction with the appellant. She
explained that she had not ever been
in a male toilet before and was
“shocked” by how it looked. She remembered that there was man
already in the disabled
toilet who had not finished urinating and that he was
wearing something “red”. She recalled that the disabled toilet
“at the back” of the bathroom. She explained that it was the
appellant who moved her underwear to the side and that
it was her right shoulder
which was pressed “up between the toilet and the wall at the back and kind
of, like, to my side.
And he just keeps going”. The complainant was
challenged about her reference to her handbag resting on the toilet
and clarified what she meant, maintaining she was not
tailoring her evidence to fit the photos of the toilet she had been shown during
her evidence which revealed the toilet did not have a ‘seat’ saying
“I’m trying to further explain my evidence”.
point to make is that the interaction with the appellant in the One22 toilet
cubicle was the kind of interaction that the jury
were entitled to reason would
likely stand out in the complainant’s mind in the context of the evening.
Reasonably, comprehensive
details of the dancing, drinking, general interactions
and socialising that she and her friends engaged in as they moved from venue
venue prior to the acts in the toilet, could have taken on less significance in
the scheme of what she went on to experience.
the trial judge properly instructed the jury in her summing up:
In making an assessment of the evidence of the witnesses, you're also entitled
to have regard to your understanding and experience
of the nature of memory. You
might consider whether some kinds of events are likely to be imprinted on the
memory in a more lasting
way than others. So for example, a person might
remember a particular event some years ago but be unable to say what they had
breakfast last Wednesday. You might also consider whether it's easier to
recall an event rather than a conversation about an event.
the complainant made important concessions relevant to her credibility and
reliability. Significantly, she accepted that
she may have perceived contact
with her perianal area as penetration of her anus and that she kissed the
appellant back. These material
concessions demonstrated the complainant’s
willingness to accept that there were aspects of her evidence which were
or about which she may have been confused. In circumstances where she
was willing to concede those matters, she remained clear and
consistent as to
the nature and detail of the interaction with the appellant in the One22 toilet
cubicle. Critically, she maintained
that she was not consenting to the sexual
acts engaged in by the appellant and that for the act in count 2 she verbalised
of consent and began to cry. The verdicts returned by the jury, as
Baker J observed, reflected careful consideration of her evidence
including the
effect of her concession with respect to count 3 and the nature and detail of
their overall interactions, as well as
the lead up to count 1.
this Court observed in
Hudson v DPP
[2024] ACTCA 28
In assessing the complainant’s evidence, it must be
borne in mind that “memory is not like a video tape which accurately
records all details of a particular event in sequence”:
AWK v Tasmania
has been repeatedly observed, it would be a rare case where a witness gives
evidence without discrepancy or inconsistency. Indeed,
a perfect account from a
witness may well found an inference that their version of events is a rote
performance and not an actual
recollection of an experience. Not every
inconsistency or discrepancy will affect the reliability of a witness, nor
should it, the
capacity for inaccuracy being a feature of human memory. Reliable
evidence may nonetheless contain unsatisfactory aspects, the presence
do not necessarily render other aspects entirely incapable of acceptance beyond
reasonable doubt.
observation in
MFA v The Queen
[2002] HCA 53
per McHugh,
Gummow and Kirby JJ is apposite:
It is necessary to consider cumulatively all of the aspects of the evidence of
which he complains, and to ask whether, in totality,
it represents an instance
of verdicts that are unreasonable or unsupported by the evidence so as to result
in a significant possibility
of a miscarriage of justice.
There are, it is true, some aspects of the evidence that are less than wholly
satisfactory. But that is not uncommon in most trials.
Experience suggests
that juries, properly instructed on the law (as they were in this case), are
usually well able to evaluate conflicts
and imperfections of evidence. In
the end, the appellate court must ask itself whether it considers that a
miscarriage of justice
has occurred authorising and requiring its
intervention.
(Citations omitted.)
inaccuracies in the complainant’s evidence were readily identifiable. That
said, the Mooseheads CCTV footage in so far as
it revealed the
complainant’s version to be inaccurate was not in our view “a
powerful body of evidence” which
went to the possibility of the offences
having occurred at all. Nor did the inaccuracies inescapably render the
complainant’s
account of what occurred in the toilet cubicle at One22
unreliable. Counsel for the appellant sought to characterise this matter
analogous to the circumstances in
. That is, it was not the
credibility of the complainant that was fatally undermined by the inaccuracies
in her evidence, but the
reliability. Counsel submitted that this was a matter
where the complainant’s “compelling” testimony was so
“undermined
by other evidence demonstrating its frailty that it cannot be
accepted beyond reasonable doubt”. After a review of the whole
evidence we do not agree.
jury assessed the complainant’s version in the face of what CCTV footage
and other evidence revealed. The extent and nature
of the contact between the
appellant and the complainant in the lead up to their interaction in the One22
toilet cubicle was apparent
in the CCTV footage. The jury were well placed to
determine whether the inaccuracies in the complainant’s account revealed
by the footage and other evidence were such as to undermine the reliability of
her entire account. An assessment of the complainant’s
reliability in this
matter was not entirely divorced from an assessment of her credibility in
circumstances where her account as
to the vital interaction with the appellant
was not directly contradicted by other evidence. Unlike
case as we have identified there was independent evidence to support the
complainant’s account which went to both
her credibility and her
reliability. The advantage of a jury in assessing credibility has previously
been described by this Court
at [31] as follows:
The assessment of credibility involves more than a lawyerly analysis of the
words on the page of a transcript. The advantage enjoyed
by the tribunal of
fact has myriad elements that can never be replicated in the sterile atmosphere
of an appellate court. It is the
difference between reading a play and seeing it
performed. Full allowance cannot be made for the advantage of presiding over a
without an honest reckoning of the extent to which observations can be
made, tone and expression interpreted, apparent inconsistencies
anomalies synthesised with other evidence, mistakes understood,
misunderstandings resolved and judgments made as words
are spoken by a witness.
Notwithstanding
the presence of inaccuracies in the complainant’s account, we have
concluded that it was open to the jury to
accept beyond reasonable doubt that
she was not consenting to the act constituting count 2 and the circumstances in
which it occurred.
Having accepted her evidence, the jury were entitled to
reject the possibility that the appellant honestly believed that she was
consenting to the act for count 2.
follows that the appellant has not demonstrated that despite the jury finding
the complainant a credible and reliable witness,
“the evidence as a whole
was not capable of excluding a reasonable doubt” (
that the jury’s verdict was unreasonable,
or could not be supported,
having regard to the evidence.
Accordingly,
the appeal should be dismissed.
Evidence Act
concluded that the appellant has not established the single ground of appeal, it
is unnecessary to consider the Director’s
submission at the appeal hearing
Evidence Act 2011
(ACT) obliged the appellant to show
the complainant the CCTV footage from Mooseheads in cross-examination.
those reasons, we make the following order:
(1) The appeal is dismissed.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and thirty-eight [138] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Date: 19 August 2025
RTF format (376 KB)
Signed PDF/A format