Mckie v Al-Hasani and Kenoss Contractors Pty Ltd (in liq) [2015] ACTIC 1 (23 June 2015)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL
Case Title:
BRETT MCKIE v MUNIR AL-HASANI & KENOSS CONTRACTORS PTY LTD (IN LIQ)
[2015] ACTIC 1
Hearing Date(s):
23, 24 & 27 February 2015
Industrial Magistrate Walker
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL – safety duty – compliance – exposure to risk
of death or serious injury or illness – control.
CORPORATIONS – Officer.
Legislation Cited:
Work Health & Safety Act 2011 ACT
Corporations Act 2001
Cases Cited:
WorkCover Authority (New South Wales) (Inspector Mansell) v. Daly Smith
Corporation (Aust) Pty Ltd and Smith
[2004] NSWIRComm 349
Australian Securities and Investment Commission
[2012] HCA 18
Texts Cited:
Barry Sheriff and Michael Tooma,
Understanding The Model Work Health And
, (CCH 2010)
Director of Public Prosecutions on
behalf of WorkSafe ACT (Prosecution)
Mr Munir Al-Hasani (1st Defendant)
Kenoss Contractors Pty Ltd (in liq) (2nd
Representation:
Ms Sara Gul (Prosecution)
Self-represented (1st Defendant)
No Appearance (2nd Defendant)
Director of Public Prosecutions (Prosecution)
Self-represented (1st Defendant)
No Appearance (2nd Defendant)
File Number(s):
CC 40209 & CC 40210of 2014
INDUSTRIAL MAGISTRATE WALKER
1. The two defendants are charged with each committing an
offence contrary to section 32 of the Work Health and Safety Act (2011)
(“the Act”). Kenoss Contractors Pty Ltd (“Kenoss”) is
charged as a corporate defendant whilst Mr Munir
Al-Hasani is charged pursuant
to section 27 of the Act as an officer of the corporation in his personal
2. At the time of the prosecution, Kenoss was in liquidation and
did not appear.
3. Section 32 of the Act creates a category 2 offence of
failing to comply with a health and safety duty which is committed if:
the person has a health and safety duty; and
(b) the person fails to comply with that duty; and
(c) the failure exposes an individual to a risk of death or serious injury
or illness.
4. The maximum penalty for an offence committed by a body
corporate is $1,500,000 and for an offence committed by an officer as defined,
5. These are criminal offences. The prosecution bears the onus of
proving the offences beyond reasonable doubt.
6. Pursuant to section 12A of
the Act, strict liability applies to each physical element of each of the
offences under the Act unless
stated otherwise in the section containing the
7. Section 27 establishes the duty of an officer. The fact that a
person is an officer of the corporation requires proof of that circumstance
beyond reasonable doubt.
8. The prosecution alleges that the corporate
defendant failed to provide a work environment without risks to health and
failed to maintain a safe system of work. In respect to the personal
defendant, the prosecution alleges that as he was an officer
of the corporation
and failed to exercise due diligence to prevent the failings of the corporate
The Circumstances
9. Kenoss contracted with the ACT Government for road
resurfacing works at the intersection of Barry Drive and Clunies Ross Street
Turner (“the Barry Drive project”). In support of that work, two
compounds were provided for use by Kenoss, being
the main site compound on
nearby Froggatt Street, which included a site office, some temporary buildings,
as well as housing plant
and some materials, and a second, smaller storage site
a short distance away at the intersection of Boldrewood Street and Hackett
Gardens, both in Turner. The second of the sites was used solely to store
10. Kenoss had at the relevant time only one director, Mrs
Beverly Brendas. Her husband, Mr Spiros Brendas, was employed as the General
Manager. Their son, Mr Dimitri Brendas, was employed as the safety officer. He
had no experience or qualification in safety systems.
11. Mr Al-Hasani, a
well qualified engineer, was employed as Project Manager. At the time, he was
managing a number of projects for
the company. Mr Sandeep Thorat was the project
engineer for the Barry Drive project. Mr Louis Clarke was the general foreman.
12. David O’Meley Truck Hire was retained by Kenoss on an hourly rate
basis to deliver materials as required. The principal,
Mr David O’Meley,
was contacted by telephone with instructions. He or a nominated driver would
then collect and deliver materials.
He had never had a site induction nor
attended a safety talk prior to attending the site. When he made deliveries the
load was dumped
on Barry Drive itself. A spotter assisted during the dumping.
13. He employed Mr Michael Booth. Mr Booth had also made a number of
deliveries for the Barry Drive project. On the afternoon of 23
March 2012 he
attended to make a delivery of road base and took it to the Boldrewood Street
site. Mr Louis Clarke, foreman on the
job, said that this was Mr Booth’s
second delivery for the day. As was most common, the first delivery was directly
site at Barry Drive. Mr Clarke stated that he directed Mr Booth to dump
the he second load that day at the “main compound”
but that, without
direction or obvious reason, he relocated to the small compound.
Clarke said that he had told the workers to stop using the small compound
because he considered it was dangerous with low hanging
electrical wires. He
also stated, nonetheless, that he left the site unlocked, initially just during
the day but later permanently
as he thought that another contractor was going to
take over the site.
15. Mr Booth attended the Boldrewood Street compound
alone. Whilst there was fencing around the compound, it was not locked. There
was a general sign marked “construction site, keep out” but
otherwise no warning signage at the compound itself, nor
on the lines above it,
indicating the presence of live power lines. It is apparent from photographs
taken that day the visibility
of the lines was obscured by foliage. It was a
cloudy day which made the lines less visible. In addition there were wind gusts
up to 54 km/h which would have set the lines in motion.
16. When Mr Booth
tipped his load, the bucket of the truck either came very close to, or contacted
with, the power lines forming an
electrical arc. This is evident because there
were burn marks under the tyres which were also partially deflated. Mr Booth
exited the truck as he was found very shortly thereafter collapsed on
the ground. He had been electrocuted. Attempts at resuscitation
failed. Mr Booth
subsequently died as a result of electrocution and its
complications.
17. Clearly there was a significant risk of serious injury or
death, which in fact manifested in this case.
18. Mr Al-Hasani and Mr Clarke
gave evidence that they had instructed workers not to use the site, however,
photographic evidence
demonstrated that the site was in fact being used and Mr
Clarke’s evidence confirmed, on review of the phoptographs, that must
been so contrary to his instruction. An adjacent resident, Mr Mario Dosen,
described observing use of the compound as a “loading
gravel and concrete pipes being moved “every so often”.
Nicholas Hearn, a Kenoss labourer, gave evidence that he was inducted in to the
Barry Drive project and its three sites. As
to the overhead power lines he was
instructed to “look up and survive”. He stated that there were no
signs or “tiger
tails” (flags) attached to them. He said that the
Boldrewood Street compound was prepared by laying a base and putting up a
with manually operated gates. Anyone authorised could go to the site however Mr
Clarke had decided that the site ought not
be used much because of the power
line danger, an approach which he discussed with the workers. Nonetheless, it
was used after this
discussion on occasion. Mr Hearn also gave evidence that
safety concerns were raised with Mr Clarke but that control over fixing
problems fell to Kenoss management from Mr Al-Hasani through to Mr Spiros
20. The risk was obvious, even without safety qualifications. It was
certainly well recognised in the construction industry. There
was in place at
the time a Code of Practice entitled “How To Manage Work Health And Safety
Risks” which made specific
mention of the issue at page seven. In
addition, Work Safe ACT had issued a Guidance Note in November 2010 on
“Working Near
Overhead Power Lines” which was available to those in
the construction industry. Mr Al-Hasani had personally been served with
prohibition notice on behalf of Kenoss regarding working near power lines in
August 2008 on another project.
21. Indeed, a Kenoss’ Safe Work Method
Statement (“SWMS”) dated 9 December 2011 addressed the issue of
construction
under overhead power lines and highlighted a number of possible
controls. The issue was brought to the attention of Kenoss workers
at a Tool Box
talk on 25 February 2012 but Mr Booth was not there.
22. Mr Booth attended
the Barry Drive project at least thirteen times between 8 and 23 March 2012,
evidenced by his employer’s
invoices. He was clearly aware of the
Boldrewood compound, as he used it, at least on 23 March. There was no sign on
the compound
itself declaring it a Kenoss site so logically he must have been
told by someone that it was.
23. There were a number of relatively simple
safety measures which could have been utilised to mitigate or eliminate the risk
with the power lines above the Boldrewood Street compound. These
• not using that site at all,
• limiting access to
the site, particularly by securing the fence around it,
• having power
turned off if a delivery to the site was required,
• requiring that any
deliveries be accompanied by a spotter,
• providing appropriate signage
as to the particular risk of overhead power lines, consisting of a sign on the
gate or fence
surrounding the site,
• placing flags or “tiger
tails” on the lines themselves to make them more
• warning all potential users to the site of the presence of,
and risk associated with, the lines at the Boldrewood compound
in particular
through a site induction.
Control of the Boldrewood Street compound
24. Mr Al-Hasani placed considerable emphasis on the fact that
as far as he was concerned control of the site had passed from Kenoss
Contractors to another corporate contractor, Cord Civil Pty Ltd
(“Cord’), prior to the incident. For this contention,
he relied on
his claim that he was informed by Superintendent Brown, an agent of the ACT
Government, that Cord had been granted possession
of the site as of 14 March
2012. He further stated that on 16 March 2012, in a co-ordination meeting
between ACT Government, the
superintendent, Cord and Kenoss, that Kenoss were
directed to stop using the compound and that Cord’s foreman was directed
to contact Kenoss in order to organise “removal of the compound”.
25. However, the overwhelming evidence is to the effect that Kenoss retained
formal control of the site as at 23 March 2012. The site
was a small parcel of
public land. Mr Hearn explained that road base had been placed on the site to
make it suitable for storage
of construction materials. That was still in place
on 23 March 2012. A government permit was required for use of the area. A permit
was granted to Kenoss by Mr Darren Gerard, the Public Use Coordinator of the
Territory’s Land Use Unit within Territory and
Municipal Services
(“TAMS”). It was for the period 21 December 2011 to 20 September
2012. Cord could not use the land
without being issued with a permit. Issue of
that permit would have led to revocation of the Kenoss permit. No new permit had
issued at the relevant time and the Kenoss permit remained current. Staff
within Civil Infrastructure and Capital Works for Economic
Development, also
within TAMS, were unaware of any change to responsibility for the site.
Particularly, Mr Nigel Ford, Cord’s
managing director indicated that the
discussion of 14 March 2012 related to a future arrangement between Cord and
Kenoss. Kenoss
was required to clear and make good the site before new works
could be completed. This would have included clearing any remaining
from the compound and the firm base which had been put in place. The photographs
make it evident that that had not been
done. There was material other than that
which been deposited by Mr Booth that day already in the compound. I am not
satisfied that
a formal handover had been effected in accordance with
contractual arrangements, but even if it had, Kenoss still had practical control
over the site and its safety duty continued as at 23 March 2012.
26. It is a
tragic irony that the work to be completed on the site by Cord was to relocate
the electricity cables below ground.
Elements of the offence
27. There is no issue that Kenoss was conducting a business or
undertaking in relation to the road resurfacing project at Barry Drive;
a $4.5 million contract.
28. Kenoss clearly had a duty of care to those who
visited its sites, including sub-contractors such David O’Meley Truck Hire
and its employees including Mr Booth.
29. That duty was clearly breached in
failing to take adequate measures to address the risk posed by live overhead
electric cables.
The general risk relating to overhead lines was identified and
broadly addressed in the SWMS. However, the specific risk at the Boldrewood
Street compound, although identified, was inadequately addressed. The limited
measure of restricting Kenoss’ employees’
use of the site did not
satisfy their safety duty. There is no evidence that the risk to other visitors
was even contemplated never
mind addressed in the multiple simple ways available
and identified above.
30. In respect to Kenoss, I find the offence
31. The issues in respect to Mr Al-Hasani, whilst overlapping with
those relevant to Kenoss, are different in a material way. The
offence relies on
establishing whether Mr Al-Hasani was an “officer” of Kenoss as
defined, and, if so, whether he acquitted
his safety duty by the positive
exercise of due diligence as required by s.27(5) of the Act.
32. In the text
“Understanding The Model Work Health And Safety Act”, Barry Sheriff
and Michael Tooma, leading authorities
in this area, noted: “One of the
most important reforms of the model work health and safety act is the
introduction of a duty
of care on officers of companies and other organisations.
The introduction of a position duty is new to the workplace health and
regulatory framework.... In all jurisdictions, officers are merely attributed
liability to conduct that is committed by the
company, rather than being
allocated to duty in their own
They continue: “The approach taken by the model WHS Act, however,
emphasises the corporate governance responsibilities of officers.
The personal
liability in that context reflects the culpability of company officers in
failing to meet the corporate governance responsibilities
by preventing the
corporate misconduct. Consistent with this rationale, officers under the model
laws will have a duty to ensure
due diligence. Thus, their attributed liability
is transformed into a positive duty to ensure corporate compliance through sound
corporate governance.”
event that Mr Al-Hasani is found to be an officer of Kenoss, then he holds a
positive duty to exercise due diligence in
respect to safety
compliance.
34. Subsection 27(5) of the Act requires that:
"due diligence" includes
taking reasonable steps—
(a) to acquire and keep up-to-date knowledge of work health and safety
matters; and
(b) to gain an understanding of the nature of the operations of the
business or undertaking of the person conducting the business
or undertaking and
generally of the hazards and risks associated with those operations; and
(c) to ensure that the person conducting the business or undertaking has
available for use, and uses, appropriate resources and processes
to eliminate or
minimise risks to health and safety from work carried out as part of the conduct
of the business or undertaking;
(d) to ensure that the person conducting the business or undertaking has
appropriate processes for receiving and considering information
incidents, hazards and risks and responding in a timely way to that information;
(e) to ensure that the person conducting the business or undertaking has,
and implements, processes for complying with any duty or
obligation of the
person conducting the business or undertaking under this Act; and
(f) to verify the provision and use of the resources and processes
referred to in paragraphs (c) to (e).
35. As project manager responsible for the Barry Drive project,
Mr Al-Hasani was fully aware of the Boldrewood Street compound and
his own evidence, of the risks associated with the live overhead power lines
above it. He did not exercise due diligence
in respect to safety compliance. His
failures in that respect were multiplicitous. They include, for example, as to
sub-section s27(5)(c),
the SWMS was general in nature and inadequate to address
the particular risk evident at the Boldrewood compound. Mr Booth was not
of it. Simply directing that the site not be used by large machines (if in fact
such a direction was given) is patently inadequate,
particularly given the
involvement of others in the project, such as Mr Booth in his capacity as a
delivery driver. A further example
of the lack of due diligence, as to
sub-section 27(5)(e), was the readiness of Mr Al-Hasani to a relinquish
responsibility for the
identified risk to the foreman, with no process in place
to ensure compliance.
36. As was observed by Staunton J in WorkCover
Authority (New South Wales) (Inspector Mansell) v. Daly Smith Corporation (Aust)
Ltd and Smith
[2004] NSWIRComm 349
, due diligence:
done by merely hoping others would or could do what they were told, but also
ensuring they have the skills to execute
the job they are required to do and
then ensuring compliance with that in accordance with the safe standards
established. Compliance
requires a process of review and auditing, both formal
and random, in order to ensure that the safe standards established are in
being adhered to and under ongoing review”.
37. However, the
requirement to exercise “due diligence” pursuant to section 27 only
arises if Mr Al-Hasani was as “officer”
of Kenoss. This position is
defined in the Act by reference to
Corporations Act 2001
(C’th). Some positions in a corporation are clearly identified as falling
within the definition, for example, a director or
a liquidator. Others are
defined by the description in sub-section 9(b) as a person:
who makes, or participates in making, decisions that affect the whole, or a
substantial part, of the business of the corporation;
(ii) who has the capacity to affect significantly the corporation's
financial standing; or
(iii) in accordance with whose instructions or wishes the directors of the
corporation are accustomed to act (excluding advice given
by the person in the
proper performance of functions attaching to the person's professional capacity
or their business relationship
with the directors or the corporation)...
38. In Shafron v Australian Securities and Investment
[2012] HCA 18
to [26], regarding the first limb of
sub-section 9(b), the full Court of the High Court observed:
the inquiry required by this paragraph of the definition must be directed to
what role the person in question plays
in the corporation. It is not an enquiry
that is confined to the role that person played in relation to the particular
issue in respect
of which it is alleged that there was a breach of
39. The Court, highlighting the issue of participation in
decision-making, observed that it did not require joint decision-making
“the notion of participation in making decisions presents a
question of fact and degree in which the significance to be given
to the role
played by the person in question must be assessed”.
40. In respect to
the three aspects of the definition of an officer in sub-section 9(b) of the
Corporations Act
, their Honours observed:
“.. Each of the three classes
of persons described in par (b) of the definition of “officer” is
evidently different
from (and a wider class than) the persons identified in the
other paragraphs of the definition...
41. They are clearly disjunctive
provisions such that satisfaction of any one of them is sufficient to
characterise a person as an
officer, although I note that the prosecution relies
on the first limb in particularising the charge.
42. In the corporations
context in Shafron their Honours recognised that the broader definition of
officer still requires that regard
be had to the role of the individual in the
corporation as a whole not limited to their role in respect to the particular
in which it was alleged there was a breach of duty. I note that I am
unaware of any decision as to the interpretation of the concept
of officer as
described in sub-section 9(b) applied to the work health and safety context.
However, as the definition is imported
from the corporations law into the work
health and safety context through the Act, it appears that the interpretation of
the concept
of an officer should to be viewed through the prism of the
organisation as a whole rather than a particular function in which the
individual was engaged.
43. Mr Al-Hasani provided an organisational chart
for the Barry Drive project in the Project Quality Plan. In it, he sits at the
as project manager. Immediately below him is Mr Dimitri Brendas, the
(unqualified) systems manager and occupational health and safety
representative.
Also below, and reporting directly to Mr Al-Hasani, are the surveyor, Mr Michael
Bereza, the project quality engineer,
Mr Sandeep Thorat, and the general
foreman, Mr Louis Clarke. Reporting to the foreman are suppliers and
subcontractors. No reference
is made to other directly employed workers. This
document is clearly relevant to the project but not to the corporation’s
organisational structure.
44. Mr Al-Hasani gave evidence about that
wider structure. He referred to Mr Spiros Brendas as “El Supremo”.
that he reported up to Mr Spiros Brendas and Ms Beverly Brendas. He
was asked “But there was nobody else on top of you between
you and Spiros
and Beverly?” He replied “Yes, there are others because I could not
tell Mr so and so to pay Mr so-and-so.
I could not hire Mr so-and-so without
people in the accounting department and the administration department. I have no
power to even
go and buy a glass of water”.
45. He agreed that in
terms of the Barry Drive project, that the project engineer, Mr Sandeep Thorat,
reported to him and that he
reported to Mr Spiros Brendas. He agreed that he was
project manager for a $4.5 million project. When asked if he made decisions
clarification, he noted that the tender was accepted by government
management had to agree with the prices he worked out for the job. If management
was not happy, then they would refuse to
tender for the project or require that
he increase the price quoted.
46. When it was put to him that Mr Spiros
Brendas’ signature did not appear on many documents in relation to the
company, he
responded that “the three missions of the company are signed
by the general manager”. It was put to him that Mr Spiros
Brendas had
little to do with the paper running of the company on a day-to-day basis but Mr
Al-Hasani responded “but if a machine
goes from this side to this side. If
he has not approve (sic) it, it does not go”. He was asked if this was as
a result of
verbal approval with Mr Al-Hasani who responded “not between
me and him. He goes by past everybody. He does it himself”.
Al-Hasani agreed that he participated in management meetings, maintained the
company’s virus protection and a backup
of computer files, liaised with
customers to identify their requirements and ensure they were met, that he was
engaged with safety
and environmental plans, Safe Work Method Statements and
emergency procedures, that he implemented project plans and supporting plans,
that he briefed, managed and supervised performance of the project team, that he
monitored projects progress and keep the general
manager advised of it, that he
advised customers of significant changes in project staffing, that he informed
the systems manager
of project matters pertaining to the continuing and improved
operation of the management system, that he managed customer supplied
materials, selected subcontractors and material suppliers, that he arranged
sub-contractors in the purchase of materials
but did not authorise their
employment, that he maintained a register of material testing equipment, some as
delegated and signed
off by him, that he managed variations in contractual
price, that he verified conformance with documented processes in the project
plan, that he assessed and took action on potential non-conformance and customer
complaints, that he reviewed and approved project
documents, verified and signed
off on completion of projects. He agreed that sometimes he would make decisions
as the project manager
and sometimes he would participate in making decisions
with Mr Spiros Brendas and Ms Beverly Brendas. He said sometimes he had to
decisions on his own. He said that Kenoss’ business was not limited to
construction work as it also had a development
business in another corporate
entity. In short, Mr Al-Hasani agreed that he undertook all of the work one
would expect of a project
48. He noted that Kenoss had a number of
other projects ongoing at the time of the Barry Drive project and he was project
for all of the major projects which Kenoss was undertaking. It was put
to him specifically “you were obviously making decisions
or participating
in making decisions that affected either the whole or a substantial part of its
business? And he replied “yes,
49. There is no evidence
from within the corporation as to where Mr Al-Hasani sat within it or his level
of influence, other than
from those who sat below him in the chain of command.
Despite there being a director and a general manager, the role of those, beyond
what can be assumed within the statutory role of a director, are unknown. Mr
Al-Hasani’s evidence was that he answered to these
two positions and that
Mr Brendas as was “El supremo”.That evidence is unchallenged. Whilst
he conceded that he was participating
in decision-making within the organisation
as put to him squarely within the terms of sub-section 9(b) of the
Corporations
definition of an officer, his concession is not conclusive of the issue.
There were clear limits on his participation delineated
by his role as project
manager as detailed in his responses in cross-examination.
prosecution has not established that Mr Al-Hasani had control or responsible for
the business or undertakings of the company;
rather he had operational
responsibility for delivery of specific contracts which had been entered into.
His role was to implement
these projects. The limited evidence before me
establishes that Kenoss was essentially a “family business”, with a
and wife director and general manager and a relatively flat management
structure. In it, Mr Al-Hasani sat close to the top of that
structure but there
is no evidence that he made, or participated in making, decisions which affected
the whole, or a substantial
part of the business of the corporation, other than
his concession of that effect without context. He could identify potential
but was not responsible for hiring and firing them. His evidence was
that he could not commit corporate funds. There is no evidence
that he had
direction over the type, or the specific contracts, which were to be pursued by
Kenoss. He did prepare tenders for particular
work but he did not sign off on
them. There is no evidence as to matters such as who determined the corporate
structure, who established
company policy as to the type of business to be
pursued and which projects were to be entered into. It is not apparent whether
Al-Hasani attended board meetings or met any of the corporation’s legal
obligations, such as ASIC returns or establishing quality
assurance compliance.
What is established is that Mr Al-Hasani’s participation in the business
process was operational; whether
it went beyond that to being organisational is
speculative. It is not clear that he made decisions, or participated in making
that affected either the whole or a substantial part of Kenoss’
51. Mr Al-Hasani had responsibility as an employee but he is not
charged in that capacity. I am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
role rises to the level of an officer within the corporation and for that reason
the charge in respect of Mr Al-Hasani is
certify that the preceding fifty [51] numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Decision of her Honour Industrial Magistrate
Date: 3 August 2015
CCH Australia 2010, p. 29
CCH Australia 2010, p. 31
RTF format (242 KB)
Signed PDF/A format