Police v Reid [2024] ACTMC 28 (12 December 2024)
MAGISTRATES COURT OF THE
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Case Title:
Police v Reid
[2024] ACTMC 28
Hearing Dates:
14 June 2024, 13 August 2024, 27 November 2024
Decision Date:
Magistrate Temby
Catchwords:
CRIMINAL LAW
– SENTENCING – Family Violence (aggravated
property damage) – trespass – fail to appear after bail undertaking
Legislation Cited:
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
Cases Cited:
[2021] ACTSC 72
[1999] NSWCCA 109
R v Carmody
[2016] ACTSC 382
DPP v Reid (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 350
[2020] NSWCCA 105
Barbaro v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 288
Georgopolous v The Queen
[2010] NSWCCA 246
Markarian v R
[2005] HCA 25
O’Brien v R
[2015] ACTCA 47
R v Deng; Carberry v The King
[2023] ACTCA 32
McCurley v Stirling
[2024] ACTSC 41
Ursino v Read; Ursino v R
[2005] ACTSC 106
Christopher Anthony Jones (Informant 1
Nigel Legh Brookes (Informant 2
Caleb Marcus Boxx (Informant 3
Jason Adam Reid (Defendant)
Representation:
ACT Director of Public Prosecutions
ACT Legal Aid (Defendant)
File Numbers:
CC 6268 of 2023
CC 6269 of 2023
CC 7896 of 2023
CC 8544 of 2023
MAGISTRATE TEMBY:
Defendant was charged with two offences of aggravated damage property, one
offence of trespass and one offence of failing
to appear after giving a bail
undertaking. He pleaded guilty to each of those charges and a sentencing hearing
was substantively
conducted over 2 days, on 14 June 2024 and 27 November
Maximum penalties
maximum penalties for these offences are:
(a) 60 penalty units and/or 3 years’ imprisonment for the aggravated
damage property offences;
(b) 10 penalty units for the trespass offence (Commonwealth offence); and
(c) 200 penalty units and/or two years’ imprisonment for the fail to
appear offence.
Defendant gave his consent to the property damage charges being dealt with
Burden of proof
considering the matter, I note that:
(a) I must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of any fact which might be
relied on in aggravation of the offence for which the
Defendant is charged;
(b) I must be satisfied on the balance of probabilities of any facts which I
take into account in mitigation of the offences or in
mitigation of the
Nature and circumstances of offending
Agreed facts
facts from the Statement of Facts, which are agreed between the parties are as
set out below.
Family violence - relationship
Defendant and the complainant had been in an on-and-off relationship since
September 2021 and are family members for
the purposes of the
Family Violence
CC2023/6268 – Aggravated damage property
June 2023, the Defendant attended the complainant’s residence to collect
items for his daughter. The Defendant
and the complainant had had an argument
over the previous couple of days and a further argument ensued on this
point, the Defendant was pacing back and forth between the lounge room and the
kitchen area, yelling and swearing
at the complainant. Once he had collected the
items that he had come for, the complainant asked the Defendant to leave the
She said that he was no longer welcome there.
the Defendant exited the residence, the complainant locked the screen door and
walked away.
Defendant was angered by the complainant locking the door. He threw a thermal
cup through the front window adjacent
to the front door, resulting in a hole in
the window and the remaining parts of the window being fractured.
accepted by the parties that the Defendant was reckless in causing damage to the
window, and that he did not intend
CC2023/6269 –
Unlawful trespass
Defendant left the property, but returned a short time later to take photographs
of the damage.
complainant came to the front door and informed the Defendant that she had
called the police and that he had to leave
her property.
Defendant then left the property.
CC2023/7896 – Aggravated
damage property
June 2023, the Defendant appeared before the Magistrates Court in relation to
the above offences and bail conditions
were imposed. These included conditions
that the Defendant:
(a) Not assault, harass, threaten or intimidate the complainant;
(b) Not contact the complainant;
(c) Not be within 100 metres of the complainant.
16․ Despite
these conditions, the Defendant arranged with the complainant to meet on the
evening of 27 June 2023. They met at
a restaurant in Kingston and ordered
takeaway food. The Defendant gave the complainant money to pay for the damage
caused to her
front window.
waiting for their food, the Defendant and the complainant entered into another
argument. The complainant walked back
to her car and left.
she was driving, she noticed the Defendant’s vehicle following her,
without headlights on. The Defendant began
to flash his vehicle lights at the
complainant, so she pulled her car into a car park.
Defendant followed her into the car park and got out of his car. He walked to
the complainant’s car, where they
continued to argue. The Defendant said
that he wanted a mobile phone.
complainant agreed to give the Defendant one of her old mobile phones. She had
previously told the Defendant that it
was not working and needed to be repaired,
however, when the Defendant realised that the phone was not working, he became
He went back to his vehicle and revved the engine loudly several times
before parking across the rear of the complainant’s
car, preventing her
from leaving the car park.
Defendant then got out of his vehicle and approached the complainant’s car
once more. The complainant closed her
car door and locked it, as she was afraid
of the Defendant’s increasingly aggressive demeanour towards her.
Defendant slammed his hands on the complainant’s car before punching the
driver’s door window and side mirror
with a closed fist. He then used his
knee to hit the door and window, causing the window to shatter inwards and cover
the complainant
with glass. The Defendant’s actions also caused a large
dent and damage to the door and driver side mirror.
complainant suffered small cuts to the side of her neck and hands from the
shattered glass and her ear felt sore.
police arrived, they observed the complainant to be visibly shaken and in a
highly emotional state. Her hands were
CC2023/8544
– Fail to appear after bail undertaking
July 2023, the Defendant appeared in the Magistrates Court and gave an
undertaking to appear again on 1 August 2023.
He failed to appear on that date
and an arrest warrant was issued on 2 August 2023.
August 2023, the Defendant was located and arrested by police in Queensland
following a routine traffic stop. On 29
August 2023, ACT police attended the
Magistrates Court of Townsville and obtained an extradition order. He was flown
ACT the same day.
Objective seriousness
CC2023/6268 – Aggravated property damage
objective seriousness of the 16 June 2023 property damage offence falls towards
the lower end of the spectrum.
28․ Clearly,
the throwing of the cup involved the Defendant taking out his anger towards the
complainant by damaging her property.
The offending involved family violence,
with the Defendant having yelled and sworn at the complainant and having become
the complainant asked the Defendant to leave her house and locked the
door behind him. Family violence is, of course, unacceptable
in any form and
freedom from family violence is a human right.
offending took place at the complainant’s house and, to some extent at
least, reduced the security of her house.
There is no evidence as to the cost of
the damage, however, the cost of replacing a window is not insignificant and
must have involved
some inconvenience to the complainant.
30․ Lessening
the seriousness of the offence is the fact that the damage to the property was
reckless, rather than intentional.
The offending conduct is also mitigated by
the fact that the Defendant paid, or at least contributed to, the cost of
CC2023/6269 – Unlawful trespass
objective seriousness of the unlawful trespass offence is at the lower end of
the spectrum.
the complainant had earlier told the Defendant that he was no longer welcome at
her residence, the offending conduct
only involved the Defendant coming onto her
property to take a photograph of the damage that he had caused to the window. He
the authors of the Pre-Sentence Report that he had contacted a glazier to
repair the broken window and had been asked to provide
a photograph for a quote,
which is why he returned to the complainant’s property. As already noted,
he gave the complainant
money to repair the window.
Defendant did not enter the complainant’s house and appears to have left
the complainant’s property once
the complainant told him that he had to
CC2023/7896 – Aggravated property damage
June 2023 property damage offence is a serious example of the offence. It falls
above the middle of the spectrum.
damage to the complainant’s property comprised the broken driver side
window (which was, in fact, almost entirely
smashed), and a large dent and
damage to the driver’s door and mirror. There is no evidence as to the
cost to repair the car,
however repairing a car is, ordinarily, not an
inexpensive exercise.
Defendant submits that, like the damage to the complainant’s house window,
he contributed to the cost of the repair
of the car window. He submits that he
gave the complainant $2,500. While he did not give any evidence supporting that
submission,
I accept that he did give money to the complainant that at least
went some way towards the repair of the window and that provides
some mitigation
for the offending conduct.
37․ Nevertheless,
at a minimum, the complainant would have been required to endure the
inconvenience of having her car repaired
and may have incurred some associated
significance in assessing the objective seriousness of the offence is the fact
that the circumstances surrounding it
involved multiple acts of family violence
which caused the complainant fear and injury. The Defendant acted in an
intimidating and
aggressive manner towards the complainant by revving the engine
of his car to demonstrate his anger towards her and exercising control
by blocking her exit with his car. Having done so, he used physical violence by
punching the driver’s door window
whilst the complainant was sitting in
the driver’s seat and kneeing the driver’s side door and window,
causing the window
to shatter and cover the complainant in glass. As noted
above, the complainant suffered small cuts to the side of her neck and hands
Defendant accepts that the incident would have been terrifying to the
complainant and accepts that it is an aggravating
factor that the complainant
received injuries as a result of the window being broken. Although the Defendant
is not to be sentenced
for the offence of assault, the fact that the offence
involved family violence, and the extent of that violence, is relevant as the
Defendant is charged with the aggravated version of the damage property
the first property damage offence, it is important to recognise that family
violence in any form is unacceptable and
that freedom from family violence is a
human right. Also like the first property damage offence, the Defendant’s
conduct involved
the physical expression of his anger towards the complainant.
contrast to the first property damage offence, however, this conduct was not
reckless and it involved the Defendant intentionally
damaging property that was
not only in the immediate vicinity of the complainant, but property which the
complainant had locked herself
in, in order to protect herself from the
Defendant. She was in a car with no capacity to get away from the Defendant. The
involved deliberate acts of physical violence and other threatening
conduct that sought to control the complainant and caused the
complainant to
fear for her safety.
Defendant submitted that the offending occurred in the context of relationship
difficulties, however that is not mitigatory.
CC2023/8544
– Fail to appear after bail undertaking
objective seriousness of this offence approaches the mid-range of the spectrum.
While the appearance that the Defendant
failed to attend was only the mention of
his matters in the Magistrates Court, the Defendant had left the jurisdiction
and extradition
was required to return him to the ACT. This involved time,
expense and the deployment of police officers who could otherwise have
engaged in policing work in the ACT.
Defendant did not offer any explanation for his failure to appear to the authors
of the Pre-Sentence Report. In submissions,
he said that he expected to be
remanded in custody for quite a while and wanted to spend as much time with his
daughters as he could
and get his affairs in order.
view, that explanation does not take away from the objective seriousness of the
offence. It highlights that the Defendant
chose to put his personal interests
over the interests of justice.
Aggravating factor on sentence
– conditional liberty
Conditional liberty
times the Defendant committed each of the present offences, he was subject to an
Intensive Corrections Order (
) and a parole order.
ICO commenced on 28 April 2021 and was to conclude 27 January 2025. It was
imposed as an alternative to full-time custody
for an aggregate sentence of
imprisonment of 3 years and 9 months that was given to the Defendant for the
offences of receiving stolen
property, burglary, theft (x2) and joint commission
minor theft:
[2021] ACTSC 72.
offending conduct comprising the present charges took place a little over
half-way into the ICO period. By the time
of the present offences, the Defendant
had not yet completed his sentences for the two theft convictions and had not
yet commenced
the sentence for the burglary conviction.
parole order was made with respect to a 30 month sentence of imprisonment that
was imposed on the Defendant in NSW for
larceny, break and enter a house (x2),
participate in criminal group and affray offences. The sentence commenced on 14
December 2021
and was to conclude on 13 June 2024.
non-parole period of 9 months (expiring 13 September 2022) was fixed. He was
granted parole from that date, before the
parole order was registered in the ACT
on 7 November 2022. The offending conduct took place less than half-way through
time of the 27 June 2023 property damage offence and the 2 August 2023 fail to
comply with bail undertaking offence,
the Defendant was also subject to bail
conditions. Of significance in relation to the 27 June 2023 property damage
offence is the
fact that not only was the Defendant on conditional liberty at
the time, but his offending conduct breached a number of the conditions
bail, being not to harass or intimidate the complainant, not to contact her and
not to be within 100 metres of her. Those
conditions were put in place to
mitigate the risk of the Defendant re-offending and endangering the
complainant’s safety and
the Defendant agreed to those conditions in order
to obtain his release from custody.
The need to avoid double
an aggravating factor on sentence that the Defendant was on conditional liberty
at the time of the offences. It is
an aggravating feature because the Defendant
has betrayed the opportunity to be in the community and pursue rehabilitation:
[1999] NSWCCA 109
53․ However,
care needs to be taken to avoid double punishment. As Refshauge J said in
[2016] ACTSC 382
], “there is a risk of double
punishment if, while cancelling the Good Behaviour Order, I do not take care to
ensure that the
sentence I impose does not punish Mr Carmody twice by failing to
take into account the fact of this cancellation”
August 2023, the Sentence Administration Board cancelled both the parole order
and the ICO.
required to serve the remainder of the sentence with respect to which the parole
order was made (taking into account
his parole time credit) in full-time
custody. That was a period of 11 months and 16 days, expiring on 15 August
also placed in full-time custody with respect to the sentence which he was
serving by ICO. The Sentence Administration
Board ordered that the Defendant
serve a period of imprisonment of 1 year and 16 days, expiring on 16 March
August 2024, on the basis of the agreed facts, I accepted the Defendant’s
pleas of guilty and convicted the
Defendant of the present charges. As required
Crimes (Sentence Administration) Act 2005
, I committed
the Defendant to the Supreme Court for it to consider whether to cancel the ICO.
November 2024, Taylor J cancelled the ICO and ordered the Defendant to serve the
remainder of the sentence in full-time
detention, to commence on 1 November 2024
and expire on 16 March 2025:
DPP v Reid (No 2)
[2024] ACTSC 350.
Honour set a non-parole period commencing 28 April 2021 and expiring 27 July
circumstances where, following the decisions of the Sentence Administration
Board on 31 August 2023, the Defendant has
remained in custody since that date,
and in circumstances where, on 1 November 2024, Taylor J cancelled the ICO
because of the commission
of the present offences, I consider that taking
account of the fact that the Defendant was on conditional liberty at the time of
committing the present offences by reason of the ICO and parole order would
amount to double punishment.
60․ However,
the fact that, at the time of the 27 June 2023 property damage offence and the 2
August 2023 failure to comply
with bail undertaking offence, the Defendant was
subject to bail conditions is an aggravating factor on sentence. As noted above,
this is particularly so in circumstances where the 27 June 2023 property damage
offence involved a contravention of bail conditions
that were imposed in order
to protect the complainant.
Hoeben CJ at CL said in
[2020] NSWCCA 105
, quoting from
a decision of Street CJ in
R v Richards
community must be protected as far as possible from further criminal activities
by persons who take advantage of their
liberty on bail to commit further crimes.
The only means open to the criminal courts to seek to provide this protection is
severely deterrent sentences upon those who thus abuse their freedom on
bail. This will ordinarily involve a significant accumulation
of the sentences
for any subsequent offences on top of the sentence proper to be passed for the
original offence. It must be made
abundantly plain that persons at large on bail
cannot expect to commit further crimes “for free”. On the contrary,
will receive salutary penalties for the very reason that they have abused
their freedom on bail by taking the opportunity to commit
further crime.”
Subjective circumstances
Defendant is a 38 year old man with five children from two relationships. He
described a stable and positive childhood.
Defendant submitted that his life fell apart in 2020, leading to the offending
which resulted in the significant sentences
of imprisonment I have referred to
earlier in these reasons. He submitted that he was dealing with relationship and
business issues
and used drugs to deal with a mental breakdown.
Defendant told the authors of the Pre-Sentence Report the same information. He
said that he commenced using methamphetamine
to self-medicate the loss of his
children and his business. He said that his use of methamphetamine had been
inconsistent with his
used methamphetamine in May 2023. Information available to the authors
Pre-Sentence Report suggests that the Defendant may have underreported his drug
use, however, and thus the extent of the Defendant’s
drug use at the time
of the present offences is unclear.
Defendant made similar statements in a detailed letter he wrote to the Court
prior to the hearing on 27 November 2024,
as well as commenting on a range of
other matters.
said that, before 2020, he was married with children and the owner of a business
employing seven staff. In 2020 and early
2021, he faced extreme hardship as
COVID-19 and bushfires ruined his business, as a result of which he suffered
some kind of a mental
breakdown and turned to drug use and, having turned to
drug use, surrounded himself with people who brought him into an environment
criminal activity.
Defendant said that, as a result, he served time in prison and both his marriage
and his businesses (including a second
business that he started whilst on bail
for the offences for which he was sentenced to an ICO) failed. His access to his
was limited, because he was either in custody or the conditions of his
ICO prevented him from leaving the ACT. While his older children
visited him in
prison, his wife took his younger children interstate.
said that the period during which he was not able to see (and often not speak
to) his children was the most traumatic
thing he had been through. He commented
that the longer he is in custody, the further away he feels his children are
getting from
him. Nevertheless, he is optimistic about the future as he and his
wife have committed to working together to co-parent the children
in custody, he has completed the EQUIPS Addictions, Foundations and Maintenance
programs and is working through the
SMART Recovery program. I note that there is
evidence that the Defendant displayed a strong level of engagement in the EQUIPS
and that he is acting as a mentor to other detainees.
noted above, whether the Defendant was usings drugs at the time of the present
offences is unclear. However, even if
drug use was not a contributing factor to
the commission of those offences, the drug rehabilitation that the Defendant has
in is likely to reduce his general risk of re-offending given the
significance of drug use to the commission of the earlier offences.
Defendant wrote that he currently works in the Activities section and that he
recently received a pay upgrade for exemplary
work ethic. He said that he has
been categorised as an “enhanced inmate” since becoming eligible for
that status 11 months
ago and has had no disciplinary issues. He also tendered
statements of attainment with respect to various units of study completed
in custody, being ‘Prepare to work safely in the construction
industry’, ‘Provide responsible service of
‘Provide cardiopulmonary resuscitation’, ‘Provide First
Aid’ and ‘Participate in safe
work practices’.
making plans for the future to ensure that he reintegrates into the community as
effectively as possible. He said
that he has been approved to live temporarily
in a Justice Housing property on his release, after which he intends to obtain
rental accommodation. He said he has secured employment with a landscape
business and also wishes to restart the business (a third
business) he created
when he was released on parole for the NSW offences (but which he had not
developed prior to being returned
to custody after having his parole revoked and
ICO cancelled in August 2023). In submissions, the Defendant also stated that he
an interest in working in the renewable energy space.
also intends to access counselling. He has done so whilst in custody, with
Relationships Australia, and was placed on
the waitlist for counselling with
EveryMan in August 2024.
74․ Ultimately,
the Defendant wishes to get on with the rest of his life. In particular, he
wishes to have the opportunity to
be a present father for his children again. It
appears that he has the support of his family and a strong commitment to
Remorse and contrition
Barbaro v The Queen
[2012] VSCA 288
, at [38], the court said
If there is evidence of remorse, and if that remorse is
genuine, it is a very important element in the exercise of the sentencing
discretion. Remorse of this kind enhances prospects of rehabilitation and
reduces the need for specific deterrence ...
first day of the sentencing hearing, the Defendant submitted that he is
remorseful for his offending conduct, as
evidenced by the fact that he paid for
the damage he caused and by his guilty pleas.
accept that both of these matters might indicate some remorse. However, a guilty
plea is weak evidence of remorse (
Georgopolous v The Queen
[2010] NSWCCA
and the Defendant’s reimbursement of the damage he caused, as an
indication of remorse, is undermined by two matters:
(a) first, he committed the second, and more serious, property damage offence
after paying for the complainant’s damaged house
window to be repaired
(placing doubt on the genuineness of the Defendant’s remorse, or at least
on the significance of his
remorse as an indictor of a reduced likelihood of
reoffending); and
(b) secondly, he told the authors of the Pre-Sentence Report that he broke the
complainant’s car window because she had threatened
to harm herself and
claimed that he did not damage her vehicle. These statements are inconsistent
with the statement of agreed facts
and were not relied on at the sentencing
hearing. As identified in the Pre-Sentence Report, this indicates a preparedness
Defendant’s part to minimise responsibility for his actions, a
preparedness that is emphasised by the Defendant’s claim
to the authors of
the Pre-Sentence Report that the complainant was affected by illicit substances
at the time of the offence.
Defendant is reported to have shown insight into his offending while
participating in the Equips Foundation program
in April 2024, however the
factors that he acknowledged as contributing factors to his offending were
work-life balance, unhealthy
relationships and financial struggles. These
factors may have contributed to how the Defendant felt at the time, but they do
acknowledge the Defendant’s personal responsibility for his conduct.
In particular, the Defendant has not identified that he
obviously had an issue
with anger management at the time. Nor is there any indication that he
appreciated the impact of the offending
on the complainant.
is an externalising of responsibility that emerges from the Defendant’s
reflection on his conduct in this regard.
That is also reflected in the
Defendant’s letter to the Court, which focuses on the impact of financial
stress on him, and
on criminality befalling him when he turned to drugs, as
explaining how he came to be where he is, and on the subsequent need for
deal with what he describes as all the unfortunate scenarios thrown at
failure of the Defendant’s first business may very well identify the point
in time that his life went off the
rails but, like the reflection he engaged in
during his rehabilitation program, there is no acceptance of responsibility for
decisions that he then made and, in terms of his remorse and insight for the
present offending, there is no recognition of the impact
of his offending on the
complainant. The letter is instead focused on the impact of custody on the
Defendant, including on his business
and on his capacity to see his
reference to the complainant merely describes the struggle he had in assisting
her with a drug addiction. That does
not explain the Defendant’s conduct
and, further, as the updated ICO assessment report identifies, while the
Defendant claimed
that the relationship had been marred due to the
complainant’s drug use issues, information available to Corrective
indicated that the Defendant was using drugs himself.
also noteworthy that, in his letter to the Court, his mention of the offences
merely describes the offences with which
he was charged, not the underlying
conduct. He even attempts to distance himself from the nature of the conduct.
After stating that
he has always prided himself on leading by example when it
comes to showing his daughters how they should be treated by a partner
with complete respect – he states that he is embarrassed to have
been put in the family violence category
submissions, he pointed to the following passage from his letter as
demonstrating his remorse:
I have learnt that self-deception usually
follows something reprehensible or unwise that I have done and that by
attempting to justify
my actions to myself it becomes a very slippery
psychological slope and when I make certain self deluded excuses and in a way
to forgive myself for my actions, it inevitably turns out badly in the
long run. I take full responsibly and know that I should have
been better, made
better decisions, reached out for help or walked away. But I didn’t and
wasn’t and I am more than sorry
to everyone in my life that has again been
affected by my actions.
the Defendant has not identified the problematic behaviour that he engaged in,
in committing the offences, why he
did engaged in that behaviour and what he has
done and will do to avoid it happening again. There is also no engagement with
particular impact of his behaviour on the complainant.
accept that the Defendant feels some remorse for his actions, although that
remorse arises more from feeling that he let
his daughters down than from any
harm or hurt he caused the complainant. For the reasons I have explained, I do
not consider that
the Defendant has any real insight into his offending
86․ Nevertheless,
as I have noted earlier, I accept that the Defendant has a strong commitment to
turning his life around and
being present in his daughters’ lives. That
commitment, in combination with a desire to avoid having to endure the hardships
of prison again, is likely to provide a strong motivation to continue his
rehabilitative efforts and not to re-offend.
Criminal history
Defendant committed numerous offences between 2005 and 2021 and received
substantial sentences of imprisonment in 2021,
in both NSW and the ACT, as I
have noted earlier in these reasons.
particular relevance to the present offences, the Defendant has been convicted
(a) Trespass and similar offences in 2021 (two offences) and 2020 (three
(b) A destroy or damage property offence in 2020;
(c) Offences in a family violence context in 2014 (two offences); and
(d) Other offences of violence, being an assault occasioning actual bodily harm
offence in 2014 and an affray offence in 2021.
are no previous instances of the Defendant committing the offence of failing to
comply with a bail undertaking. He
is entitled to some leniency with respect to
that offence.
note that there have been breaks in the Defendant’s offending. He
committed offences in 2005, 2008, 2011 and
2014, before the more serious
offences he committed in 2020 and 2021. This history both suggests that there is
a risk of re-offending,
but also that the Defendant is capable of
rehabilitation.
Pleas of guilty
91․ Paragraph
33(1)(j) of the
Crimes (Sentencing) Act 2005
Sentencing Act
requires the court to have regard to the Defendant’s pleas of guilty.
Utilitarian value is the primary consideration and,
in that respect, the timing
of the plea is important.
Defendant entered pleas of guilty to:
(a) CC2023/6268 (aggravated property damage) and CC2023/6269 (unlawful trespass)
on 3 May 2024, at the fourteenth mention of the
matter. The proceedings
commenced on 20 June 2023 and the Defendant entered a plea of not guilty on 7
November 2023, at the seventh
mention. He is entitled to a 15 per cent discount
for his plea;
(b) CC2023/7896 (aggravated property damage) on 3 May 2024, at the eleventh
mention of the matter. The proceedings commenced on 30
August 2023 and the
Defendant entered a plea of not guilty on 7 November 2023, at the fourth mention
of the matter. He is entitled
to a 15 per cent discount for his plea;
(c) CC2023/8544 (fail to appear after bail undertaking) on 9 February 2024, at
the seventh mention of the matter, having indicated
a plea of guilty on 7
November 2023, at the fourth mention of the matter. He is entitled to a 25 per
cent discount for his plea.
Statutory and other relevant considerations
sentencing the Defendant, the court is required to take into account those
matters set out in ss 33 and 34B (for the
Family Violence offending) of the
Sentencing Act that are relevant and known. I have referred to the relevant
matters above.
court is also required to have regard to the objects of the Sentencing Act as
set out in section 6 and to the purposes
of sentencing as set out in section
Purposes of sentencing
terms of the purposes of sentencing, general deterrence is the principal
consideration for the unlawful trespass and
fail to comply with bail undertaking
charges. As Crispin J stated in
Ursino v Read; Ursino v R
[2005] ACTSC
, at [12], referring to a decision of Magistrate Burns (as his Honour then
As his Honour observed, offences of failing to appear in
answer to a bail undertaking are prevalent, and the commission of offences
that character put the community to the expense and inconvenience of having to
locate and arrest the absconding defendant and
bring him or her back to court.
Furthermore, if alleged offenders were permitted, without significant penalty,
to delay trials or
sentencing proceedings by failing to answer their bail,
confidence in the whole process could suffer and other alleged offenders
be encouraged to adopt a similar course. Hence, in the absence of any
significant mitigating factor, custodial sentences should
be expected for
offences of this kind.
terms of the property damage offences, specific deterrence is clearly important
given that he committed two offences
of the same kind, in similar circumstances
(the breaking of glass that stood between him and the complainant when he was
by his anger towards her), with the second more serious than the first.
97․ General
deterrence is also important given that the offences involved family violence.
There also needs to be some protection
for the community and the Defendant
should be made accountable for his actions. For the 27 June 2023 property damage
offence, the
sentence should reflect a denunciation of the Defendant’s
conduct and recognise the harm done to the complainant.
Defendant’s need for rehabilitation should be promoted, of course, to the
extent that that is possible.
Sentencing principles
99․ Ultimately,
I must ensure that the Defendant is adequately punished in a way that is just
and appropriate.
important considerations that are relevant to that exercise are:
(a) the need to have regard to the maximum penalties for the offences;
(b) whether a sentence of imprisonment is appropriate; and
(c) if a sentence of imprisonment is appropriate, whether the sentences of
imprisonment should be made consecutive or concurrent.
Attention to be given to maximum penalties
101․ Careful
attention to the maximum penalties for the offences is required,
because the legislature has legislated for them; secondly, because they invite
comparison between the worst possible case and
the case before the court at the
time; and thirdly, because in that regard they do provide, taken and balanced
with all of the other
relevant factors, a yardstick
Markarian v R
[2005] HCA 25).
have had regard to the maximum penalties for the charged offences, which are set
out at the beginning of these reasons.
Section 10 threshold
103․ Pursuant
to s10(2) of the Sentencing Act, the court may only sentence the Defendant to
imprisonment if the court is satisfied,
having considered possible alternatives,
that no other penalty is appropriate.
104․ Having
considered all the sentencing options:
(a) I am satisfied that there is no appropriate alternative to imprisonment with
respect to the 27 June 2023 property damage offence
and the fail to appear after
bail undertaking offence. In the context of the seriousness of the offences, I
do not consider that
the purposes of sentencing would be adequately met if a
sentence other than one of imprisonment were imposed with respect to these
(b) I am not satisfied that there is no appropriate alternative to imprisonment
with respect to the 16 June 2023 property damage
offence. I do not consider that
the objective seriousness of this offence warrants a term of imprisonment.
unlawful trespass offence is a fine only offence.
Sentencing for
multiple offences
106․ Sections
70 and 71 of the Sentencing Act provide that the sentences I impose for the
present offending must be served concurrently
(with each other and with the
Defendant’s existing sentences of imprisonment) unless the court directs
that they be served
consecutively (or partly concurrently and partly
consecutively).
principles relevant to the approach to be taken in this respect are set out in
O’Brien v R
[2015] ACTCA 47
sentencing for multiple offences, the sentencing judge must fix an appropriate
sentence for each offence and then consider
questions of accumulation or
concurrence, as well as totality: Pearce v The Queen
[1998] HCA 57
at 623-624.
(b) The principle of totality requires the sentencing judge to review the
aggregate sentence, look at the totality of the criminal
behaviour and consider
whether the aggregate is “just and appropriate” for all the
offences: Mill at 63.
(c) A countervailing factor is the need to ensure that there does not emerge
a perception that there is no difference between a person
who commits one or two
offences and a person who commits six or seven offences: R v Wheeler
. The Court must avoid any suggestion that what is being
offered is a discount for multiple offending: R v Knight
[2005] NSWCCA 253
(2005) 155 A Crim 252
[2006] NSWCCA 381
; (2006) 167 A Crim R
(d) Where offences are discrete and independent, the sentence for one offence
cannot comprehend and reflect the criminality of the
other. In such
circumstances, the sentences should be at least partly cumulative; otherwise
there is a risk that the total sentence
will not reflect the total criminality
of the two offences. Where, however, the offences are not separate and distinct,
but are part
of a single episode of criminality with common features, it is more
likely that the sentence for one of the offences will reflect
the criminality of
both, in which case the sentences should be concurrent, or at least partly
concurrent: Cahyadi v The Queen
[2007] NSWCCA 1
(2007) 168 A Crim R 41
also mindful of the comments of the Court of Appeal in
R v Deng; Carberry v
[2023] ACTCA 32
A sentence should not be
‘crushing’ in that it induces a sense of hopelessness and destroys
prospects of rehabilitation,
or too severe as a result of accumulation (noting
the severity of a sentence may increase at a greater rate than the increase in
its length) R v MAK, R v MSK
[2006] NSWCCA 381
; 167 A Crim R 159 at
McCurley v Stirling
[2024] ACTSC 41
, McWilliam J also referred to
, at [103] stating:
The following passage from R v MAK; R v
[2006] NSWCCA 381
; 167 A Crim R 159 at
is apt here:
The severity of a sentence is not simply the product of a linear
relationship. That is to say severity may increase at a greater rate
increase in the length of a sentence ...
110․ Having
regard to all of the matters that I have discussed, I have determined that the
appropriate punishment in this case
(a) for the first offence of aggravated destroy or cause damage to property
(CC2023/6268) a fine of $850, reduced from $1,000 for
the Defendant’s
guilty plea;
(b) for the offence of unlawful trespass (CC2023/6269) a fine of $300, reduced
from $350 for the Defendant’s guilty plea;
(c) for the second offence of aggravated destroy or cause damage to property
(CC2023/7896) a sentence of imprisonment of 5 months,
reduced from 6 months for
the Defendant’s guilty plea;
(d) for the offence of fail to appear after bail undertaking (CC2023/8544) a
sentence of imprisonment of 1 month and 15 days, reduced
from 2 months for the
Defendant’s guilty plea.
Sentences of imprisonment to be made consecutive
two offences for which the Defendant will receive a sentence of imprisonment
involve clearly distinct offending. It
is offending of a different kind
committed on different days. Further, the aggregate sentence of 6 months and 15
days (taking into
account the guilty pleas) is appropriate for the totality of
the criminal behaviour for which the Defendant is to be sentenced for
offences. The sentences should thus be made consecutive.
112․ Similarly,
the present offending is distinct, both in terms of the nature and timing of the
offending, from the offences
for which the Defendant is presently imprisoned,
being the offences which were the subject of the now-cancelled ICO (the existing
sentence) (which are summarised in paragraphs 7 to 12 of
also of the view that the aggregate sentence (being 4 years and 5 months) is
appropriate for the totality of criminal behaviour
engaged in by the Defendant
and that the new sentence should be made consecutive on the existing sentences.
not consider that making the sentences of imprisonment for the present offences
consecutive on the Defendant’s
existing sentences will produce a result
that is crushing in the sense identified in
or otherwise
too severe, even though I accept that the severity of a sentence is not simply
the product of a linear relationship.
Defendant is strongly committed to his future and I do not consider that the
addition of a further 6 months and 15
days to his head sentence would induce a
sense of hopelessness or destroy the Defendant’s prospects of
rehabilitation.
reaching this view, I have considered not just the aggregate of the sentences,
but also the time the Defendant has spent
in custody, given that these parts of
the Defendant’s sentences are more onerous than the parts of the sentences
the Defendant
has spent in the community and the Defendant has clearly found it
difficulty to be in prison, away from his children.
considering the time that the Defendant has spent in custody, I have had regard
to the sentences imposed in NSW, given
that the NSW offences and the offences
for which he was sentenced to an ICO in the ACT were committed in close
proximity to each
other and given the short period of time between the Defendant
being granted parole for the NSW sentences and being returned to custody
result of the revocation of his parole and the cancellation of the ICO by the
Sentence Administration Board. The Defendant also
submitted that there was
similarity in the offending conduct between the ACT and NSW offences.
Defendant has spent approximately 2 years in custody since December 2021. This
is comprised of 9 months prior to being
granted parole for the NSW offences in
September 2022 and over 15 months since the cancellation of his parole and ICO
on 31 August
2023. The Defendant was in the community between 13 September 2022
and 31 August 2023.
time the Defendant has spent in custody is not insignificant but I do not
consider that the addition of a further 6
months and 15 days (beyond the further
3 months that the Defendant is liable to serve under the existing sentence)
would induce a
sense of hopelessness or destroy the Defendant’s prospects
of rehabilitation. This is particularly so in circumstances where
the granting
of parole in the near future is a realistic (if not likely) possibility.
reasons which are set out below, the non-parole period I impose will mean that
the Defendant is immediately eligible
for parole. While the Defendant submitted
that it was possible that he may never be granted parole, that is an unlikely
given the Defendant’s good record in custody (in terms of his
status, employment performance and commitment to rehabilitation).
I note that
the Defendant himself evidently considers that he has reasonable prospects of
being granted parole given the enquiries
he has already made regarding
employment and accommodation.
120․ Having
regard to the above matters, I have decided to make the further sentence of
imprisonment consecutive on the existing
sentence, subject to an adjustment for
the period that the Defendant has spent in custody in relation to the present
section 63 of the Sentencing Act, the court must take into account the period
during which the Defendant has already
been held in custody in relation to the
offences. The parties agree that the Defendant spent 6 days in custody in
relation to the
present offences.
further sentence of imprisonment will therefore be made concurrent with the
existing sentence by a period of 6 days
to take into account the time that the
Defendant has spent in custody referable to the present offending. The further
sentence will
commence on 10 March 2025 and expire on 24 September 2025.
total effective term is therefore 28 April 2021 to 24 September
Non-parole period (for sentences of imprisonment of 12 months
s 65 of the Sentencing Act the court must set a non-parole period for sentences
of imprisonment of 12 months or more,
and identify when the non-parole period
starts and ends. As the Defendant is already serving a sentence of imprisonment,
s 66 requires
the Court to set a new non-parole period.
125․ Section
65 applies as if the Court had sentenced the Defendant to imprisonment for a
term equal to the total terms of the
existing sentence and the further term of
imprisonment (s 66(2)). The imposition of the further term of imprisonment
automatically
cancels the existing non-parole period (s 66(3)).
non-parole period must be fixed having regard to all the purposes of sentencing
and represents the minimum period of
imprisonment that justice requires that a
Defendant should serve in detention.
127․ Generally,
the prospects of rehabilitation will be important, however the need for
rehabilitation must be balanced against
the requirement that the sentence be of
an appropriate severity. The extent to which the community requires protection
be of importance. Ordinarily, the non-parole period will constitute a
substantial part of the total sentence.
DPP v Reid (No 2)
, Taylor J noted that the Defendant appeared to have
engaged well since his remand in custody in terms of his employment, clean
results and participation in various educative and health programs,
including drug rehabilitation. In setting a non-parole period,
her Honour noted
the importance of transitional parole supports being provided to the Defendant
given that he has been in full-time
imprisonment since August 2023 and in light
of his more recent efforts to further his rehabilitation. Her Honour imposed a
period of 27 months, being close to 60% of the total sentence.
129․ Consistently
with the approach taken by Taylor J, I consider that it is appropriate to set a
non-parole period of 2 years
and 7 months, commencing on 28 April 2021 and
expiring on 27 November 2023. That is close to 60% of the aggregate term of
approximately
4 years and 5 months (28 April 2021 to 24 September 2025).
view, that is the minimum period of imprisonment that justice requires in the
circumstances of this case. I have
not had regard to the NSW sentences in
determining the non-parole period as, while those sentences were registered in
the ACT, they
have now expired.
also note that the Defendant will be immediately eligible for parole, and thus
the non-parole period I will set is facilitative
of the Defendant pursuing
rehabilitation and being appropriately supported in his re-introduction into the
make the following orders:
(a) For the offence of aggravated destroy or cause damage to property
(CC2023/7896), the Defendant is sentenced to a term of imprisonment
of 5 months,
commencing on 10 March 2025 and expiring on 9 August 2025.
(b) For the offence of fail to appear after bail undertaking (CC2023/8544), the
Defendant is sentenced to a term of imprisonment
of 1 month and 15 days,
commencing on 10 August 2025 and expiring on 24 September 2025.
(c) I set a non-parole period of 2 years and 7 months, commencing on 28 April
2021 and ending on 27 November 2023.
(d) For the offence of aggravated destroy or cause damage to property
(CC2023/6268), the Defendant is to pay a fine of $850, with
no time to pay.
(e) For the offence of unlawful trespass (CC2023/6269), the Defendant is to pay
a fine of $300, with no time to pay.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and thirty-two [132] numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of his
Honour Magistrate
Associate: Niamh Dwyer
Date: 12/12/2024
RTF format (325 KB)
Signed PDF/A format