Nike Innovate C.V. v Eastlake Football Club Limited [2025] ATMO 214 (17 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE
REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by Nike Innovate C.V. to registration of trade mark application
number 1657282 (class 16, 25, 28, 41 and 43) –
(composite) (series)
- in the name of Eastlake Football Club Limited
DELEGATE: Benjamin Goldsworthy
REPRESENTATION: Opponent:
Michael Wolnizer of Davies Collison Cave
Shaun Creighton of Moulis Legal
2025 ATMO 214
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) – opposition under
grounds of opposition under
argued – no grounds
established – trade mark may proceed to registration.
10 November 2014, Eastlake Football Club Limited (‘Applicant’) filed
an application to register series trade mark 1657282
Trade Marks
details of which I extract
Priority date
: 10 November 2014 (‘Relevant
: See Representations 1 to 4 in Schedule 1 to these written
reasons (‘Trade Mark’)
Specification
: classes 16, 25, 28, 41 and 43. See Schedule 2 to these
written reasons (‘Applicant’s Goods and Services’)
Trade Mark was examined under
and acceptance was advertised on 3 December
2015. On 3 February 2016 the Opponent filed its Notice of Intention to Oppose
registration
Unless specified otherwise, a reference in these reasons to a
section is a reference to such in the
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) and a
reference to a regulation is a reference to such in the
Trade Marks
Regulations 1995
(Cth) (‘Regulations’).
Trade Mark and its Statement of Grounds and Particulars (‘SGP’)
followed on 3 March 2016. On 30 March 2016, the Applicant
filed its Notice of
Intention to Defend.
11 July 2016 the Opponent filed its Evidence in Support (‘EIS’)
which consists of declarations of Kristen K Downer,
dated 1 July 2016
(‘Downer’), with Appendices A to Z and Michael Wolnizer, Trade Mark
Attorney, dated 7 July 2016 (‘Wolnizer-1’),
with Exhibits 1 to
13 October 2016 the Applicant filed its Evidence in Answer (‘EIA’)
consisting of a statutory declaration of Anthony
Ratcliffe, Chief Executive
Officer of the Applicant, dated 12 October 2016 (‘Ratcliffe’), with
Exhibits AR-1 to AR-8.
16 December 2016, the Opponent filed a request for a Notice to Produce under
requiring documents from William Alexander Laing trading as Spectrum
21 December 2016 the Opponent filed its Evidence in Reply (‘EIR’)
consisting of a declaration of Madeline Chan, Trade
Mark Attorney, dated 21
December 2016 (‘Chan’), with Exhibits MC-1 to MC-4 and a further
declaration of Michael Wolnizer
dated 21 December 2016
(‘Wolnizer-2’), with Exhibits MW-1 to MW-3.
24 February 2017 a delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks
(‘Registrar’) issued a Notice to Produce (‘NTP-1’)
certain documents to William Alexander Laing, trading as Spectrum Graphics. Mr
Laing replied and the materials were sent to the parties
by this office.
16 June 2017, the Opponent requested an oral hearing.
20 June 2017, the Registrar issued a further Notice to Produce
(‘NTP-2’) to the Applicant to produce certain documents.
Applicant responded to NTP-2 and produced documents on 25 July 2017 and these
were sent to the parties by this office.
23 August 2017, the Applicant requested an oral hearing.
16 November 2017, the parties agreed to a cooling off period of 6 months under
reg 5.16 of the Regulations. On 13 March 2018 the
Opponent requested that this
period be discontinued.
18 May 2018, the Opponent filed its written summary of submissions, prepared by
Davies Collison Cave (‘Opponent’s Written
Submissions’). On 25
May 2018, the Applicant filed its written summary of submissions, prepared by
Shaun Creighton of Moulis
Legal (‘Applicant’s Written
Submissions’). After this, the Opponent filed supplementary submissions on
and on 6 June 2018 and the Applicant filed supplementary submissions
1 June 2018, Hearing Officer Heath Wilson heard this matter as a delegate of the
Registrar. Michael Wolnizer and Madeline Chan
of Davies Collison Cave appeared
on behalf of the Opponent. Also in attendance was Sara Dimasi of the Opponent.
Shaun Creighton of
Moulis Legal appeared on behalf of the Applicant.
after the hearing there appears to have been discussion between the parties
which resulted in a decision on the matter being
deferred, without further
parties about whether the matter
had been settled. Throughout 2025, this office
made further enquiries with the parties about whether they sought a decision. I
communications in writing were filed with this office, a decision
would issue in
due course.
I was allocated this matter, I reviewed all of the evidence and other documents
filed in the proceedings as well as an audio
recording of the hearing. I am to
now decide this matter as a delegate of the Registrar.
Onus and grounds
Opponent has the onus of establishing one of the nominated grounds of
opposition.
The standard of proof is the ordinary civil standard of
the balance of probabilities.
SGP pursued grounds of opposition under ss 42(b), 44, 60 and 62A.
note that at the hearing on 1 June 2018, the Opponent raised the possibility of
there being a s 59 ground of opposition which might
be explored. There has been
little correspondence from the parties on this question since the hearing. To
the extent that such submissions
might amount
Food Channel Network Pty Ltd v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
, [32] (Keane CJ, Stone and Jagot JJ).
Telstra Corporation Ltd v Phone Directories Co Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot and Edelman JJ).
to a request to add s 59 as a ground of opposition, I do not consider it
appropriate or there to be a sufficient basis to add that
ground to the SGP at
such a late time in these proceedings.
time at which I must assess the rights of the parties is as at the priority date
of the Trade Mark, being the Relevant Date.
The Opponent is a provider of sporting, footwear and clothing goods, with
extensive reach across many overseas markets. It has operated
in Australia since
at least the 1980s offering these goods under various trade marks including the
following trade marks:
and (‘Swoosh Trade Marks’)
Opponent is also the owner of numerous Australian registered trade marks and
Protected International Trade Marks (‘PITMs’)
which I reproduce at
Schedule 3 to these written reasons (‘Opponent’s Trade
Marks’). All of the Opponent’s
Trade Marks contain or consist of
what is often termed a ‘swoosh’. Throughout these written reasons I
have at points
referred to individual Opponent’s Trade Marks by their
unique trade mark number as specified at Schedule 3 to these written
Opponent provides extensive evidence of promotion and advertising activities
involving the Opponent’s Trade Marks as well
as sales data for goods which
have carried the Opponent’s Trade Marks. Much of this evidence concerns
the Swoosh Trade Marks.
Downer provides extensive evidence and examples of the
recognition of the fame of the Swoosh Trade Marks.
notes an extremely high value for the Opponent’s brand ‘NIKE’,
of which the Swoosh Trade Marks are said to
be a strong indicator. Sales
throughout the world for the years 1979 to 2015 are provided. Various
international sporting events
and sportspersons have promoted the Swoosh Trade
Marks. The extensive nature and sales and marketing exposure in Australia are
on the materials filed in these proceedings. I need not summarise all of
the evidence as to reputation.
also extracts and summarises past decisions, across numerous different overseas
where decision
makers have found there to be a reputation in the Swoosh Trade Marks and
sometimes a likelihood of confusion compared
with other particular trade marks.
This also includes copies of the reasons for two decisions which concern an
application for extension
of protection of two International Registrations
Designating Australia (‘IRDA’), which were opposed by the Opponent
its predecessor in title.
Downer also refers me to a previous opposition which the Opponent filed
against the Applicant’s trade mark application 1554127.
application was later withdrawn.
I reproduce the trade mark
contained in that application below:
(‘1554127’)
provides evidence that the names ‘Gungahlin’,
‘Kingston’, ‘Calwell’ and ‘Kaleen’
known geographical locations in Canberra,
and that the word
‘Calwell’ is a surname.
Wolnizer-1 also declares that
various searches were performed after the Relevant Date and exhibits examples of
promotional events
by various sporting clubs.
declares that the Applicant operates various clubs being Australian Football
League clubs in the Australian Capital Territory.
describes the branding history of the Applicant’s clubs. Branding
exercises took place in 2002 with a common theme
for the various locations of
the clubs. The Applicant engaged a business named Spectrum Graphics to develop a
new single and consistent
branding for use across the clubs.
Downer, [44].
Downer, Appendix Y.
Downer, [47]-[50] and Appendix Z.
Wolnizer-1, Exhibits 1 to 5.
Wolnizer-1, Exhibit 6.
Wolnizer-1 Exhibits 7 to 10.
Graphics presented the final design to the Applicant in February 2002. This was
described as being the silhouette of an AFL
football being kicked into the
distance with its recognisable bend in the air as it propelled through the
states that 1554127 continues to be used in conjunction with the name of the
relevant club location.
declares that the declarant is not aware of any persons, at any time, suggesting
or commenting that 1554127 looks like any
trade mark of Nike, or that it
suggests any form of association with Nike,
and confirms that there
has never been any informal or formal complaint as such.
Applicant has been the registered owner of the following trade marks:
Trade mark number
Trade mark:
Specification
: classes 41 and 43
Trade mark number
Trade mark:
(‘1010879’)
(‘1011382’)
Specification
: classes 41 and 43
Ratcliffe, [10].
use of trade marks by the Applicant is declared as having been for 14 years
without complaint or confusion being brought to the
attention of the Applicant
by the Opponent or any other person.
examples of evidence of use of the Trade Mark are provided in Exhibits AR-1 to
refers to examples of the Applicant allegedly using 1554127 in isolation and
without other elements such at the Geographical
Word(s) in relation to various
services such as club services and in advertising.
declares that on 28 November 2016, various retailers were visited by the
declarant and at Exhibits MC-1 and MC-4, Chan provides
photographs taken of
goods as they appeared in the stores at the time the photographs were
Other documents produced
a result of the NTP-1 and NTP-2 a number of other documents have been produced
and referred to throughout the proceedings.
documents produced in response to NTP-1 were as follows:
EPS Files’ containing concept drawings for the Applicant’s new
to the client by the due date’ containing options for the
Applicant’s new logo.
documents produced in response to NTP-2 were as follows:
an email from
the CEO of the Applicant to the Applicant’s attorney dated 19 July 2017
stating that extensive searches were undertaken
for requested materials,
detailing reasons why a number of materials were not available, and attaching
extracts from relevant board
meeting minutes.
including the extracts from relevant board meeting minutes relating to the
Applicant’s logo change in 2001/2002.
The Applicant’s attorneys
offered to disclose copies of each of the relevant board meeting minutes upon
the Opponent’s
request. The Opponent requested these documents which were
provided, with financial information redacted.
an email from
the CEO of the Applicant to the representative for the Opponent dated 19 July
2017 confirming that no further materials
had been located.
a copy of the
MinterEllison search trade mark report.
Consideration
Section 44 and Reg 4.15A
Opponent relies on s 44 and reg 4.15A. Section 44 relevantly
44 Identical etc. trade marks
(1) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), an
application for the registration of a trade mark (
applicant’s trade
) in respect of goods (
applicant’s goods
be rejected if:
(a) the applicant’s trade mark is substantially identical with, or
deceptively similar to:
(i) a trade mark registered by another person in respect of similar goods or
closely related services; or
(ii) a trade mark whose registration in respect of similar goods or closely
related services is being sought by another person; and
(b) the priority date for the registration of the applicant’s trade mark
in respect of the applicant’s goods is not earlier
than the priority date
for the registration of the other trade mark in respect of the similar goods or
closely related services.
(2) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), an application for the registration
of a trade mark (
applicant’s trade mark
) in respect of
applicant’s services
) must be rejected if:
(a) it is substantially identical with, or deceptively similar to:
(i) a trade mark registered by another person in respect of similar services or
closely related goods; or
(ii) a trade mark whose registration in respect of similar services or closely
related goods is being sought by another person; and
(b) the priority date for the registration of the applicant’s trade mark
in respect of the applicant’s services is not
earlier than the priority
date for the registration of the other trade mark in respect of the similar
services or closely related
establish a grounds of opposition under s 44 and reg 4.15A all of the following
must be shown:
(1) that another registered or applied for trade mark/PITM/IRDA exists which is
in the name of a person other than the Applicant;
(2) that other registered or applied for trade mark/PITM/IRDA has a priority
date that is earlier than the Relevant Date;
(3) the Trade Mark is substantially identical with or deceptively similar to the
other registered or applied for trade mark/PITM/IRDA;
I note that the words of reg 4.15A are of substantially the
same effect as those of s 44. Accordingly, I do not extract the text
4.15A here.
(4) the Applicant’s Goods and Services are similar or closely related
to the goods or services of the earlier trade mark.
Opponent relies on the Opponent’s Trade Marks for the grounds of
opposition under s 44 or reg 4.15A. The Opponent’s
Trade Marks all have a
priority date which is earlier than that of the Trade Mark and they are all in
the name of a person other
than the Applicant.
Comparison of goods and services
Classes 25 and 28
is clear that all of the Applicant’s Goods in class 25 are identical to at
least some of the class 25 goods in, for example,
284352, 355649, 489050,
489051, 1119330, 1162972 and 1165658.
is also clear that the Applicant’s Goods in class 28 are all identical to
at least some of the goods specified in class 28
for 331652, 714072, 714073 and
Applicant’s Goods in class 16 are clearly of the same description as those
in class 16 for 566912.
the comparison with the other of the Opponent’s Trade Marks, the Opponent
notes the findings of Collier J in
Television Food Network, G.P. v Food
Channel Network Pty Ltd (No 2)
that goods in class 16 being publications
were closely related to class 41 services for the publication of printed
publications.
also note that 737165, 1162972 and 1165658 all have specifications in class 41.
These relate to sporting events or training in the
field of sports and fitness.
737165 also contains broad claims for entertainment and ‘publishing
services including publishing
of information in electronic form’. Noting
the relevant considerations, I accept that the Opponent’s Goods in class
for various printed goods and publications are closely related to the
Opponent’s Services in class 41 for publishing services.
[2009] FCA 271
, [136]. The specific question of the comparison
of the goods and services does not appear to have been considered on appeal.
the Full Court considered the question of confusion.
Opponent submits that the Applicant’s Services in class 41 are all
identical to, or of the same description as, at least
some of the claims in
class 41 of 737165, 1162972 and 1165658.
1162972 and 1165658 contain broad specifications for training in the fields of
sports and fitness. The Applicant’s Services
in class 41 are broadly for
the provision of sporting events, instruction and training related to health and
sport, provision of
sporting facilities. 737165 specifies the entertainment
services as being those in the nature of sporting events of all types, including
‘contests, clinics, camps, tournaments and exhibitions’. The words
‘clinics’ and ‘camps’ suggests
a dual entertainment and
training type nature which I consider to weigh in favour of a finding of these
goods being identical or
at least of the same description as those in the
Applicant’s Services in class 41 for various training and education in the
field of sports and health.
these reasons, I am satisfied that that the Applicant’s Services in class
41 are of the same description of the Opponent’s
Services in class 41 for
especially 737165, though also 1162972 and 1165658
the Applicant’s Services in class 43, the Opponent does not have a
registration for services in that class but relies
on its class 41
registrations. The Opponent submits that the Applicant’s Services in class
43 are all identical or of the same
description as at least some of the services
in class 41 for 737165, 1162972 and 1165658. The Opponent argues that sporting
in class 41 are typically provided by clubs. Such clubs also provide
packages which include provision of drinks. Exhibits 7 to 10
of Wolnizer-2 are
relied on in this regard, These show that clubs sometimes provide packages
involving the provision of food and
drink accompanied by sporting events.
accept that club services for the provision of food and drink may be of the same
description as the Opponent’s entertainment
services relating to sport
‘of all types’ specified in 737165. Notionally, the broad claims for
provision of food and
drink would also include those similar services. However,
I am not satisfied that the Applicant’s Services in class 41 for
‘arranging of wedding receptions (food and drink)’,
‘charitable services, namely providing food and drink catering’
various temporary accommodation services are of the same description as any of
the services specified in the Opponent’s
Trade Marks.
Opponent also submits that the Applicant’s Services in class 43 are
closely related to the class 32 registration for alcoholic
beverages. This was
the result in
Re Woodland
where the delegate of the Registrar found that
hotel and motel and accommodation services to be closely related to beers.
664147 each contain a claim in class 32 for beers.
decision turned on its own facts at a particular point in time and the
submissions and evidence before me do not satisfy me
that the goods in class 32
are closely related to any of the Applicant’s Services in class 43.
some of the Applicant’s Services may be of the same description, after
consideration of the relevant factors and the
evidence, I am not satisfied that
all the Applicant’s Services in class 43 are similar or closely related to
the Opponent’s
Goods and Services.
Comparison of trade marks
note the obvious differences between the trade marks including the oppositely
inverted nature of the arc present in each trade mark,
the presence of the
triangle in the Trade Mark and the Geographical Word(s). Many of the
Opponent’s Trade Marks also include
other additional elements such as the
word ‘witness’ or other visual elements such as cricket stumps.
Because of these
differences, on a side by side comparison of the Trade Mark
with each of the Opponent’s Trade Marks, there is a total impression
dissimilarity. I am not satisfied that the Trade Mark is substantially identical
with any of the Opponent’s Trade Marks.
turn to the issue of deceptive similarity. Justice Windeyer J in
Company of Australia Ltd v Esso Standard Oil (Australia) Ltd
noted that this
question does not involve a comparison which is side by side.
question concerns deceptive not abstract similarity. The test does not require
that consumers consider the trade marks to be
the same, it is ultimately whether
consumers would be caused to wonder whether goods and services bearing the Trade
Mark have a common
trade source as those of the Opponent’s Trade Marks. In
Southern Cross Refrigerating Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty Ltd
noted that this means that it is enough if the consumers are caused to wonder or
they entertain a reasonable doubt about
that question.
sufficient to ‘cause confusion’ if the minds of the public are
merely perplexed
[1999] ATMO 94
(1999) 47 IPR 365 (Hearing
Officer Thompson).
[1963] HCA 66
[1954] HCA 82
Southern Cross
or mixed up as to the relationship between the two trade marks.
requisite ‘threshold for confusion is not high’
does not matter if the confusion stops short of actual deception or mistake. It
is also said to be irrelevant if the confusion
is ‘unlikely to persist up
to the point of, and be a factor in, inducing actual sales’.
In deciding the question I must account for the imperfect recollection of the
relevant consumers.
The relevant question is not limited to whether
particular uses will give rise to deception or confusion and must be based upon
the Applicant can do if registration is obtained.
Australian Woollen Mills Ltd v FS Walton & Co Ltd
, Dixon and
McTiernan JJ said of the relevant comparison:
In deciding this
question, the marks ought not, of course, to be compared side by side. An
attempt should be made to estimate the
effect or impression produced on the mind
of potential customers by the mark or device for which the protection of an
is sought. The impression or recollection which is carried away and
retained is necessarily the basis of any mistaken belief that
the challenged
mark or device is the same.
Registrar of Trade Marks v Woolworths
French J noted that:
In the end there is one practical judgment to be made. Whether any
resemblance between different trade marks for goods and services
renders them
deceptively similar will depend upon the nature and degree of that resemblance
and the closeness of the relationship
between the services and the goods in
question. It will not always be necessary to dissect that judgment into discrete
and independent
conclusions about the resemblance of marks and the relationship
of goods and services. Consistently with that proposition, the Registrar
judge on appeal from the Registrar could determine in a particular case that,
given the limited degree of resemblance between
the relevant marks he or she
could not be satisfied, no matter how closely related the goods and services
concerned, that the use
of the applicant's marks would be likely to deceive or
to cause confusion.
Coca-Cola Co v All-Fect Distributors Ltd
, [39] (Black CJ, Sundberg and Finkelstein JJ)
Australian Postal Corporation v Digital Post Australia Pty
[2013] FCAFC 153
, [70] (North, Middleton and Barker JJ).
Southern Cross
(n 15) [5] (Kitto J);
International Corporation Pty Ltd v Tivo Inc
[2012] FCAFC 159
[115] (Nicholas J);
Phone Directories Company Australia Pty Ltd v Telstra
Corporation Ltd
[2014] FCA 373
[413] (Murphy J).
Australian Woollen Mills Ltd v FS Walton & Co Ltd
[1937] HCA 51
(1937) 58 CLR 641
, 658 (Dixon and McTiernan JJ) (‘
Woollen Mills
Registrar of Trade Marks v Woolworths
[1999] FCA 1020
[50] (French J) (‘
’). See also,
Berlei Hestia
Industries Limited v Bali Co Inc
[1973] HCA 43
(1973) 129 CLR 353
, 362 (Mason J)
Australian Woollen Mills
(n 19) 658.
(n 20) [40].
Opponent emphasises that the relevant assessment must involve consideration of
‘all the surrounding circumstances’.
These surrounding
circumstances, include the circumstances in which the Trade Mark will be used,
the circumstances in which the goods
or services will be bought and sold and the
character of the probable purchasers of the goods and services.
must give consideration to the full notional manner in which the trade marks may
be used across the specification in the Trade
The ordinary
course of business and the way in which the Applicant’s Goods are sold are
of significance to this question.
This includes how the goods and
services are promoted and acquired which may indicate the relevance and
importance of aural or visual
aspects of the mark. Also of significance are the
outlets from which goods and services are typically acquired, which may indicate
how trade marks are likely to be displayed and perceived.
the hearing, the parties made various submissions concerning the relevance of an
alleged reputation in the Opponent’s Trade
Marks. The Opponent took
Hearing Officer Wilson to the history of how Courts had treated reputation as
factor for the question of
deceptive similarity and development of the law. The
Applicant also engaged with this thread of the law and relied on decisions such
Mars Australia Pty Ltd v Sweet Rewards Pty Ltd
Clipsal Australia Pty Ltd v Clipso Electrical Pty Ltd (No
I consider the question of whether a reputation is relevant
to the question of deceptive similarity to be have been decided in
IP Holdings Pty Ltd v Allergan Australia Pty Ltd
the High Court confirmed that
reputation in a trade mark does not have a role to play in deciding the question
of deceptive similarity.
The High Court noted that,
‘[c]onsideration of the context of those surrounding circumstances does
not “open the door”
for examination of the actual use of the
registered mark, or any consideration of the reputation associated with the
I confirm that in
Cooper Engineering Co Pty Ltd v Sigmund
[1952] HCA 15
[2] (Kitto J).
Southern Cross
(n 15) [4] (Kitto J).
(n 20) 362 (Mason J).
PDP Capital Pty Ltd v Grasshopper Ventures Pty Ltd
[2021] FCAFC 128
, [109]-[110] (Jagot, Nicholas and Burley JJ).
Ibid [110].
[2009] FCAFC 174 (Emmett
, Bennett and Edmonds JJ).
[2017] FCA 60 (Perram
[2023] HCA 8 (Kiefel
CJ, Gageler, Gordon, Edelman and Gleeson
deciding the question of deceptive similarity for the purposes of s 44, I have
not considered the reputation in any of the Opponent’s
Trade Marks or the
Trade Mark.
Opponent’s submissions also took me to a number of decisions where a trade
mark comprising a combination of a device and
a word (such as the Trade Mark)
has been found deceptively similar to an earlier trade mark which was comprised
only of a device
(such as many of the Opponent’s Trade Marks). The
Opponent submits that these cases demonstrate that there is a degree of
for differences between the device components and that the addition of
words are not necessarily sufficient to remove a likelihood
of confusion. The
decisions referred to me by the Opponent include
Tokyo Metropolitan
Standards Association of Australia v Concrite
Pty Limited
Mobil Oil Corporation v Dynam Nominees Pty
Spiral Foods v Valio Pty Ltd
have reviewed the decisions referred to in the Opponent’s Written
Submissions and the comparisons involved. I consider the
trade marks before me
to involve different features and circumstances which set them apart from those
which I must compare.
Opponent also took me to numerous decisions, mostly in other jurisdictions,
where a comparison has been made between one or more
of the Opponent’s
Trade Marks and other trade marks, including some containing or consisting an
arc. This included the decision
Nike International Ltd v Guirenniao
(Fujian) Shoes & Plastics Co., Ltd
where a delegate of the
Registrar considered grounds of opposition under ss 44 and 60 to be established
in respect of an application
for extension of protection of IRDA No
of the basis for the decision was the Opponent’s related entity’s
registrations in respect of the simple rendition
of a swoosh trade mark in class
25. I consider the trade mark in
[2017] ATMO 52 (Hearing
Officer Condon) (‘
Metropolitan Government
[1999] ATMO 65 (Vija
[1999] ATMO 99 (Hearing
Officer T. Williams).
[2000] ATMO 22 (Hearing
Officer Thompson).
[2007] ATMO 19 (Hearing
Officer Thompson)
to be of a different orientation, overall effect and it to be unencumbered as an
overall trade mark by the additional and different
elements that are present in
the Trade Mark.
Opponent also referred me to an unpublished decision, of which it provides a
copy of the reasons at Appendix X to Downer.
This decision was in
respect of IRDA No 1037543 where the opposition was successful on the basis of
one or more of the Opponent’s
Trade Marks. I extract the relevant trade
mark below:
(‘1037543’)
At the hearing, Hearing Officer Wilson also took the Opponent to another
unpublished decision concerning IRDA No 573062 in relation
to clothing, where
extension of protection followed despite the presence of the Swoosh Trade Marks.
I reproduce the trade mark below:
recourse to an unpublished decision is appropriate was questioned by the
Opponent’s lawyer. Regardless, I do need not
give weight to these
decisions as I must consider the trade marks before me. These trade marks
involve different circumstances and
characteristics to those in concerning IRDAs
1037543 and 573062. I am not provided with the reasons for the decision
concerning 573062
to weigh how useful it might be in deciding this matter. I
also consider these decisions to all turn on their own facts and where
in overseas jurisdictions they turn on that jurisdiction’s own applicable
law and principles.
the hearing there was a focus on the reasons and outcome in
Jafferjee v
The Opponent submits that this
decision is High Court authority on the question
Downer, Appendix X and Appendix K, 2581.
[1937] HCA 36
(1937) 57 CLR 115
of comparison of composite and device marks and the possible effect of the
surrounding circumstances for a comparison of trade marks.
The Opponent’s
lawyer notes that despite the differences in the compared trade marks in
, the High Court was satisfied that there would likely be
confusion, in part because of the surrounding circumstances.
was an appeal from a decision of the Registrar concerning trade mark
application 65,801, which was compared with registered trade
mark 49,142 in
respect of goods being flour.
Opponent’s lawyer correctly noted at the hearing that the trade marks in
question do not appear in the reasons for
or on the Australia
Trade Marks Search system. I have made my own inquiries, and I extract the
relevant trade marks in
Trade mark number 65,801:
Trade mark number 49,142:
Australian Official Journal of Patents Trade Marks and
[1936] Vol 6, 2509.
Australian Official Journal of Patents Trade Marks and
[1935] Vol 5, 1405.
Australian Official Journal of Trade Marks
23, No 8, 164.
the High Court found that 65,801 was deceptively similar to
49,142, with Latham CJ stating that the trade marks, ‘will be used
bags containing flour, and therefore will be rather rough and not very precise
in outline and detail. There may doubtless
be a tendency towards blurring of the
marks as the bags become rubbed in transport.’
Dixon J also
placed emphasis on this factor noting that the ‘... second and perhaps the
more important is the fact that the
representation would be made by stencilling
upon flour bags. Such pictures would not exhibit the differences in the marks in
same way as a clear representation on flat paper.’
underscores is that the comparison is a practical one and
deceptive similarity must be considered in context of each of the
Applicant’s
Goods and Services and sometimes the context can be a decisive
specification of the Applicant’s Goods and Services refers to a variety of
goods and services. However, my assessment is
concerned flour sacks in the 1930s, presents its own circumstances which are
different to those for the Applicant’s
Goods and Services. The Opponent
does not directly address the trade context for every single one of the
Applicant’s Goods
and Services. However, submissions were made concerning
especially clothing, shoes and sports services contexts. With regard to the
practical manner in which the Trade Mark is likely to be used and appear in
retailers, the Opponent also prepared comparative mock
ups which show how the
trade marks might appear on goods, including when reoriented in a trade context.
It submits that this material
is instructive. I attach this material at Schedule
4 to these written reasons. I also note the findings in in
Taiwan Yamani v
Giorgio Armani
where the delegate found that the ‘commercial reality
today is that articles of clothing are simply not purchased over the counter
a verbal request but are selected by a potential customer from a rack in the
shop and very carefully inspected and compared with
other similar
There was also a suggestion that advertising
signage when viewed in a stadium context could involve the reorientation of the
Mark when viewed from far below.
note that s 219 provides that in, ‘an action or proceeding relating to a
trade mark, evidence is admissible of the usage of
the trade concerned and of
any relevant trade mark, trade name or
(n 39) 120.
(n 39) 123.
(1990) 17 IPR 92
, 96 (Hearing Officer Homann). See also,
Hugo Boss AG v Tagmill Pty Ltd
[2000] ATMO 23 (Hearing
Officer Forno) and
Autumnpaper Ltd v Maya McQueen Pty Ltd
[2016] ATMO 53 (Hearing
get - up legitimately used by other persons’. Chan exhibits various
photographs which were taken on 28 November 2016 when the
declarant visited
retailers in Melbourne. Despite being dated after the Relevant Date, I do
consider these photographs to likely
reflect the position that existed as at the
Relevant Date. The relevance of this material is that it shows how, at that
time, goods
being sports balls, sports socks, sports caps and slippers are
likely to be displayed in various retailers. I extract a number of
examples of
the photographs below:
impact of colours was noted by the lawyer for the Applicant at the hearing as a
circumstance which might weigh against a finding
of deceptive similarity.
However, s 70 makes it clear that unless there is a colour endorsement, then the
notional rights should
be considered as unlimited
the submission that colours as appearing in the representations of the Trade
Mark weigh on the question of deceptive similarity
in this matter.
Opponent submits that I must consider the different potential orientations in
which the Trade Mark might appear in relation to
the Applicant’s Goods and
Services. This argument has sometimes been made in the context of, for example,
cylindrical containers
and wrap around labels on bottles where delegates have
found that signs on these objects may be obscured when displayed in retail
the delegate considered it relevant
that the ‘orientation of the trade marks in question will not always be
apparent on swing-tags,
the tongues or soles of shoes and so
In this respect the Opponent also refers me to the
examples at Schedule 4 to these written reasons. The Opponent says that with
for example, there is a high risk of confusion. Traders in shoes
appear to use trade marks in a flip orientation, as shown in Downer
O. In the marketplace for sportswear and sports goods, the trade marks may also
be partially obscured.
Opponent submits that I should view the presence of the Geographical Word(s) in
the Trade Mark and the presence of the arc element
in that context. This may
involve the display on goods in the manners shown at paragraph [71] in these
written reasons. It is often
said that the addition of a geographical reference
should be given less weight as it likely falls short of differentiating trade
marks because of its descriptiveness.
The Opponent places
particular reliance on the fact that the Trade Mark is a series trade mark which
refers to statements or representations
as to places. The Opponent says that the
‘Geographical Word(s) merely inform the consumer of a geographical place
and the fact
that the Trade Mark has been filed as a series trade mark
underscores the descriptiveness’. Therefore, the Opponent says that
Pham Global Pty Ltd v Insight Clinical Imaging Pty
[2017] FCAFC 83 (Greenwood
, Jagot and Beach JJ)
Hans Schwarzkopf & Henkel GmbH & Co KG v Tars
International Limited
[2008] ATMO 72
, [20] (Hearing Officer Windsor) and
Pernod Ricard Winemakers Pty Ltd v Cracka IP Pty Ltd
[2018] ATMO 110
[29] (Hearing Officer Smith). See also,
Magdalena Securities Ltd’s
Application
(1931) 48 RPC 477
, 485-486 (Ch) (Maugham J).
(n 37) [18].
Accor Australia & New Zealand Hospitality Pty Ltd v Liv
[2017] FCAFC 56 (Greenwood
, Besanko and Katzmann JJ). See also,
Tokyo Metropolitan Government
Geographical Word(s) should be given less weight. The problem with this
submission is that the Geographical Word(s) may also have
a visual and
orientational impact on the minds of the consumers, when combined with the other
elements. Further, the trade marks
each must be viewed as their own whole trade
trade marks share an arc-like feature in different orientations, but this
similarity alone does not establish deceptive similarity.
The Trade Mark’s
design includes an arc or swoosh element pointing left and curving over a
Geographical Word, with a tapered
tail contrasting with the left-to-right
reading of the words. This arc is inverted compared to the Opponent’s
marks and is
not an exact copy (nor does it need to be). What matters is the
impression on consumers. In its usual position, the arc appears as
element, while the Opponent’s Trade Marks feature a clear tick shape. The
Trade Mark’s arc looks more like an
abstract curve or a planetary ring
around the Geographical Word(s).
marks can appear upside down or rotated, such as on goods displayed in stores.
However, consumers will likely recognise the
correct orientation when the mark
is used normally. The Geographical Word(s) act as a visual guide or compass
alongside the arc and
triangle elements. The words do have a descriptive
meaning, so they carry less weight, but they still influence orientation.
each rotated version of the Trade Mark may create a different
impression, possibly outside what is considered ‘fair notional
Allowing otherwise could give owners broader rights than intended. Regardless,
even considering multiple orientations,
including in retail settings, I find the
risk of confusion to be minimal and not real.
Opponent also submits that the withdrawal of 1554127 by the Applicant amounts to
a tacit recognition that the Trade Mark is deceptively
similar to the
Opponent’s Trade Marks. There can be a variety of reasons a person may
withdraw an application. I confirm that
I do not make any relevant inference
based on these events. I also note that there is no documented evidence of
actual confusion,
though I do view this in the light of the case law which says
that the test does not require as much to establish deceptive similarity.
assessment is that the effect of the Trade Mark, including the Geographical
Word(s), the triangle and swoosh elements together
as a whole, result in an
orientation likely set in the minds of the consumer different to that suggested
by the Opponent. Consumers
encountering the Applicant’s Goods and
Services, even where the Trade Mark is reoriented, are not likely to
imperfectly recollect any of the Opponent’s Trade Marks and be perplexed
in the manner asserted by the Opponent. A mere possibility,
what I consider to
be a remote possibility here if any, is not sufficient. In making the practical
decision which I must, I am not
satisfied that there is a real and tangible
danger of confusion. Therefore, I do not consider the Trade Marks to be
deceptively similar.
Accordingly,
the grounds of opposition under s 44 and/or reg 4.15A have not been
established.
Opponent relies upon s 60. Section 60 provides:
60 Trade mark similar to trade mark that has acquired a reputation in
The registration of a trade mark in respect of particular goods or services
may be opposed on the ground that:
(a) another trade mark had, before the priority date for the registration of the
first-mentioned trade mark in respect of those goods
or services, acquired a
reputation in Australia; and
(b) because of the reputation of that other trade mark, the use of the
first-mentioned trade mark would be likely to deceive or cause
priority date
see section 12.
satisfy s 60(a), the Opponent must first establish that as at the Relevant Date
another trade mark had acquired a reputation in
Australia. The word
‘reputation’ here means, ‘the recognition of the [other trade
mark] by the public generally’.
Something more than a
reputation among a small number of persons is required and the size and extent
of the class of persons may
vary depending on the circumstances.
Reputation may be inferred from a high sale volume, together with substantial
advertising expenditures and other promotions, without
direct evidence of
consumer appreciation of the Trade Mark.
The use as shown in the
evidence should be use such that it indicates a connection in the course of
trade between the goods and the
person who applied the trade mark to the
This is an objective question from the perspective of the
ordinary consumer.
McCormick & Co Inc v McCormick
[2000] FCA 1335
[81]-[82] (Kenny J) (‘
ConAgra Inc v McCain Foods (Australia) Pty Ltd
, [131]-[132] cited with approval in
(n 46) [81].
(n 50) [86].
Coca-Cola Co v All-Fect Distributors Ltd
(n 16) [19],
which was cited with approval in
E & J Gallo Winery v Lion Nathan
Australia Pty Ltd
[2010] HCA 15
, [43] (French CJ, Gummow, Crennan and Bell
(n 14) [5]-[6] (Kitto J).
SGP refers to the Swoosh Trade Marks for the s 60 ground of opposition. That the
Swoosh Trade Marks have each acquired a reputation
is not seriously in dispute
in these proceedings. The reputation was conceded by Applicant in the
Applicant’s Written Submissions
and in Ratcliffe. Past decisions
concerning the Opponent’s Trade Marks, including
confirm a reputation at various points prior to the Relevant Date. I am
satisfied that there is a reputation in the Opponent’s
Swoosh Trade Marks
in relation to sports goods, sportswear and sporting events. These trade marks
would present the most likely risk,
if any risk, for confusion of any of the
Opponent’s Trade Marks. I have noted the extremely extensive evidence of
extant as at the Relevant Date and I consider there to be a
substantial reputation.
Accordingly,
the core issue in this proceeding is whether there is a real risk of confusion
or deception because of the reputation
which has been acquired in the Swoosh
Trade Marks.
parties spent much of hearing making submissions on how I should interpret the
fact that on 14 years of use of relevant elements
of the Trade Mark, Ratcliffe
declares that not a single consumer has expressed any possible connection with
the Opponent, let alone
a significant or substantial number of consumers. I have
noted that the case law does not require this. The Opponent notes that Applicant
has only ever used its Trade Mark in the Australian Capital Territory, perhaps
only in relation to the Applicant’s Services
as there has been no evidence
of the Applicant’s use in relation to goods.
onus is on the Opponent to show that there is a real risk of deception or
confusion. A probability, if it is real, is sufficient.
This does not require
that the Trade Mark be deceptively similar to the Swoosh Trade Marks, though
that might be a factor for the
ultimate question. The Opponent again refers me
to the many extracts of decisions across many foreign jurisdictions. I do not
these other than to say that the decisions contain various findings
that there has been at various points in time, findings of a
reputation(s) and
recognition of the Opponent’s Trade Marks, especially the Swoosh Trade
Marks and those which include the
word ‘Nike’ and that confusion may
follow from other trade marks.
a deceptively similar trade mark is not required, my observations concerning
deceptive similarity would operate here. There
are notable differences in the
trade marks which minimise
Downer, Appendix K.
the risk of deception or confusion for these purposes. This is so even in the
context of the reputation acquired in the Swoosh Trade
Marks and even in the
various contexts where the Trade Mark might be reoriented, so as to reduce the
likelihood of deception or confusion.
I confirm that in deciding this issue I
have taken account of the notional use to which the Trade Mark may be put and
the practical
manner in which the Trade Mark might appear on or in relation to
the Applicant’s Goods and Services. Noting the very extensive
of each of the Opponent’s Swoosh Trade Marks, I am not satisfied that the
use of the Trade Mark would be likely
to deceive or cause confusion.
Accordingly,
the ground of opposition under s 60 has not been established.
Section 42(b)
42(b) provides,
[a]n application for the registration of a trade mark must be rejected if...
would be contrary to law [my emphasis added].
requirement for s 42(b) is that I am satisfied that the use of the Trade Mark
be contrary to law.
The Opponent has
two bases for its s 42(b) ground of opposition, which I now consider.
SGP refers to the Swoosh Trade Marks in the particulars for the ground of
opposition under s 42(b).
requirements of s 18 of the Australian Consumer Law
are that there be a likelihood that the
relevant consumer would be misled or deceived as to the origin of the
Applicant’s Services
due to the conduct of the Applicant – that is,
the consumer would be likely to be led into error. Section 29 of the ACL
representations that are false or misleading. The expression
‘mislead or deceive’ in s 18 of the ACL is effectively equivalent
the expression ‘false or misleading’ in s 29 of the
test for determining whether conduct contravenes the ACL is one that is stricter
than the that under s 60. Section 60 requires
only that consumers would be
likely to be deceived or
Advantage-Rent-A-Car Inc v Advantage Car Rental Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 683
, [28] (Madgwick J).
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth), Schedule 2.
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Coles
Supermarkets Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] FCA 634
[40] (Allsop CJ).
confused. Since I am not satisfied that the ground of opposition under
established, it follows that on the more demanding test to be applied under the
ACL, I am not satisfied that the Applicant’s
use of the Trade Mark would
be likely to mislead or deceive, or amount to a false or misleading
representation under the ACL.
determining whether there has been passing off, this involves similar
considerations to misleading and deceptive conduct in that
there must be
reputation in the relevant mark or indicia; misrepresentation leading to
deception; and damage to goodwill, or the
likelihood thereof. Where a trade mark
is not likely to contravene the ACL, it is also not likely to amount to passing
off. In this
respect, Hill J noted in
Re Equity Access Pty Ltd v Westpac
Banking Corporation
The scope for the operation of s.52
will thus be broader than that involved in the tort of passing off so that in a
case such as the
present where the claim is for the protection of the reputation
in a name against the use of that name by another, failure to succeed
will invariably mean that proceedings for passing off would likewise
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) are the equivalent
predecessor sections for
of the ACL. Given my findings in relation
sections 18
of the ACL, I am also satisfied that use of the Trade Mark
would not constitute passing off.
Accordingly,
the ground of opposition under
has not been established.
Section 62A
62A provides that the registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground
that the Application was made in bad faith.
For this ground of opposition, I
must determine whether, ‘in all the particular circumstances, the
[applicant’s] knowledge
was such that [its] decision to apply for
registration at the relevant date would be regarded as in bad faith by persons
proper standards’.
This question is determined as at
the Relevant Date. In
Hard Coffee Pty Ltd v Hard Coffee Main Beach Pty Ltd
the delegate noted that the test is whether the reasonable man in the shoes
of the person ought to have so known.
The level of similarity of
the trade mark with other trade marks can also be a relevant factor.
Re Equity Access Pty Ltd v Westpac Banking Corporation
[1989] FCA 771
, [40] (Hill J).
Fry Consulting Pty Ltd v Sports Warehouse Inc (No 2)
[2012] FCA 81
, [167] (Dodds-Streeton J).
[2009] ATMO 26
, [11] (Hearing Officer Nancarrow).
SGP refers to the Swoosh Trade Marks for the ground of opposition under s 62A.
The SGP also states that because the Opponent’s
predecessor in title
previously opposed registration of 1554127
the Applicant must have
been aware of the Opponent and its trade marks at the time of filing the Trade
Mark and that it was not entitled
to apply for registration of the Trade Mark in
Opponent also says that the statements in the Ratcliffe are incongruous with the
facts and material provided in response to NTP-1
and NTP-2. It notes that the
Applicant as a provider of club services would recognise the Trade Mark as an
almost faithful reproduction
of the most famous sporting brand in the world. The
Opponent says that there is no evidence to support a brief to the designer that
it represents a football in flight and that the majority of those designs
provided by the graphic designer do not go near that description.
No evidence is
presented as to why the Applicant would select the only trade mark, which the
Opponent says is very similar to one
of the most iconic in the world. The
Opponent also submits again that the withdrawal of the earlier application
amounts to a tacit
recognition that the trade mark was deceptively similar to
the Opponent’s Trade Marks.
Opponent further submits that parts of the EIA are potentially misleading, for
example paragraph [8] to Ratcliffe, which states
that the Trade Mark is never
used in such a way that the arc and triangle element is used separately to the
Geographical Word(s).
By contrast in Exhibits 1-3 of the Wolnizer-2, the
Applicant arguably does use, for example the swoosh element and triangle in the
Trade Mark in isolation – it may be construed as a stand alone trade mark.
I extract one example of a photograph which was
taken at Kingston Oval in March
2014 below:
Downer, Appendixes Y and Z.
Opponent says that in all the circumstances, a reasonable person in the position
of the Applicant and with its awareness and knowledge
would not believe they
were entitled to apply for the Trade Mark. The Opponent submits that sporting
clubs in general would know
that there would be an objection to the Trade Mark
and that the Applicant was aware of the similarity. There were other options
swoosh type trade marks presented to the Applicant. However, the Applicant
chose to select the Trade Mark.
process for rebranding was discussed in the evidence supplied in response to
NTP-1 and NTP-2. Prior to the use and adoption of
the Trade Mark, the Applicant
appears to have had MinterEllison conduct inquiries about whether there would be
any issue. It is factually
correct that application 1554127 was withdrawn. The
reason for this was perhaps that the Applicant wanted to avoid proceedings with
the Opponent, and in the Applicant’s estimation the addition of the
Geographical Word(s) would decrease that risk. The Applicant
says that the
design of the Trade Mark is merely a modernisation and innocent redesign of its
then registered trade marks. The Applicant
further submits that it was Spectrum
Graphics who provided the logos and Ratcliffe made modifications. The Applicant
approached a
graphic designer to have a new logo presented, they then took it to
MinterEllison to check for conflicting trade marks, after which
they proceeded.
They appear to have been reasonably diligent, involving a third-party in the
design, seeking advice and thereafter
board approval. The Applicant applied in
2004 for 1010879 and thereafter 1011382. Two elements of the Trade Mark are
materially the
same as in those trade marks.
Opponent submits that seeking the advice does not excuse the actions of the
Applicant. I have noted that the scope of the advice
appears to be in respect of
entertainment services in class 41. The Opponent adds that the director’s
meeting minutes state
that the Applicant’s board of directors concluded
that the Trade Mark was ‘the most desirable [of those options laid
it], if it does not contradict an earlier trade mark’. The Opponent says
that this suggests that the Applicant’s
act of filing the Application in
relation to the core class 25 goods is not in good faith and that a reasonable
person would not
have decided to file and if the Applicant was of such a mind
that it was not deceptively similar, there is no reason they would not
proceed with the application which was withdrawn. The Opponent also notes that
the search of MinterEllison appears to be one
directed to common law issues
rather than earlier registered
rights. Further, the earlier trade mark application’s specifications were
each unrelated at that time to the Opponent’s
core business.
assessment is that the Applicant was likely aware of the Opponent’s Trade
Marks, including the Swoosh Trade Marks. It is
also likely that the Applicant
was aware that there may be a dispute with one of the largest brands in respect
of sportswear and
sports goods in the world. The Applicant by comparison is a
relatively small operator of clubs in the Australian Capital Territory.
likely that the Applicant and its board would seek to minimise a contest even
where their assessment was that deception or
confusion was unlikely. The
relevant test for s 62A is not one which turns solely on the likelihood of there
being a dispute. I also
consider the withdrawal of 1554127 at its highest to
show that the Applicant wished in a broad sense to avoid or minimise a dispute
with the Opponent. The Applicant took some reasonable steps of making
alterations by the addition of the club names, which reduces
the risk of
confusion, should there be a dispute with the Opponent. Even though there was
likely an awareness of the Swoosh Trade
Marks and/or their presence in the
marketplace, this does not itself suffice nor would it suffice in combination
with the other events
and evidence relied on by the Opponent. Ultimately, it is
the Opponent who has the onus in the matter. I am not satisfied that in
circumstances, the Applicant’s awareness was such that its decision to
apply for registration of the Trade Mark at
the Relevant Date would be regarded
as in bad faith by persons adopting proper standards.
Accordingly,
the ground of opposition under s 62A has not been established.
relevantly provides:
55 Decision
(1) Unless subsection (3) applies to the proceedings, the Registrar must, at
the end, decide:
(a) to refuse to register the trade mark; or
(b) to register the trade mark (with or without conditions or limitations) in
respect of the goods and/or services then specified
in the application;
having regard to the extent (if any) to which any ground on which the
application was opposed has been established.
limitations
Opponent has not established a ground of opposition. Accordingly, the Trade Mark
may proceed to registration not less than one
month from the date of this
disposition of the application should be treated in accordance with any
direction or judgment of the Court should there be any
parties have sought costs. It is normal for costs to follow the event. I see no
reason to make an exception here.
award costs against the Opponent under s 221 in the amounts according to
Schedule 8 of the Regulations.
Benjamin Goldsworthy Hearing Officer Oppositions and Hearings Trade Marks and
Designs 17 October 2025
Representation 1
Representation 2
Representation 3
Representation
: Advertisement boards of paper or
cardboard; Printed matter; Printed publications; Instructional material;
Teaching materials for
education; Teaching materials for information; Teaching
materials for instruction; Photographs (printed); Newsletters; Advertising
posters; Posters; Booklets relating to games; Rule books for playing games;
Scorecards being printed matter for use with games; Advertising
material being
printed matter; Advertising publications; Printed matter for advertising
purposes; Programme guides (printed matter);
Programmes in the form of printed
matter; Promotional pamphlets; Promotional publications; Drink coasters of
cardboard; Raffle tickets
: Apparel (clothing, footwear, headgear); Athletic clothing;
Clothing for sports; Football boots; Football jerseys; Football shirts;
shoes; Boots for sports; Sports headgear (other than helmets); Sports jackets;
Sports jerseys; Sports jumpers; Sports shirts
: Apparatus for use in the game of football; Australian rules
footballs; Footballs; Miniature replica football kits; Reduced sized
Sporting articles for use in playing football (other than clothing or articles
for protective purposes); Training apparatus
for use in relation to football;
Balls for playing sports
: Fitness and exercise clinics, clubs and salons; Health club
services (health and fitness training); Instruction in physical fitness;
Operation of physical fitness centres; Physical fitness instruction; Physical
fitness training services; Physical fitness tuition;
Leisure centre services;
Health club services (exercise); Gymnasium services; Aerobics training services;
Conducting fitness classes
(aerobics); Provision of entertainment facilities;
Providing information, including online, about education, training,
entertainment,
sporting and cultural activities; Provision of sporting events;
Provision of sporting facilities; Cultural activities; Event management
(organisation of educational, entertainment, sporting or cultural events);
Social club services (entertainment, sporting
and cultural services); Advisory
services relating to the organisation of sporting events; Arranging of sporting
events; Management
of cultural events; Management of sporting events;
Organisation of sporting events; Organising charitable fundraising events being
the provision of entertainment, sporting and cultural services; Production of
sporting events; Provision of recreational events;
Rental of equipment for use
at sporting events; Coaching services for sporting activities; Information
services relating to sport;
Instruction in sports; Sporting results services;
Sports coaching; Sports officiating; Sports training; Organisation of
recreational
activities; Gaming services; Club entertainment services; Provision
of sporting club facilities; Sports club services; Arranging
competitions; Booking of sports facilities; Organisation of sports competitions;
Providing facilities for sports events;
Provision of facilities for sports;
Providing sports facilities; Providing sports training facilities; Provision of
information about
sports; Sports education services; Sports information
services; Sports refereeing; Physical health education
: Club services for the provision of food and drink; Providing
food and drink; Social clubs (Provision of food); Arranging of wedding
receptions (food and drink); Charitable services, namely providing food and
drink catering; Hospitality services (food and drink);
Arranging for the
provision of food; Food and drink catering; Food cooking services; Food
preparation; Preparation of food and drink;
Takeaway food and drink services;
Take out food
and beverage services; Providing information, including online, about services
for providing food and drink, and temporary accommodation;
accommodation; Bar services
(‘Collectively, Applicant’s Goods and Services’)
Trade mark no
Priority date
Goods and/or services
Class 25: Athletic shoes for sports, athletic shoes for training, and
athletic shoes for general use; and athletic uniforms
Class 18: All goods included in this class
Class 18: All goods included in this class
Class 18: All goods included in this class
Class 42: Retailing and related services in this class in the field of
footwear, clothing, headwear, bags, sporting goods and related
accessories
Class 9: Scientific, nautical, surveying, electric, photographic,
cinematographic, optical, weighing, measuring,
signalling, checking (supervision), life-saving and teaching apparatus and
instruments; apparatus for recording, transmission or
reproduction of sound or
images; magnetic data carriers; recording discs; automatic vending machines and
mechanisms for coin- operated
apparatus; cash registers, calculating
machines, data processing
equipment and computers; fire-extinguishing apparatus
Class 14: Precious metals and their alloys and goods in precious metals or
coated therewith, not included in other classes; jewellery,
precious stones;
horological and chronometric instruments
Class 28: Games and playthings; gymnastic and sporting articles not
included in other classes; decorations for Christmas trees
Class 32: Beers; mineral and aerated waters and other non- alcoholic
drinks; fruit drinks and fruit juices; syrups and other preparations
Class 41: Entertainment services in the nature of sporting events of all
exhibitions;
entertainment services in the nature of ongoing radio, television, Internet and
other electronic programs in the field
of sporting events; television and motion
picture production and production of multimedia programs; entertainment services
nature of live performances by musicians and other artists; and
combinations of the above being entertainment services; publishing
including publishing of information in electronic form
Class 18: Leather and imitations of leather, and goods made of these
materials and not included in other classes; animal skins, hides;
trunks and travelling bags; umbrellas, parasols and walking sticks; whips,
harness and saddlery
Class 25: Clothing, footwear, headgear
Class 3: Bleaching preparations and other substances for laundry use;
cleaning, polishing, scouring and abrasive preparations; soaps
including liquid
soaps; perfumes; essential oils; cosmetics; hair lotions including shampoos and
conditioners and other hair treatments;
hand and body lotions; face creams,
moisturisers; sunscreens; lip balms; shaving lotions and creams; aftershave;
balms; deodorants
antiperspirants; bath oils and gels; anti-aging creams; baby lotions, oils
and powders; aromatherapy lotions, creams and oils; dentifrices
Class 35: Advertising; business management;
business administration; office functions; retail of goods by any means;
retail services including retail store services and on-line
retail store
services featuring apparel, apparel accessories, footwear, footwear
accessories, headwear, eyewear and accessories, sporting goods and
equipment, all purpose sport bags, sports and fitness products
and accessories;
marketing and advertising
Class 9: Cell phone cases; cell phone straps; cell phone straps with
charms; parts and accessories for cell phones; specialty
carrying cases for cell
phones; cases for hand- held computing devices; protective covers for hand-
held computing devices; eyewear;
sunglasses; eyewear accessories, namely,
straps, neck straps; goggles for sports; ski goggles; snow
goggles; computer
application software for smart phones and mobile
devices, namely, software for social networking, receipt and
transmission
of data, shopping, fitness, weight
management and fitness assessments; online computer software for
networking, receipt and transmission of data,
shopping, fitness, weight management and fitness assessments;
computer software for fitness and fitness assessments; headphones;
computer game discs, electronic game discs, interactive
game discs; sensors
and electronic monitoring devices incorporating microprocessors, digital
display, and accelerometers,
for detecting, storing, reporting, monitoring,
uploading and downloading sport, fitness training, and activity data to the
mobile devices, and gaming consoles, and communication with mobile
devices, gaming consoles and computers, electronic devices;
USB hardware,
USB chargers, adapters; USB adapters, pedometers; electronic
monitoring devices
incorporating indicators that light up and change colour based on wearer's
cumulative activity level
Class 25: Clothing, footwear, headgear
Class 25: Clothing, footwear, headgear
Class 42: Retailing and related services in this class in the field of
footwear, clothing, headwear, bags, sporting goods and related
accessories
Class 16: Printed matter; posters, photographs, postcards, portraits,
stationery, transfers, playing cards, adhesives for stationery
or household
Class 9: Optical apparatus and equipment, including sunglasses and
spectacles; video tapes, audio tapes, compact discs; computer software,
hardware; electronic games and apparatus; amusement apparatus adapted for use
for television receivers; amusement machines,
automatic and coin operated;
anti-glare visors; photographic equipment, including camcorders and cameras;
spectacle and sunglass
cases; cassette
players; protective helmets,
including sports helmets, football helmets, cycling helmets, roller skating
helmets and other protective helmets for sports or recreational
activities;
radios; electrically heated socks; video game cartridges, video recorders, video
Class 29: Meat, fish, poultry and game; meat extracts; preserved, dried and
cooked fruits and vegetables; jellies, jams, fruit sauces;
eggs, milk and milk
products; edible oils and fats
Class 32: Beers; mineral and aerated waters and other non- alcoholic
drinks; fruit drinks and fruit juices; syrups and other preparations
Class 28: Playthings; gymnastic and sporting articles not included in other
classes; decorations for Christmas trees
Class 14: Precious metals and their alloys and goods in precious metals or
coated therewith, not included in other classes; jewellery,
precious stones;
horological and chronometric instruments
Class 28: Games and playthings; gymnastic and sporting articles not
included in other classes; decorations for Christmas trees
Class 14: Watches of all types, including altimeters, compasses,
pedometers, chronographs, speed distance monitors with speed sensor,
heart rate monitors and stopwatches; jewellery and lapel pins
Class 18: All-purpose sports bags, knapsacks, waistpacks, shoe bags, ball
bags, laptop computer bags, handbags, wallets, travel kits,
telephone cases,
luggage, book bags and pouches for carrying school materials;
Class 25: Footwear, clothing and headwear
Class 9: Eyewear, including eye glasses, sunglasses and contact lenses;
parts, accessories and cases for eyewear and contact lenses;
digital music
players; headphones; portable game players; computer software; computer hardware
(including adapters, sensors, and
computer chips); computer peripherals; video
games; CD ROMs; game pods; electronic devices, including electronic fitness
protective helmets, including protective helmets for sports
Class 14: Watches of all types, including watches incorporating altimeters,
compasses, pedometers, speed and/or distance monitors
with speed and heart rate
monitors, all being parts of watches; chronographs; stopwatches
Class 18: Bags including all- purpose bags, sports bags, duffle bags,
backpacks, tote bags, waist packs, purses
Class 25: Footwear, headgear, apparel, including
shirts, T-shirts, sweat shirts, jackets, pants, shorts, caps, hats, socks,
sports bras, underwear, wristbands, headbands, bandanas,
footwear for playing
sports, athletic footwear
Class 28: Gymnastic and sporting articles not included in other classes;
protective padding for playing sports; sports balls; cricket
balls; bags for
carrying sports balls; cricket bats; cricket bags; gloves for playing cricket;
stumps used in playing cricket
Class 25: Footwear; apparel, including shirts, T-shirts, pullovers, sweat
shirts, sweat pants, underwear, sports bras, dresses, skirts,
sweaters, jackets,
socks, headwear, sweatbands, wristbands, headbands, gloves, belts, hosiery,
Class 41: Organizing and sponsoring sporting events; providing training in
the fields of sports and fitness
Class 9: Eyewear, sunglasses, eyewear frames, eyewear accessories, cases,
digital audio equipment,
portable digital music equipment, pedometers, helmets, computer software,
computer hardware, computer peripherals,
cellular phones, compact disc players,
DVD players, DVDs, exercise videos and DVDs, videos and DVDs for playing
CD-ROMs, cases for portable digital audio equipment, headphones, gaming
and peripherals, cellular phone cases, armbands for carrying electronic
Class 14: Watches of all types, including watches incorporating altimeters,
compasses, pedometers, speed and/or distance monitors
with speed sensor and
heart rate monitors, all being parts of watches; chronographs; stopwatches;
clocks; jewellery, lapel pins;
parts and fittings for all aforesaid goods;
baller bands
Class 18: Bags, including all- purpose sports bags, tote bags, duffle bags,
messenger bags, backpacks, waist packs, purses, umbrellas,
luggage, wallets, key
fobs, portfolios, cosmetic and toiletry cases
Class 25: Footwear; apparel, including pants, shorts, shirts, T-shirts,
pullovers, sweat shirts, sweat pants, underwear, sports bras,
dresses, skirts,
sweaters, jackets, socks, headwear, sweatbands, gloves, belts, hosiery,
armbands, coats, vests
Class 35: Retail services; on- line retail services; advertising and
Class 41: Organizing, conducting, and sponsoring sporting events; providing
training in the fields of sports and fitness
(collectively, the ‘Opponent’s Trade Marks’)
RTF format (41.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format