Jain & Hingston [2021] FamCA 644; (30 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Jain & Hingston
[2021] FamCA 644
File number(s):
BRC17930 of 2020
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– NULLITY OF MARRIAGE
– where the fraud relied upon by the applicant wife is not the kind of
fraud contemplated by
section 23B
Marriage Act 1961
being neither
fraud in relation to “identity” nor fraud in relation to the
“nature of the marriage ceremony”
– application for a decree
of nullity dismissed – where the respondent husband failed to file a
response – where
the husband did file an affidavit in which he admitted
making fraudulent statements and providing fraudulent documents – where
there is no need to hear from the respondent prior to the referral of papers
– where the papers are to be referred to the Commonwealth
Director of
Public Prosecutions in respect of the husband’s admitted fraudulent
statements and fraudulent documents.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Marriage Act 1961
Cases cited:
Aird & Hamilton-Reid
[2007] FamCA 4
Australian Building
and Construction Commission v Parker
[2017] FCA 1082
[2017] FamCA 475
Huda & Huda (No 2)
In the Marriage of Deniz
[1977] FamCA 45
(1977) 31 FLR 114
Marriage of Hosking
[1994] FamCA 87
In the Marriage of Otway
(1986) 11 FLR 99
Kennedy & Smith
[2003] FamCA 136
[2000] FamCA 1253
Moss v. Moss
[1897] UKLawRpPro 23
Normandy Woodcutters Ltd v Simpson
[2002] NTSC 43
(1990) FLC 92-111
Simpson & Hodges
[2007] NSWSC
Teves III & Campomayor
[1994] FamCA 57
(1994) 18 Fam LR 844
[2012] FamCA 63
Anthony Dickey QC,
ed, 2014), 161.
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
The Applicant attended as a self-represented litigant.
There being no appearance by or on behalf of the Respondent.
BRC17930 of 2020
MR HINGSTON
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS ON A FINAL BASIS:
1. That the application for a decree of nullity of dismissed.
2. That the Registrar of the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
forward to the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
the Reasons for
Judgment delivered 30 August 2021 as well as the transcript of the entire
proceedings along with the exhibits (relating
to those proceedings) for the
consideration by the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions as to whether
or not Mr Hingston
should be prosecuted (either in Australia or in the United
Kingdom in which case the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
forward the papers to the relevant authority in that country) having regard to
the findings made by the Court against Mr Hingston
referred to in the Reasons
for Judgment – and in particular Mr Hingston’s admissions in his
Affidavit filed 19 March
2021 that he created a false document which purported
to be decree of nullity made by the High Court of Justice (Family Division)
the United Kingdom.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 17.02
Family Law Rules 2004
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this
judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Jain & Hingston
approved by the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
EX TEMPORE REASONS
FOR JUDGMENT
reasons were delivered
on 30 August 2021 and have been settled
and corrected for grammatical errors in order to convey the precise intention of
1 The matter before the Court is an application for a
decree of nullity of marriage. The applicant is Ms Jain and the respondent
Mr Hingston. The applicant was born in 1969. The respondent was born in 1970.
The respondent, Mr Hingston, had been married
before. He was married in 1998 to
Ms B Hingston. They were married in the United Kingdom. That marriage was
annulled by a decree
of the High Court of Justice, Family Division, in the
United Kingdom on 29 August 2012.
2 The applicant, Ms Jain, met Mr Hingston in the United Kingdom in July 2016.
The applicant accepts that the respondent told her that
he had been previously
married in 1998. He also told her that almost immediately – the previous
marriage was annulled and
Ms Jain says that Mr Hingston told her that a decree
of annulment was made in 1999. The parties in this case commenced a
relationship
in or about April 2017. The parties were married in 2019 at Suburb
C in Queensland. This Application for Nullity was filed on 17
December 2020.
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the
Act”), an application under the
Family Law Act
for a decree of
nullity of marriage shall be based on the ground that the marriage is void. It
is then necessary to have regard
Marriage Act 1961
sets out the grounds on which marriages are void. That section states:-
which this Division applies that takes place after the commencement
Amendment Act 1985
either of the parties is, at the time of the
lawfully married to some other person;
(b) the parties are within a prohibited relationship;
(c) by reason of
not a valid
(d) the consent of either of the parties is not a real consent
it was obtained by duress or fraud;
(ii) that party is mistaken as to the identity of the other party or
as to the nature of the ceremony performed; or
(iii) that party did not understand the nature and effect of
(e) either of the parties is not
marriageable
parties within a prohibited relationship are
(a) between a person and
descendant of the person; or
(b) between 2 siblings (whether of the whole blood or the
half-blood).
(3) Any relationship specified
includes a relationship traced through, or to, a person who is or was
and, for that purpose, the relationship between an
and the adoptive parent, or each of the adoptive parents, of the child shall be
deemed to be or to have been the natural relationship
of child and
(4) Nothing in
makes it lawful for a person to marry a person whom the first-mentioned person
could not lawfully have married if that
not been enacted.
(5) For the purposes of this
(a) a person who has at any time
another person shall be deemed to remain the
of that other person notwithstanding that any order by which the adoption was
effected has been annulled, cancelled or discharged
or that the adoption has for
any other reason ceased to be effective; and
(b) a person who has been
more than one occasion shall be deemed to be the
of each person by whom the first-mentioned person has been
(6) For the purposes of this
"adopted" , in
relation to a child, means
the law of any place (whether in or out of
relating to the adoption of children.
"ancestor" , in relation to a person, means
any person from whom the first-mentioned person is descended including a parent
first-mentioned person.”
4 It is said by the applicant that her consent to the marriage was not a real
consent because it was obtained by fraud. The fraud
that the applicant alleges
relates to fraudulent paperwork that she says was submitted in order to satisfy
the requirements of the
Marriage Act
, including
section 42.
That section
requires that parties who intend to marry are obligated to produce to the
authorised marriage celebrant various documents
including a declaration in
writing concerning such matters as the parties’ conjugal status, the
parties’ belief that
there is no legal impediment to the marriage, and
such other matters as are prescribed.
Section 42(8)
states that an authorised celebrant shall not solemnise a
marriage unless the authorised celebrant has satisfied himself or herself
the parties are the parties referred to in the notice – if the authorised
celebrant has reason to believe that a notice
given under this section in
relation to the marriage contains a false statement or an error, or is
Section 42(8)(a)
and (b) state:-
shall not solemnise a
(a) unless the
has satisfied himself or herself that the parties are
the parties referred to in the notice given under this section in relation
has reason to believe
(i) a notice given
under this section; or
(ii) a declaration made and subscribed under this section, or a
statutory declaration made for the purposes of this section; in relation
contains a false statement or an error or is
defective.”
6 In the documentation provided to the marriage celebrant, in accordance with
Marriage Act
, the respondent included a document which
purported to be, it seems, evidence that the High Court of Justice in the Family
in the United Kingdom had granted a decree of nullity on 29 August 1999
to the husband, Mr Hingston, in respect of his first marriage
to Ms B Hingston.
A copy of that document is annexed to the affidavit of Ms Jain filed 17 December
7 This current application before the Court was served upon the respondent Mr
Hingston in the United Kingdom via electronic means.
I am satisfied that the
initiating process was adequately brought to the attention of Mr Hingston,
noting as I do that there is
an affidavit of service filed by the applicant, and
that document notes that the respondent signed an acknowledgment of service.
Furthermore, whilst he has not actually filed a response to the application, the
respondent filed a case outline on 7 June 2021
and provided what purports to be
a certified copy of a document which seems to be a decree of nullity or a
confirmation that a decree
of nullity has issued in the High Court of Justice
Family Division. This particular document I will mark today as exhibit 1. This
document is confirmation that the decree of nullity obtained from the High Court
of Justice in respect of the marriage between Mr
Hingston and Ms B Hingston did
not take effect until 29 August 2012. In addition, and of particular concern to
this Court is the
fact that the respondent, Mr Hingston, filed an affidavit in
this Court on 19 March 2021 whereby he swore to the following:-
“2. The nullity certificate dated 1999 which
I submitted to the celebrant for the notice of intended marriage was not a true
certificate of nullity. My marriage to Ms B Hingston was annulled in
8 This document was sworn or affirmed by Mr Hingston in the presence of a
solicitor, Mr D, of the firm E Solicitors, F Street, G Town,
in the United
Kingdom. The document was signed on 15 March 2021, and it certainly appears on
its face to be a sworn admission by
the respondent to the fact that he submitted
to the marriage celebrant in Australia an annulment document or a certificate of
which was false. It also appears to be an admission by that person that
he, that is Mr Hingston, knew that the certificate of nullity
that he submitted
was false. In the affidavit filed by the applicant on 17 December 2020, she
states, inter alia:-
“1. I married Mr Hingston on ... 2019 in
Suburb C, Qld, Australia. The wedding ceremony was performed by an authorised
2. I met Mr Hingston in July 2016 in City J, United Kingdom while I was
studying in City J, UK. Mr. Hingston and I maintained a long-distance
relationship from November 2016-April 2018 while he was living in the United
Kingdom and I was living in Brisbane, Australia.
3. From April 2018 - December 2018, both Mr. Hingston and I lived in City
K, United Kingdom and continued to date.
4. In September 2019, Mr. Hingston relocated to Brisbane,
5. Prior to our marriage, Mr. Hingston informed me that he had been
previously married in 1998 in the United Kingdom. Mr. Hingston
informed me that
on his wedding night, his wife changed her mind about marrying him. As a result,
they immediately separated and
then annulled their marriage in 1999.
6. Mr. Hingston provided an annulment certificate dated May 1999 to me and
our marriage celebrant as the required evidence of nullity
for the "Notice of
Intended Marriage" form that was submitted for our marriage.
7. However, I recently discovered that Mr. Hingston lied to me about his
prior marriage. Mr. Hingston married and lived with his previous
wife for 14
years. Mr. Hingston did not annul his marriage to her until 2012, when his wife
went to live in a care home due to the
progression of her terminal
8. Mr. Hingston admitted to me on 11 October 2020 that he submitted a
fraudulent annulment certificate to our authorised celebrant
as evidence of
nullity for the "Notice of Intended Marriage" form.
9. Mr. Hingston admitted that the nullity of marriage certificate was
fraudulent in the presence of two other witnesses: 1) Mr L,
Pastor of M Church
Brisbane church 2) Ms N, another member of M Church Brisbane .
10. I believe that Mr. Hingston lied to me about his previous marriage
because he was aware that I would never have consented to marry
him had I known
he was previously married for 14 years. Mr. Hingston was aware that due to my
religious beliefs, I would not have
considered it acceptable to re-marry someone
after they annulled a 14 year marriage.
11. As a result of Mr. Hingston's dishonesty and the fraudulent paperwork
that he submitted for our Notifice of Intended marriage
form; I did not provide
a valid consent to this marriage. Had I known the true length of time of Mr.
Hingston's previous marriage
and the date of his annulment, I would never have
consented to marry Mr. Hingston.
12. I refer the court to the witness statements attached.
13. I also refer the court to the two certificates of annulment found on
Mr. Hingston's computer devices which have the exact same
document numbers but
are dated 14 years apart as further evidence of the fraudulent nature of the
annulment certificate Mr. Hingston
submitted and of his dishonesty.
14. I am asking the Court to annul our marriage based on the above facts.
Thank you for your consideration of this
9 It seems clear enough that the applicant has sworn to the fact that if she
had known that Mr Hingston had been previously married
for 14 years, she would
not have consented to marry him. The question for consideration is whether the
fraud which it is said has
been perpetrated by the respondent is a sufficient
basis to ground a decree of nullity. I note, for instance, what was said by
Lindenmayer
Teves III & Campomayor
[1994] FamCA 57
(1994) 18 Fam LR 844.
page 857, his Honour stated inter alia:
“A nullity decree is not to be granted
lightly. Moreover, the grant of a decree of nullity is not discretionary. If
establish that the marriage is invalid, relief must
10 The applicant, Ms Jain is a self-represented litigant and has drawn the
Court’s attention to the case of
In the Marriage of
[1977] FamCA 45
(1977) 31 FLR 114
, Frederico J granted a decree of nullity in
circumstances where a young girl living in Australia was induced by a Turkish
in Australia to marry him. The parties went through a marriage
ceremony, but the man in that case, it seems, had no intention of
together as a married couple with the woman, and the man used the marriage as an
attempt to obtain residency in Australia.
Frederico J had regard to
Marriage Act 1961
(as the relevant section was then known), and
came to the conclusion that a more broad interpretation of the word
” was intended by the legislature than had been the
case under the previous law.
11 For a long period of time prior to the decision in
been the case that the fraud which needed to be proved in order to ground a
decree of nullity was very limited. It was limited
to either the identity of
one of the parties to the marriage or to the nature of the ceremony. Frederico
J stated from page 4, inter
“However statutory enactments have now
introduced entirely new concepts, and jurisdiction is no longer derived from
ecclesiastical
principles. If fraud is still to be limited to the identity of a
party or to the nature of the ceremony, then it would seem that
the words 'or
fraud' after 'duress' in Section 18(d)(i) of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1959, in
Section 51(2)(d)(1)
Family Law Act
19 V5 (as originally enacted) and now
Section 23(1)(d)(1)
Marriage Act 1961
(as amended) are merely
surplusage, for fraud as to identity or as to nature of the ceremony is
essentially included in the provisions
relating to mistake which are immediately
following the reference to fraud in each enactment.
The legislature must have intended the words 'or fraud' to have some wider
meaning, and it would follow that the Court is bound in
the exercise of its
Family Law Act
to give effect to such wider meaning. The
Court should not be detered from doing so merely by reason of there being no
reported case
under the superseded Matrimonial Causes Act which appears to give
such effect to the words. Perhaps any previous reluctance of the
Courts in this
regard was influenced by difficulty in providing proper safeguards. For instance
there would be general consternation
if an application was granted on the basis
of fraud by reason of one party deceiving the other as to being possessed of
natural teeth.
The case of the person who marries to gain money rank or title as
distinct from the more usually professed reasons would also cause
Clearly the fraud relied on must be one which goes to the root of the marriage
But however stringent are the limitations to be placed on the words 'or
fraud' as used in the legislation, if they are to be given
any meaning they must
be taken to include the gross circumstances of the present case.
This is a case of consent being induced by trick, not as to identity or as
to the nature of ceremony, but as to the very concept of
the marriage itself.
Despite the warnings in cases such as Moss v. Moss (1897 Pat 269) of the dangers
of too closely equating a marriage
contract with a commercial contract, this is
a case in which there has been a total failure of consideration.
The Respondent has not had the slightest intention of fulfilling in any
respect the obligations of marriage. He has used the unfortunate
Applicant as a
tool of his own convenience. His conduct amounts to a total rejection of the
institution of marriage and what it stands
for. He clearly deceived the
Applicant into marriage for his own personal motives and with the intention of
summarily rejecting her
immediately after the ceremony.
In my opinion if this Court is not to protect the victim of such a
deception then it would be failing to give effect to the provisions
Family Law Act
, and in addition it would be failing to fulfil its
obligation under Section 43(a) of the Act to have regard to the need to preserve
and protect the institution of marriage. Accordingly I will grant a decree of
nullity of marriage, which will be a decree absolute
in the first
12 The applicant in the present case relies upon that decision in
The difficulty in relying upon that case is that since that
decision of Frederico J in 1977 there have been a large number of cases
Family Court of Australia which have simply not followed the reasoning of
Frederico J. The Court today drew to the attention
of the applicant a decision
of the Family Court of Western Australia,
In the Marriage of Otway
In that case, McCall J declined to follow the decision in
. McCall J at pages 101 and 102 stated as follows inter alia:-
“In the past once a marriage ceremony had
been proved there was, and still is, a presumption of consent. The onus of
the absence of consent rests upon the person who seeks to have the
marriage annulled. What is clear from the past cases is that the
fraud that is
referred to, to show that there was no real consent to the marriage, does not
include fraud inducing a consent. Accordingly,
fraudulent misrepresentations
relating to the quality of a person or as to future intentions was never
regarded as sufficient to
annul a marriage: Moss v Moss
[1897] UKLawRpPro 23
[1897] P 263.
have mental reservations on the part of one or both of the parties to a marriage
affected its validity: Silver v Silver
[1955] 2 All ER 614
13 McCall J continued at page 102:
“In my view, whatever the meaning of "fraud"
may be, it has so far not been extended in English law to include fraudulent
representations
or marriages where one party has a mental reservation concerning
the future of the marriage even where such reservations are unknown
to the other
party. Nor, in the light of the history of the interpretation of the concept in
the past, do I believe that there is
sufficient statutory warrant to depart from
this established interpretation. In my view the provisions of the
Marriage Act
were doing little more than putting into statutory form the law as it was then
understood, and did not intend to liberalize or expand
the meaning of "fraud".
At best the separation of fraud from mistake and the qualifications attached to
mistake in the sub-paragraph
only clarified the fact that an innocent as well as
fraudulent mistake could result in the relevant lack of consent to the
14 The decision in
has been followed many times since. The
decision in
was specifically not followed by Watts J in
& Hamilton-Reid
[2007] FamCA 4.
The limited grounds in relation to the
concept of fraud in this area of the law was previously confirmed by Nygh J in
the Marriage
Osman & Mourrali
(1990) FLC 92-111
Specifically in that case, Nygh J declined to follow
. His Honour
referred to
. His Honour specifically applied the law from the case
to which I have referred,
Moss & Moss,
and quoted from Sir Francis
Jeune at pages 268, 269. In that case, the Court stated:-
“But when in English Law fraud is spoken of
as a ground for avoiding a marriage, this does not include such fraud as induces
a consent, but is limited to such fraud as procures the appearance without the
reality of consent. The simplest instance of such
fraud is personation . . . in
every case where fraud has been held to be the ground for declaring a marriage
null, it has been such
fraud as has procured the form without the substance of
agreement, and in which the marriage has been annulled, not because of the
presence of fraud, but because of the absence of
15 Nygh J in
Osman & Mourrali
at page 366 explained that when
considering whether there should be a decree of annulment the Court must be
satisfied that:-
“The purported consent was given to
something other than a marriage or to a marriage with someone other than the
person physically
standing at the
16 As noted, in the decision in
Osman & Mourrali,
specifically at pages 364 and 365 – declined to follow the decision in
. Subsequent to that decision in
Osman & Mourrali,
Lindenmayer J
In the Marriage of Hosking
[1994] FamCA 87
came to the
conclusion, essentially, that in the absence of evidence that there was fraud as
to the identity of the other party or
as to the ceremony itself, then there
ought not be a decree of nullity granted. In more recent times, as I noted
earlier, Watt J
Aird & Hamilton Reed
specifically declined to
, but did follow the more conventional approach.
17 It is that orthodox approach as explained by Nygh J in
and as explained by Lindenmayer J
In the Marriage of Hosking
which has been consistently followed by the Judges of this Court for a very long
time. The mere fact, for instance, that both parties
may in fact be consenting
to a decree is not sufficient. The Court must be satisfied that there is some
proper basis for granting
the decree. This point was made by Rees J in a case
Tirta & Lim
[2012] FamCA 63
at paragraph 1:-
“The application before the court is an
application by Mr Tirta (“the husband”) for a decree of nullity in
to his marriage to Ms Lim (“the wife”). The marriage was
solemnized on ... March 2011 in Sydney. The wife consents to
the application for
a decree of nullity but her consent is insufficient to ground the decree and I
must be satisfied, on the evidence,
that a ground for the relief sought has been
established. As Justice Lindenmeyer said in In the Marriage of Theves III and
[1994] FamCA 57
(1994) 18 Fam LR 844
, ‘a nullity decree is not to be granted
lightly. Moreover the grant of a decree of nullity is not discretionary. If the
establish the marriage is invalid, relief must
18 In 2017, Tree J in a decision called
Gani & Drasher
declined to follow
and preferred to follow the orthodox
position as stated by Nygh J in
Osman & Mourrali
and as stated by
Lindenmayer J in
Hosking & Hosking
. At paragraph 25, his Honour
“25. The fraud relied upon by the husband in
this case was not as to the identity of the wife or as to the nature of the
which he undertook in 2008. Therefore unsurprisingly, the evidence
does not establish fraud within the meaning of that term in
s 23(B)(1)(d)(1).
However to cover the eventuality that fraud of the kind relied on by the husband
can be considered under
, I should record that I am nonetheless not
satisfied there was any fraud practised upon the husband. Particularly (and
mind that the onus is on the
husband’s traverse of the wife’s version of their January/February
2007 face-to-face conversation in Melbourne is
somewhat equivocal. Initially he
points out that paragraph is contradictory to an earlier paragraph (which he
subsequently successfully
objected to) but then does not specifically deny the
conversation, instead rather saying “I have never been told about her
legally married status...” To my mind that is consistent with him being
aware of a Hindu ceremony which had not been followed
up by the more traditional
series of receptions;
husband’s failure to otherwise challenge the wife’s version of
events on that occasion by cross-examination at trial
is a matter which I give
some, but not great, weight;
satisfied that thereafter indeed the husband and family did stay with the
wife’s parents in India, but that any coldness
which he may have
experienced from those visits was likely associated with her family’s
perception that her earlier marriage
had indeed brought shame on the
satisfied that the wife’s solicitor’s conduct is indicative of any
attempt to continue to conceal the wife’s
earlier marriage from the
19 The argument put forward on behalf of
the applicant (who was the husband) in
Gani & Drasher
was that if he
had known of an earlier marriage and divorce by the wife, he would not have
consented to marry her. Apart from anything
else, Tree J was of the view that
to the extent that there was any fraud, it was not fraud sufficient to ground a
decree of nullity.
Tree J also made mention of a decision of the Full Court in
Kennedy & Smith
[2003] FamCA 136
which his Honour said did not appear
to support the decision in
but preferred the orthodox view of Nygh
J and Lindenmayer J in
respectively. Anthony
Dickey QC in “
Family Law”
(Thomson Reuters, 6th ed, 2014)
provides a helpful analysis of the relevant cases. I note in particular
paragraphs 10.560, 10.570,
10.580. In those paragraphs Dr Dickey considers the
Marriage of Deniz
, and Dr Dickey stated at page 161 of his text, inter alia:
“Subsequent cases at first instance have
left no doubt that the interpretation of ‘fraud’ in the Marriage of
is to be preferred to that in the Marriage of
20 In the case currently before the Court, there appears to be evidence and a
sworn admission by Mr Hingston that he submitted a false
document and made a
false statement in the form of the decree of nullity purportedly dated 1999.
21 When the matter was here before the Court, on 14 June 2021, the Court
noted to the self-represented applicant that it would be
worthwhile to file a
more comprehensive case outline and, in fact, this was done on 25 August 2021.
Also, when the matter was before
the Court on 14 June, I suggested to the
self-represented litigant (ie, the applicant) that she should consider the cases
, as well as
and, in her written
submissions, filed 25 August, the applicant has noted that she considers that
those cases can be distinguished.
22 There is not much doubt that the cases in question have different facts to
the current case before the Court. The question relates
more to the general
rule and the general principle, which I have also called the orthodox view, in
relation to the fraud, which is
contemplated by
section 23B
. Again, today, I had my Associate provide the applicant with a copy of
the decision in
for her consideration, and the applicant made some
submissions about that, as well. I have not provided copies of every case to
the applicant. It seems to me that the cases that were suggested to her and the
cases that were provided to her today, copies of
which included
, were sufficient to fulfil the Court’s obligation to
a self-represented litigant.
23 The very clear principle enunciated in the cases to which I have referred,
to the effect that the fraud contemplated by
section 23B
and the fraud that is
required to be proved before that would be sufficient to ground a decree of
nullity is fraud in relation to
the identity of the person or the nature of the
marriage ceremony. It is argued by the applicant today that the provision of
paperwork by the respondent to the marriage celebrant is sufficient
to distinguish the current case before the court from the other
cases to which I
have referred. I drew the applicant’s attention to
Marriage Act
. This is because the applicant had submitted that the
documentation provided with the fraudulent paperwork was submitted by the
respondent in accordance with
Marriage Act
applicant maintains that the marriage should never have been solemnised.
24 The difficulty is that
specifically deals with this kind of
“Certain marriages not solemnised in
accordance with this Division to be invalid
(1) Subject to this section, a
otherwise than in accordance with the preceding provisions of this Division is
not a valid
not invalid by reason of all or any of the following:
(a) failure to give the notice required by
or a false statement, defect or error in such a notice;
(b) failure of the parties, or either of them, to make or subscribe a
declaration as required by
or a false statement, defect or error in such a declaration;
(c) failure to produce to the
a certificate or extract of an entry or a statutory
declaration as required by
or a false statement, defect or error in such a statutory
declaration;
(d) failure to comply with any other requirement of
or any contravention of that section;
(e) failure to comply with the requirements of
(f) failure to comply with the requirements of
section 13.
not invalid by reason that the person solemnising it was not authorised by this
Act to do so, if either party to the
at the time the
solemnised, believed that that person was lawfully authorised to solemnise it,
and in such a case the form and ceremony of the
be deemed to have been sufficient if they were such as to show an intention on
the part of each of the parties to become thereby
the lawfully wedded spouse of
the other.”
25 A marriage is not invalid by reason of failure to give the notice required
by section 42, or by reason of a false statement in
such a notice.
26 The applicant argued today that section 48 doesn’t apply because it
wasn’t a false statement – it was fraudulent
That’s as I understood the oral submission made today. One of the
difficulties I have with that argument is that
– in the applicant’s
own case outline, on page 2, beside the date September 2019, the applicant
herself refers to the
documents provided by the respondent to the marriage
celebrant as containing:-
“...the false statement that his first
marriage was annulled on 29 August
27 It’s clear that the false statement in writing provided by Mr
Hingston to the marriage celebrant is a “
as that term is contemplated in
section 48(2)(a)
Marriage Act
. Specifically, therefore, I note that
subsection (2) of the Act disposes of the argument put forward by the applicant
relating to false documentation provided to the
marriage celebrant.
28 The ambit within which the Courts have interpreted section 23B and the
concept of fraud in relation to applications for nullity
has been very limited
for a very long time with good reason. There is no suggestion that there was
any fraud perpetrated by the
respondent in relation to his
There is no evidence of fraud as to
the nature of the ceremony
in Suburb C in 2019. It was a marriage ceremony and known to be one by both the
applicant and the respondent. The application
for a decree of nullity is
therefore dismissed.
One further matter
29 I indicated during argument that the affidavit
sworn by the respondent which appears to make an admission that he provided a
document or made a false statement to the marriage celebrant requires some
further consideration by the Court. I had contemplated
providing to the
respondent an opportunity to be heard in relation to this matter. What I have
contemplated is whether or not the
Court papers should be referred to the
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions for further review and
investigation, as to whether
or not a charge could or should be laid against Mr
Hingston in relation to his apparent admissions of providing a false document
the nature of the decree of nullity of marriage, in which it was claimed that
his first marriage had been annulled as at the date
of 29 August 1999.
30 But I do not think it necessary for the Court to delay referring these
papers to the relevant authority. The Court is not obligated
to hear from a
party before referring documentation. In the decision of
Huda & Huda (No
(2020) 61 Fam LR 257
I reviewed the authorities in relation to the
referral of papers to the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions. I note
Malpass & Mayson
[2000] FamCA 1253.
For present
purposes of more significance I note a decision of Flick J of the Federal Court
of Australia in the
Australian Building and Construction Commission v
[2017] FCA 1082.
Flick J in that decision had referred to a
New South Wales case, the case of
Simpson & Hodges
[2007] NSWSC 1230
where Hall J stated at paragraphs 268 and 269:-
“268. A judicial officer who believes that
offences have been committed is under a duty to refer the proceedings to the
authority: [Normandy Woodcutters Ltd v Simpson
[2002] NTSC 43
per Mildren J]. Accordingly, where evidence is given in proceedings in this
Court that reasonably suggests that an offence has or
may have been committed in
relation to proceedings conducted before it, the Court has a duty to refer the
proceedings. As Mildren
J observed in [Normandy Woodcutters Ltd v Simpson
, referring the papers is not an exercise of judicial power and no
findings are made and no injury to anyone’s reputation arises
referral. Nor, as his Honour observed, is the judicial officer required to give
anyone an opportunity to be heard in such
269. In light of the evidence to which I have referred and for the above
reasons, the Registrar of this Court will be directed to
forward a copy of these
reasons for judgment to the Director of Public Prosecutions and to make
available, as may be required, the
full transcript of these proceedings and the
exhibits for inspection by any officers authorised in that behalf by the
Director of
Public Prosecutions.”
31 In the current case before the Court, I note specifically that Hall J in
Simpson & Hodges
decision had relied upon a Supreme Court of the
Northern Territory decision in
Normandy Woodcutters Ltd v Simpson
[2002] NTSC 43
. Flick J in
case supported Hall J’s observations in
to the effect that the referral of papers “
exercise of judicial power and no findings are made and no injury to
anyone’s reputation arises by a mere referral
specifically rely on the decision of Flick J and the decision of Hall J in the
case and the
Simpson & Hodges cases
respectively when
considering that this Court is not required to give anyone an opportunity to be
heard before the referral of papers.
32 For clarity and by way of further explanation, if the respondent in this
case had actually ever filed a response, and if he had
bothered engaging in the
proceedings, if, for instance, he had turned up today or sought leave to appear
by telephone, which I note
would have been granted because he is apparently
currently in the United Kingdom, then I would more than likely have called upon
him for a submission in relation to whether or not I should refer the papers to
the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions.
He has chosen not to file a
response, he has chosen to not file anything other than a sworn affidavit
confirming the provision of
the false statement and the false decree of nullity.
33 In the circumstances I do not think it’s necessary or appropriate
for the Court to delay the matter any further and seek
a submission from him as
to whether or not the papers should be referred to the Commonwealth Director of
Public Prosecutions for
consideration as to whether or not they should lay a
charge against Mr Hingston in respect of the provision by him of a false
which he represented to the marriage celebrant was a decree of nullity
of the High Court of Justice in the Family Division dated
34 It is a matter for the Commonwealth director of Public Prosecutions as to
what they may or may not do. It may or may not involve
a prosecution in this
country, it may involve a prosecution in the United Kingdom, given that the
document purports to be a document
of the High Court of Justice. These are
matters for the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions to consider. I
will be referring
the papers to the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
for the reasons stated.
I certify that the preceding thirty-four (34)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 17 September 2021
RTF format (503 KB)
Signed PDF/A format