D20-21\091 [2020] SCTA 199 (26 November 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\091
FILE NUMBER : 18-220
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Employer
The Former Employer
The Former Fund
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 28 September 2020 before:
Jocelyn Furlan,
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
decisions under review are as follows:
of the Trustee to decline to recognise 45 days’ service by the Complainant
in the calculation of his defined benefit (DB);
of the Trustee to decline to credit the Complainant’s DB pension account
with an amount representing the surcharge (plus
interest) balance deducted from
his account.
Trustee notified the Complainant of its decisions by letter dated 8 November
2017. Following reviews, it maintained its decisions,
and in its submission
dated 3 September 2020 confirmed that it maintained that the Complainant’s
benefit had been calculated
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal affirms the decisions of the Trustee.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
Submissions
were received from each Party.
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited. No responses were
Tribunal then received further submissions from the Complainant which were
exchanged with the Trustee.
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
papers provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant commenced employment with the Former Employer on 7 November
2000/2001 the Complainant commenced employment with the Employer following its
purchase of the Former Employer. As a result the
Complainant became a member of
the Former Fund.
part of the purchase, the Employer offered staff a buyout of an incentive plan
which resulted in an increase in salary, and therefore
salary for superannuation
purposes, to compensate for the loss of an at risk component of the
remuneration. The Complainant accepted
Former Fund was wound up as at 30 September 2002 and the members and assets of
the Former Fund, including the Complainant, were
transferred to the Fund on a
successor fund basis. From 1 October 2002 the Complainant became a member of
the Plan which is a plan
within the Fund.
17 May 2017 the Complainant was retrenched from his employment.
Complainant requested the Trustee provide him a benefit
Trustee provided the Complainant with a benefit quote on 10 May 2017.
7 August 2017 the Complainant lodged a complaint with the Trustee regarding the
calculation of his final DB entitlements.
a letter dated 8 November 2017 the Trustee responded to the Complainant’s
complaint explaining how it calculated the Complainant’s
final DB and
concluding that the calculation of the Complainant’s benefit was correct
and in accordance with the Fund’s
governing rules.
March 2018 the Complainant was paid the benefits from the Plan with the DB
component paid as a lifetime pension and the accumulation
component paid as a
rollover to an external superannuation fund.
6 April 2020 the Complainant contacted the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) in
relation to the erroneous deduction of surcharge
3 June 2020 the ATO advised the Complainant that his objection had been allowed
in full and a refund would be paid.
30 January 2018 the Complainant lodged a complaint with the Tribunal regarding
the Trustee’s the calculation of his DB benefit
entitlement including a
misreported surcharge amount, complaining that the decisions of the Trustee
unfair or unreasonable for the reasons summarised in this
determination.
Complainant initially made complaints about three aspects of his DB benefit as
the calculation
of his service;
the calculation
of his Final Average Salary (FAS); and
the deduction of
surcharge from his DB pension benefit.
in relation to the calculation of his FAS, in his submission to the Tribunal,
the Complainant stated:
I accept I need to address this directly with my former employer
and hence this is out of [the Trustee’s] hands.
Accordingly
this aspect of the Complainant’s benefit is not in dispute for the
purposes of this determination. The remaining
issues are the calculation of
service and the deduction of surcharge from his DB.
resolutions sought by the Complainant are:
the calculation of his service includes rounding so that the lost days totalling
in excess of 1 month are included in his benefit
calculation; and
the amount of surcharge, plus interest, deducted from his account in 2017 be
added to his DB pension benefit.
his complaint to the Tribunal, the Complainant stated that the amount in dispute
is $11,413.00.
Events not in dispute:
− the Complainant’s date of birth.
− the date the Complainant commenced employment
with the Former Employer.
the date the Complainant commenced
employment with the Employer and became a member of the Former Fund.
date all the assets and members of the Former Fund were transferred to the Fund
on a successor fund basis.
− the date the Complainant became a member of the
Plan, which is a plan within the Fund.
− the date the Complainant was made redundant from
his employment.
the date of correspondence from the
Trustee to the Complainant outlining his options as a result of the cessation of
his employment.
The letter included a summary of the Complainant’s DB
benefit entitlements.
− the date the Complainant complained to the
Trustee regarding the calculation of his final DB.
− the date the Trustee responded to the
Complainant’s complaint.
− the date the Complainant lodged his complaint
with the Tribunal.
− the date of correspondence from the Trustee to
the Complainant confirming payment of his superannuation benefits which included
a rollover of $316,715.29 to another superannuation fund and lifetime pension
of $40,915.22 per annum.
− the date of correspondence from the Australian
Taxation Office advising the Complainant that his objection to his
superannuation
contribution surcharge had been allowed in full.
− an email of this date to the ATO from the
Complainant indicates that he received cheques for $2,546.40 in relation to
and $1,815.29 in relation to interest.
Tribunal considers that the rules of the Plan relevant to this complaint are
those of the Plan in effect on the date the Complainant
was retrenched from the
Employer (i.e. 17 May 2017), being the rules of the Plan as amended up to and
including the amendment dated
25 January 2013 (the Rules).
Rules relevant to the complaint are:
1.7 SURCHARGE OFFSET ACCOUNT
1.7.1 The Trustee must establish in respect of each Category A3 Member (as
defined in clause 2.1.2) and Category B1 Member in respect
of whom the Trustee
incurs Surcharge, a Surcharge Offset Account to which the Trustee shall:
(i) any Surcharge paid, or that becomes payable, by the Trustee
in respect of the Member;
(ii) any notional positive earnings (to be applied at the Declared Rate) that
the Trustee, in its absolute discretion, determines
to debit to the account;
(iii) any establishment and ongoing administration costs associated with, or
attributable to, the Surcharge that the Trustee, in its
absolute discretion,
determines to debit to the account; and
(iv) any other amounts that the Trustee, in its absolute discretion,
determines to debit to the account from time to time; and
(b) credit:
(i) any Member contributions that the Trustee, on request of the
Member, agrees to credit to the account;
(ii) amounts received by the Trustee as a result of any over payment of the
Surcharge in respect of the Member;
(iii) any over provision for the Surcharge in respect of the Member;
(iv) any notional negative earnings (to be applied at the Declared Rate) that
the Trustee, in its absolute discretion, determines
to credit to the
(v) the amount by which any payment made to a beneficiary in respect of a
Member is reduced by the Member's Surcharge Offset Account;
(vi) any other amounts that the Trustee determines in its absolute
discretion, determines to credit to the account from time to time.
3.1.2 In this Part the following words and expressions shall unless the
context requires otherwise have the following meanings:
"Converted Amount"
means such amount of a Member's Salary as is paid
to the Member in lieu of bonuses and commissions and other incentive payments
to an agreement between the Member and the Employer with effect from 1
has the same meaning as Final Average Salary.
means Final Average Salary calculated on the basis of a
Member's Salary excluding the Converted Amount.
"Final Average Salary"
for the calculation of a
Benefit means the average Equivalent Full-Time Salary of a Member during the
last 3 years (or the actual
period, if less) immediately prior to his or her
ceasing to be a Member but not exceeding the maximum amount which the Employer
from time to time fix for the purposes of this Part.
"Membership Period"
means the latest continuous period
of membership of:
(a) the Plan under this Part; plus
(b) the Previous Fund under Schedule BI of the governing rules of that Fund;
(c) in respect of a Member whose entire benefits in Part 1 of Division B of
[the Former Fund] were transferred to the Previous Fund,...,
(excluding any period after the Member's Maximum Retiring Age) up to a
maximum of 36 years, expressed in years (including complete
months as a fraction
of a year) during which:
(d) the Member was required to make contributions under this Part, as a
member of Schedule B1 of the Previous Fund or as a member
of Part 1 of Division
B of [the Former Fund], whether their payment was deferred or not; or
(e) contributions are made by the Member's Employer under this Part, under
Schedule Bl of the Previous Fund or, in respect of a Member
whose entire
benefits in Part 1 of Division B of [the Former Fund] were transferred to the
Previous Fund, under Part 1 of Division
B of [the Former Fund],
"Retirement Benefit Factor"
in relation to a Member means 0.20 for
each complete year of Membership to Retirement, and pro rata for each additional
complete month.
of a Member means the yearly rate of the ordinary fixed
salary of the Member in respect of the Member's employment, as determined
Employer, provided that:
(a) in the case of a Member who is remunerated partly by way of bonus or
commission, the Member's Salary for the purposes of these
Rules shall be such
amount as the Member's Employer shall determine and notify to the Trustee, not
being less than the yearly rate
of his ordinary fixed salary;
(b) Salary shall not include travelling or other allowances or the value of
any benefit received by the provisions of board, fuel,
light or otherwise;
(c) if the Employer, the Member and the Trustee agree that this paragraph is
to apply the Member's Salary for the purposes of these
Rules shall be such
greater amount as may from time to time be determined by the Employer;
(d) if a Member's ordinary fixed salary is reduced and the Employer
determines not to take the reduction into account, and so informs
the Trustee,
and if the Member agrees, the Member's Salary for the purposes of these Rules
shall be the yearly rate of the Member's
ordinary fixed salary immediately prior
to the reduction or the yearly rate of the Member's actual ordinary fixed salary
be the greater;
"Transfer Date"
means 8 October 2000.
3.2 CALCULATION OF MEMBER'S RESERVE
A Member's Reserve as at the date of his or her ceasing to be a Member shall
be an amount equal to the greater of:
(a) the amount obtained by the calculation:
(2.5 X MAC) + {0.03 x FAS pre x FTS pre after 1 March 1987) + (0.03 x FAS
post x FTS post) + (0.03 X FAS pre x PTS pre after 1 March
1987 x SF) + (0.03 x
FAS post x PTS post X SF)
(b) the amount obtained by the calculation:
(FTS pre x 0.20 x FAS pre x F) + (FTS post x 0.20 x FAS post x F) + (PTS pre
x 0.20 x FAS pre X F X SF) + (PTS post x 0.20 x FAS post
provided that:
(c) where a Member remains in the employment of an Employer after age 70, the
Member's Reserve must be calculated as if the Member
had retired at age 70,
together with positive or negative earnings thereon at the Declared Rate to the
date of termination of the
Member's employment; and
(d) a Member's Reserve shall not in any event except as set out in paragraph
(c) exceed the product of the Member's FAS and the Member's
Retirement Benefit
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
main points made by the Complainant are as follows:
Calculation
of the Complainant’s service
The calculation
of the Complainant’s final entitlements excludes 45 days of his service
term. The change in the incentive payout
calculation which occurred after the
Employer bought out the incentive plan in June 2001 was not identified clearly
in the communication.
When the Trustee
took over in 2002 it released a new policy framework which:
...calculated the Super payout as two separate periods
pre June 2001 and post June 2001 The original and new policy identified that
only whole months of service would be used in calculation. In neither policy
booklets were any calculated examples shown of superannuation
members being
terminated where employees were left with part months of service time. (Where
specifically my case exhibits anomalies)
In the Sept 2000 offer there was
statements that all service for [the Employer and the Former Employer] would be
included in the
In relation to
the loss of 45 days’ service, the Trustee did not recognise the
‘injustice of their calculation’.
He chose to
remain in the DB plan because he believed in the Fund’s stability and that
all his working time would be recognised.
The Trustee’s interpretation
disadvantages him and other defined benefit members whose employment is
terminated mid-month.
superannuation offer that was a part of his original employment package in 2000
included details of how it would calculate his
superannuation payment upon
termination of employment. It did not describe termination of employment
mid-month. He stated:
The terminations used in the Superannuation FAS calculation
deprived me of 45 days via the shortchanging my time through the transition
termination in 2000 and then the final termination in 2017. In 2017, I
requested the company to delay my termination by 2 weeks
when I was made aware
of this detail by [the Trustee] but [the Employer] were not willing to change
due to their internal financial
reasons related to the termination
In response to
the Trustee’s claim that he is better off by $22,000, the Complainant
This is incorrect as the
just taking 10 years from
2001 to 2010 and assuming I met my bonus criteria 50 % of the time (though I
management expectation for 7 years in this 10 year period)
my estimate of the 10% base salary incentive program would have added $31,500
my salary which I could have added to super. I am only expecting to be fairly
treated using the formulae and policies to give
me at least from the 45 days, a
whole month of the service time I have worked.
The Complainant
I was not able to anticipate this situation [the service issue]
till my employment was terminated mid-month in 2017.
of surcharge
The Complainant
should not have had a surcharge debt. A rollover was incorrectly reported as a
surchargeable contribution in 2000.
If there was a
surcharge debt accumulating, this should have been highlighted in yearly reports
to indicate that it remained unpaid
rather than ‘buried in the total
amount hiding that there was a tax liability’. The accumulating tax debt
was not made
consistently visible over the years. The Complainant stated:
...the growth of surcharge liability is not reported
obviously in statements other than 2003, 2010, 2011 It is clear the statements
provided no consistent visibility of the increasing liability in surcharge that
was building over 17 years.
Trustee’s yearly reporting was unhelpful in identifying the escalating tax
burden as most of the yearly statements did not
provoke him to check the
increasing surcharge liability. The statement “# Please note that
Additional Account includes your
voluntary, rollover and Surcharge liability
accounts” resulted in burying the surcharge liability within the
Additional account
The Trustee is
accountable for the surcharge overpayment from his DB total:
...the error due to incorrect reporting by [the Former Fund] in
2000 and 2001, was carried forward in a surcharge account at [the
Trustee] and
not addressed correctly or fairly by [the Trustee] despite multiple
opportunities to correct this mistake and repeated
abrogation of duty of care to
limit the impact to my long term finances.
The Australian tax office has accepted the error and will refund me the
surcharge funds but not back into the Defined benefit where
it should have
Yet [the Trustee] is still not addressing their failure to act appropriately
despite my request to settle this by me paying the amount
deducted in 2017 to
them to the original Defined benefit account.
It would be my expectation that back payment of the correct pension and
reasonable interest on the funds not correctly addressed since
2017 would be
then be paid cumulatively to me.
He selected a
lifetime pension for the funds in his DB account when he ceased employment
however his DB total was reduced by the Trustee
paying the incorrect
The money should
go back into the Trustee’s calculation for his lifetime pension.
The Complainant
... From my discussion with the ATO, if any involved superannuation
company was to review and agree with me as to the inaccuracy of
the initial
reporting of my contribution in the 2000-2002 period and subsequently re-report
this change to the ATO, the ATO would
invalidate the surcharge and the funds
would be returned to my DBD and [the Trustee] would then be paying me a slightly
higher monthly
pension. There is no need for any party to take on a further
financial burden.
The Complainant
expected the Trustee to take the surcharge amount out of his accumulation
account. Had this occurred he would have
no issue in respect of the surcharge
The Trustee
main points made by the Trustee are as follows:
Its decisions in
relation to the calculation of the Complainant’s defined benefit
entitlement were fair and reasonable and in
accordance with the Rules.
Calculation
of the Complainant’s service
The Trustee
Pursuant to the Participation Agreement dated 10 October
2002, the Plan commenced in the [Fund] on 1 October 2002. The Complainant
classified as a "B1" member of the Plan. Accordingly, pursuant to clause 1.9 of
Annexure A to the Participation Agreement. the
Complainant's benefits were set
out in Part 3 of the Annexure to the Participation Agreement.
correspondence dated 8 November 2017, the Trustee stated that the governing
rules specify that membership service is expressed
as years and completed
months. The Complainant’s service pre 1 July 2001 is counted as 6 years
and 7 complete months and his
service on or after 1 July 2001 is counted as 15
years and 10 complete months.
The Trustee
recognises that this means that 45 days or so of the Complainant’s service
is not counted for DB purposes. The
Trustee does not have discretion to alter
this. The Trustee stated:
The split of [the Complainant’s] Member’s Reserve into
pre and post 1 Jul 2001 components was due to a change in how [the
Complainant’s] employer set salary for super purposes from 1 July 2001.
That change granted [the Complainant] a higher benefit...So...while
[he] forwent
a benefit for 45 days...in return [he] received a greater final benefit due to
allowing for a higher salary basis to
be used from 1 July 2001.
Employer’s refusal to change the Complainant’s date of ceasing
service is not a trustee decision or action and thus
would fall outside of the
SCT’s jurisdiction.
In relation to
the notification of the change in 2001, the Trustee does not have a copy of
documentation issued to members at that
time. Given the passage of time and
the Former Trustee no longer being in existence, the Trustee cannot comment on
what was or
was not advised to the Complainant at the time.
of surcharge
The reporting by
the Former Fund of the surchargeable contributions in 2001 was before the
Complainant joined the Plan and the Trustee
does not have copies of the relevant
documents issued by the trustee of the Former Fund during this period.
The Complainant
would have received annual member statements from the Former Fund detailing his
super account transactions:
To the extent that the Complainant identified an anomaly
in his account, this should have been raised earlier and with the Trustee
Former Fund. There is also no documentary evidence supplied by the Complainant
to support this alleged misreporting. Given
that 18 years have now elapsed and
the Complainant has now been transferred out of the Plan, the Trustee is not in
a position to
amend the reporting of a 2001 rollover from the Complainant's
account in the Former Fund.
A refund from
the ATO of the surcharge would not be able to be “put back to his defined
benefits” as it did not impact
the calculation of the multiple based
elements of his benefit from the Plan. The Complainant is able to decide which
of his current
accumulation superannuation arrangements it is most appropriate
for any refund from the ATO to be credited.
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must determine whether the decisions
of the Trustee, to decline to recognise 45 days’
service by the
Complainant in the calculation of his DB and to decline to credit the
Complainant’s DB pension account with
an amount representing surcharge and
interest deducted from his account, were fair and reasonable in their operation
in relation
to the Complainant in the circumstances.
issue is not what decisions the Tribunal would have made on the evidence before
the Trustee but whether the decisions were fair
and reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal took the whole of the evidence and
submissions into account. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the material it has
relied on has been provided to both Parties
Calculation
of the Complainant’s service
Complainant complained that the amount of service used in the calculation of his
DB was 41 to 45 days’ less than his actual
service. The reason for the
difference was that he had completed a partial month of service as at 30 June
2001 and a partial month
of service when he was made redundant on 17 May
is not in dispute that the Complainant’s actual service was 41 to 45
days’ more than the service recognised in the
calculation of his DB.
Rules define Membership Period as being years and completed months.
Accordingly, in the Tribunal’s view the Trustee calculated
Complainant’s service in accordance with the Rules of the Plan.
the role of the Tribunal is to determine whether it was fair and reasonable for
the Trustee to decline to compromise the
Complainant’s claim for
recognition of an additional 45 days’ service.
Complainant submitted that the fact that service only included complete months
was not adequately disclosed to him in the offer
in 2000 to change his
remuneration arrangements. He submitted that in the September 2000 offer for
transition to the Employer it
was made clear that service for the Former
Employer and the Employer would be treated as continuous service and this has
not occurred.
Tribunal is satisfied that Complainant’s pre and post 2001 service was
treated as continuous in the calculation of the Complainant’s
although the two part months were not included because they were not whole
the Tribunal’s view it was fair and reasonable for the Trustee to decline
to compromise the Complainant’s complaint
service. Even if there was a lack of disclosure in 2000 about the possibility
of termination of employment
mid-month, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the
Complainant would have done anything differently. As the Complainant submitted,
he was not able to anticipate the issue in relation to the calculation of his
service until his employment was terminated mid-month
in 2017, which was some 17
years later. Nor could he have known in 2000 that the two part months’
service would add to 45
Accordingly,
in the Tribunal’s view, there was no unfairness and unreasonableness in
the Trustee’s refusal to compromise
the claim in relation to his service
because the Complainant did not alter his position in reliance on any incorrect
information
or lack of information in 2000.
of surcharge
2000, surchargeable contributions were reported to the ATO in respect of the
Complainant that were in fact a rollover. The surcharge
amount was debited to
the Complainant’s account in the Former Fund and accumulated interest
until the Complainant ceased employment
in 2017 when the surcharge amount plus
interest were deducted from his account prior to his benefits being paid.
Complainant requested that the amount of surcharge deducted as a result of the
incorrect reporting in 2000 together with interest
be refunded into his DB
account with a commensurate increase in his pension. The Trustee declined the
the Tribunal’s view the Trustee’s decision to decline the request
was fair and reasonable in the circumstances for
the following reasons:
Complainant received financial advice at the time of termination of his
employment. The financial advice stated:
You require $40,000 per annum in today’s dollars to
meet your cost of living needs.
The Complainant’s benefit consisted of an annual pension of $40,915.22
together with a lump sum of $316,715.29 which was rolled
into another
superannuation fund. Given that the Complainant received the annual pension he
required and took the balance of his
benefit as a lump sum, it is not apparent
to the Tribunal that he would have taken a larger pension if his DB had been
higher. The
Tribunal is not persuaded that, had the surcharge not been
deducted, this amount would have formed part of the Complainant’s
surcharge liability was caused by the incorrect contribution reporting by a
former trustee, not the Trustee. The incorrect contributions
advised to the ATO
was not caused by an error by Trustee.
ATO has refunded the surcharge and interest to the Complainant.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decisions under review
if it is satisfied that the decisions, in their
operation in relation to the
Complainant, were fair and reasonable in the circumstances. For the reasons
stated above the Tribunal
is so satisfied.
Tribunal affirms the decisions of the Trustee.
Jocelyn Furlan, Presiding Member
Date of Tribunal signature: 26 November 2020
RTF format (356 KB)
Signed PDF/A format