Guthrie v Mondiale VGL Pty Ltd (No 3) [2025] FedCFamC2G 1848 (12 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Guthrie v Mondiale VGL Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1848
File number(s):
PEG 101 of 2020
Judgment of:
JUDGE CORBETT
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
INDUSTRIAL LAW -
Application for costs
pursuant to
s 570(2)(b)
Fair Work Act 2009
Unreasonable Defence of proceeding -Applicant unsuccessful in part of claim
– Forensic decisions in course of
final hearing - Hard fought litigation -
Evidence of costs incurred - Causal link to conduct – Costs declined.
Legislation:
Evidence Act 1995
Fair Work Act 2009
Fair Work Regulations 2009
(Cth) reg 3.46(3)
Federal Circuit Court Rules 2020
(Cth) r 21.02(1)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
Cases cited:
Australian and International Pilots
Association v Qantas Airways Ltd (No 3)
[2007] FCA 879
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Celand v Skycity Adelaide Pty Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 222
Fair Work Ombudsman v WCH Services Pty Ltd
[2018] FCCA 1876
Guthrie v Mondiale VGL Pty Ltd
[2024] FedCFamC2G 384
Guthrie v Mondiale VGL Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2025] FedCFamC2G 938
Guthrie v Visa Global Logistics Pty Ltd
[2021] FCCA 479
Kambouridis v LR Reed City Pty Ltd
[2020] FCCA 1484
Lees v Asaleo Personal Care Pty Ltd
[2023] FCA 334
Melbourne Stadiums Ltd v Sautner
[2015] FCAFC 20
Murdock v Virgin Australia Airlines Pty Ltd (No 3)
Rahman v Commonwealth of Australia (as represented by the Australian
Taxation Office)
[2013] FCCA 388
Ryan v Primesafe
[2015] FCA 8
Saxena v PPF Asset Management Ltd
[2011] FCA 395
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant
Mr J Raftos, Argos Legal
Counsel for the Respondent
Solicitor for the Respondent
Workplace Law
PEG 101 of 2020
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
JOHN GUTHRIE
MONDIALE VGL PTY LTD ACN 002 433
JUDGE CORBETT
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
application in the proceeding filed by the applicant on 13 September 2025 is
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or order to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors (r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 24.04
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal
Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE CORBETT
23 March 2021, his Honour Judge Lucev delivered Reasons for Judgment in
Guthrie v Visa Global Logistics Pty Ltd
[2021] FCCA 479
). In that decision, his Honour dismissed an application by the applicant
for an interim injunction for mandatory reinstatement of
the applicant’s
employment with the respondent (Mondiale VGL). Any application for costs under r
21.02(1) of the
Federal Circuit Court Rules 2020
(Cth) was to be made by
the parties within seven days. No application was made.
23 May 2023, his Honour Judge Lucev delivered Reasons for Judgment in
v Mondiale VGL Pty Ltd
[2024] FedCFamC2G 384
Guthrie No 2
decision, his Honour declared that the termination of the applicant’s
employment by the respondent contravened
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (Act).
19 June 2025, this Court made orders for the payment of compensation, a
pecuniary penalty and interest because of the respondent’s
contravention.
The Reasons for Judgment are to be found in
Guthrie v Mondiale VGL Pty Ltd
[2025] FedCFamC2G 938
Guthrie No 3
The question of
any costs payable by either party in relation to the proceeding was
13 September 2025, the applicant filed an application in the proceeding seeking
an order pursuant to
s 570(2)(b)
of the Act, that Mondiale VGL pay the
applicant’s costs of the proceeding (costs application).
hearing of the costs application took place via video link on 2 October 2025. Mr
Raftos, solicitor appeared for the applicant.
Ms Wong of counsel appeared for
Mondiale VGL.
The following background is from [7] of
Guthrie No 3
and [11] of
Guthrie No 1
VGL is a freight and forwarding, and customs brokering company with offices in
all States of Australia;
Guthrie commenced employment with Mondiale VGL on 10 June 2014 in New South
Wales, and was initially employed as a casual Day Shift
Heavy Combination Driver
(“Day Shift Driver”);
January 2015 Mr Guthrie commenced as a permanent Day Shift Driver;
Guthrie subsequently requested to work as an Afternoon Shift Driver, a move
approved by Mondiale VGL, resulting in Mr Guthrie commencing
as an Afternoon
Shift Driver on 17 August 2017;
November 2018 Mr Guthrie advised Mondiale VGL that he would be relocating to
Western Australia (“WA”) for family reasons;
Guthrie moved to WA in January 2019 as a Day Shift Driver;
Guthrie then requested to work an afternoon or night shift pattern to enable him
to care for his child; and
December 2019 VGL made a decision to dismiss Mr Guthrie for alleged
“nonprofessional work behaviours displayed in the workplace”
were said to be in contravention of the VGL “Code of Conduct and Ethics,
the Health, Safety, Environment and Quality
Administrative ‘Three Strike
Policy’” (“Dismissal Decision”).
Guthrie No 2
his Honour Judge Lucev made various findings regarding the
Dismissal Decision that are recorded in paragraphs [8]–[15] of
It is not necessary to repeat those findings, save to say, that
Mondiale VGL did not satisfy the reverse onus of proof and did not
call all of
the relevant decision-makers that participated in the Dismissal Decision. His
Honour found that the Dismissal Decision
was not made for the reasons stated in
the letter of termination given to the applicant at the time of termination of
his employment.
Honour also dismissed claims made by the applicant against Mondiale VGL for
underpayment of wages and an alleged failure to include
required information on
payslips in contravention of reg 3.46(3) of the
Fair Work Regulations 2009
Fair Work Regulations
). These claims failed because of a lack
of evidence (
Guthrie No 2
at [172] and [178]).
support of the costs application, the applicant filed an affidavit sworn 11
September 2025 and a further affidavit sworn 25 September
2025. The second of
these affidavits related to matters arising from the application for an interim
injunction in
Guthrie No 1
, but it is not now necessary to consider those
matters as Mondiale VGL does not seek to pursue any order for costs in relation
that part of the proceeding.
the affidavit sworn 11 September 2025, the applicant asserts that Mondiale VGL
caused him to incur costs in the proceeding by unreasonably
defending his claims
for relief, in circumstances where Mondiale VGL knew that it did not have a
defence to his claims of adverse
applicant sought to rely on the findings of Judge Lucev in
Guthrie No 1
at [73] and [87(d)] and in
Guthrie No 2
at [39], [48], [117], [149] and
[156]. The applicant also referred to parts of the transcript of the hearing
before Judge Lucev on
14 and 15 February 2022 (
Guthrie No 2
particular passages of the cross-examination of Mr Punter, the National
Transport Manager for Mondiale VGL, where he referred
in his evidence to the
Senior Management Team making the Dismissal Decision (
Guthrie No 2
applicant did not seek to recover the costs of the unsuccessful application for
reinstatement in
Guthrie No 1
but did seek the costs of the hearing
before Judge Lucev where liability for breach of the Act was established. The
applicant contends
that it was unreasonable for Mondiale VGL not to admit the
alleged breach of workplace rights and adverse action especially where
relevant members of the Senior Management Team did not give evidence about the
Dismissal Decision and why it was in fact made.
applicant contends that the conduct of Mondiale VGL, in putting the applicant to
the proof of his claims for adverse action, was
unreasonable because it should
have known that it did not have a defence to the applicant’s claims of
adverse action, had no
prospects of success and unreasonably caused the
applicant to incur costs.
COSTS JURISDICTION
Ordinarily,
costs of legal proceedings under the Act are borne by the parties. A party will
only be entitled to an order that costs
be paid by another party where the Court
is satisfied that one of the circumstances in s 570(2) of the Act arises. Those
circumstances
(2) The party may be ordered to pay the costs only if:
(a) the court is satisfied that the party instituted the
proceedings vexatiously or without reasonable cause; or
(b) the court is satisfied that the party's unreasonable act or omission caused
the other party to incur the costs; or
(c) the court is satisfied of both of the following:
(i) the party unreasonably refused to participate in
a matter before the FWC;
(ii) the matter arose from the same facts as the proceedings.
applicant seeks to rely on s 570(2)(b) of the Act which requires the Court to be
satisfied that an unreasonable act or omission
caused the applicant to incur
Ryan v Primesafe
[2015] FCA 8
, Mortimer J (as her Honour then was) said
[64] ...The policy behind s 570 is to ensure that the spectre of costs being
awarded if a claim is unsuccessful does not loom so
large in the mind of
potential applicants...with genuine grievances and an arguable evidentiary and
legal basis for them are put
off commencing or continuing proceedings. It is an
access to justice provision. [In relation to respondents], it is designed to
[that] the respondents feel free to pursue arguable legal and factual
responses to the claims made against them.
an otherwise no-costs jurisdiction, the discretion to order costs must be
exercised with caution (see
Murdock v Virgin Australia Airlines Pty Ltd (No
[2024] FCA 227
per Burley J (
Saxena v PPF
Asset Management Ltd
[2011] FCA 395
per Bromberg J).
clear case for its exercise must be demonstrated. Even where the threshold is
met, the Court retains a discretion which must be
exercised judicially
at [3]-[4]).
applicant for costs bears the onus of satisfying the Court that one or more of
the criteria in s 570(2) of the Act are met. Determining
whether a party acted
unreasonably must be determined objectively according to the facts on a
case-by-case basis
Australian and International Pilots
Association v Qantas Airways Ltd (No 3)
[2007] FCA 879
Melbourne Stadiums Ltd v Sautner
[2015] FCAFC 20
Federal Court found that a failure to accept a reasonable offer of compromise
may constitute an unreasonable act for the
purpose of s 570(2)(b) of the Act.
However, that is not applicable here because, perhaps surprisingly, there is no
evidence of a
prehearing offer that was unreasonably refused by either party
Lees v Asaleo Personal Care Pty Ltd
[2023] FCA 334
Kambouridis v LR Reed City Pty Ltd
[2020] FCCA 1484
Kambouridis
the Fair Work Commission (FWC) determined a dispute and the respondents failed
to comply with the FWC order. The respondents gave
no reason for not complying
with the FWC order. This conduct ‘...
effectively forced the applicant
to bring proceedings, despite there being no real dispute: such conduct is
unreasonable as it wastes
the applicant’s costs
Kambouridis
at [35] per Judge Riethmuller (as his Honour then
Fair Work Ombudsman v WCH Services Pty Ltd
[2018] FCCA 1876
applicant sought costs under s 570(2)(b), or alternatively s 570(2)(c), in
circumstances where the respondents failed to comply
with a FWC order and did
not engage in the proceedings before the FWC or the then Federal Circuit Court.
Judge Hartnett (as her Honour
then was) awarded costs to the applicant under s
570(2)(b) for the following reason at [55]:
[55] ...On an objective analysis of the circumstances, the Respondents’
conduct has not been what a reasonable person would
expect, and has directly
caused the Applicant to incur costs. The Respondents have been put on notice as
to the costs application
and have provided no response for the Court to
consider. The Court is satisfied that the Respondents failure to pay the amount
by [the FWC] to [the Applicant] was unreasonable and has caused the
Applicant to incur costs.
Rahman v Commonwealth of Australia (as represented by the Australian Taxation
[2013] FCCA 388
) at [4] Judge Driver said:
[4] I accept generally the parties’ submissions concerning the relevant
principles to be applied. In ordinary circumstances,
the court is not empowered
to order costs in matters arising under the
Fair Work Act
. The power is
enlivened by a party’s unreasonable act or omission. Once the power is
enlivened, the Court has a broad discretion.
What is an unreasonable act or
omission will depend upon the facts of the particular case. A procedural failure
may, prima facie,
be unreasonable and a pleading failure (by which I mean
something put in or left out of a pleading) which is unreasonable may also
enliven the power. A finding of an unreasonable act or omission must be the
exception rather than the rule. It follows that a reasonably
high bar needs to
be set for a party alleging an unreasonable act or omission.
[7] his Honour observed:
[7]The expression “an unreasonable act or omission” used in
Fair Work Act
should bear its ordinary meaning. The test
is not whether Mr Rahman acted in a manner that no reasonable person would have
that the pleadings were drafted in a manner that no reasonable person
could have drafted pleadings.
APPLICANT’S SUBMISSIONS
applicant provided an outline of written submissions filed 12 September 2025 in
which the applicant submitted that it was unreasonable
for Mondiale VGL to not
admit the adverse action claim and that the applicant was terminated for
exercising workplace rights.
written submissions did not identify that part of the costs of the applicant
that were said to have been incurred by the unreasonable
refusal to admit the
applicant’s claim. Emphasis was placed on the evidence at the hearing
before Judge Lucev in
Guthrie No 2
and on the absence of evidence from
the other decision-makers who made the Dismissal Decision.
was submitted that his Honour effectively warned Mondiale VGL in
Guthrie No 1
at [73] and [87(d)] that there was an absence of evidence regarding the
decision-making process that was required to be address. Further
no explanation
was given at the hearing as to why relevant witnesses were not available or not
it was submitted, that those advising Mondiale VGL and those that gave
instructions to defend ought to have known that,
the defence that the
termination of the applicant was lawful, could not succeed. In particular, the
applicant relied on the finding
at [156] of
Guthrie No 2
assertion that Mr Punter and Ms Coleman (who gave evidence at the hearing) were
the joint decision-makers could not be sustained
on the evidence because the
evidence of Mr Punter was that the joint decision-makers were Mr Punter, Ms
Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Mu
Sung and Mr McLaughlin.
lack of evidence supporting the defence was also apparent from the lack of
documentation produced by Mondiale VGL to support the
Dismissal Decision.
Honour also found that Mondiale VGL had made up untrue allegations against Mr
Guthrie to support the Dismissal Decision (
Guthrie No 2
at [36] and
[48]). The applicant submitted that Mondiale VGL knew that it could not disprove
the applicant’s claims and the
reasonable and appropriate course was to
admit a breach of the Act and to proceed to a compensation and penalty hearing.
a baseless defence when Mondiale VGL knew it did not have a
defence and no prospects of success was unreasonable and caused Mr Guthrie
incur costs”.
this it can be inferred that only the costs of the liability hearing were caused
or incurred by the alleged unreasonable conduct
of Mondiale VGL and that the
compensation and penalty hearing (
Guthrie No 3
) would have occurred in
any event. Mr Raftos clarified the applicant’s position at the hearing of
the costs application by
submitting in reply that only costs after the
unsuccessful application in
Guthrie No 1
were sought and only in relation
to the three days of hearing before Judge Lucev on the issue of liability under
RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
behalf of Mondiale VGL it was submitted that there should be no departure from
the ordinary rules about costs in matters under
the Act and especially so, where
a respondent is simply unsuccessful in the defence of a claim and/or had
Jones v Dunkel
inferences drawn against it due to the absence of
was submitted that the costs application is misconceived because Mondiale VGL
was successful in defending “several”
of the claims made by the
applicant. Reference was made to an abandoned interlocutory application before
the hearing on liability,
for which no costs order was made and the absence of
evidence by the applicant that established a causal link between the conduct
Mondiale VGL and any particular costs incurred by the applicant. Mere reliance
on transcript was not sufficient to establish the
level of satisfaction required
to make an order under
s 570(2)(b)
of the Act.
Wong also referred to the finding of Judge Lucev at [143]-[144] of
where he found that the applicant engaged in what could be characterised
as low-level disrespect, when corresponding with Ms Coleman
(the National Human
Resources Manager for Mondiale VGL). This was stated by Mondiale VGL to be one
of the reasons for terminating
the applicant. Therefore, the defence to the
applicant’s claim was not unwarranted or unreasonable especially when the
applicant’s
claims for underpayments and breach of the
Regulations
were successfully resisted by Mondiale VGL. Mondiale VGL was
entitled to resist these claims, especially so where there was no evidence
support them.
Wong submitted that costs under the Act were not intended to be punitive and
were the exception rather than the rule (see
per Judge Driver).
The authorities relied on by the applicant were inapt because none of them
involved similar circumstances to this
case. Reliance by the applicant on
Celand v Skycity Adelaide Pty Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 222
) simply reinforce the proposition that making a costs order
under s 570 of the Act should be approached with ‘exceptional
was also authority for the proposition that there
must be proof that an unreasonable act or acts are the cause of costs to be
was submitted that, given the seriousness of a finding of unreasonable conduct
under s 470(2)(b) of the Act, the Court should apply
a standard of satisfaction
equivalent to the very serious allegations made (see
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 362 (per Dixon J) and
Evidence Act
(Cth)). The applicant was alleging a lack of bona fides, akin to
dishonesty, by Mondiale VGL and those advising it and the Court
reluctant to draw adverse inferences about a respondent’s state of mind
without clear evidence.
the written outline of submissions filed on behalf of Mondiale VGL, reference
was made to an interlocutory application made on
19 May 2021 to amend the
applicant’s claim that was ultimately not pursued by the applicant. It was
submitted that the conduct
of the proceeding, as a whole, should be considered
and the Court should avoid splitting issues for the purpose of assessing costs.
When viewed as a whole, the proceeding was hard fought by both parties and both
had a measure of success. Mondiale VGL successfully
defended the application for
an interlocutory injunction (for which no claim for costs was made) and resisted
aspects of the applicant’s
claims on liability and also aspects of the
claims for compensation and penalty upon which the applicant was unsuccessful or
to provide adequate evidence. It was inappropriate for the Court to look
at findings in isolation and conclude that part of the defence
proceedings was unreasonable. The pursuit of contentious and ultimately
unsuccessful arguments is not an unreasonable act
at [36] per
was also place on the decision in
Tran v Macquarie University (No 3)
[2020] FCCA 1010
where Judge Humphreys declined to make an order for costs
in a proceeding, under the Act where the respondent was required to pay
compensation and penalties for breach of s 340 of the Act. In that case, one of
the key decision-makers in terminating the applicant
was not called to give
evidence. His Honour observed at [80] that it should have been apparent to the
respondent that the failure
to call the decision-maker would be a serious
obstacle to the successful defence of the case. Nevertheless, his Honour was not
that the respondent’s actions were so unreasonable to warrant an
order for costs. His Honour said at [79]:
[79] The starting point for consideration of whether or not costs should be
awarded is that the Court must be satisfied that the
Respondent’s
unreasonable acts or omissions caused the Applicant to incur the costs. It will
be a rare case where costs will
be awarded. The evidence justifying such an
award would needs to be very clear
CONSIDERATION
the principles and cautionary approach identified in the cases identified above,
I am not satisfied that the conduct of Mondiale
VGL in defending the
applicant’s claims in respect of the alleged adverse action and breach of
the Act was unreasonable or
that it caused any particular legal costs to be
incurred by the applicant.
am mindful that an order for costs in matters arising under the Act are not
frequently made and the jurisdiction to do so must be
exercised with caution.
The Court must be satisfied that an unreasonable act or omission caused costs to
have been incurred. This
level of satisfaction must be reached by clear evidence
of an unreasonable act or omission that had a causal link to identifiable
applicant submits that the entire costs of the proceeding after the unsuccessful
application for reinstatement were incurred due
to Mondiale VGL refusing to
admit adverse action which the applicant says should not have been defended.
This is casting the net
that Mondiale VGL did admit a breach of the Act for which compensation and a
penalty was payable, the costs of the compensation
and penalty hearing would
have been incurred in any event. It is also noted that the applicant had only
limited success in proving
the heads of compensation sought and sought
significantly larger penalties than were ordered. Further, the fact that
compensation
and penalties were ordered as they were, was based in part on the
conduct of Mondiale VGL in terminating the applicant’s employment
reasons other than those stated in the letter of termination. Mondiale VGL was
ordered to pay amounts for hurt and humiliation
as well a penalty amount that
was ordered to be paid to the applicant. The costs of the compensation and
penalty proceeding could
not be said to have been caused by any unreasonable act
or omission by Mondiale VGL, they were costs that would have been incurred
the parties in any event. There is no reason to depart from the no costs
were no costs orders sought following the decision of Judge Lucev in
. His Honour invited the parties (in particular, Mondiale VGL) to make
any application for costs arising from that application within
seven days.
Neither party elected to do so. The costs of that interlocutory application
could not be said to be caused by an unreasonable
act or omission by Mondiale
VGL. No costs were sought and the usual rule in relation to costs under the Act
applied to that aspect
of the proceeding.
leaves the costs of the preparation for and conduct of the hearing before Judge
Lucev on liability that took place in person,
in Perth, on 14 and 15 February
and 9 March 2022. The applicant was not entirely successful in all aspects of
his claims on liability.
He did succeed in establishing the necessary
prerequisites under s 340 of the Act thus reversing the onus that the Dismissal
was not made for an impermissible reason. Mondiale VGL was not able to
persuade the Court on the balance of probabilities that it
was not motivated by
an impermissible reason (s 361 of the Act). That does not mean that it should
never have tried to do so or that
it acted unreasonably in seeking to do
decisions are frequently made in the running of hearings under the Act in this
Court and other courts in all jurisdictions.
That a decision to call or not call
witnesses which is unexplained does not invite an inference that a party has
acted unreasonably.
A failure to call a witness may invite the court to draw an
inference that the evidence of that witness may not assist the claim
Jones v Dunkel
at 308 per Kitto J, 312 per Menzies J and 320-1 per
Windeyer J). That inference was drawn by Judge Lucev in this case to the
of the defence, but without more that is not an unreasonable act or
omissions that causes costs to be incurred.
was submitted that Mondiale VGL was warned in the reasons for judgment in
Guthrie No 1
that the evidence regarding the Dismissal Decision was weak
or was missing (
Guthrie No 1
at [79]) and required explanation
Guthrie No 1
at [87(d)]). However, I am not persuaded that the response
by Mondiale VGL to the weaknesses in its defence was so unreasonable that
should be required to pay the costs of and incidental to the entire liability
hearing. The observation of Judge Lucev in [87(d)]
Guthrie No 1
result in Mr Punter providing an affidavit for the hearing and making himself
available for cross-examination.
may have been the case that the evidence of Mr Punter at the hearing in
cross-examination, made plain that others in the Executive
Team were party to
the Dismissal Decision and those witnesses were not called to give evidence and
no explanation for their absence
was given but that does not mean that defending
the applicant’s claim was so hopeless as to make the act of defending the
in its entirety unreasonable. Perhaps the applicant’s position may
have been stronger if the applicant abandoned at or before
the hearing, the
other claims made by him on which he failed or had no evidence but he did
is dangerous in hard fought litigation, as occurred in this proceeding, to
engage in dissecting forensic decisions as to the merits
of individual aspects
of claims and assessing them as reasonable or unreasonable for the purpose of
making a costs order under s
570(2) of the Act. It invites minute scrutiny of
conduct after the event. In some circumstances, the conduct of a party may be so
clearly unreasonable that no other right-minded litigant, observing the
overarching purposes identified in
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia Act 2021
(Cth) would have acted or omitted to act
as they did. However, this is not a clear case of such conduct and there is no
clear evidence
that the defence of the applicant’s claims on liability was
altogether hopeless and ought never to have been pursued from any
identifiable
date after the decision in
Guthrie No 1
parties had some measure of success at the hearing on liability. The fact that
the evidence advanced by Mondiale VGL as to the
veracity of the Dismissal
Decision was found not to have been persuasive and an adverse inference was
drawn because of the absence
of witnesses without explanation does not warrant a
departure from the ordinary rule that there be no order as to costs for
proceedings
under the Act. Especially where there are other aspects of the
defence on which Mondiale VGL was successful in defending.
DISPOSITION
applicant has not established to the satisfaction of the Court that an
unreasonable act or omission of Mondiale VGL has caused
the applicant to incur
legal costs. The costs application filed 13 September 2025 is
application in the proceeding filed by the applicant on 13 September 2025 is
I certify that the preceding fifty-one (51)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 12 November 2025
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
RTF format (390 KB)
Signed PDF/A format