Colin McKerlie v Private Fleet Group Pty Ltd [2025] FWCFB 252 (5 November 2025)
[2025] FWCFB 252
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Appeal of decision
Private Fleet Group Pty Ltd
(C2025/8082)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT SLEVIN
DEPUTY PRESIDENT GRAYSON COMMISSIONER
SYDNEY, 5 NOVEMBER 2025
Appeal against decision
of Commissioner Sloan in matter number U2025/8790 –
application dismissed – minimum employment period – small
employer – calculation of employees - no arguable error – no public
interest - permission to appeal refused.
Mr Colin McKerlie commenced working for Private Fleet Pty Ltd on 1
May 2024. On 1 November 2024 the business and employees of that
company were
transferred to Private Fleet Group Pty Ltd (
). On 2 May 2025,
the Respondent dismissed Mr McKerlie.
Mr McKerlie applied to the Commission pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
) for an unfair dismissal remedy.
The Respondent opposed the application on the ground that Mr McKerlie was not
protected from unfair
dismissal as he had not served the minimum employment
period. The minimum employment period is defined in s. 383 as 6 months, or,
the employer is a small business employer, one year. A small business employer
is defined in s. 23 as an employer who employs
fewer than 15 employees.
Commissioner Sloan found that as the Respondent employed 14 employees at the
time of Mr McKerlie’s
dismissal it was a small business employer. As Mr
McKerlie had not served a minimum employment period of 12 months, the
Commissioner
ordered that Mr McKerlie’s application be
Mr McKerlie has lodged an appeal under s.604 of the FW Act against
Commissioner Sloan’s decision and order. Section 604(1) provides
appeal may only be brought with the permission of the Commission. This decision
deals with whether Mr McKerlie should be
given permission to appeal. For the
reasons that follow we refuse permission to appeal.
Permission to appeal - principles
The Commission has a general discretion under s. 604(2) to grant
permission but “must grant permission if the FWC is satisfied
in the public interest to do so.” Section 400(1) of the Act applies to
appeals from decisions made under Part 3-2
of the Act. Part 3-2 deals with
unfair dismissal. Section 400(1) provides that the Commission “must
not” grant permission
to appeal a decision made under Part 3-2
“unless the FWC considers that it is in the public interest to do
so.” Section
400(2) states that an appeal on a question of fact in
relation to a decision made under Part 3-2, can only be made on the ground
the decision involved “a significant error of fact.” The test under
s.400 is a “stringent
Consideration of the public interest involves a broad value
that may engage the public interest include issues of importance and general
application, a diversity of decisions at first
instance, or where the decision
manifests an
In deciding whether to grant permission to appeal, it is unnecessary
and inappropriate to conduct a detailed examination of the appeal
However, it
is necessary to engage with the appeal grounds to consider whether they raise an
arguable case of appealable error. An
appellant must ordinarily demonstrate
that there is an arguable case of appealable error to be granted permission to
appeal, as an
appeal cannot succeed in the absence of
However, the
fact that a member at first instance may have made an error is not necessarily a
sufficient basis to grant permission
Fresh Evidence
During the hearing of the matter Mr McKerlie sought to rely upon
fresh evidence and information in the appeal. He sought to be sworn
purpose of stating on oath that everything he said at first instance was true
and correct. He sought to do this to cure
the asserted deficiency arising from
the Commissioner not proceeding by way of hearing. He also sought to make a
statement on oath
that he did not receive a notice of termination from the
Respondent at the time he was dismissed. He also invited Mr Varone of the
Respondent to give evidence before us, on oath, attesting that what was said at
first instance was true, so as to enable that account
to be tested by cross
examination. Finally, he sought to tender a bundle of media clippings in which
criticisms are made about the
process of appointments to the Commission.
Section 607(2) of the Act confers a discretion on the Commission to
admit further evidence and take into account other information
or evidence on
appeal. However, the Commission must be satisfied it is appropriate to do
The Respondent
opposed the Full Bench receiving further evidence and Mr Varone declined Mr
McKerlie’s invitation to give evidence
under oath. We note that the
Commissioner did not take evidence on oath at first instance. Mr McKerlie has
made submissions on that
matter and there is no need to follow the process
requested. We also note Mr McKerlie’s assertion that he was not provided
with a written notice of termination. That is sufficient for the purposes of
these proceedings. That matter, for the reasons below
is ultimately of no
consequence. The media articles that Mr McKerlie sought to rely upon had no
relevance at all to the proceedings.
We refused to receive the further evidence
as it was not appropriate to do so.
Consideration
Mr McKerlie’s notice of appeal contains four grounds. They
assert that:
Commissioner conducted the hearing in a biased, corrupt, and incompetent manner,
including by conducting a “determinative
conference.”
Commissioner erred in failing to give weight to statements made by employees and
agents of the Respondent.
Commissioner erred in giving weight to certain documents and failed to compel
the Respondent to comply with an order to produce
Commissioner erred in not counting a temporarily vacant position when counting
the number of employees employed by the Respondent
for the purposes of the
definition of a “small business employer” in s. 23 of the FW Act
Mr McKerlie made application and was granted leave to add an
additional appeal ground. It was that his dismissal was unlawful because
Respondent did not provide him with written notice of the termination as
required by s.117 of the FW Act.
Mr McKerlie’s submissions in support of his first ground are
discursive and are littered with irrelevant and immaterial attacks
Commissioner Sloan, other members of the Commission, including the members of
this Full Bench, and the Commission more generally.
We reject those submissions.
They are intemperate, irrelevant, and immaterial to the appeal. As to the
submissions that go to the
procedure followed by the Commissioner of conducting
a determinative conference rather than a hearing, we note that s. 399 provides
that the Commission must not hold a hearing in an unfair dismissal matter unless
it considers it appropriate to do so, taking into
account the views of the
parties and whether a hearing would be the most effective and efficient way to
resolve the matter. The Commission
also has the general power in s. 590 to
inform itself in relation to any matter before it in such manner as it considers
appropriate.
Mr McKerlie acknowledges that he did not object to the Commissioner
proceeding by way of determinative conference. Mr McKerlie has
not made out an
arguable case of appealable error that the Commissioner made any error
whatsoever in proceeding in the manner he
Mr McKerlie’s second and third grounds go the weight given to
statements and documents relied on by the Respondent during the
conference. The
third ground also goes to the manner in which the Commissioner dealt with
documents produced by the Respondent in
response to an order for production.
Matters of weight are matters for the first instance decision maker and will not
be disturbed
on appeal lightly. Mr McKerlie’s submission is that the
Respondent should simply not have been believed. He does not establish
should be the case. The complaint about the receipt of documents is that the
Commissioner accepted unexecuted contracts
where the order for production should
have resulted in the production of executed contracts. This matter is dealt with
by the Commissioner
at [32] to [34] of his reasons. The contracts went to
whether some who worked in the business of the Respondent were employees or
independent contractors. The Commissioner noted that reliance on unexecuted
contracts was a matter of weight but ultimately determined
the issue by finding
that there was nothing before him that cast doubt on the contention that those
persons were independent contractors.
Whether the documents provided were signed
or not had no bearing on this finding. We see no error in the approach taken by
the Commissioner.
Mr McKerlie’s fourth ground is that the Commissioner should
have counted a temporarily vacant position when calculating the
employees employed by the Respondent at the time of dismissal. The decision
records that an employee ended employment on
4 April 2025. The decision also
records that a new employee commenced in the same position on 19 May 2025. Mr
McKerlie has not argued
that the Commissioner erred in relation to these dates
for the two employees. The Commissioner was required to determine the number
employees as at the time that Mr McKerlie was dismissed, which was 2 May 2025.
It cannot be said that either the former employee,
or the new employee, was
employed, or on Mr McKerlie’s preferred construction was ‘usually
employed’, on 2 May
2025. Consequently, the Commissioner was correct not
to include either employee in the calculation of the number of employees.
23 of the FW Act is directed at employees rather than roles or
positions. Mr McKerlie did not develop this ground in his submissions
than to repeat the argument presented at first instance. His submissions do not
identify an arguable case of appealable error.
Mr McKerlie’s additional ground goes to the operation of s.117
of the FW Act. Mr McKerlie’s asserts that the Respondent
did not comply
with the requirement in s.117 to provide written notice of his termination.
Even if it is assumed that Mr McKerlie
is correct and that the Respondent did
not comply with s.117 of the FW Act, that would not establish an arguable case
of appealable
error. There was no dispute before the Commissioner that Mr
McKerlie’s employment ended on 2 May 2025. A failure to comply
notice requirement in s.117 does not mean that there was no
to be determined was whether Mr McKerlie had served the minimum employment
period. Whether that period was 6 months or
12 months turned on the issue of
whether the Respondent was a “small business employer”. The
Respondent’s compliance
or otherwise with the notice requirement in s.117
did not have any bearing on the assessment of how many employees it had when Mr
McKerlie was dismissed.
Mr McKerlie contended that his appeal was in the public interest due
to the procedural failures associated with the manner in which
the Commissioner
conducted the proceedings and his failure to enforce the order for production.
These matters are simply complaints
Commissioner. They do not raise any genuine issue of law, principle or wider
application. Mr
McKerlie also asserts the appeal raises a novel issue concerning
the construction of s. 23 of the FW Act. While the construction
issue raised has
not been considered at appellate level before; the manner in which it is raised
does not suggest error on the part
of the Commissioner. There is no public
interest in granting permission to argue the point where Mr McKerlie has not
established
arguable error. Finally, Mr McKerlie asserts that the decision is
fundamentally unfair and contrary to the FW Act because it sets
a precedent that
an employee can lose protection from unfair dismissal where an employer
deliberately refuses to fill a vacant position
to keep the number of persons it
employs beneath 15. The Commissioner’s decision dealt with facts specific
to the case. It
does not set a precedent of general application. Mr
McKerlie’s strong sense that the outcome was unjust in his circumstances
does not attract a broader public interest.
For the reasons given, we do not consider that an arguable case has
been advanced that the decision was attended by appealable error.
satisfied, for the purposes of s 400(1) of the Act, that the appeal attracts the
public interest. It follows that we must
refuse permission to appeal.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances:
Mr C McKerlie
for himself.
Mr J Varone
for Private Fleet.
Hearing details:
By Video using Microsoft Teams.
4 November.
Colin McKerlie
v Private Fleet Group Pty Ltd
Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler and others
(2011) 192 FCR 78,
Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler and others
(2011) 192 FCR 78, [44].
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd v Makin
[2010] FWAFB 5343
(2010) 197 IR 266 (Makin)
Trustee for
the MTGI Trust v Johnston
[2016] FCAFC 140
Allied Operations Pty Ltd v AIRC
(2000) 203 CLR 194
See, for example,
Mining and Energy Union v Specialised Mine Services Pty Ltd
referring to the approach in
Akins v National
Australia Bank
(1994)34 NSWLR 155 at 160.
Metropolitan
Fire and Emergency Services Board v Duggan
– [33] and Farooq Faridi v OM Security P/L
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (375 KB)
Signed PDF/A format