URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1965/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mobil Oil Australia Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation [1965] UKPCHCA 3; (1965) 112 CLR 407 (27 July 1965)
PRIVY COUNCIL
MOBIL OIL AUSTRALIA LTD. v. FEDERAL COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
[1965] UKPCHCA 3
(1965) 112 CLR
Income Tax (Cth)
Privy Council
Lord Reid(1), Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest(1), Lord Pearce(1), Lord Upjohn(1)
and Lord Wilberforce(1).
Income Tax (Cth) - Assessable income - Allowable deductions - Taxpayer
selling petrol to retailers - Expenditure incurred in tying
retailers to
taxpayer - Capital or income expenditure - Whether allowable deduction -
Income Tax and Social Services Contribution
Assessment Act 1936-1953 (Cth),
ss. 51 (1), 260.
1965, May 27, 31; June 1, 2; July 27. 27:7:1965
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
LORD PEARCE delivered the judgment of their Lordships as follows: -
The question in this appeal is whether sums amounting to 192,701 pounds are
to as "Mobil Oil") for the year ended 30th June 1953.
Taylor J. held that they
were not. He was affirmed in the Full Court of the High Court by a majority
(McTiernan, Windeyer and Owen
JJ., Dixon C.J. and Kitto J. dissenting). The
arguments in all the Courts have been similar to those in the case of B.P.
Limited since the facts of the two cases are very similar. They
arise out of the same trade situation, namely, the development of
in the business of marketing petrol. Mobil Oil did not, however, follow its
rivals by compulsion as did B.P. It had tentative
plans for instituting the
solo site system but it was forestalled by the announcement of the Shell
company in August 1951. It then
instituted among its customers a "Trading
Agreement" for a period of years. It agreed to paint with its own colours the
service stations, to reimburse retailers for the reasonable cost of
minor alterations to their stations (and to provide skilled advice
subject), to pay half their advertising costs, and to help them to obtain
loans for their businesses. It also agreed to sell
to the retailers at the
ruling market price and deliver to their service stations all motor fuels
which they might from time to time
require for resale at the service stations.
The retailers covenanted to purchase from Mobil Oil at the ruling market price
fuels intended for resale at the service stations and not to
purchase them otherwise than from Mobil Oil nor to sell at the service
stations any motor fuels other than those purchased by them from Mobil Oil.
This agreement did not prove a sufficient attraction
to retailers and there
was superimposed on it in most cases another agreement either in form SS1-B or
form SS1-C. In each of those
it was an express term that the retailer should
execute and carry out the terms of the trading agreement for a period of
2. The SS1-B agreement (of which there was the larger number) was as follows:
It recited that the retailer had requested Mobil Oil
to lend him a specified
sum of money and that Mobil Oil had agreed to do so upon the terms set out in
the deed. The retailer covenanted
to repay the amount of the loan together
with interest at a fixed rate per annum by equal monthly instalments
comprising both principal
and interest. He also covenanted during the term of
the "Trading Agreement" not to dispose of his interest in the service station
without first offering to sell it to Mobil Oil. If such offer was not accepted
by Mobil Oil the retailer undertook not to dispose
of his interest otherwise
than by sale unless Mobil Oil approved of the person to whom he proposed to
dispose of it and unless that
person executed Mobil Oil's form of "Trading
Agreement" to run for a term not less than the unexpired term of the original
"Trading Agreement". It was also provided that unless and until the
retailer should have disposed of his interest in the station
he would, during
the term of the "Trading Agreement" continue to remain personally in
occupation of it. Further the retailer granted
to Mobil Oil the sole and
exclusive advertising rights on the station. Mobil Oil on the other hand
covenanted to pay the retailer
(so long as he remained personally in
occupation and observed the provisions of the agreement) a specified sum of
money each month,
payment of which might, at Mobil Oil's option, be made by
crediting the retailer in its books with the amount payable to him. In
the amount of these monthly payments which were to be made by Mobil Oil to the
retailer was calculated so as to coincide with
the amount of the monthly
payments of principal and interest which the retailer had covenanted to make
in repayment of the loan made
to him. In the event of any breach by the
retailer of any of the covenants, it was provided that the whole of the
principal money
or so much thereof as was then owing to the company together
with interest thereon should become immediately payable to Mobil Oil.
3. The SS1-C agreement (of which there was a smaller number) differed from
SS1-B in that it had no provision for the loan of money
by Mobil Oil to the
retailer, nor did it provide for monthly payments by Mobil Oil to the
retailer. It provided for a specified sum
to be paid annually by Mobil Oil to
the retailer in respect of each period of twelve months during which he
remained personally in
occupation of the service station and observed the
terms of the agreement. (at p410)
4. The overall cost of the sums paid under these agreements was very
substantial but when applied to the whole of the company's
turnover it
amounted, their Lordships were told, to no more than about 1/2d. per gallon.
5. Mobil Oil originally intended that the amounts paid by it under either
agreement should amount to .3 of a penny per gallon on
the estimated gallonage
which the retailer was likely to sell over ther period in question. But under
both agreements the amounts
paid varied since the retailers soon realized that
they were in a strong bargaining position. In some cases, where there was
competition
to secure a particular station - Mobil Oil had to pay on the basis
of as much as 1 1/2d. per gallon. In the words of Owen J. (agreeing
findings of Taylor J.) "the estimated 'gallonage' demand by a particular
station was no more than a factor - and no doubt
an important factor - in
deciding what sum it would be economically sound to lend or pay to the
particular operator" (1964) 110 CLR,
at p 440 (at p410)
6. The form of the agreements was not attacked as a sham at first instance,
nor was there cross examination to that effect but that
suggestion was made on
appeal. Owen J. there expressed the view (which their Lordships share) that
all the evidence pointed to the
opposite conclusion. "The arrangements were,
without question," he said, "real transactions intended to be and in fact
carried out
according to the terms of the documents" (1964) 110 CLR, at p 441
Nor did the trial judge nor the Full Court accept the suggestion
payments under SS1-B were merely book entries which should not be treated as
outgoings at all. Their Lordships agree with
that view. The cross entries
constituted notional payments even in the cases where no counter balancing
cheques passed (see per Mellish
L.J. in Spargo's Case
(1873) 8 Ch App 407
p 414 and per Knox C.J. and Dixon J. in Commissioner of Stamp Duties (N.S.W.)
v. Perpetual
Trustee Co. Ltd.
[1929] HCA 27
(1929) 43 CLR 247
, at p 263) (at p410)
7. It was argued by Mr. Menhennitt that these agreements were void as against
the Commissioner under s. 260 of the Income Tax and
Social Services
Contribution Assessment Act 1936-1960 (Cth) which reads as follows: "Contracts
to evade tax void. - 260. Every contract,
agreement, or arrangement made or
entered into, orally or in writing, whether before or after the commencement
of this Act, shall
so far as it has or purports to have the purpose or effect
of in any way, directly or indirectly - (a) altering the incidence of
income tax; (b) relieving any person from liability to pay any income tax or
make any return; (c) defeating, evading, or avoiding
any duty or liability
imposed on any person by this Act; or (d) preventing the operation of this Act
in any respect, be absolutely
void, as against the Commissioner, or in regard
to any proceeding under this Act, but without prejudice to such validity as it
have in any other respect or for any other purpose." (at p411)
8. In Newton v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1958] UKPCHCA 1
(1958) AC 450
(1958) 98 CLR
Lord Denning said - "In order to
bring the arrangement
within the section
you must be able to predicate - by looking at the overt
acts by which it was
implemented
- that it was implemented
in that particular way so as to avoid
tax. If you cannot so predicate,
but have to acknowledge that the
transactions
are capable
of explanation by reference to ordinary business or family
dealing, without
necessarily being labelled as
a means to avoid tax, then
arrangement does not come within the section" (1958) AC, at p 466; (1958)
CLR, at p 8 (at p411)
9. The learned trial judge found that "for reasons which, no doubt, seemed
proper to the appellant it was not prepared to pay in
advance and
unconditionally a lump sum for a trade tie extending over a period of years.
It was, however, prepared to pay that sum
by instalments spread over the
relevant period and in the meantime to make available to the operator an
amount equal to the lump
sum involved" (1964) 110 CLR, at p 427 Under the
circumstances existing it is not surprising that Mobil Oil took that line.
a commercial point of view it was a sensible arrangement. And it is not
easy to see by what other equally convenient method it could
achieved. In the one case (SS1-C) the retailer received his payments annually
so long as he carried out his obligations
during periods appropriate to the
payments. In the other case (SS1-B), where it was desired that the retailer
should have in his
hands the whole sum at the beginning of the transaction,
the sum was advanced as a loan on which the obligation to repay dwindled
regular rate while the retailer was earning his reward. Thus the transaction
is capable of explanation by reference to an ordinary
sensible business
arrangement. It does not therefore come within the section. (at p411)
10. What then is the nature of these payments? Under each agreement they were
periodic payments of a sum calculated as a lump sum
for the total number of
years. Under SSI-C the annual payment was such a part of the total as accorded
with the annual benefit. Although
the total was a lump sum it was worked out
by reference to the number of years which it represented. Admittedly the mere
a capital sum is payable by instalments does not convert it into an
income payment in the hands of the payer. (See Green v. Favourite
Cinemas Ltd.
(1930) 15 Tax Cas 390) In that case however the sum considered was a premium
payable by instalments in addition to current
rent on premises which were
necessary if the taxpayer was to carry on his business at all. That case
turned on the distinct difference
between the premium and the rent where both
were payable and the premium was identifiable as such. Once a sum is
identified as being
a premium in respect of a capital expenditure it does not
easily lose its capital identity and mere payment by instalments is not
to cause it to do so. (at p412)
11. In the present case however the number of years was partly decisive of
the total sum and the annual instalments under SS1-C
were calculated through a
division of the total sum by the number of years so that the periodical reward
was commensurate with the
portion of the services attributable to the period.
The lump sum element in the case of SS1-C is not sufficiently cogent to
the indication of an income expenditure given by the fact of periodic
payment corresponding with a periodic benefit. This aspect
of the matter is
only one indication but it adds to the other considerations set out in the
case of B.P. Australia Ltd. and makes
the present case a fortiori so far as
agreement SS1-C is concerned. (at p412)
12. As to agreement SS1-B there are two possible views. First, one might
regard the monthly payments as being the substance of the
outgoing, in which
case it would have the same effect as agreement SS1-C. Secondly, one might
regard its total effect as being an
advance payment of a lump sum intended as
consideration for the benefits over the number of years. This seems perhaps,
view, since it was at the beginning that the actual money changed
hands although the agreement provided mchinery for emphasizing
to the retailer
the fact that he must continue his services over the total number of years if
he was to retain the money and for
the recovery of it pro tanto if at a later
stage he failed in his obligation. Even if the agreement be so regarded, the
are income outgoings for the reasons set out in the case of B.P.
Australia Ltd. (at p412)
13. Again, in those transactions where the Trading Agreement simpliciter was
used without the addition of any other agreement, Mobil
Oil's expenditure was
income expenditure for the reasons given in the case of B.P. Australia Ltd.
14. Their Lordships will therefore humbly advise Her Majesty that the appeal
should be allowed, the orders of the Full Court and
of Taylor J. set aside
with costs and the assessments for income tax and social services contribution
for the year ending 30th June
1953 remitted to the respondent for him to allow
the appellant's objections thereto. The respondent must pay the costs of this
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter