Naparus & Frankham (No. 3) [2021] FamCAFC 150 (17 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Naparus & Frankham (No. 3)
FamCAFC 150
Appeal from:
Naparus & Frankham (No.7)
[2020] FCCA 3139
Appeal number(s):
SOA 96 of 2020
File number(s):
MLC 1462 of 2016
Judgment of:
AUSTIN, TREE & WILLIAMS JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – PARENTING
– Appeal against final parenting orders and dismissal of a relocation
application – Apprehended
bias – Where the primary judge did not err
in ordering equal shared parental responsibility or considering the
practicalities
of orders made – Where the primary judge did not mistake
the facts – Consideration of expert evidence – Weight
– Findings by the primary judge open on the evidence – Appeal
dismissed – No order as to costs.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
(2006) 224 ALR 51
(1998) 197 CLR 172;
[1998] HCA 67
Concrete Pty Ltd v Paramatta Design and Developments Pty Ltd
229 CLR 577
[2006] HCA 55
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
(2000) 205 CLR 337
Gronow v Gronow
(1979) 144 CLR 513
[1979] HCA 63
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Johnson v Johnson
(2000) 201 CLR 488
[2000] HCA 48
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 507;
[2001] HCA 17
(2010) 240 CLR 461
[2010] HCA 4
Naparus & Frankham (No. 2)
[2020] FamCAFC 238
Naparus & Frankham
[2020] FamCAFC 32
R v Watson; Ex parte Armstrong
(1976) 136 CLR 248
(2002) 211 CLR 238
[2002] HCA 36
Vakauta v Kelly
(1989) 167 CLR 568
[1989] HCA 44
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Heard in Melbourne (via video-link), delivered in
Counsel for the Applicant:
Litigant in person
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Nick Graham Legal
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Bowlen Dunstan & Associates Pty
MLC 1462 of 2016
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
MR FRANKHAM
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
AUSTIN, TREE & WILLIAMS JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The Amended Notice of Appeal filed 9 February 2021 is dismissed.
2. The respondent’s application for costs is dismissed.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Naparus & Frankham (No. 3)
approved by the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR
AUSTIN, TREE & WILLIAMS JJ:
1 Ms Naparus (“the mother”) and Mr Frankham (“the
father”) are the parents of X (“the child”),
who is now six
years of age. The parents have been in dispute about the care of the child for
many years.
2 By way of an Amended Notice of Appeal filed 9 February 2021, the mother
appeals from parenting orders made by a judge of the Federal
Circuit Court on 26
November 2020.
3 The appealed orders provide that the parents have equal shared parental
responsibility for the child, and the child to live with
the mother in Victoria,
provided she lives in reasonable proximity to the father’s home and the
child spend each alternate
weekend and half school holidays with the father. In
the event the mother did not return to Victoria with the child, the orders
for the child to live with the father and spend school holiday time with
the mother in Perth.
4 The mother contended in the appeal that the orders were infected by
judicial bias and numerous other legal, factual and discretionary
5 Both the father and the Independent Children’s Lawyer (“the
ICL”) resisted the appeal.
6 For the reasons that follow, this appeal must be dismissed.
7 The mother is 42 years of age and has lived in
Australia since 1986. The father is 38 years of age and lives in Town F in
8 The parties met online in about 2009, when the mother was living in Perth
and the father in Victoria. In 2013, the mother moved
from Perth to live in
Victoria and they commenced living together in a domestic relationship in or
born in April 2015.
9 The parents separated in October 2015, and in December 2015 the parents
entered into a parenting plan providing for the child to
live primarily with the
10 In February 2016, the father commenced proceedings under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”).
11 On 6 September 2016, final orders were made by consent providing for the
parents to have equal shared parental responsibility,
the child to live with her
mother and spend time with the father each fourth weekend on Saturday and Sunday
and for the mother not
to be permitted to relocate further than 80
km from City B.
12 In January 2017, the parties recommenced living together under the one
roof in City B, although there was a dispute about whether
they reconciled,
prior to separating again in June 2017.
13 The mother then recommenced proceedings under
of the Act in
November 2017.
14 On 30 April 2018, interim parenting orders were made by a judge of the
Federal Circuit Court which provided for the child to live
with the mother and
spend time with her father.
15 In October 2018, over a four day period, a judge of the Federal Circuit
Court heard the substantive parenting case. On 28 February
2019, the judge made
orders (“the February 2019 orders”) and delivered reasons providing
for the child to live with the
mother, subject to her living in Victoria. The
orders also provided for the child to spend time with the father.
16 The mother successfully appealed the February 2019 orders and the
proceedings were remitted for re-hearing (
Naparus & Frankham
FamCAFC 32).
17 In 2020, the primary judge made a series of interim orders in an effort to
restore the child’s interaction with the father,
given she had not spent
any time with him under former interim orders since August 2019 (at [61]). The
fresh interim orders made
by the primary judge were frustrated by a combination
of the social restrictions imposed during the COVID-19 pandemic and the
decision to move back to Western Australia with the child.
Eventually, the primary judge issued a recovery order and ordered, on
basis, that the child must live with the father (at [67]). The recovery order
was executed and the child returned to Victoria
with the father in July 2020,
closely followed by the mother (at [71]–[72]). Only two days later, the
mother took the child
of trial (at [30] and [73]–[74]).
18 The mother filed multiple appeals from the interim orders made in June and
July 2020, but the appeals were dismissed in September
Frankham (No.2)
[2020] FamCAFC 238
Naparus & Frankham
”)). The dismissed appeals included an appeal from an interim
decision of the primary judge made on 21 July 2020, when he refused
disqualify himself, because the mother asserted bias. The mother’s
pursuit of the appeals from the interim parenting orders
was futile, given the
trial was listed to commence in October 2020. The proximity of the trial was
also why the father did nothing
to try and enforce the existing interim
19 The trial ensued before the primary judge in October 2020 and the appealed
orders were made on 26 November 2020.
20 On 9 December 2020, the primary judge stayed the appealed orders until
resolution of the appeal.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
21 In her Amended Notice of Appeal filed 9 February
2021, the mother sets out five stated grounds of appeal, although some grounds
of appeal are clearly submissions and rhetorical questions. The grounds of
appeal, adopting the mother’s terminology are, Err
at Law, Bias, Mistake
of Facts, Discretion/Weight and Plainly Wrong.
Ground 2 - Bias
22 We will firstly address the issue of bias and
then each of the subsequent grounds of appeal. This is because a finding of
apprehended or real bias must result in a retrial, irrespective of the
outcome of the findings on other issues. In
Concrete Pty Ltd v Paramatta
Design and Developments Pty Ltd
[2006] HCA 55
(2006) 229 CLR 577
, Kirby and Crennan JJ
said at [117]:
117. ... An intermediate appellate court dealing with
allegations of apprehended bias, coupled with other discrete grounds of appeal
must deal with the issue of bias first. It must do this because, logically, it
comes first. Actual or apprehended bias strike at
the validity and
acceptability of the trial and its outcome. It is for that reason that such
questions should be dealt with before
other, substantive, issues are decided. It
should put the party making such an allegation to an election on the basis that
allegation of apprehended bias is made out, a retrial will be ordered
irrespective of possible findings on other issues...
23 Neither this ground of appeal nor the written submissions made in support
of it betrayed any awareness of the distinction between
apprehended
bias. Given that claims of judicial bias should usually be
confined to only apprehended bias (
R v Watson; Ex parte Armstrong
[1976] HCA 39
136 CLR 248
at 258) and because the mother’s written submissions did not
expressly engage principles relating to actual bias (
Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
(2001) 205 CLR 507 at [72], [127] and
[176]), despite her indiscriminate implications of actual bias in oral
submissions, we will
proceed to determine this ground on the basis that it
contends for only an apprehension of the primary judge’s bias.
24 It is clear from the mother’s submissions that her contention of
bias (in whatever form it takes) springs from two sources:
first, from the
comments of the primary judge made during the hearing, and secondly, comments in
the reasons for judgment.
25 The relevant test to be applied to determine apprehended bias is set out
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
”) at [6], namely whether a “fair-minded lay
observer might reasonably apprehend that the judge might not bring an impartial
mind to the resolution of the question” to be decided.
26 At [8] of
in the context of an application to disqualify a
judge on the grounds of apprehended bias, an applicant must first identify the
conduct it is alleged might lead the judge to decide the case other than
on its legal and factual merits and secondly, articulate
the connection between
the identified conduct and the reasonably apprehended deviation from the duty of
impartiality.
Johnson v Johnson
[2000] HCA 48
(2000) 201 CLR 488
”), the plurality (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, McHugh,
Gummow and Hayne JJ) stated at [12]:
12. ... At the same time, two things need to be
remembered: the observer is taken to be reasonable; and the person being
is “a professional judge whose training, tradition and oath or
affirmation require [the judge] to discard the irrelevant, the
immaterial and
the prejudicial”.
(Citation omitted)
28 The mother complains that from the start of the mother’s
cross-examination, as is evidenced by the transcripts, the primary
demonstrated that he did not believe the mother’s evidence. She does not
refer to the particular paragraphs of the transcript,
but rather to her
cross-examination about when she enrolled the child in school and what she
describes as the primary judge’s
sarcastic remark and his lack of
impartiality which is to be found in his reasoning, which infected his final
orders. She fails to
identify how the reasoning was so tainted.
29 It is permissible for a trial judge to engage with counsel during a trial
and to comment about evidence. In
the plurality said at
13. ... Judges are not expected to wait until the end of
the case before they start thinking about the issues, or to sit mute while
evidence is advanced and arguments are presented. On the contrary, they will
often form tentative opinions on matters in issue,
and counsel are usually
assisted by hearing those opinions, and being given an opportunity to deal with
30 Similarly, it is appropriate for a judge to ask questions of a witness
during cross-examination, as occurred during the trial (
[2006] HCA 2
224 ALR 51).
31 A reading of the transcript of 27 October 2020 leads to the conclusion
that the primary judge certainly engaged in robust discussion
mother’s failure to comply with previous orders to return the child to
Victoria, his pleas to the mother to return
the child without the necessity for
a recovery order and his scepticism about the mother’s professed change of
attitude. The
proposition that the mother had failed to comply with previous
court orders and had failed to return the child to Victoria, so that
could not spend time with the father, was not controversial and is clearly
supported by the evidence. In the context of
the mother’s persistent
failure to comply with court orders and the necessity for a recovery order to be
issued, it is not
surprising that the primary judge expressed his scepticism and
frustration with the mother’s position that she would in the
future comply
with orders, which was a central issue of the proceeding. That is particularly
so, when the mother had previously
told a judge of this Court that she would
comply with orders, only to return to Western Australia a couple of days after
that statement
(at [73]–[74]).
32 Notably, after the exchanges between the primary judge and the mother,
there was no application by the mother’s counsel during
the course of the
trial for the primary judge to recuse himself on the basis of actual or
apprehended bias. The mother faces significant
difficulty raising this issue on
33 Dawson J in
Vakauta v Kelly
[1989] HCA 44
(1989) 167 CLR 568
, at 579 said:
In my view, where a party in civil litigation, being
aware of the circumstances giving rise to a right to object, allows the case
continue for a sufficient time to show that he does not presently intend to
exercise that right, he may be held to have waived
34 The mother was clearly aware of her rights to make an application for the
primary judge to recuse himself on the basis of actual
or apprehended bias, as
she had done precisely that in the former appeal (
Naparus & Frankham
We are of the view that she has waived her right to
objection in this regard.
35 The mother’s complaints about bias in the reasons of the primary
judge are not clearly articulated, but appear to be her
dissatisfaction with
unfavourable findings at [75], [120], [127], [157], [170] and [172] about her
credibility, behaviour, attitude
towards parenting, her capacity to facilitate a
face-to-face relationship between the father and the child and the
impracticality
of the father moving to Perth.
36 The mother’s complaints pertain to the conclusions and impressions
of the primary judge, after he observed the mother giving
evidence and being
subjected to cross-examination. Whilst the language is no doubt highly
unpalatable to the mother, the primary
judge is entitled to assess the
credibility of each witness in reaching his determination. Subsequent to his
description of the mother’s
attitude, the primary judge (at [127]) refers
to the facts which informed his description of her attitude, namely that she had
the child from Victoria to Western Australia on two occasions, contrary
to court orders, and on the second occasion after promising
a superior court
judge that she would not do so, and thereafter attempted to unconvincingly
rationalise her actions.
37 The doubts expressed by the primary judge that there would be a consistent
face-to-face relationship between the child and the
father, if the child lived
in Perth with the mother, were in the context of the primary judge evaluating
the competing options for
the future living arrangements of the child, as were
the comments (at [172]) about the unlikely prospect of the father moving to
Perth and the mother’s accommodation in Victoria. It is a task required
of a trial judge to identify, contrast and compare
the differing proposals or
options, prior to reaching a determination about the living arrangements, which
are in the best interest
of the child.
38 The mother has failed to identify or articulate the logical connection
between the matters identified by her and the deviation
from deciding the case
on its merits. It is not sufficient that she dislikes or disagrees with the
findings and statements of the
primary judge. None of her complaints, either
individually or collectively, satisfy the relevant test, as stated in
. The statements identified by her in the reasons for judgment could
not be considered as giving rise to actual or apprehended bias
on the part of
the primary judge.
39 This ground of appeal must fail.
40 We will now consider the remaining grounds of appeal.
Ground 1 - Err at Law
41 In her Amended Notice of Appeal the mother
contended three discrete legal errors:
(a) making an order for equal shared
parental responsibility for the child without following the “prescribed
considerations”;
(b) failing to adequately consider the practicalities of the parties’
proposals; and
(c) the orders for the child to spend time with the father are unsafe because of
the amount of travel required.
42 In relation to the order for equal shared parental responsibility, the
mother submitted that such an order was contrary to the
findings of the primary
judge about the nature of the relationship between the parents (at [150]),
family violence (at [159]), the
lack of improvement in the cooperation, trust
and communication between the parents (at [160]), the legal pathway, the
own proposals and the recommendations of the family
consultant.
43 As to the legal pathway submission, it appears that the mother contends
that the primary judge’s relevant findings when applied
of the Act ought to have been sufficient grounds to rebut the
presumption of equal shared parental responsibility.
44 The primary judge (at [115]–[120]) embarked on an analysis of the
allegations of family violence made by both parents against
the other. At [118],
the primary judge accepted that there was a fairly high degree of tension,
conflict and argument in the parents’
short relationship, but it was
effectively situational upon the relationship and its ending.
45 Here, the primary judge found past family violence established, though not
in as serious a form as the mother alleged (at [83],
[115]–[117] and
[159]). Nonetheless, the finding rendered the presumption of equal shared
parental responsibility inapplicable
had no work to do. The primary judge could still make an order for equal shared
parental responsibility, as he did, but first had
to find such an order would be
in the child’s best interests, as he did (at [175]).
46 As can be seen from the reasons (at [175]), the primary judge considered
the opinions of the family consultant and the ICL, that
the parent with whom the
child lives should exercise sole parental responsibility. His Honour disagreed
with that position and clearly
stated the reasons why he considered an order for
equal shared parental responsibility would be in the child’s best
Those reasons included that both parents were intelligent and child
focused, albeit with a propensity for disagreement and that
children can benefit
from a breadth of viewpoint. His Honour further identified that the challenge
for the parents was to contribute,
negotiate and compromise and that an order
for sole parental responsibility vested in one parent would be far more likely
to further conflict and probable litigation. The primary judge clearly
explained why he did not accept the recommendations of the
family consultant and
the ICL pertaining to equal shared parental responsibility. In any event, a
trial judge is not bound by the
proposals of the parties or by the evidence of a
[2002] HCA 36
(2002) 211 CLR 238
47 The mother complains that the primary judge failed to adequately analyse
and compare the competing proposals of the parties.
48 As can be seen from an examination of the reasons, the primary judge
embarked on a detailed comparison and analysis of the competing
including the advantages and disadvantage of each proposal, particularly from
the child’s perspective.
49 The primary judge (at [163]) analysed the positive aspects of the
mother’s proposal to relocate the child to Western Australia.
He also (at
[164]) analysed the negative aspects of the mother’s proposal, which he
considered were positives of the father’s
proposal that the child not
relocate to Perth. He continued to analyse (at [165]) the further option for
the child to remain living
with the mother in Victoria and (at [171]) raised the
further option of the father relocating to Perth, although that was not explored
during the trial.
50 After embarking on that analysis (at [174]), the primary judge clearly
reached his conclusion on a finely balanced consideration
of all of the relevant
factors. It may have been that another judge might have reached a different
conclusion on the same evidence,
but without more, that does not permit
appellate intervention.
51 As to the mother’s complaint about travel, in the grounds of appeal,
the mother refers to
, which presumably is a reference to
(2010) 240 CLR 461
”). She does
not explain the relevance of this authority other than in her Summary of
Argument, stating that time spent needs
to be practical and referring to the
five hour travel distance between the father’s home and City B, where her
Victorian accommodation
is located.
52 The primary judge (at [109]) refers to
consideration of the dual requirements of
, that parenting orders
be both in the child’s best interests and reasonably practicable. The
orders made by the primary judge
for the child to live with the mother in
Victoria, should she choose to return, reflected the geographical distance
between the parties,
which had been in place for a number of years prior to the
mother’s departure for Western Australia in April 2020.
53 The primary judge was cognisant of that distance between the respective
parents and Order 2 of the orders, restrains the mother
from living further from
the father’s home, than the distance between the father’s current
in the event she chose to return to Victoria.
Although the orders require extended travel between the parties’
respective homes,
that has always been the situation for this family. In our
view, the geographical distance between the parties’ homes in Victoria
not oblige the primary judge to find that orders requiring the child to spend
time with the father on weekends and in school
holidays would not be reasonably
practicable to implement.
54 This ground of appeal must fail.
Ground 3 - Mistake of Facts
55 The mistaken facts identified by the mother in
the reasons for judgment related to the comments of the primary judge (at [5])
the father had not previously sought for the child to live primarily with
him and the circumstances of her departure from Victoria
56 At [5] of the reasons, the primary judge said:
5. Historically, and as will become apparent from the
background and chronology to be included in these reasons, the father has not
sought primary care of [the child]. He has been candid in articulating a
preference that his time for [the child] occur on weekends
holidays’ thereby delegating primary care to the mother. His position has
changed after the mother’s unilateral
removal of [the child] from Victoria
to Perth on two separate occasions in April and July 2020. At the commencement
of the trial
the father agreed and adopted the position then taken by the
Independent Children's Lawyer ...
57 The mother seized on the phrase “the father has not sought primary
care of [the child]” in isolation from the remainder
of the reasons,
asserting the observation was wrong because one of the father’s proposals
at trial was for the child to live
primarily with him. She furthermore submitted
the father had wanted the child’s primary residence “from the
of the proceedings in 2016”.
58 That is plainly incorrect. Final orders were made in September 2016, with
the father’s consent, providing for the child to
live with the mother. The
mother commenced fresh proceedings in November 2017, to which the father
responded in January 2018. He
did not then seek orders for the child to live
with him. In August 2018, the father told the Family Consultant he wanted the
to remain living with the mother (Family Report dated 6 September 2018,
paragraph 17). It was not until May 2020 that the father
changed his mind about
the child’s primary residence, because the mother’s recent conduct
led to his loss of confidence
that she could be trusted to support the
child’s relationship with him, which reasoning he discussed with the
Family Consultant
(Family Report dated 25 May 2020, paragraph 10).
59 The phrase used by the primary judge at [5] is ambiguous when read in
isolation. The mother read it to mean the father has not
primary care of the child, but, when read with the remainder of the reasons, it
was clearly meant to convey how the father
had not sought primary care of the
in the past
. The reasons went on to explain the conditional
circumstances in which the father did seek the child’s primary care by the
time of trial, having previously indicated his preference for the child to
continue living with the mother if he could be confident
the mother would
support the child’s relationship with him (at [5], [7]–[8], [17],
[83] and [108]). There was no mistake.
60 As to the mother’s complaint that the primary judge was mistaken
from Victoria, she
failed to identify in either the reasons for judgment or the transcript, how the
primary judge was mistaken about
the facts of her departure from Victoria.
Neither does she identify how that purported mistake has infected the reasoning
primary judge.
61 The transcript of the cross-examination of the mother and exchanges
between the primary judge and the mother which occurred on
the second day of the
trial, establishes that the mother does not resile from the fact that she
removed the child from Victoria to
Western Australia contrary to court
62 This ground must fail.
Ground 4 - Discretionary error
63 The mother’s complaint under this ground is
the failure of the primary judge to accord significant weight to her mental
the assessment of the consultant psychiatrist, Dr Q (at [93]) of the
mother’s mental health issues, and the consequential impact
on her mental
health, if the mother were to return to live in City B.
64 The mother seeks to challenge a discretionary judgment with all the
difficulties that entails.
65 The applicable principles for appeals from discretionary decisions are
stated by the majority of the High Court in
House v The King
at 504–505, namely:
The manner in which an appeal against an exercise of
discretion should be determined is governed by established principles. It is
enough that the judges composing the appellate court consider that, if they had
been in the position of the primary judge, they
would have taken a different
course. It must appear that some error has been made in exercising the
discretion. If the judge acts
upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or
irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does
not take into account some material consideration, then his determination should
be reviewed and the appellate court may exercise
its own discretion in
substitution, for his if it has the materials for doing so. It may not appear
how the primary judge has reached
the result embodied in his order, but, if,
upon the facts it is unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may
in some way there has been a failure properly to exercise the
discretion which the law reposes in the court of first instance. In
such a case,
although the nature of the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the
discretion is reviewed on the ground that
a substantial wrong has in fact
66 In relation to appeals which allege that a primary judge exercising
discretion failed to give appropriate weight to particular
matters, in
[1979] HCA 63
(1979) 144 CLR 513
at 519–520, Stephen J said:
The constant emphasis of the cases is that before
reversal an appellate court must be well satisfied that the primary judge was
wrong, his decision being no proper exercise of his judicial discretion.
While authority teaches that error in the proper weight
to be given to
particular matters may justify reversal on appeal, it is also well established
that it is never enough that an appellate
court, left to itself, would have
arrived at a different conclusion. When no error of law or mistake of fact is
present, to arrive
at a different conclusion which does not of itself justify
reversal can be due to little else but a difference of view as to weight:
follows that disagreement only on matters of weight by no means necessarily
justifies a reversal of the trial judge. Because of
this and because the
assessment of weight is particularly liable to be affected by seeing and hearing
the parties, which only the
trial judge can do, an appellate court should be
slow to overturn a primary judge's discretionary decision on grounds which only
involve conflicting assessments of matters of weight.
67 At [93] of the reasons, the primary judge sets out the mother’s
history, as related to Dr Q, which he said is consistent
with her affidavit
material. At [94]–[97] of the reasons, the primary judge recites in detail
paragraphs of Dr Q’s assessment
pertaining to the mother’s diagnosis
and prognosis, which is that her mental health was reasonably stable but there
risk of relapse of anxiety and dysthymia” if she was stressed
by the litigation and contact with the paternal family. It is
evident from
those paragraphs of the reasons that the primary judge familiarised himself with
Dr Q’s assessment and relied
on the psychiatric assessment in reaching his
ultimate conclusion.
68 In his conclusions (at [157]), the primary judge acknowledges that the
mother’s happiness and mental health would be enhanced
if she resided in
Perth. However, the primary judge also found that the mother “is a tough
and resilient personality and that
in all likelihood she would cope with being
in Victoria.”
69 At [161], the primary judge recognises that both parents have suffered
historical diagnoses of mental health issues but both receive
treatment and
medication, which will attend to these concerns.
70 In his conclusion at [174], the primary judge again takes into account the
mother’s mental health and said:
174. Consequently, and on a finely balanced
consideration of all of the relevant factors against a background of [the
best interests, I am persuaded that those interests are best
attended by [the child] living primarily with the mother but to do so
Victoria. The father’s time with [the child] will by geographical
necessity be limited to weekends and school holidays
where the parents should
share equally in the costs and efforts of travel. I stress that this
determination is made on balance and
taking into account all the factors
including the mother’s historical mental health
71 It is evident from the reasons that the primary judge has given weight to
the issue of the mother’s mental health. Having
expressly taken into
account and given weight to considerations about the state of the mother’s
mental health, how the weight
attributed to them by the primary judge was
insufficient was not explained by the mother. In any event, the degree of
quintessentially a matter for the primary judge.
72 The mother further complains that the primary judge failed to accord
proper weight to the practical circumstances facing the mother
if she returned
to City B and the consequential harm which would be visited on the child by
living homeless. It is apparent from
the reasons for judgment, and in
particular at [172], that the primary judge acknowledged that the accommodation
available to the
mother was far from ideal and was in a less than reputable area
and thus considered the mother’s submissions in that regard.
73 In the discussion of findings and conclusion, in the reasons for judgment,
the primary judge is cognisant of and describes (at
[165]) the possible
consequences of requiring the mother to remain in Victoria and the subsequent
impact on her demeanour, happiness
and possibly her mental health. He considers
that her personality suggests that requiring her to remain in Victoria, albeit
carer for the child, will accentuate her anger and bitterness towards
the father and this Court. The detailed reference to the psychiatric
of the mother conducted by Dr Q, and the consideration of the impact on her of
requiring her to remain in Victoria and
the possible separation of the child
from her mother, her primary carer, were clearly significant factors which
weighed on the mind
of the primary judge in reaching his determination.
74 This ground must fail.
Ground 5 - Plainly wrong
75 In her Summary of Argument the mother refers to
, which presumably is a reference to
CLR 172, although she does not explain the relevance of that authority.
76 Both the mother’s grounds of appeal and her Summary of Argument
pertaining to this ground are a litany of complaints about
the recovery order
made by the primary judge in interim proceedings in July 2020. She asserts the
recovery order was made for the
purpose of compelling her return to Victoria
with the child in the middle of the COVID-19 pandemic, in circumstances where
she asserts
that she faced potential homelessness. It should be remembered that
the orders made in July 2020 were not the subject of this appeal.
77 She also raises a number of rhetorical questions about the disposition of
her appeals against earlier orders made by judges in
the Federal Circuit Court
and asserts that the primary judge made it clear in the transcript of the
proceedings subject to appeal,
that everything that happened was the
mother’s fault.
78 Her final submission is that the final orders of the primary judge are a
reflection of what he had prejudged to be in the child’s
best interests
and are not only plainly wrong but are unjust, biased and contrary to law [sic]
principles.
79 This asserted ground of appeal does not constitute a valid ground of
appeal, but rather is a statement of the mother’s view
that the orders of
the primary judge do not accord with her point of view. The mother has failed
to identify any error or argument
which supports the assertion that the primary
judge was plainly wrong.
80 This ground of appeal must fail.
81 Having found no merit in any of the grounds of
appeal, the Amended Notice of Appeal filed 9 February 2021 will be
82 The remaining issue for determination is whether
or not there should be an order for costs.
83 Neither the mother nor the ICL sought orders for their costs of the
84 The father sought that the mother pay his costs of the appeal, on a
party/party basis, which are calculated at $3,820.00, according
to the Schedule
of Costs filed by his solicitor. The mother opposed any order for costs.
85 Counsel for the father submitted an order for costs against the mother was
warranted, if the appeal were dismissed, notwithstanding
that both the mother
and the father were unemployed and were of modest financial means, primarily for
three reasons. First, because
of the manner in which the mother had conducted
the appeal, secondly, because the mother would be wholly unsuccessful, and
because during the trial the mother had offered to pay for the father
to fly to Perth to spend time with the child, which was inconsistent
asserted financial situation.
86 Counsel for the father appropriately conceded firstly, that the father did
not file a Schedule of Costs until 21 June 2021, in
breach of procedural orders
made by the Appeal Registrar on 22 March 2021, providing for the filing of
a Schedule of Costs seven
days prior to the first day of the sittings in which
the appeal was listed for hearing, and secondly, his breach militated against
costs order as sought.
87 The mother submitted that an order for costs as sought by the father would
impose an onerous financial burden on her and that her
previous offer to pay for
a flight was substantially less than the amount of costs sought. The proposal
to pay for a flight was
made in the context of her anticipation of obtaining
housing and employment in Perth. The ICL did not seek to make any submissions
Section 117(1)
of the Act, states, subject to the provisions of
, the general rule in proceedings in this Court, is that each party
to proceedings, shall each bear his or her own costs. We are not
persuaded, as
between two impecunious litigants, and notwithstanding the lack of merit in the
mother’s appeal, that the usual
rule established by
, that each party
should bear their own costs, is displaced. The father’s application for
costs is dismissed.
I certify that the preceding eighty-eight (88)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Austin, Tree &
Dated: 17 August 2021
RTF format (483 KB)
Signed PDF/A format