Kalari v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FCA 1388 (12 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Kalari v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FCA 1388
Appeal from:
Kalari v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
FedCFamC2G 1085
File number:
QUD 690 of 2024
Judgment of:
SARAH C DERRINGTON J
Date of judgment:
Date of publication of reasons:
Catchwords:
– appeal from Federal
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) dismissal of an application
for judicial review of
a decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal –
where Tribunal affirmed decision of a delegate of the Minister not to grant
appellant a Student (Temporary) (Class TU) (Subclass 500) visa – where
appellant seeks to challenge findings regarding
study history and satisfaction
of the genuine temporary entrant criterion in cl 500.212 of Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) – where appellant did not appear
at hearing of appeal – where hearing proceeded in the absence of appellant
where grounds of appeal invite an impermissible merits review and lack
merit – appeal dismissed
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) ss 359, 359AA,
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) Sch 2, cl 500.212
Cases cited:
Chopra v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship
and Multicultural Affairs
[2023] FCA 843
DBWG v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCAFC 3
301 FCR 344
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant
Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2019] FCAFC 217
272 FCR 528
Kalari v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
FedCFamC2G 1085
Liang v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
185 CLR 259
VUAX v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2004] FCAFC 158
238 FCR 588
General Division
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Appellant:
The Appellant did not appear
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Mr J Kyranis of Sparke Helmore Lawyers
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
The Second Respondent filed a submitting notice, save as to costs
QUD 690 of 2024
GOPINATH KALARI
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Second Respondent
SARAH C DERRINGTON J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
name of the first respondent be amended to “Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship”.
name of the second respondent be amended to “Administrative Review
appeal be dismissed.
appellant pay the first respondent’s costs of the appeal, to be taxed if
not agreed.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR
, revised from
transcript)
SARAH C DERRINGTON J:
INTRODUCTION
a Notice of Appeal filed on 6 November 2024, the appellant,
appeals against the judgment and orders of the Federal Circuit and Family Court
of Australia (Division 2) (
) delivered on 25 October 2024:
Kalari v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
FedCFamC2G 1085
). The primary judge dismissed an amended application
for judicial review of a decision of the then Administrative Appeals
which had affirmed a decision of a delegate of the
for Home Affairs (as the Minister then was) not to grant Mr
Kalari a Student (Temporary) (Class TU) (Subclass 500) visa (
morning, when the matter was called on for hearing, Mr Kalari did not appear.
Nor has Mr Kalari filed any submissions in this
appeal, despite being followed
up by the Court’s Registry on two occasions in the last week by both
telephone and email. Upon
Mr Kalari's non-appearance, the Registry made further
telephone contact with Mr Kalari to discover his whereabouts. Mr Kalari
over the phone that he was not in a physical state to attend the Court
but declined the opportunity to participate in this hearing
by phone or video
circumstances where Mr Kalari did not, of his own volition, contact the Court to
advise of his alleged incapacity, and in circumstances
where there is no
evidence at all to support his claim to be unable to attend the Court, I
proceeded to hear the appeal.
Kalari is a citizen of India who arrived in Australia in July 2018 as the holder
of a student visa for the purpose of studying
a Master of Business
Administration (International) (
). His course of study commenced on 16
July 2018 and was due for completion on 30 June 2020. However, Mr Kalari did not
complete the
course and ceased studying in April 2019.
Subsequently,
on or around 30 July 2019, Mr Kalari enrolled in a Certificate III course in
carpentry, which he did not complete, and
a Diploma of building and
construction, which he did not commence (together, the
construction
). His enrolment in the construction courses was cancelled in
February 2020.
July 2020, Mr Kalari enrolled in a Certificate III course in “light
vehicle mechanical technology”, which commenced
on 1 December 2020 and was
due for completion on 29 May 2022, and a Certificate IV course in
“automotive mechanical diagnosis”,
which had a commencement date of
4 July 2022 and was due for completion on 1 January 2023 (together, the
automotive courses
27 August 2020, Mr Kalari applied for the student visa the subject of these
proceedings based on his enrolment in the automotive
courses. Mr Kalari stated
that he had chosen those courses of study as a product of his childhood
passions. He did not however complete
the Certificate III course, which
enrolment was cancelled in December 2021, and never commenced the Certificate IV
15 December 2021, the delegate refused to grant Mr Kalari the student visa on
the basis that the requirements of cl 500.212 of
Schedule 2 to the
Regulations 1994
Regulations
) were not met, as the
delegate was not satisfied that he intended genuinely to stay in Australia
temporarily. Mr Kalari applied to
the Tribunal for review of the
delegate’s decision on 22 December 2021.
Tribunal wrote to Mr Kalari, pursuant to s 359(2) of the
(Cth), on 24 October 2022 inviting him to provide
information as to whether he was enrolled in a registered course of study and in
support of his claim to be a genuine applicant for entry and stay as a student.
He responded to that invitation on 22 November 2022
by providing a completed
“Request for Student Visa Information” form and supporting documents
to the Tribunal which,
relevantly, identified that he was at that time
undertaking a Certificate III course in commercial cookery, which he had
on 4 July 2022 and was due to complete on 2 July 2023. That course was
to be followed by a Certificate IV course in commercial cookery,
due to commence
on 3 July 2023 and to be completed on 11 February 2024 (together, the
), which in turn was to be followed by a Diploma of hospitality
management, due to commence on 19 February 2024 and to be completed
on 18 August
Kalari was invited to attend a hearing before the Tribunal on 17 January 2023
and was asked to provide further information prior
to that hearing as to his
enrolment in a registered course of study. In response, on 1 January 2023, Mr
Kalari provided supporting
documentation and a written statement to the Tribunal
which, amongst other things, stated that it was his “dream” to
“an expert in hospitality & culinary spectrum of business”.
16 January 2023, the day before the hearing, the Tribunal provided Mr Kalari
with a copy of his Provider Registration and International
Student Management
) Report and Movement Record. During the hearing, the
Tribunal put those documents to Mr Kalari in accordance with the procedure in
359AA of the
Migration Act
and invited him to comment on the information
orally and in writing. The Tribunal permitted Mr Kalari until 31 January 2023 to
any further information, including further evidence of study. On that
date, Mr Kalari provided further information to the Tribunal,
including a
statutory declaration and submissions from his migration agent.
21 February 2023, the Tribunal affirmed the delegate’s decision and
published written
. Mr Kalari applied to the FCFCOA for judicial
review of the Tribunal’s decision pursuant to
THE PRIMARY JUDGMENT
the primary judge, Mr Kalari relied upon an amended judicial review application
filed on 25 July 2024. The seven grounds advanced
by that application are set
out at PJ[27] and were as follows:
"The Tribunal failed in understanding that the applicant tried to attain the
master's degree and his intentions were pure, but it
was extremely difficult for
him to cope up." The Tribunal failed in understanding that the applicant
intended to complete his master's
degree, but the difficult level was genuinely
quite high due to which it was becoming tough for him to manage the study load
with other responsibilities. Eventually, he had to give up and downgrade
his studies in order to be physically and mentally healthy.
"The Tribunal failed in understanding that the applicant was completing the
units of Certificate III and IV in Commercial Cookery
that the institute had as
per their course profile, and it wasn't his mistake if wrong information was
provided on their website."
The applicant enrolled in Certificate III and IV in
Commercial Cookery at Gamma Education & Training. He was completing the
that the institute had proposed for the students to complete those and
attain the certificate of completion. The applicant was provided
the information
as per what he had studied but it was contradictory to the website information.
It seems that it was the institute'
s fault that they had been providing wrong
information on their website. In this case, the Tribunal failed in considering
applicant was misleading the Tribunal.
Ground Three
"The Tribunal failed in understanding why the applicant was unable to study
leading to a study gap between July 2021 and June 2022."
During that time, the
applicant and his family were extremely suffering physically and financially due
to Covid-19 Pandemic. His
father's business was suffering from losses, and he
also did not have a job for quite some time due to which, he did not have fees
for the course leading to a study gap of 12 months. He was holding a Bridging
Visa A which gave the applicant work rights but due
to lack of funds, he
couldn't enrol in any course at that time and struggled immensely.
Ground Four
"The Tribunal failed in understanding that the applicant has a business mind,
and he wants to set up his business in different field
due to which I tried to
study different courses but eventually, his planned failed." The Tribunal should
have tried to understand
that not all people want to excel in one field,
numerous people have other plans in life and want to explore and set up
in different field. Although it is against the normal way of living a
life, but it shouldn't be considered as if he was just maintaining
residency in
Australia or misleading the authorities.
Ground Five
As a student with limited knowledge and understanding of the legal process, I
respectfully seek judicial review on the grounds that
any mistakes I may have
made in my application were unintentional and exacerbated by the unprecedented
challenges posed by the COVID-19
pandemic. The tribunal's refusal to consider
the impact of these extraordinary circumstances on my situation is both unfair
and unjust,
particularly given the significant disruptions and uncertainties
that affected many students during this period. I believe this warrants
reassessment of my case to ensure a fair and just outcome.
As a student committed to completing my education, I respectfully seek judicial
review on the grounds that I fell victim to incorrect
advice from both my
college and education agent in selecting my course of study. Additionally, my
parents' financial situation during
the COVID-19 crisis significantly affected
my academic progress in Australia. The tribunal did not consider these crucial
in its decision. Therefore, I request the Honorable Judge to remit the
Tribunal's decision back for a fresh review, ensuring that
these critical
aspects are duly considered to achieve a fair outcome.
Ground Seven
I stand here before the Honorable Registrar to respectfully request the
acceptance of my amended application and grounds for appeal.
I seek a thorough
review of my case by the Honorable Judge, with the hope of receiving just and
fair consideration. I am committed
to completing my education and believe that
the circumstances affecting my academic progress, including erroneous advice and
hardships during the COVID-19 crisis, warrant a fresh review. I trust
in the righteous justice of the court to ensure a fair outcome.
primary judge ultimately was satisfied that the Tribunal had regard to all the
factors required by the relevant Ministerial Direction
and had rationally
explained why it was not satisfied that Mr Kalari met the genuine temporary
entrant criterion (PJ[51]). Her Honour
found that Mr Kalari had failed to
establish jurisdictional error under any of the grounds and accordingly
dismissed the judicial
review application.
this Court, Mr Kalari advances five grounds of appeal, which are in similar
terms to several of the grounds of judicial review
raised before the primary
note at this point that the Minister resiled from relying upon a Notice of
Contention filed on 4 December 2024, which course was
communicated to Mr Kalari
by an email dated 24 January 2025. That notice had sought to raise an argument
that the Court should refuse
to grant relief in the exercise of its discretion
because Mr Kalari had brought the proceeding for an ulterior purpose, namely to
extend his residence in Australia – an argument which the primary judge
was not prepared to accept below (PJ[52]-[53]).
Grounds 1-3: study history
of the first three grounds advanced by the Notice of Appeal challenge the
Tribunal’s assessment of certain aspects of Mr
Kalari’s study
history, particularly as to the evidence of the reasons for his enrolment in,
and withdrawal from, courses of
1 of the Notice of Appeal concerns the MBA course and is expressed in the
following terms:
The Tribunal overlooked the Appellant's genuine efforts and intentions to
complete his master's degree, failing to consider the high
difficulty level that
made it challenging for him to manage the academic load alongside other
responsibilities. Ultimately, he discontinued
the course to protect his physical
and mental well-being.
ground is almost identical to the first ground considered below which, as I have
already noted, was dismissed by the primary
judge because her Honour was
satisfied that the Tribunal had clearly taken into consideration Mr
Kalari’s evidence as to why
he had discontinued studying the MBA
any event, that Mr Kalari discontinued the MBA course to protect his physical
and mental wellbeing was not a matter in evidence
before the Tribunal. Mr
Kalari’s evidence to the Tribunal was that he enrolled in the MBA at the
behest of his parents, but
he did not enjoy the study and could not cope with
the demands of the course, and so changed the direction of his studies as he
to try working in a more technical field. The Tribunal expressly
considered that evidence, accepted the explanation for not completing
and did not make any adverse findings against Mr Kalari because of his
withdrawal from the course (Reasons at [14(j)], [22(c)],
the primary judge identified (PJ[37]), this ground is merely an expression of Mr
Kalari’s disagreement with the Tribunal’s
conclusion and does no
more than invite an impermissible merits review:
Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs v
Wu Shan Liang
[1996] HCA 6
185 CLR 259
Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh and Gummow JJ. The primary judge was correct, with
respect, to find that there was no error
by the Tribunal in its assessment of Mr
Kalari’s study of and withdrawal from the MBA course on the evidence which
it. Ground 1 must fail.
2 of the Notice of Appeal concerns the construction courses and is expressed in
the following terms:
The Administrative Appeals Tribunal committed a jurisdictional error by failing
to properly assess the Applicant's lack of genuine
interest and commitment to
the Certificate III in Carpentry and Diploma of Building and Construction. The
Appalant [sic] initially
enrolled in these courses based on his migration
agent's advice, which emphasized potential career and business benefits rather
his personal aspirations. The Tribunal overlooked the impact of this lack
of intrinsic motivation on his decision to discontinue
the programs,
misinterpreting his intentions and thus failing to consider a critical aspect of
the Appellant's circumstances.
ground mirrors in some respects the complaint agitated by the first limb of the
sixth ground below, namely Mr Kalari’s
claim to have received incorrect
advice from his education agent in selecting a course of study. As I have
already said, that claim
was quite rightly rejected by the primary judge as one
which was not in the material before the Tribunal.
any event, that Mr Kalari discontinued the construction courses because he
lacked genuine interest in, and commitment to, those
courses and had only
enrolled in them based on his migration agent’s advice was not a matter in
evidence before the Tribunal.
As the primary judge identified (PJ[45]-[47]), Mr
Kalari did not claim before the Tribunal, nor provide any evidence to show, that
he had enrolled in courses of study following advice from his migration agent.
Rather, his evidence to the Tribunal was that he chose
the construction courses
himself, because he is a “technical type of person” (Reasons at
[22(c)]), and on the advice
of and pressure from his family (Reasons at [4]). He
said that he withdrew from the courses as they did not suit him (Reasons at
[14(k)-(l)], [17]). The Tribunal expressly considered that explanation for
changing the direction of his studies to automotives,
acknowledged that
“people can have a change of career path” (Reasons at [22(m)]), and
did not make any adverse findings
against Mr Kalari because of his withdrawal
from the courses.
the primary judge identified, this ground is merely another expression of Mr
Kalari’s disagreement with the Tribunal’s
conclusion that the study
history showed that he was using his student visa to maintain an ongoing
residence in Australia, and an
attempt to seek impermissible merits review. No
error by the Tribunal in its assessment of Mr Kalari’s study of and
from the construction courses on the evidence which was before it is
revealed. The primary judge was correct to so find. Ground 2
3 of the Notice of Appeal concerns the automotive courses and is expressed in
the following terms:
The Administrative Appeals Tribunal committed a jurisdictional error by failing
to adequately assess the genuine reasons behind the
Appellant's discontinuation
of his automotive courses. The Appellant, who initially trusted his migration
agent's guidance, later
faced significant physical and financial hardships
during the COVID-19 pandemic, including his father's business losses and
unemployment in Australia. These challenges led to an unavoidable
12-month study gap due to an inability to afford tuition. The Tribunal
dismissing these mitigating factors and incorrectly concluding that the
Appellant's actions were intended to mislead authorities,
thereby overlooking
the genuine circumstances that led to the study interruption.
ground mirrors both the third ground below and the complaint agitated by the
second limb of the sixth ground below, namely Mr
Kalari’s claims that he
faced an inability to afford tuition and that his parents’ financial
situation during the COVID-19
pandemic had affected the progress of his studies.
As I have already said, those grounds were rejected by the primary judge.
any event, there is no record that Mr Kalari gave evidence to the Tribunal that
he withdrew from the automotive courses for any
of the reasons canvassed in
Ground 3. Instead, the effect of his evidence was that, after his enrolment in
the construction courses
was cancelled in February 2020 (Reasons at
The [appellant] then moved to the suite of Vehicle Mechanic courses and sought
to progress there
but, once again, this did not suit him
enrolments in the Certificate III and Certificate IV in the Vehicle Mechanic
studies show as cancelled on his PRISMS records.
(Emphasis added.)
Tribunal plainly had regard to the evidence before it concerning the reasons
behind Mr Kalari discontinuing his study of the automotive
courses. It made no
finding that his actions “were intended to mislead authorities”.
Once again, this ground raises no
more than another disagreement with the
Tribunal’s ultimate conclusion concerning Mr Kalari’s study
primary judge was correct to reject these grounds of review below. Ground 3 is
not made out.
Ground 4: genuine temporary entrant criterion
4 of the Notice of Appeal is expressed in the following terms:
CHOPRA v MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & ANOR
, the Federal Court
identified a jurisdictional error where the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(AAT) failed to properly assess the
appellant's genuine intent to pursue his
studies despite academic difficulties and stress. Mr. Chopra, who had initially
in a Bachelor of Accounting, subsequently downgraded to diploma-level
studies due to his challenges in coping academically. The Court
acknowledged
these mitigating factors as legitimate, recognizing his intention to progress
and allowing him to continue his studies.
Similarly, Mr. Gopinath transitioned
from a master's program to diploma-level courses due to considerable stress and
other compounding
factors affecting his academic performance. The Tribunal,
however, neglected to fully consider Mr. Gopinath's genuine efforts and
circumstances, instead misinterpreting his educational history as an attempt to
prolong residency. Drawing from Chopra, Mr. Gopinath
respectfully seeks a fair
reassessment that acknowledges his commitment to complete his studies if
afforded the same consideration.
that Mr Kalari was not present in Court and was not represented, the Court was
aided by the Minister’s identification
in written submissions that Mr
Kalari must be taken to be relying upon the Court’s decision in
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and
Multicultural Affairs
[2023] FCA 843.
The determinative issue before the
Tribunal in
was the same as the present matter, namely whether the
visa applicant satisfied the genuine temporary entrant criterion for the
of cl 500.212 of the Regulations.
should be noted at this juncture that Mr Kalari did not rely on this decision as
a ground of review in his application for judicial
review before the primary
judge. As such, he would require leave to raise that ground for the first time
on this appeal. The Minister
did not contend that he would suffer any prejudice
if Mr Kalari were to be permitted to rely on the ground but submitted that in
any event the ground is without merit. Those are two key considerations in
determining whether leave ought to be granted, as stated
by the Full Court in
VUAX v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCAFC 158
238 FCR 588
, and applied more recently in
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2024] FCAFC 3
301 FCR 344
. I consider these two
matters, even though Mr Kalari has not appeared on this appeal, out of an
abundance of concern that he be afforded
procedural fairness.
, Logan J explained (at [24]-[27]):
Tribunal was required in conducting the review to reach a state of
administrative satisfaction in relation to whether Mr Chopra
was a genuine
student in terms of cl 500.212 of the Regulations.
Satisfaction-based decisions are not immune from scrutiny on judicial
— see, notably, a discussion on this subject by Gummow J in
Minister for Immigration & Multicultural Affairs v Eshetu
[1999] HCA 21
One basis upon which a satisfaction-based administrative decision
might be impeached on judicial review is where the reasoning process
that led to
an absence of the requisite satisfaction was infected by a wrong finding of
I mention these cases because,
in principle, had the Tribunal made a wrong
finding of fact
in relation to reasons for Mr Chopra’s progression or
absence of progression and attainments or absence of attainments in his
it is just possible that
there may be an arguable case that this had infected
the absence of satisfaction
by the Tribunal as to his being a genuine
(Emphasis added.)
the outset, it ought to be clarified that Logan J did not “identify a
as Mr Kalari seems to suggest by
the terms of Ground 4. Indeed, as is clear from [27] of the reasons as extracted
above, his Honour
merely outlined the
possibility
in principle
a finding of jurisdictional error,
(i.e. if) the Tribunal made a
wrong finding of fact in relation to Mr Chopra’s study history. However,
his Honour immediately
went on to say in the next paragraph that, on the facts
of that case:
difficulty for Mr Chopra, as was demonstrated in the submissions for the
Minister, is that, on analysis, the statements made
by the Tribunal, at [25] and
[26], have foundations in supporting material before the Tribunal
together with the final sentence of [25] of his Honour’s reasons, it is
plain that Logan J was not persuaded that the
Tribunal’s decision was
infected by a wrong finding of fact in that case. The Minister submits that the
same is true in the
present case.
Tribunal’s process of reasoning in relation to Mr Kalari’s lack of
academic progress, and the inferences to be drawn
from that fact, commenced at
Reasons [22(c)-(e)], where it stated:
(c) However, it is the case that at approximately the halfway mark of his
current course which requires some 25 competencies, the
applicant has only
completed 6 of them and otherwise, in approximately 4 and a half years in
Australia has achieved no other academic
qualifications. His reasons for this
are that, as outlined, he initially felt duty bound to follow his parents'
wishes that he study
a Master of Business Administration but this proved beyond
his capabilities. The applicant highlights the technical type of person
and therefore he tried Carpentry and then Vehicle Mechanic studies before
finally settling upon Catering studies which he says
is his ultimate desire and
having worked in restaurants in Australia since 2019 is what he really wants to
(d) This is a finely balanced decision. The Tribunal notes that reasonable
minds may reasonably differ. When it was clear that further
information was
required to be provided after hearing by the applicant with a view to clarifying
confusion over the subject matter
of the competencies being undertaken at the
applicant's current RTO, it was pointed out that further submissions to address
of time without academic progress issue was going to be a very
important one for the applicant and his representative to address.
The Tribunal
highlighted in great detail why the current situation did cause the Tribunal a
great deal of concern as to how that
conduct of spending significant time in
Australia without academic progress and only achieving some 6 units of
competencies so far
really needed to be dealt with. Regrettably, the thrust of
the statement by the applicant and the submissions by his representatives
that it acknowledged past lack of success but noted that the applicant had now
found his way and ought to be allowed to complete
those studies.
(e) While the Tribunal is sympathetic to the case of the applicant, it has to
look at the conduct of the applicant as someone coming
to Australia as a student
and how they deal with that situation. This is a case where the Tribunal, noting
that it is a finely balanced
issue and that there are factors both for and
against the applicant, in the exercise of its discretion, the Tribunal considers
the explanation given does not satisfactorily explain the lack of academic
progress which leads the Tribunal to the conclusion that
the applicant is really
seeking to maintain residence in Australia and for that reason does not have a
significant incentive to return
to his home country.
factual findings in the first of those sub-paragraphs accord with Mr
Kalari’s evidence to the Tribunal. The second and third
sub-paragraphs
contain the Tribunal’s discretionary evaluation of his circumstances and
demonstrate that the Tribunal had weighed
the evidence favourable to and against
Mr Kalari in respect of his academic progress.
Tribunal continued (Reasons at [22(m)-(n)]):
(m) As to the level of the applicant's studies, it is noted the applicant
arrived in Australia with Bachelor level qualifications
and then studied for
Master level qualifications but not successfully. The applicant has now reverted
to Vocational Education and
Training (VET) level qualifications. The lack of
relevant progress has been highlighted already at length in this decision. The
does of course acknowledge that people can have a change of career
path. The question whether [sic] several changes of career path
in a short space
of time is a reasonable situation. In any event, the applicant says that it is
his intention to seek employment
in the catering and hospitality industry and
for that particular reason, the studies do relate to that occupation and
accordingly
the Tribunal can properly regard those studies as those which will
assist the applicant to obtain employment or improve his employment
prospects in
his home country.
(n) Similarly, the Tribunal can find that the studies the applicant is enrolled
in will be relevant to his future employment either
in his home country or a
third country.
factual findings in the first part of sub-paragraph (m) accurately record Mr
Kalari’s study history. The final sentence
of that sub-paragraph, as well
as sub-paragraph (n), show that contrary to Mr Kalari’s contention, the
Tribunal did give consideration
to his statements as to why he wished to pursue
the cooking courses and the hospitality course for his future career.
Tribunal went on to conclude (Reasons at [22(t)], [23]):
(t) As noted, were the applicant to remain in Australia for the completion of
his currently enrolled studies, the last day of that
course as per the CoE being
August 2024, the applicant would have been in Australia for a period of 6 years
40 days. This is in circumstances
where the Tribunal is concerned by the conduct
of the applicant. That conduct largely relates to academic performance and
At hearing, after about 4 and a half years in Australia, the applicant
had not yet completed any course. In his currently enrolled
approximately the halfway point of the course, he has only achieved 6 out of the
required 25 competencies. The Tribunal
refers to the detailed consideration it
has already gone through in this decision as to the conduct it considers the
applicant has
displayed and how it has balanced the competing evidence in favour
of the applicant and that which the Tribunal is, in this instance,
exercise of its discretion and noting that reasonable minds may differ, has been
unable to find in favour of the applicant.
Having regard to all those
circumstances, it is the case that the Tribunal finds that the conduct of the
applicant amounts to the
actions of a person who is using his Student visa
primarily for the maintenance of ongoing residence in Australia.
all of these findings, the Tribunal considers the weight of the evidence points
more to those factors and findings not
favouring the applicant's case than those
factors that are supportive or neutral to his case. No doubt, there are factors
point to an intention to return home, namely the applicant's stated
intention to do so and broad generic statements of intention
with respect to
finding employment there. However, in weighing up all of the evidence, the
Tribunal places lesser weight on these
particular aspects given the overarching
conduct and concern as to genuine status a [sic] student the Tribunal has found
instance. The Tribunal is at pains to note that these factors have been
considered at some length and very carefully by the Tribunal
and the Tribunal's
reasoning has been expressed already in this decision. The Tribunal acknowledges
reasonable minds may differ,
but this Tribunal has balanced the evidence very
carefully and while the Tribunal is sympathetic to the circumstance of the
the Tribunal finds that the factors and circumstances it considers
are applicable in this case, do lead to the conclusion that the
applicant is
using his Student visa to maintain ongoing residence in Australia.
again, the first portion of sub-paragraph (t) describes the circumstances of Mr
Kalari’s time in Australia without error.
The balance of that
sub-paragraph, as well as paragraph [23], explains the decision-making process
engaged in by the Tribunal in
concluding that the purpose of the student visa
was primarily to maintain ongoing residence in Australia. To the extent that Mr
challenges the weight which the Tribunal gave to the competing evidence
in reaching that conclusion, it is trite that the weight
to be attributed to a
party’s evidence is a matter solely within the remit of the primary
decision-maker, in this case the
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v
Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
at 41 per Mason J.
Ground 4, Mr Kalari also challenges the Tribunal’s assessment of his
“genuine intent to pursue his studies”.
As I recently summarised in
Liang v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2025] FCA 1047
the determination of a person’s intention is a question of fact reposed
solely in the primary decision-maker. In this case,
the Tribunal was required to
consider Mr Kalari’s intention in respect of staying in Australia
temporarily as at the time of
its decision, applying cl 500.212, based on all of
the material which was before it:
v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
272 FCR 528
. Here, much as had occurred before the
Tribunal below in
, the Tribunal formed the view that Mr
Kalari’s actions were consistent with an intention to use the student visa
maintain an ongoing residence in Australia. That conclusion was
reasonably open to the Tribunal on the material before it, particularly
its finding that Mr Kalari’s explanations for his lack of academic
progress were unsatisfactory.
Kalari has not shown any misinterpretation by the Tribunal of his educational
history, nor any incorrect finding of fact or error
in the process of reasoning
adopted in evaluating whether he was a genuine temporary entrant. No error is
shown in the primary judge’s
findings on this issue below. Ground 4 does
not identify any error.
Ground 5: gap in study history
5 of the Notice of Appeal concerns a gap in Mr Kalari’s study history and
is expressed in the following terms:
[The primary judge] did not recognize that both the Tribunal and the Department
of Home Affairs erred in considering the Appellant's
situation. They placed
undue weight on the "gap" in the Appellant's study history and concluded that
the Appellant had breached visa
condition 8202. The Tribunal and Delegate
evaluated the appellant's intention at the time of its decision and found that
he intended
to undertake further studies. However, the exceptional circumstances
faced by the Appellant during the COVID-19 pandemic were not
considered by [the primary judge]. The pandemic brought about unprecedented
challenges worldwide, which impacted various
aspects of life, including the
ability to pursue studies as planned. It is unjust to consider the time during
the pandemic as a regular
period when, in reality, it was a global crisis that
affected many individuals' plans and routines. [The primary judge] should have
recognized that the respondents erred in accounting for the COVID-19 pandemic
time as a standard gap, without giving due consideration
to the exceptional
circumstances faced by the Appellant during that period.
are three separate matters raised by this ground.
Mr Kalari contends that the primary judge failed to recognise that the
Tribunal erred in placing undue weight on the gap in his study
history and that
the COVID-19 pandemic meant that this was not a “standard gap”
between two periods of study. However,
the Tribunal expressly acknowledged in
relation to the gap period that (Reasons at [14(o)]):
(o) There appears by an examination of the PRISMS records a gap in studies
between July 2021 and the applicant's cessation of vehicle
mechanic studies and
approximately 12 months later when he enrolled in the catering studies. At that
time, however, he was the holder
of a Bridging visa class A which did not
include study obligation visa conditions which would have applied had the
applicant been
the holder of a Student visa.
passage makes plain that the Tribunal did not consider the gap in studies
adversely to Mr Kalari. That fact did not factor into
the Tribunal’s
ultimate decision, which was based on an evaluation of his academic progress
over the entire period of his time
spent in Australia, being some four and a
half years by the time of hearing, and not merely the 12-month gap period.
regards the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the gap in studies, this is a
re-agitation of the fifth ground advanced before
the primary judge. As her
Honour identified (PJ[41]), correctly with respect, there was no evidence before
the Tribunal that any
of Mr Kalari’s courses of study were cancelled
because of the COVID-19 pandemic, nor that he had changed courses because of
impacts of the pandemic. The primary judge recorded that at the hearing before
the FCFCOA, Mr Kalari agreed with the latter observation
Mr Kalari contends that the Tribunal erred in concluding that he had
breached visa condition 8202 (i.e. a requirement to be enrolled
in a full-time
course of study or training). As the Minister has rightly identified, this
contention was not raised before the primary
judge and Mr Kalari would again
require leave to advance it for the first time on appeal. The Minister does not
oppose the granting
of leave were that to be raised. Assuming Mr Kalari wishes
to pursue the question of leave, the assertion is in any event misconceived.
Tribunal in fact found at [22(r)] of the Reasons that:
(r) As to compliance with visa conditions, there is no evidence to suggest that
the applicant has failed to comply with his visa
conditions. It is noted that
the applicant has visa condition 8105 on his Bridging visa class A which limits
the applicant to working
40 hours per fortnight during term times. The applicant
suggests he has not breached that particular time limit. Even if he had,
result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the applicant has the advantage of having that
condition waived and should he technically have
been working in excess of that
length of time on a fortnightly basis the Tribunal would not make any finding of
a breach of that
visa condition in connection with the applicant.
the Tribunal did not mention visa condition 8202 anywhere in the Reasons. It
therefore cannot be said that it concluded
that Mr Kalari had breached that
circumstances where Mr Kalari has not appeared on the hearing of this appeal, I
have also considered the possibility that, reading
the second sentence of Ground
5 as a whole, he intended to make an argument that the Tribunal
constructively
found him to be in breach of visa condition 8202 as a
result of the gap in his study history. If so, that argument is completely
dispelled by the terms of paragraph [14(o)] of the Reasons to which I have
already referred. There, the Tribunal found correctly
that during the gap in his
studies, Mr Kalari held a bridging visa “
which did not include study
obligation visa conditions
which would have applied had [he] been the holder
of a Student visa” (emphasis added). It is clear that the Tribunal made no
finding, whether explicit or implicit, that Mr Kalari had breached any visa
conditions – including visa condition 8202, which
was acknowledged to have
no application to him during the gap period.
Mr Kalari contends that the primary judge failed to recognise that the Tribunal
failed to take into account the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on his ability
to pursue his studies as planned. This is another re-agitation of the fifth
ground advanced below. For the
reasons I have already set out above, that ground
was rightly rejected by the primary judge.
error is shown by Ground 5.
DISPOSITION
these reasons, none of the grounds of appeal advanced by Mr Kalari have merit.
The appeal must therefore be dismissed.
is no reason to disturb the usual order as to costs. Mr Kalari must pay the
Minister’s costs of the appeal, to be taxed
if not agreed.
I certify that the preceding fifty-six (56)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 14 November 2025
RTF format (493 KB)
Signed PDF/A format