O v Financial Institution [2010] PrivCmrA 18 (24 December 2010)
Case Citation:
O v Financial Institution
[2010] PrivCmrA 18
Subject Heading:
Disclosure of personal information
National Privacy Principle 2.1 in Schedule 3 of the
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
The complainant and their partner had divorced. While married, they had
established an education fund in both their names to support
children’s education.
The complainant’s former partner attended a branch of a financial
institution to enquire whether a cheque from the educational
fund had been paid
into the complainant’s account. The cheque was made out in the complainant
and former partner’s names.
The financial institution conducted enquiries on the complainant’s
account and advised the former partner it would place a trace
on the cheque. The
financial institution provided details of the deposit to the former partner,
including dates and amounts.
The former partner provided these details to the Child Support Agency for use
in a reassessment of the complainant’s income.
The complainant considered that the financial institution improperly
disclosed their personal information to the former partner.
NPP 2.1 provides that an organisation must not use or disclose personal
information about an individual for a purpose other than the
primary purpose of
collection unless an exception in NPP 2.1(a)-(h) applies.
The Commissioner opened a formal investigation under
section 40(1)
The financial institution denied it had disclosed the complainant’s
account balance or account number to the former partner,
but conceded it had
disclosed details of the cheque. It acknowledged that it should not have used
the complainant’s personal
information, contained in the account, to run a
trace on the cheque. It could have told the former partner to contact the
educational
fund as the drawer of the cheque.
Given the financial institution acknowledged it had inappropriately disclosed
personal information the Commissioner decided to conciliate
the matter as is
allowed under
section 27(1)(a)
The respondent agreed to issue a written apology to the complainant; conduct
an analysis of the complainant’s accounts across
a specified timeframe to
reassure the complainant that no other unauthorised disclosures had occurred;
and counsel the staff member
who had dealt with the former partner’s
The respondent also paid compensation to the complainant after the parties
signed a Deed of Release.
Consequently the Commissioner closed the complaint under
section 41(2)(a)
on the grounds that the respondent had adequately dealt with the
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
RTF format (128 KB)
Signed PDF/A format