Sigley & De Santis (No. 6) [2021] FamCA 632 (27 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Sigley & De Santis (No
[2021] FamCA 632
File number(s):
MLC 9296 of 2015
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
FAMILY LAW –
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– eleventh hour
adjournment application – applicant left unrepresented after eighth day of
the trial – applicant
suffering psychiatric condition – unfairness
in pressing her to resume the trial in circumstance where she is unrepresented
– trial scheduled to resume on day nine – formidable task facing an
unrepresented litigant absorbing material so as to
best advance her own case
between now and 20 September – adjournment granted.
CASE GUARDIAN
– request to Federal Attorney-General
under Part 6.3 of the
Family Law Rules
Legislation:
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Family Law Rules
Cases cited:
Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd v Australian
National University
(2009) 239 CLR 175
DJL v Central Authority
[2000] HCA 17
(2000) 201 CLR 226
Krnjic v Bunnings Group Ltd (No. 2)
(2018) 334 FLR 168
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
20 & 27 August 2021
Counsel for the Applicant:
Not applicable
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Not applicable
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Not applicable
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Not applicable
Counsel for the Second Respondent:
Not applicable
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
Not applicable
Counsel for the Third, Fourth, Seventh, Tenth, Eleventh, Fourteenth,
Fifteenth, Sixteenth and Seventeenth Respondents:
Not applicable
Solicitor for the Third, Fourth, Seventh, Tenth, Eleventh, Fourteenth,
Fifteenth, Sixteenth and Seventeenth Respondents:
Berry Family Law
Counsel for the Fifth, Sixth and Thirteenth Respondents:
Dr A. Trichardt
Solicitor for the Fifth, Sixth and Thirteenth Respondents:
Charles Fice Solicitors
Counsel for the Eighth Respondent:
Not applicable
Solicitor for the Eighth Respondent:
Oxford Partners Pty Ltd
Counsel for the Ninth Respondent:
Not applicable
Solicitor for the Ninth Respondent:
Not applicable
Counsel for the Twelfth Respondent:
Mr M. Wilson
Solicitor for the Twelfth Respondent:
MLC 9296 of 2015
MR DE SANTIS
Q PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR Q DISCRETIONARY
Second Respondent
R PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR DE SANTIS
FAMILY TRUST
(and others named in the Schedule)
Third Respondent
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. I dismiss the applicant’s application in a case dated 13 August
2. I vacate the part heard trial of 18 days recommencing on 20 September
3. The applicant must file and serve an updated psychiatric report by 4pm on
31 January 2022.
4. I list this proceeding on 7 February 2022 at 10am for mention.
5. I refix the resumption of the trial of this proceeding on 25 to 29 July
2022 and 8 to 19 August 2022 for 15 days.
6. All respondents’ costs of and incidental to the applicant’s
application in a case dated 13 August 2021 are reserved.
7. Pursuant to
rule 6.11(1)
Family Law Rules
I request the
Attorney-General of the Commonwealth of Australia to nominate, in writing, a
person to be a case guardian for the applicant,
as a matter of
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Sigley & De Santis
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
EX TEMPORE REASONS
FOR JUDGMENT
1 To say that this entire litigation has suffered a lamentable history is an
understatement of monstrous proportions. This litigation
was commenced in 2015.
Having been heard on interlocutory applications on 46 occasions prior to the
trial commencing on 15 October
2020, the case presently stands part heard, on
day eight, with another 18 days already earmarked so as to complete it. In the
month or thereabouts the newest complication to the case emerged, namely,
the consequences of the applicant finding herself unrepresented
by her solicitor
who had represented her for years as well as by her senior and junior counsel.
She currently faces the prospect
of prosecuting her case as a lay person when
the trial resumes on 20 September 2021. The applicant has hearing problems and
recently admitted for psychiatric care to the RR Health Clinic on 31 July
2021, as was recorded in a letter from Dr SS, a psychiatrist,
with the RR Health
2 On 13 August 2021 the applicant filed an application in a case supported by
her affidavit made 10 August 2021. She sought a large
array of orders mostly
concerning the applicant’s former solicitor and her former senior counsel.
In essence she sought orders
for each to be ordered by the Ethics Committee to
review the professional conduct
” of her former legal
representative against her claims that each breached the duty of care each owed
3 In that application in a case she also sought an order requiring the
parties to attend a conciliation conference on 20 September
2021 rather than
proceeding with the part heard trial. She sought a further order that if
an agreement is not reached at the conciliation conference, the
applicant asks his Honour to make a decision based on the submissions
past six years instead of an 18-day trial commencing 20 September
.” On 20 August 2021, all respondents told me each refused to
participate in any form of conciliation conference, submitting
it would be
pointless to order one, given that no respondent intends to treat with the
applicant by way of settlement.
4 Paragraph 8 of the applicant’s application in a case provided for the
possibility that the resumption of the trial of this
proceeding may be
adjourned. The applicant told me on 20 August that her preferred position
was for the parties to attempt to resolve
the matter. No respondent agreed to
that. In the upshot I allowed the applicant to obtain such further psychiatric
evidence as
she was able and for that to be produced to all respondents by 26
August 2021 with the further hearing of the applicant’s application
case proceeding today, that is to say, on 27 August 2021.
5 I heard further argument today. Having regard to the proximity of the
adjourned trial’s resumption date and to the fact that
all respondents
told me each was diligently preparing for the resumption of the trial, it seemed
to be most efficient for me to determine
now the adjournment application and
also the relief the applicant seeks against her former legal
representatives.
CLAIMS AGAINST THE SOLICITOR
6 At its core, the applicant invited me to order the
Ethics Committee (she did not say of what but presumably, of the Law Institute
of Victoria) to review the conduct of the applicant’s former solicitor
against claims the applicant makes about her former
solicitor, those claims
being enumerated in the eight alphabetical subparagraphs of paragraph 1 of her
application in a case. Those
claims include assertions that the
applicant’s former solicitor advanced his own interests ahead of his
client’s, that
he did not discharge his duty of care to his client and
that he misled her. There were others. In paragraph 2 of her application
case she sought orders for the payments of costs, outgoings and
compensatory damages
” (her words), to be determined.
7 As to paragraphs 1 and 2 of her application in a case, I do not possess
power to make an order directed to the Ethics Committee
of the Law Institute of
Victoria. The jurisdiction conferred on justices of the Family Court of
Australia is statutory and also
although the court’s
implied jurisdiction is confined in the main to controlling its own processes.
I have no general supervisory
power to control the process of an organ (the
Ethics Committee) within a body established to govern solicitors.
8 In a recent directions hearing in this case the applicant informed me she
has filed a complaint or other application before the
Legal Services Commission.
She told me then that she was waiting for a first return of that process.
9 The applicant’s former solicitor filed a notice of ceasing to act on
15 July 2021. He has played no role in this litigation
since then. Consequent
upon his ceasing to act, the role of counsel became tenuous and they too ceased
to act on the ground that
no instructing solicitor instructed them. I gave the
applicant several opportunities to seek legal representation, whether paid
pro bono, all to no avail and the applicant continues to inform me that she has
no legal representation in this case.
10 The issues raised in this case are factually and legally complex. Even a
highly experienced silk would encounter difficulty stepping
in, now, part heard,
to take over the applicant’s case. All the more for a lay person.
11 I refuse to make the order in paragraph 1 of the applicant’s
application in a case for the reason that a justice of the Family
Australia has no power to make such an order.
12 Paragraph 2 is expressed to be conditional upon a finding by the Ethics
Committee that the applicant’s former solicitor breached
his ethical
responsibilities to her. Whether the proceeding presently pending before the
Legal Services Commissioner will address
alleged breaches of professional duties
remains to be seen. Even if it did, I have no power to make orders of the type
in paragraph 2(a) to (h) of the applicant’s application in a
CLAIMS AGAINST SENIOR COUNSEL
13 In paragraph 3 of her application in a case the
applicant raised an array of issues she wanted me to order the Ethics Committee
(she did not say as much but I presume, the Ethics Committee of the Victorian
Bar) to review the conduct of her former senior counsel
against claims she makes
in her 10 August 2021 affidavit. To select a few only, the applicant asserted
(a) her senior counsel ceased acting prior to her
solicitor ceasing to act;
(b) her senior counsel misled the Bar’s Ethics Committee by falsely
stating he ceased to act by reason of his instructing solicitor
(c) her senior counsel misled this court (me, by other words) by falsely stating
he ceased to act by reason of his instructing solicitor
ceasing to act; and
(d) her senior counsel did not “
perform his duty of care
(her words) to the applicant.
14 On 28 July 2021 the applicant’s senior counsel assured me he had in
fact been provided with a ruling by the Victorian Bar’s
Ethics Committee
to the effect that he was entitled to withdraw from this litigation. I accepted
his assurance without reservation.
He had not participated in this litigation
except on 20 August 2021 in anticipation of my dealing with paragraphs 3 and 4
applicant’s application in a case dated 13 August 2021 and
15 As with the Ethics Committee of the Law Institute of Victoria, I have no
general supervisory power over the Victorian Bar’s
Ethics Committee. It
follows that I have no power to make the orders the applicant seeks in
paragraphs 3(a) to 3(j) of her application
in a case. And, as paragraph 4 is
premised on the Ethics Committee findings being proven, since no such findings
have been made
the orders sought in paragraph 4 are otiose.
16 I dismiss the applications made in paragraphs 3 and 4 of the
applicant’s application in a case.
CONCILIATION CONFERENCE
17 The applicant in paragraph 5 of her application
in a case canvassed converting the 18 days scheduled for the resumption of the
trial of this proceeding into a conciliation conference. In the passages above
I have already recorded that no respondent agreed
to such a course. Each
respondent contended that no resolution by agreement was likely. In those
circumstances I refuse to order
parties to attend a conciliation conference
where they say they will not conciliate. I dismiss paragraph 5.
18 Paragraph 6 was the expression of the applicant’s wish for all
respondents “
to work together to formulate an offer to the applicant so
a reasonable settlement can be reached
”. Again, I have no power to
compel a party, all the more in the case of a reluctant party, to put an offer
to another party.
The respondents have indicated each is preparing for this
proceeding to resume at trial. All parties have expended enormous sums
litigation already. Paragraph 6 must likewise be dismissed.
A DECISION BASED ON SUBMISSIONS
19 In paragraph 7 of her application in a case the
applicant requested me to make a decision in this litigation, if no agreement
reached at a conciliation conference, “
based on the submissions
over the past six years instead of an 18-day trial commencing 20 September
” (her words).
20 It seemed that the applicant was keen to avoid the inconvenience and
personal pressure she will bear if forced to resume the trial
of this case. The
trial is to resume, not commence. It is part heard before me even though it has
travelled very little distance
and no evidence has yet been adduced. That
aside, the applicant mistakes what will happen next. In saying that I mean no
to her. After all, a lay person is unlikely to fully appreciate the
subtleties, dare I say, immense factual and legal complexities,
of a case such
21 No scope exists for me to make a determination of the issues in this case
based solely on “
submissions over the past six years
litigation is at the stage of adducing evidence, testing it, and challenging it.
Witnesses must be called, cross-examined
and re-examined. After the close of
the evidence, submissions will then be entertained. The applicant seems to
overlook the evidentiary
phase of the case. If the trial proceeds in the manner
it has so far, there are likely to be more debates about the claims made
pleadings. Precisely how a litigant-in-person such as the applicant will
address those issues remains to be seen.
22 It also remains to be seen how the applicant will absorb the large amount
of documentation in this case. The task of cross-examining
the various
respondent witnesses will be formidable. Complicated issues of trust and
company law emerge in this litigation. In
view of the passing of the first
respondent, the consequences of his death on remaining claims as between various
parties needs to
be addressed. It is entirely conceivable that the applicant,
as a litigant-in-person, will encounter substantial challenges in those
23 Of course, the respondents are entitled to test the applicant’s
assertions in this case. Each respondent has and continues
to incur costs.
Beyond saying they are arguable, it is too early to tell how strong are the
claims the applicant makes against each
respondent. As a rule of thumb, most
experienced practitioners in this court proceed on the basis that each day of
trial represents
the incurring of costs of between $30,000 – $40,000.
Those costs will be very substantial by the conclusion of the remaining
the trial in this case.
24 The concept of my determining this case merely by considering the
submissions made by parties over the past six years fails to
address what a
court is required to do when determining contested issues to which deponents
swear or affirm and the need to test
those assertions. To the lay eye, no doubt
the applicant’s proposal in paragraph 7 of her application in a case has
superficial
attraction. But it is not a substitute for a proper trial where
evidence is tested.
25 I dismiss paragraph 7.
APPLICATION FOR THE ADJOURNMENT OF THE TRIAL
26 Paragraph 8 of the applicant’s application
in a case was an omnibus claim for costs in the event an adjournment was
That inverted the enquiry because the anterior enquiry was whether the
applicant sought an adjournment. If so, the next issue was
whether such an
application if sought should be granted and finally, if sought and then granted,
whether costs should be ordered,
against whom and on what basis.
27 When this matter was before me on 28 July 2021 all parties, including the
applicant, told me they wanted the case over, consequent
upon the trial
resuming. On 20 August 2021 the applicant’s position had shifted. She
said she wanted events to unfold, sequentially,
as follows –
(a) first, for a conciliation conference to be
(b) if not that then for me to determine the case on submissions, essentially,
on the papers;
(c) if not that, for the trial to be adjourned.
28 That stance was diametrically opposite to her earlier position in which
she said she wanted the trial to resume. As mentioned
earlier, the evidence on
which she earlier relied, being psychiatric in nature, was deficient.
29 In accordance with my orders made on 20 August 2021, the applicant filed a
further affidavit affirmed on 25 August 2021 exhibiting
a number of medical
documents pertaining to her current state of mind and medical conditions.
30 In her affidavit affirmed on 25 August 2021, the applicant exhibited a
letter dated 20 August 2021 from her treating general practitioner,
relevance was the following –
She has been very stressful, and has attempted suicide
few times, and has been admitted to UU Hospital ED by ambulance and police
times in the last few months. She is currently under psychiatrist’s
She has just been discharged from RR Health Clinic 2 days ago on 18/8/2021 with
severe Anxiety/Depression as her diagnosis. She is
now on medical treatment.
She still has self harm thought (sic), and very anxious about her future. I do
not think she is in her best set of mind to represent
herself on the Court, and
she will need ongoing medical and psychological treatment for a long period of
31 On that same day, Dr TT provided a referral letter for readmission to UU
Hospital as the applicant’s “
mental status
still not stable
”. That letter also outlined the prescribed
medication currently taken by the applicant. A letter dated 23 August 2021 from
Dr VV of the RR Health Clinic confirmed that the applicant had in fact been
readmitted to the clinic on 21 August 2021, her third
admission since March
32 Of greater relevance to the application presently before me was a letter
dated 24 August 2021 from the applicant’s treating
psychiatrist Dr
In it Dr SS reported as
This report has been requested by Ms Sigley to help with
her current legal matters. Ms Sigley has said that the court needs medical
information to ascertain whether she is able to conduct herself in court.
Ms Sigley has a number of mental health conditions: alcohol abuse, major
depressive disorder, and symptoms of borderline personality
During the time she has been seeing me there have been ongoing stressors which
have had an impact on her mental state.
She had an admission to The RR Health Clinic on the 7
2021. She presented with a depressive episode of major depressive disorder. This
responded to supportive therapy and an
increase in her dose of antidepressant
medication, sertraline to 200mg per day. She had been drinking alcohol
excessively and showed
signs of alcohol withdrawal. She was discharged from
hospital on the 22
of March 2021 with a significant improvement in
I then didn't have any contact with Ms Sigley until the 21
2021. At that consultation we talked of the significant challenges with her
mental health issues and also her request for
a medicolegal report. I had phone
of July 2021. During our discussion it
was evident that she was under the influence of alcohol, and she made references
her life. Given safety concerns I called the police to take her to
hospital as an emergency and she was taken to her local public
Ms Sigley next saw me when she was admitted to The RR Health Clinic on the
of July 2021. She presented in stress related to the legal
problems before her. With further review I judged that she was suffering
major depressive episode. She had depressive symptoms such as suicidal thoughts,
reduced appetite, feelings of guilt, poor
concentration and complaints of
feeling depressed. She also reported other symptoms such as visual
hallucinations however her presentation
was not consistent with an illness such
as psychosis. Eventually there appeared to be some partial resolution of her
stressors and
her mood soon improved. She appeared happier and she was wishing
to go home. She was discharged on the 18
of August 2021.
My next contact with Ms Sigley was on the 21
of August when she was
admitted to The RR Health Clinic, again in crisis. From what Ms Sigley told me
her legal issues had not resolved
on the 20th of August when her matters were
discussed in court. By the 20
of August 2021 Ms Sigley was again
seeking admission to The RR Health Clinic. She contacted the admissions team of
The RR Health
Clinic. She wasn't coping and was experiencing suicidal thoughts.
I saw her on the 21
of August 2021. She was feeling stressed and
anxious. She was requesting that I write a medicolegal report for her.
Ms Sigley is still in The RR Health Clinic. Presently I feel she is suffering
from an adjustment disorder with anxiety. She is experiencing
social pressures
(legal in this case) and is feeling anxious in that context. A differential
diagnosis being that she is again suffering
from a major depressive episode.
Obtaining an adequate history has been more problematic during this admission.
She has been very
keen to convey to me that she cannot attend to her court
matters on account of her mental illness.
With regarding to being able to represent herself in court or instruct legal
counsel I find that she isn't fit to perform these duties
presently. She
experiences high stress at times with labile emotions and crying. She has
expressed suicidal thoughts if she doesn't
receive a report as requested. She
has said that she cannot understand legal matters which are currently before
her. To complicate
matters she has appeared consumed with her legal
matters/concerns. She has demonstrated intense and labile emotions when talking
of her problems. This has made assessment more difficult.
I think it would be reasonable to review her fitness to conduct her legal
matters in two weeks. However, I expect that she will continue
to experience
high levels of stress when faced with her legal
33 Given that the trial of this proceeding is listed to recommence in only a
matter of weeks, having regard to the medical evidence
exhibited to the
applicant’s affidavit affirmed 25 August 2021, it seems to me that the
applicant’s present inability
to prepare for and run the part heard trial
as a litigant-in-person will not significantly alter between now and the date of
resumption.
34 The legal principles concerning adjournments that guide trial judges are
Aon Risk Services Australia Ltd v
Australian National University
No longer are principles concerning case management the determinative
considerations in assessing whether to grant or to refuse an
adjournment
application. In the end it is the justice of the situation which is the
paramount consideration.
35 In this case the scales are finely balanced in all but one respect. The
respondents, all well-resourced, have prepared for the
trial to resume on 20
September 2021. They say their costs will or may be wasted if the trial is
adjourned because, so they say,
time will need to be spent again re-acquainting
counsel with the subtleties of the facts of the case, especially if the
trial resumption date is many months away. They say they have been
embroiled in this case for over six years and that the time has
come to get on
with the evidence.
36 There is merit in those submissions. Mr Lipshutz further submitted that
his clients will suffer irreparable harm if the trial
is adjourned by reason of
the impact that the pending nature of this litigation is having on their
commercial operations. He submitted
that while this litigation remains part
heard, his clients encounter trouble entering into long term contracts. Mr
Wilson submitted
that his client’s life “
(his words) by reason of the prolonged uncertainty that this litigation is
causing. While I doubt the validity of the submission
that trouble entering
into long term contracts is a consequence of the undetermined status of this
case, there is merit in the respondent’s
submissions that this case simply
must be determined.
37 On the other hand, at the eleventh hour the applicant lost her legal
representation. The circumstances of that phenomenon have
not been ventilated
before me. The applicant tells me she has applied, without success, to a
variety of firms of solicitors, none
of whom expressed a willingness to assist
38 With a little less than one month until the resumption of the trial of
this proceeding, the applicant finds herself as a litigant-in-person
faced with the task of conducting the trial of this proceeding by herself. That
is likely to be a daunting reality for the
applicant. It is set in a temporal
context in which the applicant says her solicitor and her senior counsel, who
had advised her
for over six years, withdrew from the case in circumstances, so
she says, in which they had no entitlement to withdraw. She goes
asserting that each breached a duty of care each owed her. The trust that
existed between the applicant, her solicitors
and her silk has been damaged
– probably irreparably – and she has filed some form of disciplinary
complaint against
her solicitor.
39 To that must be added her psychiatric state. She told me during a very
recent directions hearing that she has entertained thoughts
of suicide. She has
spent over two weeks in a psychiatric facility. That does not augur well for a
person who faces running a trial
40 This case has been on foot for over six years. It is difficult to see how
it suddenly assumes a degree of urgency now that the
applicant is unrepresented.
I am unable to see how any relevant prejudice asserted by the respondents
eclipses the reality of a trial
proceeding where the applicant is distinctly
disadvantaged for being unrepresented.
41 In the appearance prior to 20 August 2021, the respondents submitted,
correctly, that no certainty existed that the applicant’s
position will be
any different if the case is adjourned and refixed. That much is true. But
that is little more than speculation.
It may well be that the applicant is able
to persuade a firm of solicitors to take on her case. It may be that the Legal
Commission intervenes somehow, irrespective of how unlikely at present
that may seem.
42 The psychiatric state of the applicant may turn out to be fluid. Her
prognosis may well be favourable in a short time. In order
to balance the need
to keep this case under a watchful eye and not let it float into the distance, I
propose to require the applicant
to file and serve an updated psychiatric report
by early next year so that consideration may be given to her psychiatric
at that time. I propose to fix 31 January 2022 for that report to be
filed and served. The proceeding will be listed thereafter
on 7 February 2022
at 10am for mention. As it presently stands, the resumption of this trial will
not require a further 18 days.
I will list the part heard trial for a further
15 days. In the meantime, so that a block of 15 days does not become impossibly
distant into the future, I will fix 25 to 29 July 2022 and 8 to 19 August 2022
for the resumed trial dates. A 15 day time slot for
any case is extremely
difficult to accommodate. My diary simply does not allow one any earlier.
43 Costs of the respondents of and incidental to the application in a case
dated 13 August 2021 are reserved.
CASE GUARDIAN
44 Very helpfully, Mr Lipshutz raised the
possibility of my invoking
Family Law Rules
respectfully requesting the
Attorney-General
to appoint a case
guardian for the applicant in this case. The applicant eventually agreed to
such an approach. Mr Lipshutz applied,
, for the appointment
of a case guardian of the applicant and he submitted that the
applicant was a person to whom
rule 6.08(1)
applied. In
Krnjic v Bunnings
Group Ltd (No. 2)
I addressed
the circumstances in which largely similar, although not identical, provisions
applied for the appointment of a litigation
guardian. It was readily apparent
to me that the applicant has very little command of this litigation and that she
suffers from
psychiatric issues that disable her from effectively conducting
this case herself. For the purposes of
rule 6.11(1)
Family Law Rules
I am of the opinion that the applicant does not have available to her a
person suitable for appointment as a case guardian. In those
circumstances I
respectfully request the Attorney-General of the Commonwealth to provide a
nomination of a case guardian for the
applicant in accordance with
rule 6.11(1)
Family Law Rules
. Having regard to the timetabling of this case,
I also, respectfully, ask that such nomination may be made as a matter of
45 In the upshot, several orders must now be
pronounced.
46 First, I dismiss the applicant’s application in a case dated 13
August 2021.
47 Second, I vacate the fixture of 18 days commencing on 20 September
48 Third, I order the applicant to file and serve an updated psychiatric
report by 4pm on 31 January 2022.
49 Fourth, I list this proceeding on 7 February 2022 at 10am for mention.
50 Fifth, I refix the resumption of the trial of this proceeding on 25 to 29
July 2022 and 8 to 19 August 2022 for 15 days.
51 Sixth, all respondents’ costs of and incidental to the
applicant’s application in a case dated 13 August 2021 are
52 Seventh, pursuant to
rule 6.11(1)
Family Law Rules
the Attorney-General of the Commonwealth of Australia to nominate, in writing, a
person to be a case guardian for the applicant,
as a matter of urgency.
I certify that the preceding fifty-two (52)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Associate: at
Dated: 27 August 2021
MLC 9296 of
Respondents
Fourth Respondent:
MR S DE SANTIS
Fifth Respondent:
MR T AND MR U AS LIQUIDATORS OF E PTY LTD (IN LIQUIDATION)
Sixth Respondent:
MR T AND MR U AS LIQUIDATORS OF E PTY LTD (IN LIQUIDATION)
Seventh Respondent:
WW PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR E SUPERANNUATION FUND
Eighth Respondent:
V PARTNERS PTY LTD (FORMERLY P PARTNERS PTY LTD)
Ninth Respondent:
Tenth Respondent:
X PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR TRUST FOR THE CHILDREN OF MR & MS DE
Eleventh Respondent:
Twelfth Respondent:
MS DE SANTIS (ALSO KNOWN AS BB DE SANTIS)
Thirteenth Respondent:
Fourteenth Respondent:
MR AA DE SANTIS
Fifteenth Respondent:
Sixteenth Respondent:
Seventeenth Respondent:
MS AA DE SANTIS
DJL v Central Authority
[2000] HCA 17
(2000) 201 CLR 226.
“BT4” to the applicant’s affidavit affirmed 25 August
(2009) 239 CLR
In this context, such a
reference is a reference to the Attorney-General of the Commonwealth of
Australia –
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
RTF format (443 KB)
Signed PDF/A format