Purvis v New South Wales Department of Education (No 2) [2000] HREOCA 47 (13 November 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION ACT 1992
Matter No: 98/127
ALEX PURVIS on behalf of DANIEL HOGGAN
Complainant
THE STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES (DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION)
REASONS FOR DECISION OF INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
GRAEME INNES
Date of decision: 13 November 2000
Dates of hearing: 24-27 May, 2-6 August, 6-10 September, 9-10 November
Location of hearing: Grafton
Appearances: Ms Eastman of counsel instructed by Mr Paul Batley and Ms
Sally Bryant of the Legal Aid Commission for the complainant.
Ms Chris Ronalds of counsel instructed by Ms Mimi Barbaro of the Crown
Solicitors Office, for the respondent.
INTRODUCTION
THE EVIDENCE
2.1 Participants and their roles
2.1.1 Daniel Hoggan and his family
2.1.2 Expert witnesses
2.1.3 Staff of Gillwinga Primary School
2.1.4 Staff of the School
2.1.5 Staff of Grafton High School
2.1.6 Other staff of the Department
2.1.7 Staff of New South Wales Department of Community Services
2.2 Daniel Hoggan’s disabilities
2.3 Daniel Hoggan’s family situation
2.4 Daniel Hoggan’s previous education
2.5 Chronological outline of events
2.5.1 Initial enrolment application and initial
2.5.2 The second enrolment application
2.5.3 Preparations for Daniel’s attendance at the
2.5.4 Term 2 1997
2.5.5 Term 3 1997
2.5.6 Term 4 1997
2.5.7 Relevant events of 1998 and 1999
Department and school policies, and policies specifically for
2.6.1 Policies of the Department
2.6.1.1 Special Education Policy
2.6.1.2 Student Welfare Policy
2.6.1.3 Procedures concerning suspension, exclusion and expulsion of
students from school and declaration of place vacant (“the
2.6.2 Policies of the School
2.6.2.1 School Discipline Policy 1995
2.6.3 Policies specifically for Daniel
2.6.3.1 Draft Welfare and Discipline Policy for Daniel
2.7 Expert evidence
2.7.1 Dr Robert Lincoln Jackson
2.7.2 Ms Deborah Knight
2.7.3 Mr Alan Andreasen
2.7.4 Mr Norman John Lord
2.7.5 Ms Carrie Brooks
2.7.6 Professor Trevor Parmenter
2.7.7 Dr Graham Alan Wise
2. 8 Teacher assessments and observations
2.8.1 Evaluation sheets
2.8.2 Half-yearly reports
2.8.3 Mid-term evaluations
2.8.4 Distance Education Support Unit Reports
2.8.5 Yearly report from school - December 1997
STATUTORY PROVISIONS
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
4.1 Complainant’s submissions
4.2 Respondent’s submissions
4.3 Complainant’s submissions in reply
FINDINGS OF FACT
5.1 Daniel Hoggan
5.2 Identification of the complainant
5.3 Respondent is an educational authority
5.4 Daniel Hoggan being a student
5.5 Daniel’s previous education
5.6 SGHS knowledge of Daniel’s disabilities
5.7 Planning for Daniel’s enrolment
5.8 Daniel’s education and participation at SGHS
5.9 Daniel’s performance in Term 2
5.10 Assessment of Daniel
5.11 Role of the Teachers Federation
5.12 Case management and other meetings
5.13 Modification of policies for Daniel
5.14 Resourcing
5.15 Failure of Daniel’s placement at SGHS
5.16 Daniel’s view of school in 1997
5.17 Expert advice
5.18 Greater regional involvement
5.19 Suspensions
5.20 Exclusion
5.21 Attitude of participants
6.1 Underlying objectives of the DDA
6.2 Daniel’s disabilities
6.3 Discrimination
6.4 Exclusion
6.5 Suspensions
6.6 Other detriments
6.6.1 Failure to properly assess Daniel’s needs on
6.6.2 Failure to provide Daniel with orientation on
commencement
6.6.3 Failure to implement Principal’s recommendations to
accommodate Daniel at SGHS
6.6.4 Failure to adjust Welfare and Discipline Policy to address
Daniel’s needs and behavioural patterns
6.6.5 Failure to develop guidelines in accordance with the Welfare and
Discipline Policy
6.6.6 Failure to provide teachers with training or awareness
6.6.7 Failure to obtain assistance of experts in special education or
6.6.8 Failure to assess Daniel between 18 September and 3 December
6.6.9 Failure to inform Daniel and the complainant that Daniel had been
excluded from school
6.6.10 Failure to follow school policy for dealing with excluded
6.6.11 Modifying Discipline and Welfare Policies thus denying the
opportunity for Daniel to be dealt with according to applicable
7.1 Introductory Comments
7.2 Daniel’s return to SGHS
7.3 Apology
7.4 Damages
1. INTRODUCTION
On 22 March 1998 Mr Alex Purvis lodged a complaint with the Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission alleging that his foster-son
Daniel Hoggan had been
discriminated against in breach of the
Disability Discrimination Act
(Cth) 1992 (“the Act”) by the State of New South Wales, through
the New South Wales Department of Education and Training
(formerly the New South
Wales Department of School Education, referred to in these reasons as “the
Department”). The
complaint related to Daniel’s enrolment at, and
subsequent exclusion from, South Grafton High School (“the School or
SGHS”) in 1997, and the events leading to the exclusion.
The Acting Disability Discrimination Commissioner investigated the complaint,
and an attempt to conciliate it was unsuccessful. The
complaint was referred to
the Commission for hearing on 15 October 1998.
The hearing took place over 16 days in Grafton in 1999, from 24 to 27 May, 2
to 6 August, 6 to 10 September, and 9 to 10 November.
The complainant was
represented by Ms Eastman of counsel instructed by the Coffs Harbour office of
Legal Aid New South Wales, and
the respondent was represented by Ms Ronalds of
Counsel instructed by the Crown Solicitor’s Office New South Wales.
The complainant called eight witnesses and the respondent called nineteen
witnesses. Some twelve volumes of exhibits were tendered.
During the hearing the respondent made an application that I should dismiss
the complaint pursuant to section 100 of the Act. I refused
that application,
and provided written reasons for that refusal. Those reasons are published
elsewhere, and I will not re-visit that
application in this decision.
Daniel Hoggan was born on 8 December 1984 and when he completed Year 6 at
Gillwinga Primary School (“Gillwinga”) at the
end of 1996 he was
twelve years old. Had he remained in school he would have been in Year 9 at the
time this hearing took place and
in Year 10 at the time that this decision was
being prepared and brought down. During the hearing I expressed my concern, with
the parties concurred, about the length of time Daniel had not been
attending school. I have therefore attempted to comply with the
wishes to bring this decision down as quickly as possible. However, volume and
complexity have made this difficult.
Daniel Hoggan did not give evidence during the hearing. This was not
surprising given the nature of his disabilities, which will be
detailed in the
next section of this decision. Towards the end of the hearing I indicated that I
wished to meet with Daniel on an
informal basis with Mr Purvis (the complainant)
and Mr Bartley (representing the respondent) present. My hope was to gain a
understanding of the person to whom this complaint relates. I am also
aware of the obligations which arise under the UN Convention
on the Rights of
the Child (CROC) and the High Court’s view as expounded in
Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Ah Hin Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 183 CLR 273
Australia’s ratification of CROC has given rise to a legitimate
expectation that decision makers not violate its provisions.
CROC article 3.1
requires that the interests of the child shall be a primary consideration in
decisions involving a child. Article
12.1 requires that children be given
appropriate involvement in decisions and actions affecting them.
After consideration of the proposal that I meet with Daniel, the complainant
indicated through his legal representative that he was
not agreeable to this
meeting taking place. The respondent was agreeable.
I regard the complainant’s decision on this matter as unfortunate, as I
believe that it would have been beneficial for me to
meet with, and better
understand, the person to whom my decision is most central. Whilst the nature of
Daniel’s disabilities
may have meant that my understanding was an
imperfect one, I believe that it would have assisted me in the making of what
a very difficult decision.
2. THE EVIDENCE
2.1 Participants and their roles
The following is a list of people who gave evidence or were referred to
during the inquiry, and their role in the process.
2.1.1 Daniel Hoggan and his family
Daniel Hoggan: The aggrieved person. Daniel is a ward of the state and has
been in the foster care of Mr and Mrs Purvis since 1988
(part time) and 1989
(full-time)
Mr Alexander Francis Purvis: The complainant on behalf of his foster son
Mrs Clemency Purvis: The wife of the complainant and Daniel’s foster
Ms Christine Hoggan: Daniel’s natural mother
Mr Steve Gallagher: Ms Hoggan’s fiancée
2.1.2 Expert witnesses
Dr Robert Lincoln Jackson: Director of the Centre for Disability Research and
Development, Edith Cowan University, Western Australia
Ms Deborah Ann Knight: Clinical psychologist
Mr Norman John Lord: Registered psychologist
Professor Trevor Reginald Parmenter: Foundation Chair in Development
Disability, Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney and Director,
Development Disability Studies, Royal Rehabilitation Centre, Sydney
Dr Graham Alan Wise: Child neurologist, Sydney Children’s Hospital
2.1.3 Staff of Gillwinga Primary School
Mr Stuart James Airlie: Principal
Mr Peter Waldron: Daniel’s Year 6 teacher
2.1.4 Staff of the School
Mr Mac Lindsay: Principal
(pre December 1996)
Mr Barry Bartley: Principal (post December 1996)
Ms Naomi Court: Support Teacher Learning Difficulties
Ms Lynne Donsworth: School Counsellor; Registered Psychologist
Ms Alison Durant: Humanities teacher
Ms Christine Ebeling: Humanities teacher
Ms Narelle Fernance: Senior School Assistant supervising ancillary staff,
including teachers’ aides
Ms Margaret Anne Fitzmaurice: English/ Drama teacher, Year 7 Adviser in
Ms Lorraine Gay Laforest: Teachers’ Aide Special
Ms Terry-Anne Jerome: Teacher
Mr Colin Lang: Mathematics teacher
Ms Dell McClennan: Teachers’ Aide
Ms Elizabeth McMillan: Previously Head Teacher, Student Welfare, and
Mathematics teacher
Mr Jeff Miller: Music teacher
Mr Brad Neill: Creative arts teacher
Mr Robert Perl: Head Teacher, Personal Development, Health and Physical
Ms Karyn Thompson: Teachers’ Aide Special
Mr Norman Aubrey Thomas Trudgett: Science teacher
2.1.5 Staff of Grafton High School
Glen Clark: Head Teacher, Support Unit
Allen Simmons: Principal
2.1.6 Other staff of the Department
Dr Ken Boston: Director-General of School Education
Ms Ilona Bruveris: Special Education Consultant
Mr Ken Callan Leader, Operational Support, Special Education Directorate
Mr Robert Gordon Field: Special Education Consultant, Grafton
Ms Debbie Fisher: Daniel’s teacher, Distance Education Support Unit
Mr Peter Garrard: Senior Education Officer (Transition), Special Education
Directorate
Mr Ian Hamilton: Director, Distance Education, Open Training & Education
Ms Heather Martin: Director, former Special Education Directorate
Ms Jan O’Keefe: Principal, Distance Education Support Unit
Mr Ronald Phillips: District Superintendent Clarence-Coffs Harbour
Mr John Sutton: Assistant Director-General (Primary)
2.1.7 Staff of New South Wales Department of Community Services
Ms Carrie Brookes: Program Officer, Far North Coast
Mr Dennis Myers: Area Manager, Far North Coast
Mr Paul Scahill: Manager, Grafton Office
Ms Kim Whitney: District Officer
2.2 Daniel Hoggan’s disabilities
In his statement, Mr Purvis describes Daniel’s disabilities as:
“...an intellectual disability which may manifest itself in his
behaviour. He also has a visual impairment. His eyes are healthy
but the parts
of his brain that appreciate what his eyes are seeing have been affected by
severe encephalopathic illness which occurred
when he was 6 months old. He has
epilepsy which is well controlled on his current medications and he has had no
seizures for 6 years”.
Dr Wise gave evidence as follows:
“Daniel’s intellectual disability and his behaviour and his
visual difficulties and his epilepsy all result from severe
brain injury which
he sustained at about seven months of age. The pattern of brain injury that we
saw at that time on scans and
subsequently, indicated damage to the
parieto-occipital lobes on both sides. That’s the posterior part of the
brain where
you receive and integrate visual information but there is also
bilateral damage to the frontal lobes. This pattern of damage occurs
severe illness causes blood supply to the brain to be reduced for a significant
length of time. So it’s like a stroke
which affects that part of the
brain which has the least good blood supply at that time and so the intellectual
disabilities that
Daniel has suffered. The epilepsy which he has suffered, the
difficulties with his vision and his difficult behaviour can all be
to that serious incident that he had”.
In relation to Daniel’s visual disability, Dr Wise wrote in a neurology
report of Daniel on 3 July 1997:
“His eyes are healthy, he does not require spectacles but the parts of
the brain that appreciate what his eyes are seeing have
been affected by his
illness. He perceives colours well, perceives shapes but not line drawings, is
able to read large print held
close to his eyes, will pick movements in his
fields of vision such that he is able to navigate his way around unfamiliar
environments
and he is able to ride his bicycle with a reasonable degree of
safety...” (Exhibit 6, page 50).
When questioned by counsel for the complainant as to the type of behaviour he
would expect Daniel to display because of his disabilities,
“The major part of his difficult behaviour would be disinhibited and
uninhibited behaviour. That is, your frontal lobes are
very important for you
to smooth out emotional ups and downs, to cope with emotional crises in a
relatively even way. So he would
be likely to have flares of temper which he
wouldn’t be able to control as well as a child of his age and with this
of intellectual handicap who did not have those particular frontal
Mr Lord described the relationship between Daniel’s disability and his
behaviour in his evidence as follows:
“...Daniel, like a lot of children, a lot of people in his
circumstances, has enormous difficulties with communication so that
don’t have access to the same ways that we have of communicating. Quite
often their behaviour - his behaviour quite often
is a way of expressing
himself, particularly when he’s finding it very difficult and very
emotional, so rather - and it may
well appear to us to be inappropriate”.
Mr Lord continues:
“He acts without a view of consequences or an intent on the behaviour,
so he is more prone to strike out, to become - it’s
probably as a last
resort. Initially he may withdraw. As he becomes frustrated he may start
talking to himself, he may start sort
of using offensive words, to isolate
himself or - he may isolate himself and use offensive words - become aggressive
and push somebody
away, strike out at somebody who is not involved, all as a
sense of not being able to articulate what the problem is that he’s
with his feelings”.
2.3 Daniel Hoggan’s family situation
In her first statement (Exhibit 32) Mrs Purvis describes Daniel’s
family situation:
“7. For the first four years of his life Daniel lived with his natural
parents in Glen Innes. Due to his high support needs
Daniel was placed with a
different carer each day and respite care each alternate weekend.
8. For the first 7 months we shared Daniel with his natural family so that he
would spend 1 week with us and then 1 week with his
mother. In hindsight, I
realise now that that was the worst thing we could have done for Daniel given
Dan’s need to know his
routine and the difficulty he faces coping with
9. In May and June 1989 Daniel and I attended the early intervention program
10. In July, Daniel returned to his natural family however in November 1989
the family situation broke down again and on 30 November
1989 Daniel was placed
with our family on a long term basis after he was made a State Ward. Daniel
still has contact with his natural
parents, who have now separated. About 3
times a year he spends the weekend with his natural mother in Glen
Mr and Mrs Purvis have three other children, all older than Daniel. In 1990,
when Daniel was five years old, the Purvis family moved
from Moree to
In a psychological report dated 7 May 1997 (Exhibit 42), Mr Lord wrote:
“Alex and Clemency’s children impress as having adopted Daniel as
a natural sibling and assist with the care and support
for Daniel... Both Alex
and Clemency have contributed enormous energies to the care of (sic) support of
2.4 Daniel Hoggan’s previous education
In 1990 Daniel commenced school in the Support Unit at Grafton Primary
School, which he attended for four years.
At the beginning of 1994, Mr and Mrs Purvis decided not to send Daniel back
to the Support Unit but to investigate other schools.
Daniel did not attend
school in 1994 until November, when he commenced for one hour a day for the last
five weeks of term at Gillwinga.
In 1996 Daniel was enrolled in a Year 5/6 class
at Gillwinga and his enrolment was full-time by term 2.
2.5 Chronological outline of events
The following outline of events is based upon the chronology prepared by the
respondent in its written submissions, and agreed to
by the complainant.
2.5.1 Initial enrolment application and initial complaint
In the second half of 1996, Mr and Mrs Purvis sought to enrol Daniel in Year
7 for 1997 at the School. On 20 June 1996, Mr Lang and
Ms McMillan from the
school attended a case meeting held at Gillwinga to discuss Daniel’s needs
and abilities.
On 6 August 1996, Mr Mac Lindsay, then principal of the School met with Mr
and Mrs Purvis to discuss Daniel’s application for
enrolment in Year 7 at
the school.
On 14 August 1996, Alex Purvis completed an application for Daniel’s
enrolment at the School.
On 29 August 1996, Ms O’Keefe and Ms Nicholls from the Distance
Education Unit attended a case management meeting at Gillwinga.
attendance were Mr and Mrs Purvis, Mr Airlie, Mr Field, Mr Waldron, Ms Thompson
and Ms LaForest. Mr Lang and Mr Lindsay apologised
for not attending.
On 10 September 1996, Ms Donsworth, Ms McMillan, and Ms Jerome (staff
representative) from the School attended Gillwinga to talk to
staff about Daniel
and to observe Daniel in class. Mrs Purvis states that she had previously
requested permission to be present during
this visit and that her request was
declined. Mrs Purvis happened to be at Gillwinga on that day and she sat in for
the science lesson
during which Daniel was observed.
In September 1996, Mr Airlie and Mr Waldron met with Mr Lindsay to discuss
Daniel. Mr Airlie states in his evidence that this meeting
lasted around half an
hour and that its focus was to look at what support the School would need to ask
for to meet Daniel’s
needs. Mr Airlie states that he explained to Mr
Lindsay how Gillwinga had set up its aide support structure with two aides and
Waldron showed Mr Lindsay some examples of Daniel’s work.
An Integration Committee was formed at the School to consider Daniel’s
enrolment. On 19 September 1996, this committee held
a meeting at which were
present Mr Lindsay, Ms Jerome, Ms McMillan, Ms Donsworth and Mr Huxley. Ms
Donsworth, Ms McMillan and Ms
Jerome gave a verbal report regarding their visit
to Gillwinga. Various issues were discussed and the minutes of the meeting note
that the enrolment of Daniel into year 7 at the School in 1997 was not
recommended by the Integration Committee.
On 24 September 1996, the Integration Committee prepared a report in relation
to Daniel’s enrolment.
On 7 November 1996, Mr Lindsay and Ms Donsworth met with Mr and Mrs Purvis.
Mr Lindsay listed a range of potential obstacles to Daniel
coming to the school,
and asked why Mr and Mrs Purvis didn’t want to send Daniel to the Support
Unit at Grafton High School.
Mr and Mrs Purvis explained that Daniel had been in
a Support Unit, that they felt his behaviour in particular regressed; that he
was in the integrated environment at Gillwinga and that they wished this to
On 11 November 1996, Mr Lindsay wrote to Mr and Mrs Purvis to inform them of
his decision to decline Daniel’s application for
enrolment at the School.
This decision was appealed by Mr Purvis to Mr Phillips.
On 28 November 1996, Mr Field attended Gillwinga for half a day to observe
Daniel, in order to assess the type and level of support
he would need if he
were to attend the School.
On 17 December 1996 Mr Phillips met with Mr & Mrs Purvis to discuss their
appeal against Mr Lindsay’s decision.
On 23 December 1996, Mr Purvis filed a complaint with the Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission in relation to the School’s
refusal to accept
Daniel’s enrolment application.
In December 1996, Mr Bartley was appointed as Principal of the School.
On 24 December 1996 Mr Phillips wrote to Mr Purvis. Mr Phillips indicated
that the Department’s policy on the enrolment of children
disabilities had not been fully complied with by the School, that he regretted
this situation and that he intended to finalise
it as a matter of urgency in
consultation with the newly appointed Principal.
On 24 January 1997, the delegate of the Disability Discrimination
Commissioner convened a conciliation conference. According to Mrs
statement, it was agreed at this conciliation conference that the Department
would communicate its decision regarding
Daniel’s enrolment by 21 February
1997, that the Department would inform Mr and Mrs Purvis whether Daniel could
attend Gillwinga
from 4 February 1997, and that Mr and Mrs Purvis would not
press an application for an interim determination until informed of the
Department’s decision regarding the School.
2.5.2 The second enrolment application
In either late January or early February 1997, shortly after the conciliation
conference, Mr Bartley visited Mr and Mrs Purvis at
Purvis recalled discussing Daniel’s visual disability and his lack of body
awareness and the need
for positive direction. She also recalled that Mr
Bartley was very positive about Daniel.
In February 1997, a new Integration Committee was established at the School
to determine the amount and types of resources and support
that the school would
need to cater for Daniel. The members of this Integration Committee were Mr
Bartley, Mr Perl (Teachers’
Federation staff representative), Ms
Donsworth, Ms McMillan, Mr James (the President of the School Council) and Ms
Fernance (administrative
support staff representative).
On 4 February 1997, a Teachers’ Federation meeting was held by staff
members at the School to discuss Daniel’s application
for enrolment. This
meeting unanimously passed a motion calling on all concerned to ensure that the
procedures in the NSW Teachers
Federation Guidelines for Integration be strictly
observed and that the Department provide resources and support services as
in the NSW Teachers’ Federation Annual Conference Resolution
On 5 February 1997, the Integration Committee met to discuss Daniel’s
application for enrolment. In attendance were Mr Bartley,
Mr Perl, Ms Donsworth,
Ms McMillan, Mr James and Ms Fernance. It was suggested that Daniel be invited
to attend the School for one
day to assist with assessing his needs and the
resources required to successfully integrate him into the School.
On 6 February 1997, the Integration Committee met with Mr Airlie and Mr
Waldron from Gillwinga, to discuss their experiences with
Daniel in primary
school. It was noted that a strong orientation program in which Daniel became
familiar with his movement from lesson
to lesson would be very important. Also
discussed was the fact that Daniel would need assistance in getting changed for
education classes, and that Daniel’s aides were female and Daniel
would be using a male changing room. It was also suggested
that a welfare action
plan be developed, and other matters discussed.
On 7 February 1997, Mr Bartley met with Mr and Mrs Purvis to discuss actions
being taken by the School in relation to Daniel’s
application for
On 11 February 1997, Mr Airlie and Mr Waldron attended a Teachers’
Federation Meeting at the School to provide examples of Daniel’s
to answer questions from staff at the School.
Also on 11 February 1997, Mr Purvis wrote to Mr Bartley advising that he and
Mrs Purvis were apprehensive about Daniel participating
in a trial day at the
School, if this had the potential to be used as a barrier to Daniel attending
the school. Mr Purvis stated
that he would feel more comfortable about a trial
day if Daniel’s enrolment at the school was already confirmed.
On 13 February 1997, Mr Bartley wrote to Alex Purvis requesting Mr Purvis to
re-consider his position regarding a trial day, and indicating
that the trial
was seen as a positive attempt by the School to assess the type of supports and
resources that Daniel may require.
On 13 February 1997, Mr Purvis wrote to Mr Bartley conditionally agreeing to
allow Daniel to take part in a trial day at the School.
In February 1997, Mr Bartley prepared a lengthy document entitled
“Daniel Hoggan’s Integration”, which set out the
background and plans for the support and resources sought.
On 20 February 1997, a Teachers Federation meeting was held at the School. Mr
Bartley attended and presented the meeting with a copy
of the submission in
support of his application for state integration funding, which is referred to
above. A motion was passed at
the meeting to accept the document prepared by Mr
Bartley, and it was decided to defer a decision on whether to
Daniel’s enrolment.
On 20 February 1997, Mr and Mrs Purvis met with Mr Bartley and Ms
Donsworth.On 21 February 1997, Mr Bartley completed a Department
application
form for state integration program funding for Daniel.
On 26 February 1997, a further Teachers Federation meeting was held to
discuss Daniel’s integration. Mr Bartley attended and
set out the support
and resources that would be made available to facilitate Daniel’s
integration. A motion was carried 27
to 12, with 9 abstentions, to
“reject” the proposed enrolment of Daniel.
On 27 February 1997, an extraordinary staff meeting was held to discuss
Daniel’s integration. Mr Bartley sent a memo to staff,
saying that he
needed to be clear about the reasons for the vote to reject Daniel
Hoggan’s enrolment. Mr Bartley’s memo
asked staff to consider
whether they were saying no on educational or industrial grounds.
After the staff meeting, also on 27 February 1997, a Teachers’
Federation meeting was held. A motion was carried condemning
the Department for
placing the staff and Principal in the predicament of making a decision on
enrolment without the necessary information.
The motion also disapproved of
additional funding being granted for Daniel when a Special Unit was already in
existence at Grafton
High School. 49 teachers voted in support of this motion,
none against it, and 2 abstained. The minutes note that copies of the motion
were sent to the Teachers Federation, senior officers of the Department, and
politicians.
On 28 February 1997, Mr Bartley informed staff at the school that he had
decided to accept Daniel’s application for enrolment.
2.5.3 Preparations for Daniel’s attendance at the school
In February/March 1997, before Daniel came to the school, a toilet and
bathroom were constructed specifically for him. This toilet
and bathroom were to
be used by Daniel and his teachers’ aides in the event that he soiled
himself and needed to get changed.
Mrs Purvis stated that the construction of a
toilet and bathroom was not necessary, nor did she and Mr Purvis request it. In
cross-examination
of Mrs Purvis, counsel for the respondent put to Mrs Purvis
that a special bathroom was constructed on advice from staff at Gillwinga.
Purvis stated that a special toilet was also put in at Gillwinga for Daniel and
that to her knowledge it was only used about
On 3 March 1997, Mr Bartley met with Mr and Mrs Purvis to discuss
Daniel’s enrolment at the school. The establishment of a case
committee was discussed.
On 7 March 1997, a further Teachers’ Federation meeting was held to
discuss the Principal’s decision to enrol Daniel.
A motion was carried by
23 to 14 (with one abstention) to re-assess the situation and re-convene the
meeting in four weeks time.
Also on 7 March 1997, the Special Education Directorate approved funding of
an amount equivalent to a Teachers’ Aide (Special)
for 77 days (6 1/4
hours per day) and a Casual Teacher for 20 days (6 hours per day), until the end
of Term 2, 1997. This amount
totalled $10,691.13.
On 11 March 1997, Mr Bartley met with Mr Purvis to discuss the issues that
would be dealt with at the meeting to be held on the following
day, including a
welfare and discipline program and Daniel’s educational program.
On 12 March 1997, Ms Donsworth and Mr Bartley met with Mr Purvis. The minutes
of this meeting note that teachers were asked to bring
in copies of their
teaching programs, which would be provided to Distance Education to organise
modified programs for Daniel. The
issues of a welfare and discipline policy with
appropriate sanctions for inappropriate behaviour was also discussed.
On 12 March 1997, Ms Fisher, Daniel’s Distance Education teacher,
travelled to Grafton from Sydney and spent a day at the Purvis’
Fisher met with Daniel, Ms Thompson, Ms LaForrest and Mr and Mrs Purvis. In her
‘Field Trip Report’ of her visit
to Grafton, Ms Fisher noted that
she talked to Ms Thompson and observed her working with Daniel. She also
reported discussing with
Mr and Mrs Purvis how they would like Daniel’s
inclusion to work, and noted that total inclusion for Daniel in the classroom
and socialisation were the priorities for them.
The next day, on 13 March 1997, Ms Fisher and Ms O’ Keefe spent a day
at the School. They met Mr Bartley and the Year 7 Co-ordinator,
Ms Fitzmaurice.
Mr Bartley had organised for groups of Year 7 teachers to meet with them
throughout the day. At lunchtime they met
with Mr Phillips. Ms Fisher’s
notes record some of the teachers’ main concerns, for example how
Daniel’s presence
in the class would affect the learning of other
students, the constant presence of the teacher’s aide in the classroom;
learning; and being accountable.
On 19 March 1997 a meeting was held to formulate a Draft Welfare and
Discipline Policy for Daniel. Mr Bartley and staff members Mr
McMillan, Ms Donsworth, Ms Court and Ms Fitzmaurice attended that meeting.
Neither Mr Purvis, or Mrs Purvis, or Ms Thompson
or Ms LaForest were invited to
this meeting.
On 24 March 1997, Mr Bartley prepared a document entitled ‘Enrolment of
Daniel Hoggan to South Grafton High School (Student
with special needs)’
(Exhibit 2, pages 20 to 21). This document states that no formal assessment has
been made of Daniel’s
motor skills or visual impairment, and there is
concern regarding possible dangers to Daniel from his participation in the
of Science, Design and Technology, Visual Arts, PE and Sport. The
document lists some of the safety concerns in relation to those
subjects as
including Daniel’s level of dexterity and fine motor skills combined with
his visual impairment, Daniel’s
ability to understand and respect the
safety rules and guidelines in relation to practical subjects, the time required
to change for sport and whether his aide will participate in physical
activities with him.
On 25 March 1997 a case management meeting was held. Mr Bartley, Mr Purvis,
Ms Donsworth, Ms LaForest, Ms Thompson, Ms McMillan, Mr
James and Ms Court
attended the meeting. The notes of the meeting indicate that Mr Bartley read out
the draft welfare and discipline
policy. The issues noted in the minutes as
being discussed include safety in the classroom, assessments, welfare policy,
of other students in Daniel’s class, and the staff development
day. The minutes also note that it has been identified that
Daniel is a better
auditory learner than a visual learner, and that the school will be seeking
resources, including tapes and headphones,
which relate to auditory learning,
and accessing suitable programs. The minutes also note that all contact with the
school regarding
Daniel’s progress is to be made through the Principal
On 25 March 1997, Mr Bartley had a conversation with Ms Whitney from DOCS
On 26 March 1997, Mr Bartley received a letter from Mr Purvis. Mr Purvis
explained in this letter that he had never been adverse to
providing the school
with information about Daniel, however in the past he had sought more details
regarding what information was
needed and the purpose to which it would be
On 7 April 1997, a staff development day was held for Daniel’s Year 7
teachers and his teacher’s aides. This was chaired
by Mr McPherson and
was attended by Daniel’s teachers’ aides - Ms Thompson and Ms
LaForest, and most of Daniel’s
Year 7 teachers: Mr Miller, Mr Murray, Ms
Beletich, Mr Trudgett, R Jubb, G O’Connor, Ms Ebling, C Inmon, Ms Durant,
and the Year 7 Adviser, Ms Fitzmaurice. Ms Thompson stated that many of
the teachers said that they were concerned about teaching
Daniel and about what
sort of behaviour to expect from him. The notes of the staff development day
record the issues discussed as
including mapping a daily routine, safety issues,
classroom placement, regular testing and development of a ‘progress
2.5.4 Term 2 1997
On 8 April 1997, Daniel commenced at the School.
On 24 April 1997, Daniel was suspended for one day after an incident with Ms
Thompson. Ms Thompson stated that she cannot recall what
happened, although she
remembers going home. Mrs Purvis stated that the incident happened as a result
of Daniel’s reluctance
to come to school. The suspension was recorded in
the ‘Suspension, Exclusion and Declaration of Place Vacant Register’
(“the Register”), where the reason given for the suspension was
noted as ‘violence against staff’.
On 30 April 1997, a case management meeting was held which Mr Bartley, Mr
Purvis, Ms Whitney, Ms Fitzmaurice, Mr James, Ms LaForest,
Ms Thompson, Ms Court
and Ms Donsworth attended. At this meeting, according to the notes, Ms
Fitzmaurice reported that the effect
of Daniel’s presence in the classroom
varied from class to class. She also reported that there had been some problems
work from Distance Education. Ms Donsworth, the school counsellor, noted
her concerns that Daniel was isolated in the playground.
Mr Bartley commented on
Daniel’s behaviour in relation to the incident with Ms Thompson on 24
April 1997, and it was recommended
that the usual letter of suspension and
paperwork for a short suspension should be completed. Mr Purvis suggested that
there might
have to be adjustments to the Draft Welfare and Discipline Policy
for Daniel, as Daniel may interpret being suspended and being sent
reward. It was noted that teaching staff were unsure whether their teaching
strategies were improving Daniel’s knowledge
and whether he was learning
in their classes. The need to assess Daniel was raised again, and Mr Purvis
noted that he didn’t
have a problem with testing, so long as it benefited
Daniel educationally. Mr Purvis stated that he believed Daniel was learning
things, and benefiting by being at the school.
On 2 May 1997, Ms Thompson recorded in the Communication Book as follows:
“Excellent again today - no trouble getting him to school today. Great
day - excellent mood - worked well. Went to Mrs Court
“testing” I went too - went really well - she is lovely”.
On 6 May 1997, Mr Bartley prepared an application for continued integration
support for Daniel’s enrolment at the school.
Also on 6 May 1997, Mr and Mrs Purvis arranged for Mr Lord to meet with them
and Ms Thompson to discuss problems they were having
getting Daniel to school.
Following this discussion, on the advice of Mr Lord, Ms Thompson began meeting
Daniel halfway between home
and the school. In or around May or June 1997, Mr
Bartley advised Ms Thompson not to leave the school grounds to collect Daniel.
Mr Bartley explained to Ms Thompson that escorting a student to school was not
part of her duties and she would not be covered by
workers compensation
insurance if she were injured while off school grounds.
On 7 May 1997, Mr Lord prepared a report on possible supports that may be
required for Mr and Mrs Purvis to sustain Daniel’s
placement with them. Mr
Lord noted that he was concerned about the level of stress that Daniel’s
behaviour and the Purvis’
efforts to have him integrated into the school
system were placing on the Purvis family. He recommended that DOCS maintain
Also on 7 May 1997, Daniel was suspended for two days for kicking a fellow
student and for calling his teachers’ aide, Ms McLellan,
cunt”. Daniel’s suspension took effect from 3.30pm, 7 May until 9am,
12 May 1997. Mr Bartley wrote a
letter to Mr and Mrs Purvis informing them of
the suspension and the reason for the suspension, and the suspension was
recorded in
the Register.
Also on 7 May 1997, Mrs Purvis discussed the incident with Ms McLellan and
what could be done differently next time. Ms McLellan mentioned
that Daniel
appeared isolated in the playground.
On 8 May 1997, Mr and Mrs Purvis met with Mr Bartley to discuss their
concerns about the appropriateness of suspension as a sanction,
as Daniel did
not understand that staying home from school was punishment. It was agreed that
Mr Lord be contacted again and that
a meeting be arranged to discuss behaviour
management.
On 9 May 1997, a report was prepared by Ms Donsworth setting out the results
of tests conducted by herself and Ms Court. Ms Donsworth
concluded that
Daniel’s literacy and numeracy skills were at about pre-school level. Mr
Purvis stated that this testing was
performed without his permission, and was
inappropriate for Daniel because of his visual impairment. Mr Bartley stated
result of the discussion at the case management meeting held on 30
April 1997, he understood that Mr Purvis had agreed to literacy
and numeracy
testing of Daniel being coordinated by Ms Donsworth.
On 11 May 1997, Mr Purvis wrote to Mr Bartley in relation to the mid-term
evaluation, the daily evaluation sheets and the Draft Welfare
and Discipline
Policy for Daniel. He questioned the objectives of the mid-term evaluation and
daily evaluation sheets and noted his
concerns regarding suspension, as it was a
sanction which Daniel did not understand. Mr Purvis suggested that it might be
to utilise the psychologist, Mr Lord, to assist with the development of
more appropriate sanctions and rewards for Daniel.
On 12 May 1997, the Communication book records as follows:
“Excellent today - walked to school, no problems - really wonderful all
of my time.
Great this arvo, very happy asking lots of questions...”
On 15 May 1997, the Communication Book records “Dan has been great this
arvo, did heaps of work in Science, Humanities teacher
away so we did Distance
Ed. Two boys and four girls had lunch with Dan today, their choice, encouraging
him to answer them when they
ask questions, did really well, they stayed around
for the whole of lunch...”
On 22 May 1997 the Communication Book records:
“Excellent again today, worked beautifully through Art and Health/PE,
is talking more with the other children. They are interacting
more of their own
accord - is happy to be at school.”
On 26 May 1997 the Communication Book records:
“Great day! Worked well throughout morning - happy to be here... great
this arvo, threw the javelin in the carnival... Excellent
at carnival, Dan went
in the shot-put, discuss and 200 metre run, was really good - had a good
In May 1997, some of Daniel’s teachers prepared half-yearly reports for
Also in May 1997, most of Daniel’s teachers completed a mid-term
evaluation for him.
On 29 May 1997, Mr Bartley met with Mr Lord, a psychologist with the
Department of Community Services. The meeting lasted for about
three hours. The
use of ‘time out’ as a behaviour management strategy was
Also on 29 May 1997, the Communication Book records:
“Great arvo, had our speech today. Dan didn’t want to wear his
helmet and armour but held it and told the class who wore
it. We had taped Dan
last week so we played the tape the class all clapped and told Dan well done, he
did a great job.”
On 30 May 1997, Ms Thompson spoke to Ms Fisher in relation to Daniel being
unsettled when other students sat exams.
On 30 May 1997, Daniel kicked a desk over, kicked other students, kicked bags
and swore. The Communication Book (Exhibit 27) between
the teachers’ aides
and Mr and Mrs Purvis recorded for Friday 30 May 1997:
“Day started well, but unfortunately spent double English in time-out
for kicking a desk over, kicking kids bags and swearing
in English. Is very
stressed about Science test (Monday) (that’s what upset him)”.
2.5.5 Term 3 1997
In her first statement Mrs Purvis states as follows:
“By June of 1997 I had observed that Daniel had settled down and was
going to school quite happily. I believe his level of
self esteem had improved
and he appeared to be maturing. Daniel was making friends and had been invited
to another birthday party.
Some of the things he enjoyed and his achievements in
that time included:
the Willows”
He was in a play
“ A Convicts Life”
Presented a talk
on Ned Kelly to the class
he was playing
with boys at lunch time
Card” for Art
he was in a
motor bike rally as part of an English project where he worked in a team
he completed a
science project”
On 6 June 1997, the Communication Book
“Excellent start today. A boy named Nathan has been talking to Dan
regularly. He came looking for him before school today...”
On 10 June 1997 the Communication Book records:
“Good morning, worked really well, singing ++ boys Ben, Matt & Mark
asked him to sit with them in Library and for lunch
(dirty clothes in bag)...
Great arvo, had a good time at lunch with the boys Ben, Matt, Mark, Daniel Saye,
Ned and about four others,
enjoyed Language. We ate for 30 mins rice, noodles
and sate chicken, told Mr Avery it was nasi goreng and sate ayam.”
On 18 June 1997, the Communication Book records:
“Dan would not get changed/ He wet himself. He tried to hit and kick me
(Ms McLellan) so I made him stay in the corner...”
On 18 June 1997, Mr Bartley again met with Mr Lord, for one and half-hours,
to discuss behaviour management strategies. Mr Bartley
said that Mr Lord did not
make many suggestions as to additional strategies that could be used to manage
Daniel’s behaviour
more successfully. Mr Lord stated that he did not feel
in a position to make any further suggestions, not having observed Daniel
the school.
On 18 June 1997, a case management meeting was held which Mr Bartley, Mr
Lord, Mr and Mrs Purvis, Ms Court, Ms Thompson, Ms McMillan,
Ms Fitzmaurice and
Ms Whitney attended. Mr Lord addressed the meeting regarding assessing Daniel
and other matters. Mr Lord stated
that at this meeting, he offered to attend
the school to observe Daniel and to then sit down with the teachers and devise a
management plan at no cost to the school. However he stated that he
was not contacted again. Mrs Purvis states that she prepared
(Exhibit 32, pages 75-76) which she ‘skim-read’ to the meeting and
stated how pleased she and Mr Purvis
were with Daniel’s integration. Under
the heading “What has been the effect on Daniel of starting high
Mrs Purvis wrote in these notes:
“Daniel has become more responsible and has taken on jobs of his own
accord... He is also interacting with other children and
adults better. Note: As
Daniel has settled into school he appears more settled within himself and his
self-esteem seems to be on
the rise so that he wants to do things like
Mrs Purvis goes on to state in this document that:
“Daniel has had over fifteen different teachers. He knows their names
and what subjects they teach... Daniel is coming home
and accurately reporting
what his day was like, how he coped and what he learned... He talks about his
friends at school and especially
at sport. When we go down the street kids come
up and say hi to him. It is very rewarding when on two separate weekends his
rang up and came around to play... We have been very pleased with the
way Daniel has settled into school. All the teachers need to
be commended with
how he is becoming an accepted member of the class...”
In her statement Ms Thompson says as follows:
“It was my view that by the end of term 2 Daniel had settled well into
his school life at South Grafton High School and was
very much enjoying the
interaction with his peers. He began to develop friendship with the group of
boys with whom he sat at lunch
times. In Music, Science and Library, Daniel
completed the same tests that were being done by all students in the class and
answer some questions correctly. Daniel was learning and retaining things
that interested him. Whilst Daniel was not always on
task, and it could take
some effort to get him to complete tasks, he was by no means the most disruptive
member of the class. Most
other students were louder than Daniel, which
contributed to his poor concentration.”
On 19 June 1997, Daniel told his aide to “fuck off”, then kicked
his aide, Ms McClennan, and ran off. In the Communication
Book Ms McClennan
“Dan sat with Matt and friends at lunch and enjoyed his noodle. But
when it was time to go to class Dan was going home. When
I told him we had 2
bells to go before Dan goes home. So he told me to F off then kicked me then
ran down to the back fence to go
Dan to go to class but he told them to F off and tried kicking again. He
go, one of the students got Mr Bartley. As soon as Dan saw Mr Bartley
he knew he was in trouble and went with him quietly. I’m
OK just a little
On 23 June 1997, Daniel kicked, punched and bit his aide. The Communication
Book records:
“Horrid start to day. Dan wouldn’t come to school got as far as
tennis courts before he started yelling, swearing etc.
Tried for 5 mins to talk
him round, he was kicking, punching and biting me. I had to pull his hair to
stop him biting. Ran off toward
Geoff came past in car, then walked back. Talked to him for about 5 mins then
started to get him back to school, we got as far as the gate then he
started again, the bell had gone by this time. Daniel wasn’t
school. Ran across paddock and threw himself in grass. Barry came to get him,
spent 1 ½ periods outside Barry’s
On 24 June 1997, Daniel was swearing and tried to kick his aide. The
teacher’s aide that afternoon records:
“Not a very good start, swearing and tried to kick me (too quick). Wet
clothes in bag.”
On 25 June 1997, Mr and Mrs
Purvis wrote to Mr Bartley to thank him and Daniel’s case management team
for their efforts in relation
On 17 July 1997, the Special Education Directorate approved funding totalling
$10,296.30 in respect of Daniel’s enrolment at
the school. This was an
amount equivalent to a teacher’s aide (special) for 105 days (6 ¼
hours per day) and a casual
teacher for 6 hours a day.
The following entry appears in the Communication Book with 25/6 written next
to it, however it appears that this is an error as there
is an earlier entry
some pages previous for 25 June 1997. This entry should be for 25 July 1997. The
entry records:
“Totally lost it after you left, kicked and punched me, kicking doors etc
- Barry came and got him - took him to his office
- kept him until
On 28 July 1997, Mr and Mrs Purvis
attended parent teacher interviews at the school.
On 30 July 1997, Daniel was suspended for 2 days following an incident in
which he kicked his teachers’ aide, Ms LaForest. On
1 August 1997 Mr
Bartley wrote a letter to Mr and Mrs Purvis in relation to this incident. The
suspension was recorded in the suspension
and exclusion register. In her
statement (Exhibit 49) Ms LaForest describes the incident as follows:
“I was having difficulty convincing Daniel to go to class and he kicked me
with the back of his heel.
I said words to the effect “it’s not nice to be kicked Dan”
and, to my horror, I kicked him back.
I was horrified and very surprised by my
Mr Bartley completed a
“Critical Incident Report” form the same day, which was faxed to Mr
On 31 July 1997, Mr & Mrs Purvis met with Mr Phillips and Mr Bartley
regarding the incident and the fact that Ms LaForest had
kicked Daniel. Mr and
Mrs Purvis advised Mr Bartley and Mr Phillips that they did not wish the matter
to be taken any further and
Ms LaForest was not suspended from her duties.
On 1 August 1997, Mr Bartley wrote to Ms LaForest to formally note his
concern about the incident.
On 4 August 1997, Ms Fisher, Daniel’s Distance Education teacher, again
travelled to Grafton. She met with Ms Thompson and Ms
LaForest and later met
with Mr and Mrs Purvis and Daniel at the Purvis’ home.
On 5 August 1997, Ms Fisher spent a day at the School. She met with Mr
Bartley and then observed and worked with Daniel in the classroom.
On 8 August 1997, Mr Garrard and Mr Callan, both of whom were special
education consultants with the Special Education Directorate
of the Department,
attended a case management meeting at the School. Prior to this meeting Mr
Garrard and Mr Callan had spent the
day at the school observing Daniel in his
classes. Mr Bartley, Mr Purvis, Ms Thompson, Ms LaForest, Ms Donsworth, Ms
Fitzmaurice,
Ms Court, Kim Whitney, and Mr Field also attended the meeting. Many
issues were discussed, such as the appropriate curriculum for
On 13 August 1997, a student reported that Daniel came running towards her
and another student near the library, with Ms Thompson
in pursuit. The student
said that they started talking to Daniel in order to stop him running, and they
asked him where he was going
and why he was running away from Ms Thompson.
Daniel is reported to have responded, “I hate her and I’m going to
her”. Ms Thompson stated that she finds it difficult to believe that
Daniel would have used those words.
On 21 August 1997, Daniel ran onto the street. The Communication Book
records as follows:
“15 mins late to Art (1st period) ran away was on way home down past
tennis courts out onto street. Finally to class - very
easily distracted in Art
- ran off with 5 minutes to go - refused to come back was going home - took 20
mins to get him to Barry’s
(Mr Bartley’s) office...”
In August or September 1997, Ken Callan and Peter
Garrard prepared a document entitled “Program Review” in relation to
Daniel (“the Callan and Gerrard Report”). The Callan and Gerrard
Report was set out under the headings of background,
review procedure, the
current situation, and recommendations. The Callan and Gerrard report’s
recommendations are as follows:
current placement at SGHS should continue with appropriate ongoing support.
An individual
transition plan (ITP) be developed to clarify the goals for Daniel’s
program. The development of this plan can
be supported by district or state
transition personnel.
ITP form the basis of his individualised program including appropriate
curriculum design, modifications to the support
provided by the DESU, greater
involvement of ST(LD) and support to individual class teachers who wish to take
a more active role
in the planning, preparation and delivery of Daniel’s
Administrative
processes to support the management and coordination of Daniel’s program
be clarified to endure that the year
adviser and other key staff can monitor
progress towards the goals of Daniel’s ITP.
The involvement
of additional support staff available from district and state should be
considered...
The main focus
of the principal’s responsibility should continue to be liaison with Mr
and Mrs Purvis, school personnel and
outside agencies. The support currently
being provided daily to Daniel by the principal should be shared with one or two
other members
of staff who volunteer to develop a closer relationship with
Daniel. This relationship may be developed into a mentoring and crisis
management role...
The Director,
Special Education be requested to provide an additional allocation from the
state integration program to provide five
days of teacher release time to enable
interested teachers to participate in IEP/ITP development for Daniel.
formal review of the acceptance and implementation of these recommendations in
Term 4 involving the case management committee
and district and state support
personnel.”
Mr Phillips then made contact with Ms Martin to
discuss his concerns about the Callan and Gerrard Report and issues that he felt
failed to address. Mr Phillips stated that he said something to Ms Martin
along the lines of:
“Well, clearly this is a complex issue. The Principal and the School need
support. We need people on the ground. We don’t
need a piece of paper
which has got generalisations and is limited. We need people to come up”.
Mr Phillips stated that Ms Martin then agreed to
organise for support staff to travel to Grafton. This arrangement was confirmed
Ms Martin’s letter to Mr Phillips of 16 September 1997, which
recommended that Mr Gerard and Ms Bruveris, “visit the
school with
appropriate personnel from district office to provide follow-up to the issues
which were initially discussed”.
Mr Bartley and Mr and Mrs Purvis were unaware of the existence of the Callan
and Gerrard Report until Mr Purvis obtained a copy of
it under Freedom of
Information legislation in 1998. In cross-examination, when asked why he did not
provide a copy of the Callan
and Gerard Report to Mr Bartley, Mr Phillips stated
that the Report was meant to be a working document for Ms Martin; that there
no need to provide the report to Mr Bartley or the case management group as he,
Mr Phillips, immediately spoke to Ms Martin and
organised for Mr Gerrand and Ms
Bruveris to visit; and that while Mr Callan and Mr Gerrard were expected to
provide feedback, this
“...I had major concerns with the limitations of the recommendations and
the way in which it had been written. And I asked
the people to be sent - I
asked Heather Martin for these people to revisit and come back to the school to
talk to the people, and
talk firsthand about these matters, which I believed was
far better than faxing a piece of paper from Sydney in isolation, and people
trying to make some sense of what was being offered through two or three pages
of documentation that was clearly limited”.
2 September 1997, Daniel was suspended from school for 13 school days for
kicking a Year 10 student in the leg. This was later
reduced to a 7-day
suspension. Ms Thompson says in her statement (Exhibit 45):
“61. The suspension arose because Daniel was difficult to get to school
that day and was very stressed. I took Alana Richards
to the Office for an ice
pack as a precaution and took Daniel to Mr Bartley. Alana was very confused
impact of the kick, there was no broken skin or mark,
and Alana was not limping and did not appear hurt”.
On 6 September 1997, Daniel ran out onto the road
and was narrowly missed by a car.
On 8 September 1997, Ms Donsworth prepared a report as school counsellor in
relation to Daniel’s suspension of 3 September 1997.
On 10 September 1997, Mr Field faxed a handwritten note (Exhibit 52, pages
656 to 657) to Mr Bartley with a list of “ideas you
may consider”
for dealing with Daniel’s behaviour, which he had formulated following a
meeting with Ms Thompson and Ms
“1. Alter morning entry point to school from present to entry from
football field.
2. Karen to pick Daniel up at steps and take him to library and retain there
until commencement of period 1... Karen to debrief on
any previous day issues
and prepare Daniel for day ahead.
3. Certain alternative uses to be made of four particular periods during the
Tuesday - period
5 for Dist. Ed work to catch up on much undone work
Wednesday -
period 6 - TAS to provide Daniel with O.T. type activities
period 7 (see Tuesday)
Friday - Period
1 - debriefing of weeks activities and reading time in
4. Rewards & Punishment - Karen & Lorraine to shift
‘blackboard’ punishment to symbolic level involving home
& punishments (need to elaborate on this with you).
5. Jenny Pursey, IST (Integration) can be accessed through this office as an
ideas & support person for K & L & gets
on well with
On 15 September 1997, Daniel returned
to school following a decision to shorten the length of his suspension to allow
him to attend
a behavioural management course.
An entry in the Communication Book headed 17 September describes Daniel
swearing at his teacher’s aide, kicking over a garbage
bin and refusing to
pick up the garbage when asked to do so by the aide. The Communication Book
records as follows:
“Not a great arvo. Wanted to go home at lunchtime had to keep changing his
direction as he kept heading towards car park. Got
change for P.E. with little
hassle, went to P.E. threw ball around with Adam and Daniel for about 10 mins
then threw ball over the
fence. Adam went and got it and he threw it over again
so I told Adam not to give it to him again and tried to talk to Dan positively
Daniel started swearing at me and said he was going
to wet is pants which he did
3 times then ran over to the garbage bin kick rubbish everywhere, wouldn’t
go with me to get changed,
wouldn’t pick bin up. Just kept swearing and
saying he was going home, went to get Bob Perl who then came over and spoke to
Dan got him to pick up rubbish by this time there was about 5 mins to final
The next dated entry in the
Communication Book is headed 16 September, but appears to have been written in
later. This entry records
that Daniel pushed a student into a wall and pulled a
chair out from under another student:
“Rotten start, swearing agro++, not happy to go to class, worked well in D
& T. Bad day, not happy to be here.
Pushed Daniel Saye into a wall, pulled Katie’s chair from under
On 18 September 1997, Daniel was
suspended for 12 school days (until 17 October 1997) after punching Ms Thompson
in the back. Daniel
did not return to the school following this suspension thus
18 September 1997, was Daniel’s final day at the school. The Communication
Book records:
“Bad start, not happy to go to class from roll call, ran off across
carpark. I sat and watched from a distance. Norm Trudgett
came to intervene,
walked with us to Art. Ran off from Art would not go to class stood at tennis
courts then ran of to small oval
- refused to go to class sat under table -
after about 20 mins into 2nd period - went up to Dan and said “I’m
get our bags” when I walked away, Daniel came up behind me and
thumped me in the back. Brian Heath and Mr Bruce came and took
Daniel to the
Also on 18 September 1997, Mr Bartley
wrote to Mr and Mrs Purvis, advising of the suspension and that the incident
with Ms Thompson
“...has left all of us in a quandry as to where we should
go from here”. He also writes:
“You should be aware that at this stage, both teacher’s Aids are
feeling extremely stressed because they feel that as
a result of all of their
efforts, sensitivity and care, that Daniel is not responding it the manner that
we had wished, indeed Daniel’s
violence, swearing and inappropriate
behaviour in the last 8 weeks has increased by a considerable amount...
As the Principal of the School, I have averaged approximately 7 hours per week
in providing the structure and strategies to support
Daniel’s education at
this school...
I feel a sense of loss and have no joy in again suspending Daniel from school
for violent behaviour and assault of his aid. We will
again await the reports of
another expert, Ms Carrie Brookes, to see if there is anything that we may do to
however, one thing that is clear, is that Daniel is
not coping with the normal life of a High School. I think it is time for all
us to rethink our objectives in relation to meeting the needs of Daniel for as
we have stated in the past, his needs, both educationally
and social, are our
greatest concern...”
Also on 18 September, Ms
Fisher and Ms Thompson had a telephone conversation regarding Daniel’s
behaviour that day. Ms Thompson
indicated that she was upset and that Daniel
appeared very stressed. Ms Fisher’s notes of the conversation are as
“Karyn rang to say that Daniel had kicked her for no reason in the back.
Hurt her quite badly - she was very upset. Clemency
had picked Daniel up from
school and taken him home. Karyn says she is not prepared to continue with
Daniel - she feels as though
she has ‘had it’.
She loves Dan and can see that he is stressed and unhappy. Barry in a meeting.
Karyn is waiting to see him before she goes home.
Will let me know what is
happening”.
On 18 September 1997, Mr Bartley
faxed to Mr Phillips a draft recommendation in relation to Daniel’s future
education. This
document recommended that his teachers’ aides through
Distance Education deliver Daniel’s academic education at home,
his aides have access to the full support and resources of the school. Mr
Bartley recommended that Daniel joins sports lessons
and school excursions, and
that a social group or circle of friends be established to meet with Daniel on a
regular basis.
On 19 September 1997, a Teachers Federation meeting was held to discuss
Daniel’s continued enrolment. A letter was drafted to
Mr Phillips calling
for Daniel to be placed in a more suitable environment, and seeking a response
by 22 October 1997.
On 25 September 1997, Ms Thompson spoke to Ms Fisher regarding Daniel’s
suspension & other matters, Ms Fisher’s notes
record in part:
“Phoned Karyn. Daniel is suspended until Week 3 of Term 4. Karyn is still
distressed. Her back is healing- she is having physio.
Is working at school
doing photocopying etc. Staff being very supportive. Barry also very
supportive.
Daniel went to school on Tuesday so that DOCS counsellor - Carrie Brooks could
do some assessments and behaviour assessment. Daniel
was really acting out and
was verbally abusive to Karyn”.
September 1997, Mr Bartley wrote to Mr and Mrs Purvis outlining his concerns and
strongly suggesting that they explore the option
of enrolling Daniel in the
Special Unit at Grafton High School.
2.5.6 Term 4 1997
On 15 October 1997, a case management meeting was held. Mr Bartley, Mr
Phillips, Carol Baldwin, Mr and Mrs Purvis, Ms Thompson, Ms
LaForest, Ms
McLennan, Ms McMillan, Ms Donsworth, Ms Court, Mr Scahill, Ms Brooks, Mr Garrard
and Ms Bruveris, and Kim Whitney attended.
Various options were discussed for
Daniel’s return to school, however no consensus was reached about what
should be done.
On 15 October 1997, Ms Brookes completed a report in relation to
Daniel’s behaviour after observing him in the classroom and
playground over two mornings. This report identified the functions of
Daniel’s behaviour as avoidance of a particular
situation and seeking
attention. Ms Brookes’ guidelines aimed to provide more predictability,
responsibility and rewards for
Daniel on a daily basis.
On 16 October 1997, Mr Scahill telephoned Mr Bartley and advised him that
Daniel would not be returning to school until the situation
was resolved.
On 25 October 1997, Ms Donsworth prepared a counsellor’s report in
relation to Daniel’s suspension of 18 September 1997.
Ms Donsworth
recommended that Daniel be enrolled in the Special Education Unit 10 class at
Grafton High School in Term 4.
On 28 October 1997, Mr Bartley prepared an application for state integration
program funding support for the 1998 school year in respect
of Daniel’s
enrolment at the school.
On 4 November 1997, a Teachers’ Federation meeting was held to discuss
Daniel’s enrolment. A motion was passed by 41 (including
two proxies) to
zero, rejecting the inclusion of Daniel at the school based on safety issues and
the needs of the student, and recommending
that he enrol in the Special Unit at
Grafton High School.
On 4 November 1997, Mr Bartley received a letter from Mr Perl informing him
of the motion passed at the Teachers’ Federation
meeting held earlier that
day rejecting the inclusion of Daniel at the school.
On 5 November 1997, a case management meeting was held. Mr Bartley, Ms
Thompson, Carol Baldwin, Kim Whitney, Mr and Mrs Purvis, Ms
McMillan and Ms
Brookes attended the meeting.On 6 November 1997, Mr Purvis contacted Mr Clark to
request his assistance in adjusting
Daniel’s curriculum and to find out if
he would attend a meeting with Mr & Mrs Purvis, Ms Whitney, Ms Brookes and
Ms Thompson.
Mr Clarke advised that the Teachers’ Federation had issued a
directive opposing the inclusion of all children with disabilities,
of the nature of their disabilities, in general classrooms, and that he would
think about it.
On 6 November 1997, Mr Clark advised Mrs Purvis that he was not able to
assist because he was opposed to what the Purvis’ were
doing and because
of the Teachers’ Federation directive.
The minutes (Exhibit 52 pages 777 to 783) note that Mr Bartley opened the
meeting by saying that “Ron (Phillips) is the Case
Manager and that being
the case, what is said at this particular meeting has no bearing on any outcomes
decided. It all has to go
through Ron...” Some of the matters discussed
included the motion passed by the Teachers’ Federation, and general issues
regarding Daniel’s placement. Mr Bartley had to leave the meeting early to
attend a prior appointment. On 6 November 1997,
a meeting was held between Mr
and Mrs Purvis, Kim Whitney, Ms Brookes and Ms Thompson to discuss a proposed
revised educational program
for Daniel.
On 7 November 1997, Mr Bartley received a facsimile from the Department of
Community Services attaching a submission prepared by Kim
Whitney in conjunction
with Ms Brooks, Mr and Mrs Purvis and Ms Thompson setting out a proposed
educational program for Daniel.
On 17 November 1997, Mr Purvis wrote to Mr Phillips regarding the meeting on
18 November 1997. Mr Purvis requested to attend the meetings
scheduled to take
place the next day.
On 18 November 1997 at 1pm, a meeting was held to discuss Daniel’s
educational needs. Mr Bartley, Mr Phillips, Ms Brookes, Mr
Scahill, Mr Clark, Mr
Field, Ms Bruveris, Ms McMillan, Carol Baldwin and Kim Whitney attended the
meeting. Mr and Mrs Purvis were
not invited to attend. The decision was made at
this meeting that it would be in Daniel’s best interests for him to attend
the Support Unit at Grafton High School.
Mr and Mrs Purvis were invited to attend at 3pm on 18 November 1997 to be
advised of the outcomes of the meeting.
On 20 November 1997, Mr Purvis met with Mr Clark and Allen Simmons from
Grafton High School.
On 27 November 1997, Mr Myers (DOCS) wrote to Mr and Mrs Purvis stating that
Daniel should be enrolled in the Support Unit at Grafton
High School. This
letter states that:
“the current situation, where Daniel is out of school completely for
lengthy periods, is however, not a situation we can continue
to support, either
in principle or in terms of funding... Daniel should be enrolled immediately in
Grafton High Special class and
the issues of integration pursued from
On 2 December 1997, Mr Purvis sent a
fax to Mr Phillips and Mr Bartley advising that he would be sending Daniel to
the School the
following day, 3 December 1997.
On 3 December 1997, Mr Bartley met with Mr and Mrs Purvis and Daniel. Mr
Bartley states that he advised Mr and Mrs Purvis at this
meeting that he would
have to move on Daniel’s exclusion. Mr and Mrs Purvis state that Mr
Bartley was not prepared to allow
Daniel to stay at school, however they claim
that Mr Bartley gave no indication that Daniel was going to be excluded from the
On 3 December 1997, Mr and Mrs Purvis issued a press release in relation to
Daniel, with the heading, “Department of School
Education Chooses
International Day of People with a Disability to Refuse Child With Disability
Access to School”.
Also on 3 December 1997, Barry Bartley wrote to Mr Scahill at DOCS advising
of his decision to exclude Daniel from the School:
“Following the three meetings that have been held in relation to your
ward, Daniel Hoggan, the situation that caused his last
suspension for very
violent behaviour has not been resolved... As well as Daniel’s education,
I am also responsible for over
1000 other students and 80 teaching or SASS
staff. The health and safety of all these people are also of great
Based on the above procedures and meetings which have been unresolved, I am
moving an exclusion of Daniel from South Grafton High
School. Action will be
taken to find an alternative placement within ten days. I will discuss with Ron
Phillips options within the
timeframe”.
On 3 December 1997, Mr Bartley
prepared a report form for Distance Education re Daniel. The form is headed
‘1997 Review’
and firstly seeks comments on the student’s
(Daniel’s) program and progress in 1997, to which Mr Bartley
“The programs sent have been well prepared and researched. However, they
have not met Daniel’s needs. It is most difficult
to measure progress in
any area. We linked the program to the curriculum that all students are doing. I
think we need to start again
in relation to what Daniel should be taught and how
it should be taught”.
On 5 December 1997, Mr
Phillips made a statement to the press about Daniel’s exclusion. In her
first statement, Mrs Purvis says:
“On 5 December 1997 Alex & I found
out in the media that Daniel had been excluded from school. We were both at home
saw Rob Phillips being interviewed on the television about Daniel.”
On 7 December 1997, Alex Purvis wrote to John Sutton, Assistant Director
General, of the Department, to appeal the decision to exclude
Daniel from the
Also on 7 December 1997, Mr Purvis replied to Mr Myers’ letter of
27/11/97. Mr Purvis advised that he and Mrs Purvis had no
intention of enrolling
Daniel in segregated education.
On 8 December 1997, Ms Donsworth prepared another counsellor’s report
in which she reiterated her recommendation of 25 October
1997, that Daniel be
enrolled in the Support Class of the Special Education Unit at Grafton High
On 9 December 1997, Mr Bartley was advised that Mr Purvis had appealed to the
Assistant Director-General in relation to the decision
to exclude Daniel.
In mid-December 1997, most of Daniel’s teachers prepared a yearly
report for him.
On 15 December 1997, the State Integration Funding Committee approved funding
for Daniel for 1998 totalling $20,822.30.
On 18 December 1997, Mr Bartley wrote to Mr Sutton and provided background
information regarding Daniel’s case. Mr Bartley
wrote of the meetings
organised with various educational authorities, teachers and departmental
officials throughout 1997. He attached
a report prepared in early 1997 which was
a summary of support and resources required for Daniel’s successful
integration.
He noted that the Department advised that it would not be possible
to supply a Special Education teacher, but that Daniel would be
supplied with
teaching resources and programs from Distance Education, and that Staff from
this area had travelled to Grafton as
part of formulating his material. Mr
Bartley stated that Mr and Mrs Purvis declined any numeracy and literacy
On 14 January 1998, Mr Myers replied to Mr Purvis’ letter to him of 7
December 1997. Mr Myers responded to Mr Purvis’
questions, and confirmed
that the position of DOCS was that a placement in the Special Unit at Grafton
High School would be less
detrimental to Daniel’s development than no
school placement. Mr Myers also indicated that financial support for
care would be terminated while he was out of school from the
commencement of Term 1 1998.
2.5.7 Relevant events of 1998 and 1999
On 8 February 1998, Mr Purvis sent an additional submission to Mr Sutton in
relation to his appeal (Exhibit 6). This submission consisted
of some 14 pages
plus attachments, and responded to Mr Phillips’ letter of 9 January 1998.
Some of the points Mr Purvis raised
the Department
“has eliminated us (his parents) from the communication loop and
communicates and continues to communicate with
DOCS. This is particularly
critical in relation to exclusion...”
false to claim that case management meetings in October and November 1997
discussed options for Daniel’s education.
They were about convincing
Clemency and myself to enrol Daniel in a support unit.”
last suspension was for 12 school days, until 17 October 1997, therefore the
“issue of the suspension being unresolved
is a fiction...”
do not wish in any way to condone violence, for most students some of the
incidents for which Daniel was suspended
are regarded as part of the rough and
tumble of the school playground and so go unreported even though they may be
observed by teachers.
One of the issues that is well documented in the
literature is the over reporting of such incidents for students with
disabilities.
Unfortunately these incidents are seized upon by those who
don’t want students with disabilities at school, used to demonise
exclude them from school.”
school was advised verbally and in writing soon after Daniel commenced of his
difficulty in grasping the purpose of suspensions
but failed to modify its
actions. Daniel was effectively taught to see suspensions as a way out of
stressful situations.”
teachers aides refused to work with Daniel because the DET wouldn’t modify
its practices. It wasn’t so much
Daniel they were concerned about but
rather the lack of support and the hostile atmosphere at the school.”
school never implemented Ms Carrie Brooks’ advice.”
the school has failed to take effective advantage of the expert resources that
were made available at no cost to itself.”
On 17 February
1998, Mr Sutton wrote to Mr Purvis advising him of his decision to reject Mr
Purvis’ appeal against the decision
by Mr Bartley to exclude Daniel from
the School. Mr Sutton stated that he had considered material provided by Mr
Bartley and Mr Phillips,
a copy of which he said was provided to Mr Purvis on 27
January 1998. He had also considered Mr Purvis’ submissions dated 19
December 1997, information provided at their meeting on 27 January 1998, and
further information provided on 8 February 1998. Mr
Sutton said he was satisfied
“Mr Bartley was genuinely unable to resolve the issues which led to
Daniel’s long suspension of 26 September 1997.
In my opinion Mr Bartley acted appropriately in his decision to exclude Daniel
in accordance with the Department of Education and
Training’s Revised
Procedures Concerning Suspension, Exclusion and Expulsion of Students from
School and Declaration of Place
Vacant. I have therefore declined your
Mr Phillips will contact you as a matter of urgency so that a suitable
alternative school placement can be considered for
On 5 March 1998, Mr Myers wrote to Mr
and Mrs Purvis advising them of his decision to terminate financial assistance,
which had been
provided to support Daniel during the day while he was out of
On 22 March 1998, Mr Purvis lodged his complaint with the Human Rights and
Equal Opportunity Commission in relation to the decision
to exclude Daniel from
the school.
On 23 March 1998, Mr Purvis wrote to Mr Myers in relation to the decision of
DOCS to terminate financial assistance for Daniel’s
On 7 April 1998, Mr and Mrs Purvis appealed to the Community Services
Commission in respect of DOCS’ decision.
On 15 July 1998, the Community Services Commission completed an assessment of
Mr and Mrs Purvis’ complaint.
On 28 August 1998, Mr Myers wrote to Mr & Mrs Purvis advising them of
DOCS’ view re Daniel’s education, that Daniel’s
best interests
would be served by enrolling him in the Special Unit at Grafton High School with
the maximum integration that his
behaviour indicates he can tolerate.
On 20 October 1998, Ms Brookes completed a memorandum for Keith Pyke, Senior
Practitioner, DOCS, supporting Daniel’s placement
in the Special Unit at
Grafton High School. Some of the reasons Ms Brookes cited for this
recommendation are that the Special Unit
provides “an augmentative
communication environment that would be very beneficial for Daniel to provide
predictability for
his daily activities”; more academically orientated
classes at the School were difficult for Daniel and he had a higher probability
of behavioural outbursts; “functional” teaching at the Special Unit
is more suitable for Daniel; class sizes are smaller;
and staff are trained in
working with learners with specific needs similar to Daniel’s.
On 15 January 1999, a meeting was held between DOCS, Mr and Mrs Purvis, Ms
Hoggan and Mr Gallagher in relation to the complaint to
the Community Services
Commission. DOCS agreed that financial assistance would be restored.
On 8 March 1999, Mr Hamilton, Director Distance Education wrote to Mr Purvis
advising him that the Distance Education Program was
not appropriate and Daniel
should be enrolled in the Support Unit at Grafton High School.
On 22 March 1999, a Case Management Meeting was held between DOCS, Mr and Mrs
Purvis and Mr Phillips.
On 22 March 1999, the Community Services Commission provided its
‘Review of Assessment Decision’ in relation to the complaint
and Mrs Purvis and their subsequent request for a review of the
Commission’s complaint assessment decision. In this review,
Dawson, Manager, Complaints Investigations and Reviews, states that Mr and Mrs
Purvis complained that DOCS failed to provide
adequate support and advocacy for
them and Daniel in relation to Daniel’s education. The review concludes
that the Commission’s
initial assessment decision to refer the complaint
to DOCS for action should stand.
2.6 Department and school policies, and policies specifically for Daniel
There were three general Department policies relevant to Daniel. The first of
these is the Special Education Policy, the second is
the Student Welfare Policy,
and the third is the Procedures Concerning Suspension, Exclusion and Expulsion
of Students from School
and Declaration of Place Vacant.
There was one policy specific to the School, the School Discipline Policy
The document referred to in the chronology as the Draft Welfare and
Discipline Policy for Daniel was a modified version of the Department’s
Student Welfare Policy.
All of these policies are summarised below.
2.6.1 Policies of the Department
2.6.1.1 Special Education Policy
The Special Education Policy (Exhibit 86) states that the Department
“will ensure quality of educational opportunities and will
continue to
provide for groups with special teaching and learning requirements within
available resources.” It sets out a list
of “Special Education
Objectives”, which seek to, for example, “provide an equitable and
flexible continuum of
Special Education services (regular classes, support
classes in regular schools and special schools) to allow for appropriate
choices which cater for the needs of each student”. The policy
states that it is “based on the principle of Normalisation,
that is, the
creation of a lifestyle and set of living conditions for people with
disabilities which are as close as possible to
those enjoyed by the rest of the
population.” For example, the Department “acknowledges that every
child with a disability,
learning difficulty or behaviour disorder has the right
to attend the regular neighbourhood school where this is possible and
practicable
and in the best interests of the child”. The policy goes on to
state that strategies for its implementation will be developed
in schools and
regions, with implementation responsibilities shared between the
Director-General, the Special Education Directorate,
Regions, and schools.
2.6.1.2 Student Welfare Policy
The Student Welfare Policy (Exhibit 52, pages 388 to 396) states that school
and practices within the
framework of the Department’s policy. Under the heading, “Effective
learning and teaching”,
the policy sets certain objectives, for example,
“encouraging students to take responsibility for their own
behaviour”.
Outcomes and results for students are also listed - for
example, “Students will participate in decisions about their own
Under the heading, “Positive climate and good discipline”, a
number of objectives are set, for example, “maximising
participation in decision making and ensuring that principles of equity and
fairness are reflected in school practice”.
Some of the outcomes listed
include, “The well-being, safety and health of students and other
community members will be priorities
in all school policies, programs and
practices”; “The discipline code of the school will provide clear
guidelines for
behaviour which are known by staff, students and parents who have
contributed to their development.” Some of the results listed
“Students will be safe in the school environment”; “Students
will know what is expected of them and of
others in the school
community”.
There is also a section in the policy headed “Community
participation”, which talks of, for example, “building learning
results”. The policy also talks of the responsibilities
of schools (and
within them, Principals, teaching and support staff, staff with a specific
student support role, students, and parents),
districts and state office, in
relation to the policy.
2.6.1.3 Procedures concerning suspension, exclusion and expulsion of
students from school and declaration of place vacant (“the
The Discipline Policy (Exhibit 1, page 112) states at point 3:
“It is essential that suspension, exclusion and expulsion are seen as
strategies within the student welfare policy and discipline
code of the school.
These strategies are to be used only in serious cases of misbehaviour in
accordance with these procedures.”
Discipline Policy also sets out other general principles, and procedure to be
followed in relation to suspensions - for example,
notifying the parents or
care-giver in writing of the details of the suspension, convening a meeting to
discuss appropriate action
and recording action taken in the suspension
register. There are also general principles regarding exclusion from school and
“declaration
of place vacant”
2.6.2 Policies of the School
2.6.2.1 School Discipline Policy 1995
The School Discipline Policy 1995 (Exhibit 52, pages 231 to 245) states:
“School discipline concerns the development of appropriate behaviour in
students. It implies the acceptance of self discipline
and the ability to
distinguish right from wrong.”
The policy sets out a list of rights and corresponding responsibilities. For
example, “I have the right to be treated with
understanding, respect and
politeness”, and “I have the responsibility to treat others politely
and with understanding
and respect, regardless of individual
differences.”
There are school rules, and
‘student behaviour requirements’ for the classroom and playground.
There is also a ‘student
management chain’, which begins with a
warning, then possibly a second warning, followed by relocation within the
class, relocation
to head teacher, detention, head teacher interview, parent
the Principal and parents.
There is a “Level Scheme”, from 0 to 5. All students begin on 0,
with no documentation and teacher based discipline applying.
“reasons” for placing on “Level 1” (for two weeks) are a
major report or several referral slips from
a number of sources, and the
consequences of being placed on Level 1 included a form letter to parents,
interview by Year Adviser
and possible after-school detention, for all of which
the Year Adviser is responsible.
A student may be placed on Level 2 for two weeks if there is no improvement,
or if they have committed a more serious breach of school
rules, or engaged in
unco-operative behaviour which infringes the rights of others. Placement on
“Level 2” has certain
consequences, for example, a parent interview
is requested, some privileges may be withdrawn, and so on.
The “Level Scheme” continues to “Level 5”, for
students who have shown either no improvement at Level 4, or
deterioration in
behaviour. The consequences of a student being placed on “Level 5”
are exclusion and expulsion may be
considered. The personnel responsible at this
level are the Principal, Director, Assistant Director-General, and Minister.
The “Level scheme” policy notes that the Head Teacher Girls and
Head Teacher Welfare “monitor the Level Books of
students placed on a
level. A student is placed on a level, by the Deputy Principal, in consultation
with the Level Committee.”
There is also a guide to the sort of
consequences that stem from various forms of misbehaviour. For example, a
student leaving the
school grounds will be reported to and interviewed by the
Deputy Principal and receive an after-school detention in the case of an
isolated incident. For a “repeated or more blatant offence”, the
student’s parents may be contacted and they may
be placed “on
2.6.3 Policies specifically for Daniel
2.6.3.1 Draft Welfare and Discipline Policy for Daniel
As described in the chronology at 2.5.3, the document referred to as the
Draft Welfare and Discipline Policy for Daniel (headed “Department
School Education Welfare Policy”) (Exhibit 1, page 22) was formulated at a
meeting of staff from the School on 19 March
1997. The document begins by
stating that:
“The Student Welfare Policy of South Grafton High School has been modified
(in keeping with the Department of School Education’s
guidelines 1996) to
cater for the special needs of Daniel Hoggan.
Modification has been necessary in an effort to: -
1. Encompass everything the school community does to meet the personal, social
and learning needs of Daniel.
2. Incorporate a revised discipline procedure.
3. Provide programs and support while acknowledge (sic) the differences required
for Daniel’s education, while maintaining
as many social interaction
experiences as is possible for Daniel.”
Draft Welfare and Discipline Policy for Daniel states that the “Effective
Learning and Teaching Objective” is to enhance
effective learning and
teaching by, for example, “providing lesson material suitable for
Daniel’s level”, providing
support personnel and establishing a Case
Management Team. The Outcomes of these strategies are stated as:
“coordinated services
will provide effective support to classroom
programs”, and “the learning experiences of Daniel will affirm his
individuality
and be positive and satisfying”. As a result, “Daniel
will pursue a program of learning relevant to his needs”,
“Daniel will develop further skills for positive social
participation.”
Under the heading “Positive Climate and Good Discipline”, the
objective is “to enhance school climate and discipline”
example, “ensuring that principles of equity and fairness are reflected in
school practice”, and establishing
clear rules specifically for Daniel by
adopting the school rules already adopted by the school and its
community”.
The Draft Welfare and Discipline Policy for Daniel goes on to say:
“The Case Management Team has developed a set of codes and consequences
relating to unacceptable behaviour. Understanding that
all behaviour has a
purpose it will be necessary for the Team to be aware of instances that may
upset Daniel’s normal course
of behaviour”.
A table sets out possible classroom or playground
behaviours, and lists consequences. For example, disruptive classroom behaviour
such as swearing at students or teachers, unauthorised movement, or unauthorised
calling out, have as a consequence: “1. Initial
warning; 2. Repeated
offence: (a) Withdrawal with Aide to designated room where program is continued
for rest of the period. (b)
Referral slip detailing behaviour written and sent
to Head Teacher for discussion at regular Case Management Team Meetings.”
2.7 Expert evidence
2.7.1 Dr Robert Lincoln Jackson
Dr Jackson is the Director of the Centre for Disability Research and
Development at Edith Cowan University in Western Australia. Dr
Jackson is a
registered Psychologist who appeared as a witness for the complainant. Dr
Jackson stated that he had met Daniel and
stayed overnight with Daniel at his
parents’ home in Grafton. He commented as follows:
“My experience with Daniel, which is in accord with the report tendered as
part of this case, is that Daniel has a range of
behaviours that appear to be
designed to gain attention. As is normal in such cases verbal rebukes are not
effective in controlling
the behaviours as they just become part of the
attention desired. However, I found that if one set clear boundaries,
established
an environment where there was ample opportunity for him to gain
attention for behaving appropriately and did not respond to negative
then within a few hours of first meeting him he was responding appropriately and
enthusiastically, even when significant
intellectual challenges were put to
him... Daniel is similar to large number of children that I have seen
successfully included in
mainstream High School in Australia and
Dr Jackson explained the concept of
inclusion as being composed of eight elements: presence in the regular school
activities; curricular
inclusion; social inclusion; self-esteem; good social
image; teaching relevant skills; potent teaching; and positive expectations.
Jackson stated that he did not believe that Daniel’s needs could be best
met in a segregated unit at another school. Dr
Jackson stated that the research
literature showed that children such as Daniel do significantly better
academically in inclusive
rather than segregated settings such as the units. Dr
Jackson also stated that children who grow up with their peers are much more
likely to gain and hold a job and that children who come from segregated
schooling are much more likely to end up in sheltered employment.
2.7.2 Ms Deborah Knight
Ms Knight is a Clinical Psychologist and appeared as a witness for the
respondent. In her first statement Ms Knight stated that she
had been employed
as a Clinical Psychologist and Director of the Dalwood Assessment Centre since
1992. She states that the centre
in conjunction with Palm Avenue School provides
an assessment and treatment service for children and adolescents who are
experiencing
severe learning, communication, and/or behavioural and emotional
disorders. In her clinical role, Ms Knight states that she is responsible
conducting psychometric, educational and behavioural assessments of the students
referred to the centre and, in liaison with
the students’ parents and
teachers, for formulating appropriate home and school based treatment and
management plans.
On 7 May 1999 Ms Knight conducted an assessment of Daniel at his family home.
In her assessment findings, Ms Knight described Daniel
as presenting as a well
mannered and quick to engage boy. She noted the limitations in his
conversational skills once topic content
moves beyond welcoming formalities. Ms
Knight stated that Daniel was cooperative during formal testing and displayed an
in the testing materials. She noted that Daniel fatigued quickly and
struggled to sustain focused attention after approximately 20
minutes, so
testing was completed over two sessions.
Ms Knight administered the verbal scale of the Wechsler Intelligence Test for
Children: Third Edition. She stated that estimates from
a verbal scale have a
high predictive validity for school based learning ability. Ms Knight stated
that results on testing indicated
that Daniel’s verbal ability is in the
moderately intellectually delayed range or, for peer comparison purposes, at the
percentile for his age. Ms Knight also states that Daniel could not
accurately complete any items involving basic numeracy skills.
Ms Knight states
that Daniel demonstrated no functional literacy skills. She further stated:
“Daniel’s communication, daily living/self help and socialisation
skills were found to be significantly impaired with
functioning placed at
approximately 4-year old age level. His social and conversational skills are
In her statement Ms Knight goes on
to discuss the implications of the above finding. She states that it is widely
documented that
students with an intellectual disability in the moderate range
rarely develop literacy and numeracy skills beyond a basic functional
“For Daniel, whose disability extends in the lower Moderately delayed
range and who currently has no demonstrable academic
skills, any implication
that he can effectively learn to read and perform arithmetic function is both
unsubstantiated and places
unrealistic expectations on Daniel himself and those
responsible for his instructional program... There are clear indications, on
reading Mr Jackson’s statement, that his arguments in support of a
mainstream placement for Daniel, are based on an unclear
knowledge of
Daniel’s intellectual and adaptive behaviour
capabilities.”
Ms Knight recommends
Daniel’s placement in a support unit. She states that:
“His presence in a stable classroom with a smaller peer cohort and with
instruction provided by a single, skilled special education
teacher should also
with a schedule that requires
regular movement between
In relation to Ms Knight’s
report, Mrs Purvis states (Exhibit 34, para 5):
“I believe that Mrs Knight has not taken into account the fact that Daniel
had a cold that day (she was aware of this), the
fact that Daniel was anxious
and later very tired, and that it was a stressful situation for
2.7.3 Mr Alan Andreasen
Alan Andreasen is a consulting Clinical Psychologist who prepared a report on
Daniel in August 1994 at the request of Mr and Mrs Purvis.
Mr Andreason’s report states that Daniel was seen at the request of Mr
and Mrs Purvis first at their home and subsequently at
Mr Andreasen’s
clinic for psychological assessment in relation to the Purvis’ application
for Daniel to be enrolled at
Gillwinga. In his report Mr Andreasen states that
the initial intention was to attempt to administer the Stanford-Binet Test of
intellectual
and cognitive functioning. However, Mr Andreasen states that he
believed that Daniel was not capable of the sustained attention and
response to
directions that will be necessary for the validity requirements of this test to
be satisfied therefore he assessed Daniel
based on two hours of observations of
Daniel’s interactions with him and with Daniel’s family, of his
drawing, of his
response to questions and inquiries, of his knowledge of books
and tapes of which he was familiar, and of his general ability to
complex interaction within the assessment session for a two hour period.
Mr Andreasen notes that he has read the 21 page typed written response by Mrs
Purvis to his request that she write down some of the
strategies that the
Purvis’ had developed for accessing Daniel and for managing his behaviour
and for bringing out the best
for him in terms of his intellectual and cognitive
“I would want to say at this point that Mr and Mrs Purvis have been
outstandingly successful with Daniel as reflected both
in strategies they have
developed for living with him and providing optimal conditions for his
development personally, socially and
intellectually, as well as a real
improvement in his neurological status.”
the section of his report headed observations and findings upon examination, Mr
Andreasen states:
“Daniel’s vocabulary was notably variable and of a good quality and
more consistent with a normal child of his age than
a severely intellectually
handicapped child of his age. He was observed to initiate conversation including
reasonably sophisticated
words and concepts and conversations were generally
interactive rather than autistic... the limitations in Daniel’s
conversations,
verbal descriptions and verbal interactions were that they were
rather short and Daniel’s attention would change from a conversation
inquiry back to his drawing without any apparent relation to whether the
conversation had finished, whether the inquiry was completed
or whether the
other person had finished or not.”
section headed conclusions and recommendations Mr Andreasen states:
“It would seem that there might be some value in seeing Daniel as a brain
damaged child rather than a severely intellectually
handicapped one. His
particular weaknesses appear to be in the area of sustained attention, a slow
development of his sense of himself
and of the ability to describe his own needs
to others, his slowness of visual perception and visual concept formation and
his general
motor control integration. His high level intellectual function
shown by his vocabulary and level of abstract thinking and conceptual
understanding are considerably better than those of an intellectually
handicapped child... Daniel’s foster parents would be
the best source of
illustrative strategies for accessing Daniel and managing his behaviour and
emotions. Daniel needs to be challenged
to learn things and I would see the
purpose and value in the mainstream educational process as providing some of
this challenge albeit
with extremely limited expectations in terms of any formal
curriculum.”
2.7.4 Mr Norman John
In May 1997 Mr Lord was a Psychologist employed by the NSW Department of
Community Services. In May 1997 he prepared a report (Exhibit
42) regarding
Daniel which states that he was asked to see Daniel “to consider possible
support that may be required for this
family to sustain the care of
Mr Lord states that:
“Daniel’s intellectual ability is well below his peers. This is
evident in the quality of his classroom efforts. The
school counsellor
administered the Peabody Picture vocabulary test to Daniel and concluded he is
functioning around two years 9 months
of age with his receptive language skills.
However these results, on their own, should not be considered a comprehensive
of Daniel’s level of disability as Daniel’s score fell
below the basal level measure by this test. Also Daniel’s
impaired vision
would have reduced his performance on this particular test. Daniel’s
efforts with his mathematical skills were
very basic. I gather from the school
counsellor’s report that Daniel is able to count to 12 but it is not clear
that he perceives
the relationship between numbers and
In his statement Mr Lord says that he
does not agree with Ms Knight’s conclusions that Daniel’s best
interests would be
served in the support unit at Grafton High School. He states
“Daniel is a relationship focused child and also has a tendency to imitate
behaviours. His contact with peers who are not diagnosed
with disability is
essential for Daniel to develop appropriate behavioural norms and social
integration. This would be most effective
with significant periods of inclusion
into mainstream classes with programs adjusted to permit his inclusion in normal
activities.”
2.7.5 Ms Carrie Brooks
Ms Brooks was a Program Officer with the Department of Community Services,
Far North Coast in 1997. She prepared a document headed
“Interim Report
Daniel Hogan 18 September 1997”, which begins:
“Daniel is a twelve year old young boy who was referred to the programming
team for management strategies for a number of identified
behaviours of
Some of the identified behaviours
which Ms Brooks lists include swearing, kicking walls and furniture, hitting
people, refusal to
attend school and deliberately wetting himself, refusal to
attend class, physical aggression against school staff. The report states
Ms Brooks’ assessment consisted of a functional analysis completed by
Daniel’s foster parents; a functional analysis
completed by Daniel’s
aides at school; direct observation of Daniel in the classroom situation over
two mornings; direct observation
of Daniel in the playground; an anecdotal
report from the District Officer case managing for Daniel; review of report from
review of report from Mr Andreasen; minutes of the case meeting held on
8 August 1997; and the school welfare and discipline policy.
identified certain behaviours and when they are most likely and least likely to
occur. She then identifies functions of
behaviour under the headings
“behaviour achieves and avoids”. She lists previous programs which
have been tried with
Daniel and makes various recommendations:
“Recommendations are designed to address the functions of the behaviours
by making some environmental changes, increasing alternative
communication
skills and providing opportunities for stress
For example, Ms Brooks recommends an
alternative functional communication strategy for Daniel when he starts to
exhibit any of his
behaviours indicating anxiety or inability to concentrate. Ms
Brooks suggests asking Daniel “Daniel do you need help? Yes or
She suggests continuing to prompt Daniel for a response waiting for
approximately five seconds for him to respond. If
Daniel doesn’t respond,
Ms Brooks suggests saying to him, “Okay, I will help you” and
starting to provide support
Ms Brooks states that Daniel’s timetable at school needs to be made
more accessible for him. She suggests that an enlarged written
version of the
timetable be produced using colours to indicate each lesson. Ms Brooks states
that she would like the aides to trial
packing up early before the end of class.
Ms Brooks makes various other suggestions including the use of a good behaviour
Daniel receives a sticker for being good, for example, for completing
his work and for not displaying rocking, teeth clacking or
disruptive behaviours
and proceeding to class without incidents. She states that positive
reinforcement needs to be provided verbally,
intermittently, throughout each
teaching session. She states that it should be reinforcement relating directly
to behaviour, for
example, “I like it when you sit quietly”.
Ms Brooks summarises her recommendations by stating that:
“The identified function of Daniel’s behaviour is avoidance and
attention. These guidelines are designed to provide some
environmental changes
to provide more predicability, choice and intrinsic rewards to Daniel’s
day. Currently Daniel’s
ability to learn is being hampered by his
behavioural outburst which in my opinion are the result a lack of predicability
day and frustration with participation in a number of activities that are
not intrinsically rewarding for
2.7.6 Professor Trevor
Professor Parmenter is the Foundation Chair in development disability,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney and Director, Centre
for Development
Disability Studies, Royal Rehabilitation Centre, Sydney. Professor Parmenter
states (Exhibit 60):
“My experiences as a teacher, principal, teacher trainer, researcher and a
well travelled observer of special education programs
in developed and
developing countries lead me to make the following observation concerning the
factors essential to the successful
inclusion of students with disabilities into
regular classes. These factors are not necessarily listed in order of
importance, but
should be included together.
a supportive
school climate towards diversity in the school population - this relies heavily
upon the leadership qualities of the
School Principal and the School Council.
teachers who
possess sound instructional and learning skills which can adapt to individual
student’s needs. For some students
these skills may need to be quite
sophisticated and one would not suspect all teachers to possess them. At many
universities there
are courses at Special Diploma and Masters level which
include tuition in these skills. Teachers in regular training programs certainly
do not acquire these skills which include topics such as: the functional
analysis of behaviour, specific teaching and learning skills
for students with
cognitive impairment, curriculum development and modification, needs assessment,
program planning, special curriculum
evaluation strategies, collaborative
teaching; and a knowledge of health needs of children with specific impairments
such as epilepsy
and those with this dual diagnosis of intellectual and
emotional problems.
a school with
adequate physical access.
the presence of
at least one teacher with special education skills who can act as a support and
mentor to the regular class teachers
and who can support families as partners in
the educational process.
a school which
can adopt an inclusive curriculum approach so that students with diverse
educational needs can access the same broad
key learning areas...
the development
of a sound educational plan which is based around the long-term goals for the
disabled student and not simply on current
skill deficits. This approach is
known as “personal futures planning”.
a school which
has a flexible organisational structure.
a school which
has a good school support program.”
In his statement Professor
Parmenter goes on to say:
“I can cite opposing research to that referred to you by Dr Jackson
concerning the lifelong impact of ‘segregated education’.
Longitudinal data from carefully designed studies collected by my team at
Macquarie University indicated very strongly that students
who had been provided
with a comprehensive transition program, including work experience had a better
subsequent employment program
than students who had not had such a program. The
results further indicated that it was students from special education units and
special schools who have received the more comprehensive transition program.
These results highlighted the nub of the issue on discussion.
It is the type and
quality of education program that a student receives rather than the educational
setting alone. The USA public
law 94-142 introduced the term ‘least
restrictive alternatives’ to indicate that the student should be placed in
an environment
that is as ‘normal’ as
Professor Parmenter states that the
assertion by Dr Jackson that literature shows that children such as Daniel do
significantly better
academically in an inclusive life than segregated settings,
is unsupported. Professor Parmenter also states that Dr Jackson’s
assertion that children who grow up with their peers are much more likely to
gain and hold a job is in many respects an invalid statement.
Parmenter states the assertion that segregated education is counter to later
societal inclusion is partly predicated on
the philosophical rather than
Professor Parmenter states that he finds it difficult to envisage that Daniel
could be successfully integrated into the School, even
if further facilities
were to be made available. Professor Parmenter goes on to comment on the current
climate between the School
and the parents; some of the changes that would be
needed, for example, an intensive staff development program for all teachers
with Daniel; a special education teacher within the school to support
the planning and execution of Daniel’s educational program
and to support
his individual teachers; a reassessment of his overall program; and a further
analysis of the effects of Daniel’s
presence in the regular classes.
Professor Parmenter states:
“Decisions for integration are made on an individual basis after an
assessment of educational needs has been made. The principle
of ‘the most
advantageous educational environment’ is applied in the context of
available resources.”
2.7.7 Dr Graham Alan
Dr Wise prepared two neurological reports of Daniel which were referred to in
the discussion of Daniel’s disabilities in 2.2.
The first neurological
report was prepared in July 1997 and the second in January 1998. Dr Wise is a
child neurologist at Sydney
Children’s Hospital. In relation to Dr
Wise’s assessment of Daniel’s future neurological status, in his
cross-examination
Dr Wise said as follows:
“I think most of his neurological problems will be very stable from this
point. I think even when you have a significant degree
of handicap, but
it’s from a past static injury, they will continue to be able to adjust
for the problems that they have to
a certain degree, but they are not going to
make a great leap forward in intellectual ability. Their behaviour may become a
tractable and may become more knowing of the world and incorporate this
into their functioning. But their not going to get a major
increase in
intellectual capacity from this time
2.8 Teacher assessments and
observations
2.8.1 Evaluation sheets
In the minutes of the meeting of the staff development day held on 7 April
1997 for Daniel’s Year 7 teachers, the development
of a progress sheet was
discussed. The minutes note that:
“The sheet below was developed at least as a temporary measure, to monitor
Daniel’s in class progress. Each teacher should
have a supply of these
sheets. They should be filled in each lesson without it becoming a chore. They
should be placed in Anne Fitzmaurice’s
pigeon hole, as regularly as
possible (weekly at the outside) Anne will be
collating.”
The form set up a table inviting
teachers to grade Daniel on his participation, cooperation, understanding, and
behaviour at 20-minute
intervals during the class. Daniel was to be given a
rating of -2 (very poor), -1 (poor), 0 (average), +1 (good), or +2 (very good).
It appears that only Mr Trudgett, Daniel’s science teacher, regularly
completed these forms.
The forms completed by Mr Trudgett show a variety of ratings assigned to
Daniel’s behaviour ranging from a comment on 22 August
1997 that Daniel
was “reluctant to come in, unsettled, wandering around, settled down by 10
to 40. A Fire drill - Dan extremely
unsettled - kicked aid, elbowed student
etc”; to a form completed on 6 June 1997, when Mr Trudgett comments that
Dan was “doing
class work” and rates his participation both at 20
minutes and at 40 minutes, as good, his cooperation at both intervals as
his understanding at both intervals as average and his behaviour at both
intervals as very good. On this day Mr Trudgett has
written, “Very good
2.8.2 Half-yearly reports
In May 1997, some of Daniel’s teachers prepared half-yearly reports for
him. In Science and Music his teachers commented that
Daniel appeared to be
working to the best of his ability. His teachers for Art, English, and
Indonesian commented that he enjoyed
participating. In Personal Development,
Health and Physical Education, his teacher commented that he has been unable to
assess Daniel
“due to his lack of participation in assessable
2.8.3 Mid-term evaluations
In May 1997, most of Daniel’s teachers completed a mid-term evaluation
In the subject Personal Development, Health and Physical Education, Mr Perl
said that Daniel did not settle into the class routine.
The teacher said that he
was withdrawn for remedial work, and has not been benefiting or learning in this
class. Although he was
“treated as another class member” he
“receives no extra time and no less. As a result, Daniel doesn’t
the time he needs”.
Daniel’s teacher, Mr Jubb said that Daniel did settle into the class
routine “In the sense that he is cooperative’’
and that he
didn’t, in the sense that “he usually did not take part in what the
others are doing”. The teacher
said that Daniel had created a greater
workload, although marginally so, because he “needed to continually keep
an eye on him
in class”. The teacher noted that Daniel’s effect on
the class was a mixture of positive and negative and also as having
The teacher noted also that Daniel was not benefiting from his class, although
he had not changed the way in which he
taught his class.
In the subject, Home group, Daniel’s teacher Ms Court makes the
comments that Daniel has not settled into the class routine,
and is withdrawn
for remedial work as “concepts for Home group are beyond his
understanding”. The teacher says that Daniel’s
effect on this class
is disruptive and she feels that Daniel is not benefiting from the class.
His Science teacher, Mr Trudgett says that Daniel has not settled into the
class routine and “needs continual guidance/direction”.
that Daniel’s enrolment has created a greater workload for him as the
teacher, although, to date, he says Daniel
seems to have no effect on his class
“both positives and negatives seem to be balanced”.
The music teacher, Mr Miller says that Daniel has not settled into the class
routine. Daniel has not participated in all of his music
lessons, and he feels
Daniel “isn’t really learning at all”. Mr Miller states that
Daniel has created a greater
workload for him because of the “extra
monitoring of class”.
In Maths, Daniel’s teacher, Ian Zuill states that “Daniel is
working well in class”. Although he is withdrawn from
remedial work,
Daniel has not created a greater workload, or changed in any form the way in
which Mr Zuill teaches his class. Mr
Zuill feels that Daniel has had no effect
on the class, but is unsure if he is actually learning or benefiting from his
In his LOTE (Languages other than English) class Daniel’s teacher, Mark
Avery, states that Daniel has settled into the class
routine and attends all the
lessons. Daniel has, however, created a greater workload for the teacher and has
a disruptive effect
on his class. Mr Avery says that this effect is “not
so much his behaviour but the background noise created by the continued
between he and aide” as the teacher claims “most work needs to be
done by aide”.
His Library teacher, Ms McBeath, agrees that Daniel has settled into class
routine although he “rarely attends” because
he is withdrawn for
remedial work.
In the subject ‘SRE’ Daniel’s teacher, Mr Murray says that
Daniel has settled in and has been able to attend all
lessons of this class. The
teacher notes that Daniel has created an extra workload for him as he spends
“approximately ¾
of an hour preparing special sheets (each
week)”. Mr Murray is unsure if Daniel is benefiting from this class
although Daniel
has no effect on the class or the way in which Mr Murray teaches
In the subjects Humanities and History, Ms Durant is unsure if Daniel is
learning anything from her class. His presence in her class
difference to the way she teaches the class, in that she has second thoughts
that Daniel and his aide make. She
says, “ I can’t really afford to direct much attention towards
Daniel as there are
a few in the class that require constant monitoring to
ensure behaviour is acceptable and work is done”.
Again in Humanities - History, Daniel’s teacher Ms Ebeling feels that
Daniel does arrive on time and settles into the class
and commences his work but
says “it could hardly be classified as our class routine”. She feels
that Daniel has a disruptive
effect on the class as “the aide is
constantly communicating with him while I am speaking to the class”. Ms
Ebeling states
that she prefers “to teach a class which is sitting quietly
without anyone speaking and I find Daniel’s integration extremely
distracting due to the constant communication needed”.
Daniel’s English teacher, Ms Beletich feels that Daniel has settled
into the class routine. However, Daniel seems withdrawn
for remedial work and is
unsure what effect Daniel has on the class “At times discussions with the
Aide can get noisy - which
is distracting (mostly for me)”. She is also
unsure whether Daniel is benefiting from her class: “I do have concerns
for Dan. I believe he often feels ‘lost’; he is sensitive enough to
know he is different and his attitude reflects this”.
Ms Fitzmaurice (the year 7 Adviser in 1997) reports that Daniel creates a
huge amount of work for her in terms of “coordinating
staff, aide and
management concerns, monitoring Daniel, checking Distance-Education
material” she feels that it is “presently
impossible” to spend
any more time on Daniel.
2.8.4 Distance Education Support Unit Reports
In June 1997, Ms Fisher from the Distance Education Support Unit (the
DESU”) prepared a report for Daniel. This report summarised
Daniel had covered in English, Mathematics, Science, Human Society and its
Environment, and Design and Technology and the
skills and knowledge gained. In
her additional comments, Ms Fisher noted that:
“Daniel has coped well with the DESU programs that have supported Year 7
topics covered in the above Key Learning Areas. He
has tried hard and appears to
have gained some understanding of most subjects. The excellent support that he
has received in the
classroom has enabled him to complete activities relating to
topics at his level and to access class discussions with some
comprehension”.
The DESU also provided a
Yearly Report for Daniel for 1997, in which his achievements in each Key
Learning Area are reported as outcomes
(Exhibit 52, pages 1327 to 1332). In
relation to English, Ms Fisher reported that “Daniel has participated at
his own level...
In Term 3, he completed work around a film study of ‘The
Princess Bride’ and demonstrated some understanding of the main
occurring in this film.” Ms Fisher commented on his mathematics program
that Daniel continued to practice counting skills
and to develop basic
mathematical concepts and appears to enjoy the activities in this area. In her
final comment, Ms Fisher states:
“During Daniel’s attendance at school this semester, his DESU
program has attempted to continue the development of his
basic skills while
assisting him to access, at his own level, topics being studied in his Year 7
classes. Returned work and comments
from his tutors have indicated that this has
sometimes been achieved and that Daniel’s knowledge and understanding of
topics has increased. However, some concepts are very difficult for Daniel
and inappropriate to his level of development, causing
him considerable
frustration. His basic skills continue to develop slowly but require a greater
focus if any real progress is to
2.8.5 Yearly Report from School -
December 1997
As noted in the chronology at 2.5.6, in mid-December 1997, most of
Daniel’s teachers prepared a yearly report for him.
Ms Fitzmaurice, the Year 7 Adviser, wrote:
“Daniel’s progress has been very difficult to monitor and assess,
due to his inability to perform most of the mainstream
curriculum delivery.
Distance Education has assessed and reported on his progress in that
Daniel’s teachers completed a
form headed, “Daniel Hoggan’s Individualised Outcomes Assessment
Performance Indicators”.
They were asked to grade him on a scale of 1 to
5, one being excellent, two good, three satisfactory, four poor and five
unsatisfactory,
in the following eleven areas and sub-areas:
1. Is working well on the program provided by Distance Education
2. Daniel is able to join in:-
discussions
class activities
Brief description of sample task:-
3. Daniel is able to socially interact with other class members
4. Daniel is able to work without his Aide on some class tasks
Brief description of sample task-
5. Daniel’s work habits are:-
works well with
others responds to teacher’s directions
attends all
appropriately in class
required work set by Distance Education
required work set by class teacher
In English, Ms Beletich graded
Daniel ‘satisfactory’ in five of the above areas, ‘poor’
in four areas and
‘unsatisfactory’ in two areas. She noted,
“Daniel has great difficulty relating to the environment and those in
it”, and “Daniel is unable to complete any task without his
In Science, his teacher graded Daniel ‘satisfactory’ in two
areas, ‘poor’ in seven areas, and ‘unsatisfactory
areas. Sample tasks described were “Colour the object that does not match
(with vertical prompts)”, and “Classify
buttons, sorting into
In Maths, Mr Lang reported that Daniel was performing at a ‘good’
level in one area, was ‘satisfactory’ in
‘poor’ in two areas and ‘unsatisfactory’ in six
In Geography, Ms Ebeling graded Daniel as ‘poor’ or
‘unsatisfactory’ in all applicable areas.
Daniel’s teachers in Design and Technology, Library, Japanese, Art and
‘Personal Development, Health and Physical Education’
reported that
they did not receive programs from Distance Education. In Design and Technology,
Daniel was graded ‘satisfactory’
in three areas, ‘poor’
in four areas, and ‘unsatisfactory’ in two areas. His teacher
commented that he was
unable to complete the majority of tasks set and is very
dependent on aide for 99% of transfer.
In Library, Daniel was graded ‘poor’ in six areas and
‘unsatisfactory’ in four areas.
In Japanese, his teacher rated him ‘unsatisfactory’ in all areas.
In Art, Daniel was awarded a ‘satisfactory’
in two areas,
‘satisfactory to poor’ in one area, ‘poor’ in four
areas, and ‘unsatisfactory’
in two areas. In ‘PD/H/PE’,
Daniel was graded as ‘poor’ in five areas and
‘unsatisfactory’ in
four areas.
3. STATUTORY PROVISIONS
The provisions of the Act relevant to this decision are
(2). They are set out below.
provides in part that:
disability, in relation to a person, means:
(a) total or partial loss of the person’s bodily or mental functions;
(b) total or partial loss of a part of the body; or
(c) the presence in the body of organisms causing disease or illness; or
(d) the presence in the body of organisms capable of causing disease or
illness; or
(e) the malfunction, malformation or disfigurement of a part of the
person’s body; or
(f) a disorder or malfunction that results in the person learning differently
from a person without the disorder or malfunction;
(g) a disorder, illness or disease that affects a person’s thought
processes, perception of reality, emotions or judgment or
that results in
disturbed behaviour;
and includes a disability
(h) presently exists; or
(i) previously existed but no longer exists; or
(j) may exist in the future; or
(k) is imputed to a person.
“ (1) For the purposes of this Act, a person (discriminator) discriminates
against another person (aggrieved person) on the
ground of a disability of the
aggrieved person if, because of the aggrieved person’s disability, the
discriminator treats or
proposes to treat the aggrieved person less favourably
than, in circumstances that are the same or are not materially different,
discriminator treats or would treat a person without the disability.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), circumstances in which a person treats
or would treat another person with a disability are
not materially different
because of the fact that different accommodation or services may be required by
the person with a disability.”
Section 22(2)
“It is unlawful for an educational authority to discriminate against a
student on the ground of the student’s disability
or a disability of any
of the student’s associates:
(a) by denying the student access, or limiting the student’s access, to
any benefit provided by the educational authority;
(b) by expelling the student; or
(c) by subjecting the student to any other
detriment.”
4. SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
4.1 Complainant’s submissions
The complainant’s submissions state that the respondent has sought to
highlight the fact that Daniel was not able to participate
in the Year 7
curriculum at the level of other students. The complainant states that:
“There is no disagreement between the parties about Daniel’s ability
to participate in all of the year 7 curriculum.
Considering all the evidence,
there was never any expectation on the part of any person who was involved in
the process of admitting
Daniel to SGHS that he participate in the year 7
curriculum at the level of other year 7
The complainant notes that Mr
Bartley’s plan for Daniel’s integration was “a researched,
thoughtful and comprehensive
document.” The complainant notes this
document was prepared after consultation within the School and identified what
would be needed for Daniel’s placement at the School:
“However, Mr Bartley did not consult with Mr Bob Field the special
education consultant. At that time, Mr Bartley was new to
the school and unaware
of all the available resources. It also appears that the plan did not take into
account the existing Departments
Special Education Policy: Exhibit 86. This plan
was never implemented in full and key recommendations were not
The complainant alleges that there
was little preparation for the teachers, prior to Daniel commencing in April
“The teachers evidence reveals that there was no clear understanding as to
whether they were to modify the existing program,
administer work provided by
DESU or undertake some other methods for teaching Daniel. Some teachers assessed
him on the same work
and in the same way as other students. Some teachers
modified their own programs and others did nothing
different.”
In relation to the assessment
forms that were completed in the main only by Mr Trudgett (the complainant
alleges that other teachers
such as Ms Court completed them only when they
reported poor conduct, or occasionally completed them):
“The forms themselves reveal that at times Daniel’s behaviour was
excellent. Yet, these forms were relied on by Mr Bartley
in justifying his
decision to exclude Daniel. The very tool designed to assist Daniel was used
against him.”
The complainant notes that there
was no orientation transition program put in place to assist Daniel during the
initial days of Daniel’s
attendance at School.
The complainant notes that neither Mr Garrard nor Mr Callan was called by the
respondent as witnesses:
“In 1997, this was the only report prepared which attempted to identify
all of the relevant personnel, consult with those persons
and then identify
problems and devise a way forward. It offered the principal a way out of the ad
hoc meetings and discussions which
had characterised the management of Daniel
from mid-1997. This was the only time that specialised Department of Education
came to SGHS... Mr Phillip’s criticisms of the report - a
failure to consult and a failure to appreciate the complexities -
are not valid
criticisms and cannot be supported when one considers the experience of these
men, the nature and extent of the consultations
and the methods that they use,
as recorded in their report.”
In relation to
the Draft Welfare and Discipline Policy for Daniel, the complainant firstly
states that:
“At the outset, those who are best placed to participate in the process
were not consulted. The policy was formulated without
seeking an expert input
and was based on how Ms Donsworth thought Daniel might behave. Many involved in
the formulation of the policy
had not met
Secondly, the complainant alleges
that the Draft Welfare and Discipline Policy for Daniel lacks flexibility in
that there were no
modifications to it during 1997 and that:
“To provide Daniel with something less than the whole deprive him of the
benefits of a comprehensive and sensitive welfare
policy. The parts that were
removed were those parts which enabled flexibility...
Daniel was the only student not entitled to the benefits of the
Department’s general welfare policy - he received something
everyone else. In doing so he was treated less favourably than the other
children... Mr Lord observed that the special
policy for Daniel was based on a
model of action/consequence/tolerance levels. The meaning of the behaviours were
not being addressed,
only the outcomes the behaviour. It is not an appropriate
model for Dan.”
The complainant states that if
amendments were required, they were required for the School Discipline Policy
1995, and that there
were no amendments to this policy for Daniel:
“In fact the evidence supports that it was applied more harshly to him.
When one compares the list of behaviours which was
assumed that Daniel might
exhibit and the consequences/tolerance levels, of the behaviours and tolerance
levels in the SGHS discipline
policy, then it is clear that consequences for
Daniel were more severe. The level system in the SGHS policy was applied to
in a more rigid manor compared to other
In relation to the alleged unlawful
discrimination the complainant refers to several overseas authorities. The
complainant alleges
that Daniel has been treated less favourably within the
of the DDA. The complainant alleges that the respondent has
(2)(b) of the DDA by excluding Daniel from the
School on 3 December 1997. The complainant alleges that the respondent breached
of the DDA by suspending Daniel from the school on five separate
occasions: 24 April, 7 May, 30/31 July, 3 September and 18 September
complainant also contends that the respondent has discriminated against Daniel
in breach of
of the DDA by subjecting Daniel to a detriment in his
education. It is alleged that those detriments are: failing to make a proper
assessment of Daniel’s needs on admission as a student at the School;
failing to provide Daniel with an orientation on his
commencement; failing to
implement the principal’s recommendations to accommodate Daniel; failing
to adjust the welfare and
discipline policy to address Daniel’s needs and
behavioural patterns when the need arose; failing to develop a set of guidelines
in accordance with the welfare and discipline policy; failing to provide
Daniel’s teachers with training or an awareness program
to assist them
teach Daniel; failing to obtain the assistance of experts in special education
or behaviour to assist the School develop
a program to accommodate Daniel;
failing to assess Daniel between 18 September 1997 and 3 December 1997 to
address the reasons for
the suspension and appropriate actions to be taken;
failing to inform the complainant and Daniel that he had been excluded from the
School on 3 December 1997; and failing to follow the School’s policy for
dealing with excluded children and facilitating Daniel’s
The complainant alleges that it became clear during the course of the hearing
that the nature of the modification to the Department’s
Student Welfare
Policy had the effect of denying or limiting Daniel’s access to a benefit
provided by the respondent, namely
an entitlement to be treated in accordance
with the relevant and applicable school policies. The complainant alleges that
a further ground for unlawful discrimination within
(2)(a) of the
DDA. It is further alleged that the failure of the respondent to accord Daniel
the benefits of the Departments Special
Education Policy had the effect of
denying or limiting to him a benefit provided by the School, in breach of
section 22(2)(a)
of the DDA.
The complainant alleges that Daniel was excluded from the School on 3
December 1997 because of his disability. The complainant states
that no other
child in year 7 was excluded from school in 1997, for any reason, and that
Daniel was treated less favourably than
other year 7 students were. The
complainant also contends that suspending Daniel for disturbed behaviour
constitutes less favourable
treatment because of his disabilities. For the
purposes of establishing a comparator the complainant points the Commission to
Fitzmaurice’s 1997 diary which records behaviour issues of year 7
students. The complainant submits that Daniel was treated
less favourably
compared to those students in Ms Fitzmaurice’s diary because he was
suspended and they were not. It is alleged
that this less favourable treatment
was compounded by the fact that Daniel’s conduct was more closely observed
and analysed
than that of any other child. It is alleged that the
respondent’s failure to have a proper program in place for Daniel
him to a detriment in his attendance at the School for the purposes of
s.22(2)(c).
It is alleged that failing to provide the guaranteed services and
facilities, such as those set out in Mr Bartley’s plan, subjected
to a detriment in his education.
4.2 Respondent’s submissions
In the first part of their submissions the respondent addresses 15
‘misconceptions’. The respondent states that the complaint
and the conduct of the proceedings, or at least parts of it, are based on some
misunderstandings of the actual events or on
incorrect or inaccurate
assumptions. The respondent refers to these in combination as misconceptions.
The respondent alleges that the first misconception is that Daniel’s
educational progress benefited from his placement in an
age appropriate class at
the School. The respondent claims that during his time at the School Daniel made
little, if any educational
progress. As none of the teachers’ aides were
trained educators the respondent claims that their views about Daniel’s
progress while working on the distance education material has no appropriate
professional basis. The respondent claims that Daniel
had no or minimal
participation in the class and so achieved no or minimal benefit from his
participation in educational terms and
that this conclusion is supported by his
reports from his teachers. The respondent claims that it is irrelevant whether
the distance
education unit formed a view about his progress or otherwise, as it
claimed that this progress could have been achieved in any setting.
submitted by the respondent that the only conclusion open to the Commission on
the evidence before it is that there was no
educational benefit to Daniel from
the period of his attendance through joining the year 7 classes.
The respondent states that the second misconception is that Daniel’s
social skills are more important than his educational progress
and these will
benefit from his placement at the School. The respondent states that the
emphasis of Mr and Mrs Purvis on social skills
demonstrates a misunderstanding
of both Daniel’s own needs and the supposed benefits to be obtained from
his placement at the
School. The respondent submits that the Purvis’
objecting socialisation as a primary role for Daniel while at the School is
fundamental misunderstanding of the role and purpose of a School. It is claimed
that there was considerable evidence that Daniel
derived little social benefit
from his attendance at the School and that there is evidence even from the
complainants own witnesses
that Daniel was, at least at times, socially
The respondent states that the third misconception is that the enrolment of
Daniel at the support unit at Grafton High School will
be detrimental to his
academic and social progress. The respondent claims that the evidence about the
benefits of mainstreaming is
discussed comprehensively by Ms Knight and relates
mainly to students with a mild intellectual disability. It is claimed that views
held by Mr and Mrs Purvis about the Grafton High School support unit are not
based on any proper assessment of the facts.
The respondent states that the fourth misconception was that there was a
‘blame the victim’ approach and ‘it was
somehow all
Daniel’s fault’. The respondent states:
“The approach of the school and the department has always been that if
Daniel is to remain a placement at SGHS or any other
mainstream school, then he
must be able to be a full member of the school community. This means taking
responsibility for his own
actions and behaviour and the results of them. His
disability does not exclude him from the boundaries which exist for all
It is submitted by the respondent
that there was no attribution by the School or the department overall of Daniel
as a “victim”
who should be or was “blamed”. The
approach it is claimed was at all times positive but to acknowledge those
difficulties and endeavour to deal with them in order to resolve them.
The respondent states that the fifth misconception is that Daniel “has
already shown he is able to survive and thrive in a mainstream
environment, and
that is not the problem”. It is stated by the respondent that Daniel did
not thrive when at the school, either
socially or educationally and that he did
not want to be there and manifested his rejection of the school environment in a
The respondent states that the sixth misconception is a further misconception
that it was the suspensions themselves, which were the
causal link with the
deterioration in Daniel’s behaviour. The respondent claims that the
suspensions were the direct result
of the deterioration of Daniel’s
behaviour, rather than the cause of it. It is claimed that his acting out anti
social behaviour
in the classroom and the general school environment were
indicators of his level of stress in being forced into a place where he
increasingly felt isolated and his self-esteem was eroding. The respondent
submits that the deterioration in Daniel’s behaviour
caused the suspension
and ultimate exclusion and not the suspensions, which caused the deterioration
of his behaviour. It is claimed
that this is a demonstration of Daniel’s
lack of capacity to deal with the demands of high school life, if he is unable
process a relatively simple matter of action leading to outcome.
The respondent states that the seventh misconception is that there is some
person or persons who can be blamed for the breakdown of
“The issues arising with Daniel’s placement are complex and
difficult. While requiring some level of resources for a
continued, long term
placement, that is not the most important issue. There is a shared
responsibility between the school community,
the home community and Daniel
himself. These must be able to work cooperatively for any achievements to occur.
It is submitted that
Ms Fitzmaurice has been unfairly identified as the
The respondent states that
the team was headed by Mr Bartley and that this is where responsibility and
accusations must be made.
The respondent states that the eighth misconception is that any comments
construed as
negativity. It is claimed that at all times the Purvis’ have down played
both the degree of Daniel’s intellectual
disability and his behavioural
problems. The respondent states that the Purvis’ immediate and sometimes
emotional reaction
to any adverse comment regarding Daniel means that there was
closed dialogue only. It is claimed that one of the major on going barriers
between the Purvis’ and the School was the inability of the foster parent
to engage in a realistic thick dialogue, which permitted
an open discussion of
the real problems which were arising.
The respondent states that the ninth misconception is that the curriculum at
the support unit at Grafton High School teaches only
social skills and that
these can be taught at home.
The respondent states that the tenth misconception is that the
Teachers’ Federation at the School was making the decisions in
relation to
Daniel’s enrolment and return to School. The respondent states that the
eleventh misconception is that antagonism
to Daniel’s enrolment by a
number of key people at the School and a negative mythology of disability and
difference exists
among some in the educational community at the School.
The respondent states that the twelfth misconception is that the complaint
which is the basis of these proceedings is that the School
has discriminated
against Daniel in various different ways including inadequacies in programming
support, yet there is no criticism
of the principal. The respondent state that
if the School was discriminatory as contended by the complainant, then the
responsibility
for those acts of discrimination which are denied by the
respondent, rests with the principal. He is responsible for the performance
the School and for any actions within it.
The respondent states that the thirteenth misconception is that
Daniel’s attendance at Gillwinga Primary School was an overwhelming
The respondent states that the fourteenth misconception is that there is no
limit to the amount of resources the department should
make available to
maintain Daniel’s enrolment at the School.
The respondent states that the fifteenth misconception is that different
behaviour strategies were implemented at the school:
“The criticism made of the principal and/or the school in not obtaining
the use of experts in special education to assist the
school to develop a
program to accommodate Daniel is based on an assumption that is inherently
It assumes that there are no parental responsibilities for the way in which
students conduct themselves when at school and in some
unexplained way, the
school operates in a vacuum and takes on all the issues relating to the
student’s behaviour...
If read in abstract, it could be assumed that the unacceptable behaviour which
Daniel manifested on some occasions at school was
only manifested there and at
no other place, particularly at home.”
respondent discusses the evidence of Dr Jackson, Ms Knight and Professor
Parmenter and also the other teachers. The respondent
is critical of the
evidence of Dr Jackson claiming that parts of the report were plagiarised and
that the report contained no citations
for all the references he included, as is
usual in academic work. It is claimed that Dr Jackson’s evidence was
vague, general,
lacking specificity and that Dr Jackson had published no peer
reviewed articles on integration. The respondent submits that the evidence
Jackson should be entirely discounted by the Commission and no reliance placed
In relation to the relevant statutory provisions the respondent submits that
the various tests have not been established as a question
alternatively as a question of fact. The respondent contends that any other
student who had behaved in the same or similar
way to Daniel would have been
excluded earlier than Daniel. The respondent states that a causal nexus must be
established between
the person with a disability and the decision or action as
required by the comparison with a person without a disability. The respondent
referred me to various cases and submits that as a question of law the
complainant has not demonstrated the causal nexus necessary
to establish a
In relation to the issue of Daniel’s exclusion from a school, the
respondent states that “that Daniel has been excluded
appropriately within
the terms and the intent of the relevant policies. Further, the act of exclusion
was not in breach of the Act
even if policy was not followed (which is not
conceded).”
The respondent states that Mr Bartley did advise Mr and Mrs Purvis that he
was “moving to exclusion” on 3 December 1997
and later that day
wrote to DOCS as Daniel’s legal guardian. This was done on the advice of
the legal section of the department.
The respondent states that a suitable
alternative school placement had already been identified for Daniel and Mr
Bartley had ensured
that there was a vacancy at the Grafton High School special
unit prior to the exclusion being advised to DOCS in December 1997. The
respondent states that the place was then available and remains available today.
The respondent states that the issue arising from
Daniel’s behaviour was
the safety of other students and staff. The respondent states that an
application of the “but
for” test shows that the reason or even part
of the reason was not Daniel’s disability. It is stated that no other
in year 7 or in the School overall had hit a member of staff in an
unprovoked attack. Therefore it is submitted that the fact that
no other year 7
student was excluded from the School, is irrelevant:
“The effect of the complainant’s submissions is that it does not
matter what Daniel does or how he behaves within the
school community, he is not
obliged to be part of the standards and practices of the school because of his
disability and hence he
is, in effect, allowed free range. If he injures another
student or a member of staff that, apparently is cause for a moment of passing
regret but because of his disability, the school can do nothing about the
It is submitted that the Act was
designed to eliminate as far as possible discrimination against persons on the
ground of disability
in the area of education. The respondent states that the
explicit recognition that there are limits to the extent of the legislative
coverage is further recognised in the definition of direct discrimination on
which the complainant relies.
In relation to the suspensions the respondent submits that none of these
constituted less favourable treatment within the context
of the school and the
outcome of equivalent behaviour for other students and the actual incidents for
which Daniel was excluded.
It is submitted that the suspensions were not an act
of direct discrimination as there was no less favourable treatment on the ground
of disability as a student who did the acts Daniel did would have been suspended
and for repeated suspensions for the same general
they would have been excluded also. In relation to the complainant’s
allegation that the respondent’s
failure to have a proper program in place
for Daniel subjected him to a detriment in his attendance at the school for the
, the respondent states that it accepted that Daniel
needed some specific support and provided an substantial amount of resources
permit his enrolment to proceed. It claims that these resources went far beyond
the requirement imposed by the Act. In response
to the complainant’s
allegation that the respondent failed to make a proper assessment of
Daniel’s needs on admission
as a student at the School, the respondent
states that all students enrolling at the School are required to undertake an
to ascertain their levels and to establish a benchmark. It states
that Daniel was not assessed because at all times it was the School’s
clear understanding that Mr Purvis would not permit any of the usual forms of
assessment of Daniel.
In relation to the complainant’s allegation that the respondent failed
to provide Daniel with an orientation on his commencement
at South Grafton High
School, it is submitted that Daniel underwent an orientation period over two
days with the other year 6 students
from Gillwinga Primary School, and that Mr
Purvis advised Mr Bartley that this was sufficient. It is further submitted that
rejected a later attempt for an extra day prior to Daniel’s
formal commencement when offered by Mr Bartley.
In relation to the allegation that the respondent failed to implement the
principal’s recommendations to accommodate Daniel
at the School, the
respondent states that Mr Phillips was the decision maker and Mr Field, the
district special education consultant,
explained the reasons for the rejections
of some parts of Mr Bartley initial funding application.
In relation to the allegation that the respondent failed to adjust the
Welfare and Discipline Policy to address Daniel’s needs
and behavioural
patterns when they arose, the respondent states that because the discipline
policy was invoked in relation to suspensions,
it did not demonstrate that there
was any apparent need for alterations or modifications of the policy. The
respondent submits that
a failure to incorporate any alterations or
modifications could not be an act of unlawful discrimination. It is submitted
is no basis in law or fact for any finding in relation to the
complainant’s allegation that the respondent failed to develop
guidelines, in accordance with the Welfare and Discipline Policy.
In relation to the complainant’s allegation that the respondent failed
to provide Daniel’s teachers with training, or
an awareness program to
assist them teach Daniel, the respondent states that Daniel’s enrolment at
the School was subject to
the understanding on the part of the principal and his
staff that the educational material needed by Daniel would be provided by
distance education unit, and there would be no demands on the class teachers.
The respondent states:
“Mr and Mrs Purvis insist that Daniel be enrolled at SGHS and invoke this
Commission’s assistance to achieve their objective.
Once that occurs, then
they complain about the lack of certain resources which are the very ones which
they have eschewed at the
support unit, particularly that of fully trained and
aware teachers who are solely engaged in teaching students with a disability.
This also raises the resources they anticipate being made available for Daniel
to meet their objective.”
It is stated that
specially trained teachers are available at the support unit at South Grafton
High School. It is submitted that
even if there was no special training or
information opportunities afforded to the teaching staff, there would not have
been a breach
of the Act. The respondent submits that the requirements, which
the complainant seeks to impose on the School, go beyond the purview
legislation.
In relation to the complainant’s allegation that the respondent failed
to obtain the assistance of experts in special education
or behaviour, to assist
the School develop a program to accommodate Daniel, the respondent states:
“This is another example of the extra steps and resources the complainant
requires of the respondent in order to maintain Daniel
at the school which he
insists Daniel attends. The fundamental premise is that in order to enable
Daniel to comply with the requirements
imposed on him and the school by Mr
Purvis, a special program for Daniel must be implemented which is only possible
to achieve with
the assistance of a range of outside
expertise.”
The respondent states that
“reasonable accommodation” does not require the principal to extend
efforts and resources.
In relation to the allegations that the respondent failed to assess Daniel
between 18 November 1997 and 3 December 1997 to address
the reasons for the
suspension and appropriate action to be taken, the respondent points to a case
management meeting on 15 October
1997. The respondent states that at the end of
this meeting Mr Scahill from DOCS observed that what was happening was not
successful.
The respondent states that the reasons for the suspension was fully
assessed and accurately analysed and the appropriate recommendation
The respondent states that failing to inform the complainant and Daniel that he
had been excluded from school on 3 December
1997, relates to a factual dispute
between Mr Bartley and Mr and Mrs Purvis about the contents of a conversation on
that day. The
respondent submits that Mr Bartley’s version of the
conversation will be preferred and even if it is not, there is no actual
discrimination in breach of the Act.
In relation to the complainant’s allegation that the respondent failed
to follow the School’s policy for dealing with
excluded children and
facilitating Daniel’s return to the School, it is submitted that the
policy was followed and that there
was no actual discrimination.
The respondent claims that the complainant seeks to add to the alleged
breaches of the Act after the evidence has closed and with
no formal notice. The
respondent submits that the Commission should have no regard to the matters
raised in paragraphs 4.10, 4.11
and 4.12 of the complainant’s submissions,
which claim that the failure of the Department to follow its policies gave rise
to further grounds of discrimination. The respondent seeks that the hearing be
reopened if these matters are to be considered. The
respondent submits that the
complaint should be dismissed.
4.3 Complainant’s submissions in reply
In relation to the respondent’s discussion of what it refers to as
“misconceptions”, the complainant states that
the respondent is
seeking to divert the Commission from its proper inquiry function.
In relation to the respondent’s “misconception number 1”,
the complainant states that the respondent’s definition
“education” is narrow. The complainant refers the Commission to the
international instruments when considering the
“education”. The complainant states that there is evidence of Daniel
acquiring knowledge and skills; that
there is evidence of Daniel’s
progress at his own level, and that his teachers acknowledge this.
The complainant states that only six half-yearly reports were provided to Mr
and Mrs Purvis. Not all the teachers who had prepared
mid-term evaluations
completed half-yearly reports. It is stated that on the whole, the half-yearly
reports recognise that Daniel
was participating in the class activities and
doing so to the best of his ability. The complainant submits that the reports
by the Distance Education Support Unit were essentially relevant to
measuring Daniel’s progress and any educational benefit.
The complainant
states that Daniel’s achievements in the Distance Education Support Unit
program delivered at the School could
not have been achieved in any setting.
In relation to the respondent’s “misconception number 2”,
the complainant states that there is no evidence that
Mr and Mrs Purvis
persistently refused to allow Mr Bartley to implement a social skills program.
In relation to the respondent’s “misconception number 3”,
the complainant states that whether or not Daniel would
benefit by being placed
in the Support Unit at Grafton High School is not a relevant matter for this
In relation to the respondent’s “misconception number 4”
the complainant states that the evidence supports a finding
that Mr and Mrs
Purvis are active and open in their involvement with the School.
In relation to the respondent’s “misconception number 5”.
the complainant notes that matters relating to Gillwinga
were specifically
excluded from the inquiry.
In relation to the respondent’s “misconception number 6”,
it is stated that the respondent’s own records support
view that the suspensions and their duration increased.
In relation to the respondent’s “misconception number 7”,
it is stated that Ms Fitzmaurice performed a critical
role and any suggestion
that the complainant continues to hunt for a scapegoat misconceived.
In relation to the respondent’s “misconception number 8”,
the complainant states that Mr and Mrs Purvis have not
sought to down-play the
degree of Daniel’s intellectual disability or his behaviour problems and
that they have been candid
in their dealings with the school and provided
information to the School to assist with the understanding of Daniel’s
disabilities
and how they had developed strategies to manage his behaviour in
In relation to the respondent’s “misconception number 10”,
the complainant states that the influence of the Teachers’
Federation in
relation to Daniel’s exclusion is apparent in Mr Phillips’
recommendations to Mr Sutton, who made the final
decision on the appeal.
In relation to the respondent’s “misconception number 11”,
the complainant states that the negative and adverse
stereotypical views of the
teachers are clear on the face of the minutes of the Teachers’ Federation
In relation to the respondent’s “misconception number 12”,
the complainant states that there was no such claim made
by the complainant with
respect to this issue.
In relation to the respondent’s “misconception number 13”,
the complainant states that these submissions address
Daniel’s placement
at Gillwinga, evidence of which was not admissible.
In relation to the respondent’s “misconception number 14”,
“there is no evidence that Mr and Mrs Purvis did
not accept that there was
a limit on the Department’s resources. This matter was not specifically
put to them in cross-examination
and the contention should be dismissed.”
The complainant further continues that it is misleading to assert that Daniel
receiving the highest funding in the state. The complainant states that no
evidence was led by the respondent about the funding on
a statewide basis for
all the students attending secondary and primary schools in NSW.
In relation to the respondent’s “misconception number 15”,
the complainant states that there is no evidence to support
respondent’s assertion. In relation to the evidence of Dr Jackson, the
complainant states that Dr Jackson indicated that
he agreed with much of
Professor Parmenter’s report. However, unlike Professor Parmenter, Dr
Jackson had the opportunity to
observe Daniel directly and consider the work
Daniel was undertaking. The complainant submits that there is no basis for the
to contend that Dr Jackson’s evidence should be entirely
discounted.
In relation to the evidence of the teachers, the complainant states that this
evidence is unreliable and does not assist the Commission:
“...the unreliability of the teachers’ evidence starts with their
limited understanding and appreciation of Daniel’s
disability. Their
opinions are based on Daniel’s ability and focus on negative aspects of
his time at SGHS.”
The complainant states that
the only relevant evidence on the issue of behaviour is the form, which the
teachers were asked to complete
each lesson. The complainant states that the
thrust of the teachers’ evidence is that Daniel received limited
educational benefits,
and that Daniel was not suspended or excluded because of
his perceived inability to benefit educationally. The complainant then comments
on the “but for” test in relation to the relevant statutory
provisions, and refers to several cases. The complainant
states that the
evidence supports the finding that Daniel has been treated less favourably
because of his particular disabilities.
5. FINDINGS OF FACT
The complainant argued that the treatment of Daniel during his attendance at
SGHS, his suspensions and his exclusion from SGHS, constituted
less favourable
treatment pursuant to
of the Act. The respondent disputed the
factual basis put forward by the complainant. The respondent argued that, on its
interpretation
of the facts, the treatment constituted more rather than less
favourable treatment.
As set out at the beginning of this decision the evidence before the
Commission in this matter was vast. The chronology of events
in 2.5, whilst very
detailed, only briefly summarises that evidence. The other parts of
fill in more details in certain specific important areas. In this section, I
have briefly referred to the evidence on which my findings
are based but not
repeated what is in
All of the evidence referred to in this section
may not have been canvassed in
I have attempted to set out my findings of fact in a logical, chronological
order, and where possible to follow
section 2.5
of this decision. In its
submissions the respondent set down 15 alleged misconceptions in the
complainant’s case. I have dealt
with these where they appear to be
relevant in my findings, but not necessarily returned to them in other sections
where they may
also be relevant.
5.1 Daniel Hoggan
Daniel Hoggan was born on 8 December 1984. He is a ward of the State and has
been in the foster care of Mr Alex and Mrs Clemency Purvis
part-time since 1988
and full-time since 1989. Daniel is totally accepted as part of the Purvis
family, and views himself as a member
of that family. Daniel’s family
situation is described in
section 2.3
, and that description, which is not in
dispute, is adopted.
It is not in dispute that Daniel Hoggan has a disability for the purposes of
the Act. It is described in
section 2.2
of the evidence and that description is
adopted in these findings.
For the purposes of the definition in
, Daniel has-
(a) an intellectual disability that manifests in unusual individual
mannerisms and disturbed behaviour such as rocking, humming,
swearing, and at
times aggressive behaviour such as hitting or kicking.
(b) an intellectual disability that affects Daniel’s thought
processes, perception of reality, emotions, and results in disturbed
(c) an intellectual disability which results in Daniel learning differently
from a person without the intellectual disability;
(d) a visual disability;
(e) epilepsy; and
(f) a past disability, namely severe encephalopathic illness.
Mr Purvis acknowledged in his evidence that Daniel can be a difficult child,
but asserted that over the years he has spent with the
Purvis family he has
progressed dramatically. He has matured, and his behaviour has improved. I
accept this evidence. Mr Purvis also
stated that when Daniel behaves in a manner
which may be described as acting out, swearing or socially inappropriate
behaviour, it
is usually with some level of warning, and it cannot be said that
his behaviour occurs in a vacuum. Whilst not experts in the field,
Purvis have by far the most experience in developing strategies to deal with
Daniel’s behaviour, and I am happy
to rely on Mr Purvis’ assessment
on this issue.
Mr Lord, in his evidence, stated that the nature of Daniel’s disability
means that he has no sense of the cause of his behaviour
such that his behaviour
can be described as planned or motivated by an ill intent. I also accept this
evidence, which is important
to later findings.
He also noted “It is essential for Daniel to develop appropriate
behavioural norms and social integration. This would be most
effective with
significant periods of inclusion into mainstream classes with programs adjusted
to permit his inclusion into normal
activities.”
He said further, “Daniel is a sensitive child, and he picks up on
verbal and non-verbal cues. He senses whether he is accepted,
and responds to
these cues.”
5.2 Identification of the complainant
On 22 March 1998 Alex Purvis, on behalf of his son Daniel Hoggan, lodged a
complaint of disability discrimination with the Commission.
The complainant is
clearly the writer of the letter, Alex Purvis. He has lodged the complaint on
behalf of his son, who is the aggrieved
person, pursuant to s 69 (1) (c) of the
5.3 Respondent is an educational authority
Again this is not in dispute between the parties.
The State of NSW, through the Department of Education and Training is an
educational authority administering the South Grafton High
School for the
purposes of the definition of the definition of educational authority in
of the Act.
The South Grafton High School is an educational institution as also defined
The State of NSW employs the Principal and Staff of the SGHS. The State of
NSW is vicariously liable for the acts of its employees
and agents pursuant to
of the Act.
5.4 Daniel Hoggan being a student
It is not in dispute that, at the relevant time, Daniel Hoggan was a student
at South Grafton High School. After admission the previous
month, he commenced
there in Year 7 on 8 April 1997, and attended there (subject to periods of
suspension) until 18 September 1997.
He was excluded from the school on 3
December 1997.
5.5 Daniel’s previous education
The facts set out on this issue in
section 2.4
are not in dispute and are
adopted. However, this is only background, as the matter before me deals with
Daniel’s time at SGHS.
The respondent has suggested that there is a misconception (number 13) that
Daniel’s placement at Gillwinga was very successful.
Because this inquiry
deals with Daniel’s attendance at SGHS I make no finding regarding this
The respondent has suggested that there is a further misconception (number 5)
drawn by the complainant that Daniel was able to survive
and thrive in a
mainstream environment. The complainant’s comment in this regard, in the
actual complaint, refers to Daniel’s
time at Gillwinga which I am not
taking into account. This is not, therefore, a misconception in the
complainant’s case. The
respondent has outlined much evidence supporting
its contention that Daniel was not happy at SGHS and did not want to be there,
I will consider later in these findings.
Further details on Daniel’s previous education, and his first
unsuccessful application for enrolment at SGHS, are set out in
section 2.5.1.
These are adopted.
5.6 SGHS knowledge of Daniel’s disabilities
The various medical reports relating to Daniel’s disabilities, with
some minor exceptions, were on Daniel’s file at the
school, and Mr Bartley
in his evidence said that he was aware of Daniel’s disabilities. However,
when Daniel commenced at SGHS
his teachers, from the evidence, had little
understanding of the nature of his disabilities, and how they affected his
learning and
Teachers exhibited a wide disparity of views about Daniel’s
disabilities. Ms Fitzmaurice said she thought it related to his
sight, learning,
and having limited social skills. Mr Trudget could not explain what he
understood Daniel’s disabilities to
be. Mr Lang thought it was visual. Mr
Perle thought it was difficulty concentrating, sitting still, and not being able
simple directions. Ms Ebeling thought it was not being able to retain
information for very long, and she did not appreciate that
he had a vision
disability. Mr Miller thought Daniel had a mental age of three. Ms Durant said
eyesight was an issue and reading
was at basic level. Mr Neill, considering them
in relation to art tasks, said Daniel had no fine motor skills, limited
and writing. Ms Court said she was aware of vision disability but not
the severity of his impairment and, according to Mrs Purvis’
evidence, she
did not have an understanding of the relationship between Daniel’s
disability and his behaviour. As his home
room teacher, and the special teacher
for learning difficulties, this is quite concerning. Ms Court was given relief
time to assist
Daniel, but appears to have spent little time with him.
Whilst the file in which this information was kept was available to staff,
according to Mr Bartley, it appears that teachers were
not aware of it or did
not read it.
I find that, overall, staff at SGHS had a very poor knowledge of the nature
of Daniel’s disabilities, and the implications of
those disabilities. This
lack of understanding is a fundamental issue in this case.
5.7 Planning for Daniel’s enrolment
Much information was gained during the first unsuccessful application for
enrolment. This information, and the application process,
was assessed by Mr
Phillips prior to the commencement of the second enrolment process. This
provided him with an opportunity to seek
further information if he felt that it
was required. That did not occur, and in fact on 24 December 1996 he wrote to Mr
and Mrs Purvis
indicating that the information on Daniel’s needs gained as
part of the first application process was sufficient.
The fact that the first process was flawed, which was recognised by the
Department, could indicate that facts and impressions then
collected may have
impacted on the second enrolment process, and assumptions made by SGHS and
Department staff during and after Daniel’s
Mr Bartley visited the Purvis family at their home early in 1997 and met
Daniel. He set up a committee to assess the resources at
SGHS, and prepared a
carefully considered integration plan for Daniel. It recognised the special
services and facilities Daniel would
require. Consultation occurred within SGHS,
but Mr Bartley did not consult with Mr Field (the special education consultant),
did not take into account the Departments Special Education Policy. This
plan, which went to Mr Phillips for approval, included requirements
resource allocation for Daniel by the Department. Whilst some of these
allocations were made, not all were. Both Mr Phillips
and Mr Field gave evidence
as to the reasons for these decisions. Whilst the provision of even greater
resources may have benefited
Daniel and improved the likelihood of success of
his placement (even though to hypothesise on this is of little value) Mr
decisions were valid in the context of overall resource
allocation for his region.
The respondent asserts that, unlike other SGHS students, Daniel was not
assessed prior to his commencement at the School because Mr
and Mrs Purvis would
not agree to it. However, I find that this misrepresents the Purvis’
position. The respondent relies on
a letter to the School from Mr Purvis dated
13 February 1997 referring to a proposal for a trial day which, in fact, did not
place. The letter consents to a trial provided that “Daniel is not
being assessed”. This condition on the trial is not
preventing assessment,
and in fact in his evidence Mr Purvis indicated that he was prepared to agree to
assessment of Daniel if its
educational benefit could be demonstrated to him. He
did not want Daniel to be assessed, labelled from that assessment and then
as a result of that labelling. Such concerns have been acknowledged
in debate about “special” education. It is unfortunate
that teachers
were not able to explain the benefits of assessment to Mr Purvis’
satisfaction.
I accept that Mr Bartley formed the view, honestly but incorrectly, that Mr
Purvis was refusing assessment altogether. This is supported
by his report in
February 1997 in which he notes the constraints that this places on the school.
Mr Field also notes this as one
of his concerns.
But I do not find that this was Mr Purvis’ position. However, whilst
understanding Mr Purvis’ position the hard line to
which he held was
unfortunate. In my view, both Daniel and the staff at SGHS would have benefited
if a valid means of assessment
had been found, as it would have provided a
benchmark from which progress could have been gauged. Responsibility for the
assessment did not occur, though, must lie as much with Mr Purvis as
with the respondent. I note that Mr Phillips put special arrangements
to ensure that, even though parts of the funding application could not be filled
in because Daniel had not been assessed,
the funding was still made available.
The complainant submitted that there was little preparation for teachers
prior to Daniel’s arrival. A staff seminar took place
as one session of a
staff training day, and not all of Daniel’s teachers participated. The
notes of the meeting confirm this.
At the seminar the teachers aides answered questions relating to their
experience with Daniel, which was very useful, but little expertise
education was involved.
Ms Thomson’s evidence about the seminar, which I accept, was that most
of the teachers’ questions related to Daniel’s
behaviour. Whilst
this was certainly a relevant area of discussion, this indicates a concerning
focus in the teachers’ minds
prior to Daniel’s enrolment.
The respondent rejects the complainant’s assertion that all of
Daniel’s teachers should have attended a UWS two-day workshop
education. Whilst this may have been beneficial for Daniel it is clearly an
issue of resource allocation, and a matter
for individual teacher choices.
The complainant submitted that this lack of preparation for teachers was
reflected in their lack of understanding of Daniel’s
disabilities, how
they were to teach Daniel, and the role of the teachers aides. The involvement
of the DESU was not clear, and teachers
did not know whether to modify the
existing program, administer work provided by DESU, or undertake some other
method of teaching.
Their assessments indicate that all of these methods were
tried by different teachers.
This problem was clearly demonstrated in the teachers’ evidence about
Daniel’s placement. The respondent submits that
Daniel’s enrolment
was accepted on the basis that the school would provide a place for Daniel, but
that he would be “taught”
through material provided by the DESU.
However, this cannot have been the reality. Whilst the DESU material was
provided it was done
to support Daniel following the year 7 curriculum at his
level of learning. It does not follow from the provision of this material
the teachers had no role in teaching Daniel. Clearly some of them did not think
this was the case as they worked through this
material with Daniel. Nor did the
DESU, as it did not provide material for all of Daniel’s classes. Other
teachers prepared
specific material for Daniel. I reject this submission of the
respondent.
The respondent’s submission in paragraph 399 seems to me to be a major
concession. It says: “the evidence is overwhelming
that it was the
teacher’s aide who had the principle responsibility for working through
the material. The actual amount of
teaching, in the commonly understood usage of
the word, undertaken by any of the individual teachers was non-existent.”
it is an admission that the teacher’s aides, rather than the teachers,
principally taught Daniel then it would seem to provide
clear grounds for the
complainant’s assertion of a “detriment in education” under
the Act. It was certainly recognised
by all parties that Daniel would require
the assistance of a teacher’s aide. But I do not think it would have been
that such an aide would have the primary teaching role. I will consider
the question of detriment in the next section.
The teachers aides were not given any training about the workings of SGHS.
The complainant alleged that, unlike other year 7 students, Daniel was not
given an orientation day at SGHS. The respondent relies
on the orientation given
to all Gillwinga students in 1996 and that Mr Purvis said that this was
sufficient and he did not need a
trial day. However, the proposal for a trial
day is very different from the concept of orientation, and I do not accept the
respondent’s
rejection of the complainant’s submission of detriment
on that basis. Orientation is having the opportunity to learn about
the School,
its environment, etc. A trial carries the implication of being some sort of test
for Daniel- hence Mr Purvis’ comments
in the letter referred to above
Daniel’s enrolment
whereas orientation would be expected to occur on the
first day of attendance as a student of the school. For the respondent to assert
that these are the same is a nonsense.
I accept, however, that on Daniel’s first day of school he was taken
around the School and shown all the things that he needed
to know. Whilst that
might not constitute the level of orientation provided to other year 7 students
it is difficult to compare what
one student commencing in term 2 received in
this context with what the whole of year 7 received at the beginning of term 1.
5.8 Daniel’s education and participation at SGHS
Clearly Daniel was not able to participate in the year 7 curriculum at the
level of other students- there is no disagreement between
the parties on this
point. However, it is also clear that Daniel did participate in some aspects of
the year 7 curriculum. This is
supported by the evidence of the teachers aides
who, although not educationally qualified, were involved in Daniel’s
activities.
It is also supported by some teachers themselves, particularly in the
half-yearly assessments provided for Daniel. A number of these
positive. It is true that the mid-term evaluations are not so positive, but it
must be remembered that they occurred in
May of 1997, after Daniel had been at
the school for a relatively short period.
A number of the teachers held the view that Daniel did not benefit
educationally, but this view was by no means unanimous. Others
hesitation in expressing a view because they found it difficult to assess
The DESU reports from visits and work which they marked also indicate
educational benefit. The respondent suggests that they are
not relevant because
the same result could have been achieved in any setting. but they provide a
proper measure - against clearly
established criteria - of Daniel’s
progress. It is impossible to determine, and fairly irrelevant, whether the same
would have been achieved somewhere else. For a start such a program may
well not have been available at the GHS support unit.
Daniel participated in some regular classroom activities, and followed the
same timetable as other students in his class.
The respondent asserts that if school life is taken to principally mean the
education offered by the school, as Daniel - in the main
- was not participating
in that because he was doing DESU work, he was not participating on an equal
footing at any time. Endeavours
were made to line the DESU work up with the work
of the rest of the class, in some ways this can be seen as tokenistic and as a
of the curriculum. This assertion is hard to accept bearing in mind
that the DESU prepared this work, and did so - it is assumed-
in line with the
Department’s policies for this type of situation.
The respondent, in its submissions, seeks a finding that Daniel did not
benefit educationally during his period at SGHS. It asserts
that the fact that
Daniel did so benefit is the first misconception in the complainant’s
case. In seeking such a finding it
adopts a relatively narrow definition of
education, rather than a more holistic approach. It relies on the Macquarie
Dictionary definition
of education. The complainant relies on the broader
definition set out in the UNESCO Salamanca Statement and Framework For Action
Special Needs Education. Because of the fact that this statement was prepared
specifically in the educational context, and that
it is an international
instrument setting out rights to which the Commission should have due regard
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 183 CLR 273)
I am more inclined to accept this broader definition.
I am not persuaded that Daniel did not benefit educationally. I am also not
persuaded that he did not participate in any curriculum
activities. I am
satisfied that he learned, and that the activities he carried out (although at a
very different level) were following
the thrust of the curriculum.
Further, this was not the only reason for his attendance at SGHS. Mr and Mrs
Purvis were clear in their objectives for Daniel’s
participation in a
mainstream setting, and they were not only concerned with educational benefit.
Others, such as Mr Bartley in his
evidence, recognised this.
In any event it is not the Commission’s role to make such a finding.
What I must determine is whether, during his time at SGHS,
discriminated against on the ground of his disability.
The respondent also sought a finding regarding Daniel’s social
integration at the school. The respondent asserted that the complainant
argued that Daniel’s social skills were more important than educational
progress, and these would benefit from his placement
at SGHS. This, asserted the
respondent, was the second misconception in the complainant’s case. It
relied on evidence from
Mr and Mrs Purvis for this assertion.
The respondent argued that this was not the main function of SGHS. It
asserted that, according to Professor Parmenter - Daniel would
need support for
this to occur anyway as it was not “an osmotic process”. It further
argued that, according to the teachers’
observations - it largely did not
Mr and Mrs Purvis argued that it was an important facet of Daniel’s
development, and the aides gave evidence of a number of
instances where it was
occurring. This is contrary to the evidence of teachers, but I prefer the
evidence of the aides who were with
Daniel most of the time. The teachers were
only able to make observations of what they noticed as part of their normal
duties, and as part of teaching whole classes of children.
I am satisfied that learning is a primary function of schools, but that
social activities and interaction also play an important part
in the overall
learning process. Whilst Daniel’s social integration may not have been as
successful as hoped I am satisfied
that, in term 2 of 1997 at least, social
integration was beginning to occur. The evidence in
section 2.5
, mainly the
quotations from the communications book, is relied on for this finding.
Unfortunately, the positive trend did not appear
to continue to the same extent
The respondent further asserted that there was a misconception (number 3)
that enrolment of Daniel at the support unit at Grafton
High School would be
detrimental to his academic and social progress. This was certainly the view of
Mr and Mrs Purvis, and it is
a view that they are entitled to hold. The
respondent attempted to show that it was without valid foundation. But Mr Purvis
inquiries of the unit, and both parents had clearly considered this
question in great detail over the years of Daniel’s education.
view shared by Dr Jackson and Mr Lord (in the sense that he felt strongly that
Daniel would do better in an integrated setting),
although not by Ms Knight and
other of the respondent’s witnesses. They asserted that attendance at the
Support Unit would
have been beneficial to Daniel’s social and academic
I must be particularly careful here to restrict my findings to those relevant
to these proceedings.
Dalla Costa v The ACT Department Of Health
, makes it very clear that provision of a segregated service - because
of it being innately exclusionary - is discriminatory per se,
and that even if
inclusive education provides an inferior service, that service would have to be
greatly inferior in order to counterbalance
the loss by the person with the
disability caused by the innate exclusion. I agree with and adopt the reasoning
in that decision.
That being the case I need only find that Daniel’s
social and academic progress at the Support Unit would not have been greatly
superior to that at SGHS. Based on the complainant’s evidence as outlined
that is a clear finding. I do not need to take the
further step of finding that
attendance at the Support Unit would have been detrimental. I must focus on the
issues which assist
me to determine whether discrimination occurred in breach of
The respondent asserted that the ninth misconception in the
complainant’s case was that the Support Unit at GHS taught only
skills which could be taught at home. I accept Mr Clarke’s evidence about
the wide range of skills taught at the Unit.
However, I do not accept that the
complainant was asserting this narrow view of the Unit. Whilst the complainant
and Mrs Purvis hold
strong views about the unacceptability of the Support Unit
for Daniel, this alleged misconception takes their evidence out of context
misrepresents their views. Further, the issue is of marginal relevance to this
inquiry for the reasons set out above.
5.9 Daniel’s performance in Term 2
Prior to his commencement Daniel had been completing DESU work at home,
co-ordinated by Ms Thomson. I find that, in the main, Ms Thomson
continued this
work when Daniel commenced at SGHS. This is her evidence, supported by the notes
of the DESU. Whilst I accept that
Ms Fitzmaurice spoke to the DESU on a number
of occasions, I do not accept her evidence that she co-ordinated Daniel’s
even though it was her role to do so.
There was no orientation or transition program for Daniel when he started,
although this was available to all other year 7 students
according to Ms
Fitzmaurice’s diary. Again according to Ms Fitzmaurice’s diary and
her evidence year 7 is recognised
as a year of change, and in first term
students are given flexibility accordingly. This flexibility, again according to
this diary,
was given to other students who started that year later or missed
periods of school. However, it was not afforded to Daniel when
he started in
second term. This was a particular problem for him considering his difficulty
coping with change as a result of his
disability.
By June 1997 Mrs Purvis observed that Daniel had settled down and was going
to school happily. She believed that his self-esteem had
improved substantially,
and that he was maturing and making friends. This is reflected in the
communications book, and in the evidence
of Ms Thomson and Ms LaForrest. He was
attending, and participating in, the same classes as other students. He was
learning and attempting
some tests- some modified and others not. This evidence
is set out in more detail in section 2.5.
DESU notes on 26 June 1997 record a conversation with Mr Bartley in which he
indicated that things were going well, and that Daniel
had settled down.
Happiness of teachers varies, and some are concerned about reporting processes.
Mr Bartley sought some form of
outcomes-based reporting, which the DESU advised
it was moving to. Mr Bartley noted that on the whole most teachers are quite
and have come a long way towards changing their attitudes. I am
satisfied that, at the end of June, Daniel was settling in well and
beginning to
progress. I also accept Mr Bartley’s comments - as recorded in the DESU
notes - that the attitudes of many teachers
were becoming more positive.
Evidence from Ms Thompson and Ms LaForrest asserts that Daniel was no more of
a distraction in the class than other students. They
stated that Daniel was one
of the quietest students in the class, particularly in the second term, although
recognising that conversations
between him and them may have caused some noise.
The evidence of teachers on this issue is mixed, with some asserting that these
conversations were a distraction, and others seeming not too concerned.
Classrooms can be quite noisy environments, depending on
the teacher and
teaching methods, the particular activities taking place, and the approach of
students. I am satisfied that, in this
context, neither Daniel’s behaviour
nor the conversations between himself and his aides caused any greater problem
Clearly Daniel’s behaviour deteriorated later in the year. This is
supported in the chronology of evidence set out in 2.5 above.
It is what led to
this deterioration which is more difficult to determine. I will address this
issue later.
5.10 Assessment of Daniel
The daily assessment forms, agreed upon at the teachers’ seminar prior
to Daniel’s enrolment, demonstrated two problems
in the process. Firstly,
Daniel was the only child monitored in such a way. Secondly, only one of
Daniel’s many teachers completed
them daily. Some others completed them
for a while or less frequently. Others, such as Ms Court, only completed them
when they reported
poor conduct. Because of these inconsistencies, the forms
were of little use in formulating behaviour management strategies.
Ms Fitzmaurice, who was responsible for collecting them and collating the
information from them, did not follow up on their non-completion.
The forms demonstrate periods of excellent behaviour, and other periods where
behaviour was poor.
Longer term assessments such as the mid-term evaluations and the half-yearly
and yearly reports, generally indicate that teachers
were of the view that
Daniel did not receive much educational benefit from his time at SGHS. However,
it is difficult to draw much
from them because - as expressed by the teachers
themselves - there were not clear criteria on which to assess Daniel. Therefore,
he was assessed differently by different teachers.
Different approaches seemed to be adopted to teach Daniel. Some teachers
relied totally on the DESU material. Some spent a great deal
of time and effort
setting Daniel particular work relating to the areas of the curriculum they were
covering with other students.
Some teachers made accommodations for Daniel, and
others treated him as they did all other students. I found the teachers’
evidence on assessments overall difficult to assess because of these variances,
and of little assistance in making findings on the
assessment processes.
The question of assessments and testing was raised at the case management
meeting on 25 April 1997, and at other times. It is clear
from the meeting
notes, as well as Mr Purvis’ evidence, that he was not opposed to these
provided that it would benefit Daniel.
The school saw Mr Purvis as being
inflexible on this issue, perceiving his position as refusing testing and
assessment altogether.
They saw this as limiting their capacity to assess
progress. However, as a parent of, and advocate for, his son with a disability
(for whom assessment has been a commonplace activity for all of his life) his
position is quite understandable. He did not wish to
have Daniel participate in
the activity without understanding what could be gained from it.
It was unfortunate that this issue was not explored further by all concerned.
Whilst I understand the position which Mr Purvis took,
had he been a little more
open to negotiation, and had people at the School spent more time explaining the
benefits, then further
assessment may have occurred. Some real measures of
Daniel’s progress would, in my view, have assisted the teachers, been of
benefit to Daniel, and perhaps meant that positions taken on other issues would
have been less oppositional.
5.11 Role of the Teachers Federation
Prior to Daniel’s enrolment several meetings of the Teachers Federation
occurred to discuss it. Fear and uncertainty were evident
at these meetings from
the minutes and resolutions recorded. Strict adherence to the Federation
guidelines for the enrolment of students
with disabilities was sought, and
appropriate resources demanded.
The respondent asserts that misconception eleven in the complainant’s
case is that there was antagonism to Daniel’s enrolment
by a small number
of key people at the School, and a negative mythology of disability and
difference amongst some in the School.
The respondent states that only Ms
Donsworth and Ms Court were named by Mr Purvis as being negative, and that the
Teachers Federation
was also named.
It is true that many teachers worked hard to assist Daniel and provide him
with a profitable educational experience. However, it is
also true that some
were opposed to his integration at the School, and based their views on
stereotypical assumptions about people
with disabilities.
Of course the Department cannot be held responsible for views expressed at
Teachers Federation meetings. However, the notes of these
meetings, and
decisions made, indicate strong opposition amongst teachers for Daniel’s
integration. They also demonstrate that
teachers had, prior to Daniel’s
arrival, formed preconceived views about Daniel and his capacity to participate.
This is supported
by comments about teachers only being baby-sitters, even after
the presentation by Mr Bartley of his integration plan. Most of the
teachers had
not met Daniel when these meetings took place.
The opposition of the Federation continued throughout Daniel’s
placement. Mr Perle, the convenor, provided material in opposition
to inclusion
to Mr Bartley, and wrote on 19 September 1997 threatening industrial action if
Daniel was not moved. This was reaffirmed
following a meeting in November.
The complainant in his submissions suggests that the role of the Teachers
Federation was an influencing factor on Mr Bartley’s
enrolment decision,
on Mr Bartley’s decision to exclude, and on material provided by Mr
Phillips for the consideration of the
appeal of that second decision. Whilst I
accept that Mr Bartley took his own decisions, and that the enrolment decision
he took was
contrary to that of the Federation, I accept the complainant’s
submissions in large measure. The continued opposition of the
Federation had a major negative impact on Daniel’s attendance at the
school. This was unfortunate, because many of
the views expressed at their
meetings, particularly prior to the enrolment, were quite uninformed.
I am sure that Mr Bartley’s decision to exclude was his own decision,
but he would not have been able to completely eliminate
from his mind the
continued opposition of the Federation. This view also applies to the material
which Mr Phillips submitted to Mr
Sutton on the appeal from Mr Bartley’s
decision. This assertion by the complainant is not challenged by the respondent
submissions.
The respondent asserts that misconception 10 in the complainant’s case
is that the Teachers Federation was making the decisions
in relation to
Daniel’s enrolment and return to school. This somewhat overstates the
complainant’s position.
5.12 Case management and other meetings
The purpose of these were to discuss Daniel’s progress and set ongoing
direction. They were to involve all relevant members
of the school community,
including Daniel’s parents.
Apart from the one parent-teacher night these meetings were the only
opportunity for Daniel’s parents to communicate their views
suggestions to teachers, and receive teachers feedback. The critical role of
informing teachers about the outcomes of the meeting
was to be performed by Ms
Fitzmaurice. She also had to inform case management meetings of the
teachers’ views and information.
My assessment of the notes from and evidence of case management meetings, as
against the evidence of Daniel’s various teachers,
brings me to the view
that this conduit role was not performed successfully. Many suggested strategies
for behaviour management and
other issues seemed not to have percolated down to
the teachers. Information about Daniel’s disability and its impacts
did not. On the other hand, teachers’ concerns about assessment,
teaching methods and Daniel’s learning were not voiced
at, and acted upon
by, the case management meetings.
Meetings took place involving some members of the Case Management Team on 3,
11 and 12 March 1997. Mr and-or Mrs Purvis were in attendance
at all of them.
Mr and Mrs Purvis were not invited to the case management meeting on 19 March
1997 where Daniel’s individualised welfare and
discipline policy was
formulated. Ms Thompson and Ms LaForrest were also not invited. It is hard to
understand the reason for this,
as all four would have been the best people to
contribute strategies for managing Daniel’s behaviour.
The negativity of these meetings alleged by the complainant is demonstrated
in the minutes of the meeting of 25 March 1997. One of
the potential problems
with Daniel’s placement was listed as expected complaints from other
parents. Mr Bartley, in his evidence,
indicated that no complaints were
received. Ms Fitzmaurice stated that only one parent had complained, and that
matter could as arguably
have related to her own child as to Daniel. Whilst it
is appropriate to try to anticipate problems and plan to avoid them there is
fine line between this process and putting up unnecessary barriers. I am
satisfied that this line was crossed by the respondent
on a number of occasions
at case management meetings.
At the meeting on 30 April Mr Bartley reported two items of concern relating
to Daniel’s behaviour which he said he was not
sure how to deal with. Mr
Purvis suggested that there may need to be adjustments to the Discipline and
Welfare Policy, but these
never occurred. Mr Purvis set out his concerns about
this policy in a letter which was not tabled for discussion at following case
management meetings.
Following some concerns John Lord prepared a report on behaviour management
strategies for Daniel in May, and spoke to the case management
meeting on 18
June 1997. He offered to come and watch Daniel at School so that these
strategies could be refined in consultation
with the teachers, but this offer
was never taken up by the School. This was a most unfortunate lapse, as it may
have led to events
being different later in the year.
5.13 Modification of policies for Daniel
Both the processes used for, and the modifications made in, policies prepared
relating to Daniel were flawed. People who were very
well placed to participate
in the formulation process- Mr and Mrs Purvis, the aides, John Lord, Bob Field-
were not consulted. It
is true that Mr Bartley had had conversations with the
Principal and the year 6 teacher at Gillwinga, and that he had spent much
researching the issue. However, Mr and Mrs Purvis, Mr Lord and the aides had a
wealth of experience regarding behaviour management
strategies for Daniel. Mr
Field was a special education expert. Whilst Mr Bartley, as Principal, was
always going to be the ultimate
decision-maker, the process would have benefited
from including these people.
Daniel’s discipline and welfare policy was largely based on how Ms
Donsworth thought Daniel might behave. Many involved in the
policy formulation
had not met Daniel, and he had not started at SGHS.
The discipline and welfare policy was not allowed to be flexible. It was not
modified during 1997 based on the School’s experience
with Daniel. This
was despite proposals by Mr Purvis, and offers by Mr Lord to work in this area.
The respondent argued that events
at the School did not necessitate the
policy’s modification. However, I cannot accept this view bearing in mind
that the policy
was a first attempt at addressing quite complex issues, and also
considering the comments which Mr Lord made regarding the cause
Daniel’s behaviour discussed elsewhere in this section.
The complainant asserts that the Department’s Welfare Policy was
amended to be more “appropriate” for Daniel but
it was hard to find
items deleted from the general Department policy which were not relevant. The
complainant says that the removal
of these deprived Daniel of the benefits of a
comprehensive and sensitive welfare policy. Their removal decreased the
flexibility
of the policy. However, there are no specific examples in the
complainant’s submissions of how Daniel suffered a detriment
as a result
of these changes.
The complainant also mounts this argument with respect to the
Department’s Special Education Policy. However, again, no specific
examples are provided.
Daniel was disadvantaged because the amended policy failed to understand the
nature of Daniel’s disabilities and the relationship
to his behavioural
reactions. Mr Lord noted this inappropriateness for Daniel when he said that the
policy addressed the actions-consequences-tolerance
levels of Daniel’s
behaviour rather than the meaning of the behaviours.
The complainant asserts that if amendments were required to policies the
relevant one would have been the 1995 SGHS Discipline Policy.
This policy was
not amended. When the behaviours and tolerance levels assumed for Daniel are
compared with those in the SGHS policy
consequences for Daniel were more severe.
The levels system in the SGHS policy was applied to Daniel in a more rigid
manner than
for other students.
The respondent asserts that the levels system never applied to Daniel,
because the SGHS discipline policy of 1995 was replaced by
the specially
formulated discipline policy for Daniel. The respondent asserts that the amended
policy was formulated to deal with
the specific behavioural difficulties which
it was foreseen could arise. I accept the respondent’s submissions. I
further accept
that there were many events which occurred which, had they been
initiated by another student, would have resulted in some form of
disciplinary
action being taken. The example of swearing is a clear demonstration of this.
Whilst Daniel’s inappropriate behaviour cannot be condoned, I accept
the submission of the complainant that it must be considered
in its context. I
agree that “the use of a pejorative term such as “violence”
was and is not appropriate to describe
the behaviour of a child whose behaviour
stems from an illness which had caused an injury to his brain.” A policy
as a behaviour management strategy in the welfare sense became a
vehicle for a form of punishment. By inflexibly following a
behaviour-consequence
approach, rather than attempting to manage the behaviour,
Daniel’s behaviour (which was a symptom of his disability) was being
5.14 Resourcing
Whilst the evidence is not completely clear, I am satisfied that, at times
during 1997, Daniel was receiving one of the highest amounts
of Departmental
funding for a child with a disability in the State. Whether or not this was the
case, the funding was approved by
the Department, and this fact is not in itself
telling, as such figures can vary depending on how capital and recurrent
are valued and allocated.
It is clear that the time spent on Daniel was very disproportionate to that
spent on other children, although the process used to
calculate Ms
Fitzmaurice’s time is questionable, the time spent by Mr Bartley alone was
very large. Numerous other staff members
were also involved. However, it has
been the case for many years that the Department will commit more time and
resources to students
with disabilities, whether they go to school in support
units or in regular classes.
The respondent asserted that the fourteenth misconception in the
complainant’s case was that there was no limit to the amount
of resources
the Department should make available to maintain Daniel’s enrolment at
SGHS. This assertion was supported by reference
to evidence from Mr Purvis
relating to further provisions which the Department could have made to support
Daniel’s enrolment
at SGHS. However, these matters were also identified by
Mr Bartley as being necessary. Further, the fact that there was a limit on
Department’s resources was never put to Mr and Mrs Purvis in
cross-examination.
Finally, many of the resources available to the School were not accessed
either adequately or at all- Messrs Field and Lord are examples
Further, plans and recommendations developed over the year were not implemented
or followed through. I have referred to
a number of these above, but they
include Mr Bartley’s integration plan, Mr Lord’s recommendations,
and the Callan-Garrard
The question of lack of resources cannot be used as a defence by the
respondent to the allegations made. However, I do not find that
the resources in
this placement were limited and so the complainant cannot argue that allocation
of resources was a factor which
led to a breach of the DDA.
5.15 Failure of Daniel’s placement at SGHS
Most of the teachers who gave evidence felt that Daniel’s inclusion had
been unsuccessful because of his level and nature of
disabilities and his
inability to cope in a regular classroom.
The aide’s assessment was that the system failed because of its
inflexibility. Whilst they do not have the educational qualifications
teachers they were with Daniel all of the time and thus more able to provide an
overall assessment. Further, Messrs Callan
and Garrard, experts in special
education, recommended the continuation of the placement.
Professor Parmenter made some interesting observations in his evidence and
publications about the perceptions of the behavioural problems
of children with
intellectual disabilities and the issue of competency of the service provider
(transcript 1223).
The respondent asserts that a misconception in the complainant’s case
(number 7) is that there is a person or persons who can
be blamed for the
breakdown of Daniel’s placement. It asserts that “There is a shared
responsibility between the school
community, the home community and Daniel
himself. These must be able to work co-operatively for any achievements to
This statement is unarguably true.
The respondent goes on to assert that, in suggesting in cross-examination
that Ms Fitzmaurice had a pivotal role in the success of
placement, the complainant is hunting for a scapegoat. The respondent states
that such action demonstrates an inability
to accept responsibility for the
outcome of the placement, fails to accept that many members of the school
community played an active
role, and avoids recognition of the wider issues for
other students and teachers which arise from his enrolment.
On the other hand, the complainant asserts that Ms Fitzmaurice, as year
adviser, did play a critical or important role, but this in
no way removes the
responsibility of others, including the complainant. Further the respondent,
against whom this complaint is made,
only acts through its employees.
I accept the submissions of the complainant on this issue. I have commented
elsewhere on Ms Fitzmaurice’s important role as
a conduit between the Case
Management Team and teachers, and in regard to the collection of forms. However,
these are only two of
the numerous issues which led to the failure of
Daniel’s placement.
The respondent asserts that a further misconception (number 12) is that SGHS
has discriminated against Daniel in various ways yet
there is no criticism of
the Principal. The respondent asserts that the Principal is responsible for
events which occurred at the
school. Whilst it is correct that Mr Purvis admired
Mr Bartley’s leadership, and recognised his difficult position, he was
also critical of him in certain areas such as not obtaining the use of experts
in special education, not always being consultative,
and not always being
sensitive. Further, it is not valid to assert that Mr Bartley is responsible for
all of the events occurring
at the School even though he is responsible for its
administration. Finally, the complaint is made against the Department, which
made numerous decisions beyond Mr Bartley’s control. This misconception
misrepresents the complainant’s case.
5.16 Daniel’s view of school in 1997
The evidence on this issue comes from many witnesses involved in this
process. Mr and Mrs Purvis, and Daniel’s aides, gave evidence
following some apprehension at the beginning of his school year, Daniel enjoyed
his attendance at SGHS. Mr Bartley agreed with
this assessment in his
discussions with the DESU on 26 June.
Some of Daniel’s teachers gave evidence that Daniel, a sensitive boy,
was conscious of the difference in learning ability between
himself and other
students, and did not enjoy participation in class because this difference was
only reinforced. Whilst this assessment
may be true, it does not mean that
Daniel did not enjoy the environment and learning experience apart from this.
Later in the year it is clear that Daniel was not happy going to school. The
amount of “acting out” by Daniel confirms
this. This observation,
made by many of the SGHS staff, is reinforced by his aides, the people closest
to him during his time at
the School.
What this evidence does not clarify, and what must be the subject of
conjecture, is why. The respondent would submit that it related
Daniel’s inability to cope in the high school environment, and that his
behaviours indicated increased levels of stress
and unhappiness. Ms
Knight’s evidence certainly supports this view. So does that of Professor
Parmenter, who asserts that integration
of children with high support needs is
far more successful in primary school than high school because of the
“differences in
the school structures, teacher competencies, curriculum
levels and the ages of students.”
The complainant’s view is that some of the strategies used to manage
Daniel’s behaviour sent him wrong messages, and actually
behaviour to worsen. As an example, it was argued that being suspended (and thus
sent home) for hitting or kicking could
be perceived by Daniel as a reward
rather than a punishment. Also, such punishments isolated Daniel further and
increased the chances
of him “acting out”. This view is supported by
the evidence of John Lord referred to above, and by the recommendations
Gerrard Callan report which recommended the continuation of the placement with
some variation in strategies.
On balance, I am inclined to accept the complainant’s view on this
issue. I am satisfied that from all of the evidence set out
in section 2 of this
decision, (including the notes in the communications book which were
contemporaneous reporting) that had Daniel
received some different messages his
“acting out” would not have increased. It is unfortunate that the
advice of Messrs
Lord, Callan and Gerrard were not acted upon, as it is my view
that had this occurred Daniel’s “acting out” would
diminished. Had this been the case Mr Bartley and the Department may not have
formed the views that they did with regard to
Daniel’s exclusion.
5.17 Expert advice
Messrs Field, Garrard and Callan attended the 8 August Case Management
Meeting. They were all experts in special education. Frustrations
were expressed
by the teachers about not knowing how to report on Daniel, and that there was
uncertainty as to whether teachers were
doing anything for Daniel academically,
or whether it was all being done with the DESU material. The experts, having
listened, agreed
to come back with some recommendations.
A report was prepared by Messrs Callan and Garrard but it was never given to
Mr Bartley or the case management team. It was withheld
by Mr Phillips, who was
not satisfied that its content and recommendations were going to assist the
situation at SGHS.
The report detailed wide consultation which had taken place. It recommended
that Daniel’s placement continue. It recommended
the development of an
individual transition plan for Daniel, and some modification of work from the
DESU. It proposed some release
time for interested teachers to gain a better
understanding of curriculum planning and development for Daniel. It suggested
Mr Bartley’s input to supporting Daniel should be spread. Two other
staff could share the mentoring and crisis management responsibilities
after developing a relationship with Daniel. This report was the first occasion
on which the advice of the Department’s
special education experts had been
sought, apart from some minor interactions with Mr Field prior to the
commencement of Daniel’s
placement and a visit from members of the DESU.
This report identified problems and advised a way forward. It offered a way
out of the ad hoc meetings and discussions which had characterised
management of Daniel’s placement from mid 1997. The recommendations are
also of importance because Messrs Garrard and Callan
were not tainted by views
or pressures surrounding Daniel’s placement.
Mr Phillips did not make this report available to SGHS because of his
concerns regarding it. He felt that Messrs Callan and Garrard
had failed to
widely consult, and that the issues were complex. He felt that people with
expertise on the ground were needed rather
than a set of recommendations.
However, it seems to me that his assessment does not take into account the
experience and expertise of Messrs Garrard and Callan,
the nature of their
consultations (recorded in the report) and the methods used. In light of Mr
Phillips’ criticisms it is
unfortunate that the authors of the report were
not called to give evidence. The implementation of some or all of the proposals
this report could have averted the deteriorating situation which developed as
the year progressed.
In September the aides made an effort to find a way forward by consulting Mr
Field. His recommendations were put to Mr Bartley, but
the only one implemented
was changing the way Daniel went to school.
Mr Bartley also prepared his own plan in September for Daniel’s ongoing
attendance at school. This was sent to Mr Phillips,
but its recommendations were
not acted upon.
At the same time Carrie Brooks from the Department of Community Services
proposed some strategies, but none of them were acted upon.
5.18 Greater regional involvement
By the time of the 15 October case management meeting Daniel was no longer at
school. Mr Phillips had become more involved by this
time, and was aware of the
Callan Garrard report and other efforts made to improve the situation. He said
that, by this stage, Daniel’s
behaviour was the major consideration for
On 5 November a further meeting occurred about Daniel not attended by all
members of the case management team. Although denied by
Mr Phillips, I prefer
the evidence of Mr Bartley, others in attendance, and the notes of the meeting,
that Mr Phillips indicated
that he had taken over as case manager. Even if his
evidence is accepted, he had clearly become much more closely involved, and was
not making all information which he had available to Mr Bartley and his staff.
At this 5 November meeting Mr Bartley informed people of the Teachers’
Federation motion passed the day before opposing Daniel’s
inclusion at
the School and recommending his attendance at the Support Unit at Grafton High
By November, bearing in mind the level to which the situation had
deteriorated, Mr Purvis was prepared to have discussions with Glen
Clarke, the
head teacher at the Support Unit at Grafton High School. Mr Purvis approached Mr
Clarke for some guidance on Daniel’s
placement at SGHS, but Mr Clarke was
not keen to provide such advice because he was ideologically opposed to the
placement. Mr Clarke’s
comment, at a meeting which Mr and Mrs Purvis did
not attend, that leaving Daniel at SGHS was “bordering on criminal
negligence”
was insensitive and inappropriate coming from someone in his
position, particularly when an alternative placement option was at his
also demonstrated an intention to restrict the choice of parents of children
with disabilities to determine what they consider
to be the most appropriate
placement for their child.
5.19 Suspensions
Daniel’s first suspension occurred on 24 April, when he had been at
school for 13 days (in term 2). It occurred because he hit
his aide Karen
Thompson as a result, according to Mrs Purvis’ evidence, of being
reluctant to attend school. It was for one
day. Mr Bartley gave evidence that
Daniel’s behaviour had been good up to that stage. Yet Daniel was
immediately given a short-term
suspension rather than a warning as set out in
his specific discipline and welfare policy.
It is noteworthy that no other year 7 child that year was suspended during
their first term of attending school. However, it is also
noteworthy that there
is no other recording of a year 7 student hitting a member of staff.
Mr Bartley’s evidence on his approach to any physical activity of this
nature was very clear. He stated that there was zero
tolerance for such
behaviour in the school.
I am satisfied that, based on the general Discipline and Welfare Policy for
the School, and the policy prepared for Daniel, Mr Bartley’s
decision to
suspend Daniel on this occasion was as a result of Daniel’s behaviour
being outside that accepted by either the
School’s or his specific
discipline and welfare policy.
The second suspension was on 7 May 1997 (in term 2) for 2 days. On the
previous day John Lord had been involved because of problems
getting Daniel to
school. He had made some suggestions which the communications book records as
“working well”. Further,
Daniel’s aide at the time was Del
McLennan, who had been working with him for 3 days. Whilst getting changed for
PE he began
“acting out” and was suspended for kicking a year 10
girl and swearing at his aide.
Mr and Mrs Purvis explain this behaviour as relating to the inexperience of
Ms McLennan and her attempt to force him to go to a PE
In Mr Bartley’s letter to Daniel’s parents he advised that the
aide had described Daniel’s actions as pre-meditated
rather than just
lashing out. Whilst I accept that Ms McLennan believed this, and that Mr Bartley
correctly reported it, it does
not accord with the medical and psychological
evidence (particularly of Mr Lord) and I do not regard it as the truth.
Mr Bartley’s decision here was consistent with his earlier one. Once
again I am satisfied that Daniel was suspended because
of his behaviour towards
the year 10 student. Whilst the complainant’s assessment of why the
behaviour occurred is probably
correct, I am satisfied that Mr Bartley followed
both policies in acting as he did.
Following this suspension Mr and Mrs Purvis questioned the appropriateness of
suspensions as a behaviour management strategy, asserting
that Daniel did not
understand that staying home from school was punishment. Mr Lord’s
assistance was again sought.
The third suspension, on 31 July (in term 3), was for kicking his aide, and
was for 2 days. This was the incident where Ms Laforrest
kicked Daniel back. Ms
Laforrest said that she had been having difficulty persuading Daniel to go to
class when he kicked her with
the back of his heel. Ms Thomson had been off sick
that week and there had been many unexpected changes to his routine.
I accept the evidence that there had been many changes that week which were
unsettling for Daniel.
I also accept Mr Bartley’s evidence that any other student would have
been expelled at this stage for repeated unprovoked violence
against staff and
I am again satisfied that Mr Bartley’s decision to suspend Daniel was
on the ground of Daniel’s behaviour and in accordance
with both relevant
The fourth suspension was on 2 September (in term 3) for 13 days, reduced to
8 days. This was for kicking a year 10 student.
It had been a stressful weekend for Daniel for family reasons and Mr Purvis,
who witnessed the incident, whilst not condoning it,
felt that it had been taken
out of context.
Daniel, according to Ms Thomson’s description, had been reluctant to go
to school that day, and had already run out on to the
road from where his father
had brought him back. He was going to “time out” when the incident
Once again I am satisfied that Mr Bartley’s decision related to
Daniel’s behaviour and was in accordance with the policies.
appreciate Mr Purvis’s view of the incident, I must take account of Mr
Bartley’s clear position on such actions
set out earlier in this section.
The fifth suspension was on 18 September (in term 3) for 12 days. It was for
hitting Karen Thompson in the back.
It occurred after Daniel had, for some time and despite some encouragement by
Ms Thomson and others, refused to go to class. Ms Thomson
told Daniel that she
was going to get their bags and, as she walked away, he hit her in the back. She
stated that this had never
occurred before.
Ms Thomson consulted a physiotherapist and a counsellor over the incident.
Again I accept that Mr Bartley’s decision was on the ground of
Daniel’s behaviour and in accordance with the policies.
The reason recorded for all of Daniel’s suspensions was violent or
inappropriate behaviour. The respondent asserts that there
were a number of
other occasions, recorded in the communications book, where such behaviour
occurred and where Daniel was not suspended.
This is the case, and I accept that
submission.
Mr Bartley explained in his evidence that the purpose of the discipline and
welfare policy prepared for Daniel was to give him more
flexibility, recognising
Daniel’s disabilities and not having him treated absolutely the same way
as everyone else. He explained,
having looked at the suspensions register for
that year, that many of the students who he referred to as “repeat
were now not at the School - either their places had been
declared vacant, or they were put on to distance education programs. He
that the School would not tolerate violence. The respondent submitted that the
suspensions did not constitute less favourable
treatment, and that this part of
the complaint should be dismissed.
Mr Purvis felt that, although he would question the severity of the responses
for two of the incidents, it was appropriate for the
School to make some sort of
a response on all of these occasions.
The respondent in its submissions asserted that a misconception in the
complainant’s case (number 6) was that it was the suspensions
which were the causal link with the deterioration in Daniel’s behaviour in
Term 3. The respondent argued, however,
that “the suspensions were the
direct result of the deterioration of Daniel’s behaviour rather than the
cause of it.”
It asserted that Daniel’s “acting out” was
an indicator of the level of stress placed on Daniel because of being
into a place where he “increasingly felt isolated and his self-esteem was
The respondent stated that Daniel “did not belong naturally in the
class. His participation was minimal. He was permanently
accompanied by a
teacher’s aide, and he was doing separate work, .. Every day was a
reinforcement of his difference and his
disability. .. It is a reflection of the
basic fact that the school environment in year 7 was not an educational
environment which
could provide him with many, if any, rewards. It was one that
would demonstrate his lack of capacity, not only to him, and reinforce
negative sense he may have had.”
The respondent asserted that, if the argument was that suspension was a
reward rather than a punishment, then this supports the view
that Daniel was not
happy at school. If the argument was that Daniel could make no connection
between his behaviour and suspension
then he lacked the capacity to deal with
the demands of high school life.
The complainant rejected these submissions. He asserted that the
respondent’s own records support the view that the suspensions
durations increased. This fact is clearly correct. The complainant asserts that
in other parts of the respondent’s
submissions teachers’
observations of Daniel becoming increasingly isolated are referred to as
insightful, but when Mr Purvis
draws this conclusion it is misconceived. The
complainant also states that no evidence was led by the respondent to counter Mr
As the year continued there is little doubt that more difficulties occurred
around Daniel’s placement. The causes of these difficulties
were complex.
It is too simplistic to say - in isolation - that either the suspensions
worsened the behaviour and increased the isolation,
or the behaviour worsened
because Daniel was not happy and could not cope and thus caused the suspensions.
The respondent asserted that the fifteenth misconception in the
complainant’s case was that different behaviour strategies implemented
the School would have led to a different outcome in terms of Daniel’s
behaviour when at the School. The respondent asserted
that the criticism of the
Principal and-or the School in not obtaining the use of experts in special
education to assist the school
to develop a program to accommodate Daniel is
based on an inherently invalid assumption. The assumption is that there are no
responsibilities for the way in which a student conducts themselves at
The respondent asserts that if read in abstract it could be assumed that
Daniel’s behaviour was only manifested at the School.
Such an assumption
would be flawed, as there was clear evidence that Daniel also “acted
out” at home. The respondent
asserts that this means that the complainant
considers that the School should be able to deal with behaviour that cannot be
within the family environment. The family environment is innately less
stressful for Daniel than the school environment as it does
not include the
level of change, continual reinforcement of difference, and loss of self-esteem.
The complainant states that there is no evidence to support this submission,
and that it was not put to Mr and Mrs Purvis during their
cross-examination. I
agree with this view. I cannot find any evidence from Mr and Mrs Purvis where
they assert that they do not have
some responsibility for Daniel’s
behaviour, or where they assert that the school should be able to stop behaviour
which cannot
be stopped in the family environment. They recognised that this
behaviour occurred, and were keen to find behaviour management strategies
deal with it.
The complainant provided a colation of evidence gathered from the 1997
suspension register for SGHS and from the diary of Ms Fitzmaurice,
co-ordinator for that year. This colation is presented as tables attached to
submissions. The complainant asserts that
these tables, and the diaries,
demonstrate that other students in year 7 whose behaviour could be described as
violent, aggressive,
or inappropriate were not suspended. I accept these
submissions as correctly assessing the evidence on this issue. This serves to
provide a possible comparator relating to these allegations. However, the
behaviours outlines were not as extreme or did not occur
as often as did those
of Daniel.As already indicated, I am satisfied that Mr Bartley imposed the
suspensions in compliance with the
policies and as a result of Daniel’s
behaviour. Whilst I understand Mr Bartley’s approach on this point (zero
to what he described as violence) it was the outcome that may have
been different if that more flexibility had occurred. I accept
the evidence of
Mr Purvis and Mr Lord that Daniel could not make the association between his
behaviour and the suspensions. This
does not, in my view, indicate an incapacity
to cope with the stresses of high school life. It indicates that other
management strategies
should have been tried before the placement was brought to
an end. Mr Purvis requested this, Mr Lord offered to assist, and Messrs
and Callan made recommendations. None of these options were taken up.
My decision on this and the next section of the complaint must turn on
whether or not Daniel’s behaviour is a consequence of
his disability for
the purposes of the Act. This is a question of law which I will address in
5.20 Exclusion
Daniel was excluded from SGHS on 3 December 1997. His parents assert that
they were not informed until 5 December, although Mr Bartley
asserts that they
were told earlier. Both Mr Bartley’s account of the conversation between
Mr and Mrs Purvis and him in his
office on 3 December, and Mrs Purvis’
notes of that conversation, suggest that Mr Bartley advised of his decision on
It is also consistent with the fact that Mr Bartley declined to allow
Daniel to remain at school on that day. Exclusion was certainly
discussed, as
rights of appeal were referred to.
The respondent further argued that Mr Purvis must have known of
Daniel’s exclusion when he put out a media release referring
Department refusing a child with a disability access to school. However,
refusing access is different, in my view, to exclusion.
I find on this point that there was miscommunication and that, when Mr
Bartley discussed the issue on 3 December, he indicated his
decision but Mr and
Mrs Purvis thought the matter was only under consideration.
It is true that Mr Bartley wrote to the Department of Community Services
(Daniel’s legal guardian) on December 3 1997 advising
of the exclusion.
The evidence indicates that this was on the advice of the Legal Section of the
Department. There is no evidence
to support the assertion that DOCS had
effectively taken over the liaison role with the School after 15 October 1997.
They had become
more involved, it is true, but in the context of the situation
it would be unrealistic to think that Mr and Mrs Purvis - after all
previous involvements and efforts - would allow this to occur or would be placed
in this position.
It is not necessary for me to determine whether the Department’s legal
advice was correct for the purposes of my inquiry. However,
given the extensive
dealings which Mr and Mrs Purvis had had with the School during Daniel’s
placement, and the anguish which
the Department knew exclusion would cause them,
this advice was extremely insensitive. If the Department of Community Services
the correct recipient of the letter, the considerate and courteous course
would have been to write to Mr and Mrs Purvis as well.
The exclusion did not flow from a further incident, but rather from the fifth
suspension. Various strategies to better manage Daniel’s
behaviour were
suggested but not tried.
Although the aides had expressed concerns about returning to work, they were
willing to return if some viable strategies were implemented.
Mr Bartley’s decision to exclude did not comply with the
Department’s policy and procedures concerning suspension, exclusion
expulsion of students from school. This policy provides as its principles in
“(9) Violent behaviour must be dealt with swiftly and will result in
immediate suspension....
(12) When considering these strategies the Principal must ensure that no student
is discriminated against on any of the following
grounds .. disability
It also provides-
“(1) Exclusion is not a substitute for expulsion. Accordingly exclusion
may take place only where a long suspension has not
resolved the problem, and it
is considered that the student might develop self-discipline and co-operative
behaviour in a suitable
alternative school.
(2) Where a student is excluded from the school district office staff, in
conjunction with the Principal and parents or care-giver,
will arrange a
suitable alternative placement for the student within ten school days. If this
cannot be arranged an application for
expulsion or a return to the school are
the only options.
(3) The Principal must immediately notify the parents or care-giver in writing
of an intended exclusion from the school. ..”
Although there had been discussions of
Daniel’s enrolment in the Support Unit at Grafton High School over a long
period of time,
Mr Bartley did not make arrangements for an alternative
placement after 3 December 1997, although he did confirm that there was a
vacancy at the GHS Support Unit prior to the exclusion. This accords with the
evidence of Mr Simmons, the Principal at Grafton High
School. The policy clearly
implies that such arrangements will be made after the exclusion has occurred at
the commencement of paragraph
(2) set out above.
If no such arrangements were made the only alternatives were to seek
expulsion, or for Daniel to return to SGHS, but neither of these
occurred. Even
if arrangements for placement at the Support Unit had been made, it was the
clearly expressed view of Mr and Mrs
Purvis that such a placement was not
suitable. The policy is unclear as to the weight that the views of the parents
would carry,
but they are certainly to be involved in the process, although
clearly they would not have a right of veto. Further, there was no
evidence that such a placement would have a positive impact on Daniel’s
behaviour. Mr Lord, in fact, asserted that such
a placement could have a
detrimental effect on Daniel’s behaviour. This view was supported by the
evidence of Mr and Mrs Purvis
when discussing Daniel’s attendance at the
Support Unit during his primary education. I therefore find that the Department
was not in compliance with its policy on this issue.
It is not clear, in my view, that the Department of Community Services were
in support of the exclusion. Paul Scahill’s observations
at the case
management meeting on 15 October (two days before Daniel’s proposed return
from suspension on 17 October) were
that what was happening was not successful,
and that he could not come back on Monday unless things are put into place. This
was confirmed by Mr Scahill to Mr Bartley on 16 October in a telephone
conversation in which he said that Daniel would not be returning
to school until
the situation was resolved. Whilst the letter from the Department of Community
Services dated 27 November supports
enrolment in the Support Unit, Mrs
Purvis’s evidence is that Mr Myers never told her that Daniel must be
enrolled in the Support
Unit. DOCS representatives were looking for solutions,
not supporting exclusion.
Ms Donsworth’s report on the fifth suspension was prepared on 25
October 1997. It assessed the reasons behind the suspension
and concluded that
Daniel was becoming frustrated by being at SGHS. It said: “he is
indicating that he has been unable to adjust
to all of the different pressures,
academic, social and behavioural in mainstream high school...he does not appear
to want to come
to school and is anxious and unhappy when he is here.” The
report proposed that he be enrolled at the Grafton High School Support
Mr Bartley asserted, in correspondence, that the reason for the exclusion was
the welfare and safety of Daniel, other students and
staff. He referred to
Daniel’s violent behaviour, and asserted that it had “arisen out of
his frustration to cope with
formal demands of high school life.” However,
in his re-examination at page 2297 of the transcript, whilst comparing
behaviour with another student (SH) in year 8, he suggested that
“the behaviour of that student had been more gross in some
behaviours than Daniel.” That student had not been similarly excluded.
I find, based on the correspondence and evidence of Mr Bartley, that the
reason for Daniel’s exclusion was more broadly based
than just the last
suspension. It related to Daniel’s behaviour leading to the five
suspensions, and throughout the period
of his enrolment at SGHS. It also related
to Mr Bartley’s judgement that Daniel could not operate in a regular high
environment as a result of his disability. Mr Bartley’s underlying
reasoning - unlike that for his decision on the suspensions
- included issues
broader than just behavioural. Certainly Daniel’s behaviour (and its
impact on himself and other students
and staff) was a factor, but it was not the
only factor. The decision also related to Mr Bartley’s perceptions of
success socially and educationally.
Mr Bartley clearly thought that this may not be the end of the matter. After
Daniel’s exclusion the aides continued to work
at SGHS, his teachers
prepared final year reports for him on 12 December, and the School received a
grant of funding for him for
1998. However, at the end of the year he was
removed from the School register as a student.
5.21 Attitude of participants
Much evidence was adduced by both sides on the attitudes of participants to
the process, and the negativity and hostility alleged
to have been involved. The
respondent asserted that the complainant’s attempts to infer a
“blame the victim” approach
to the Department’s case was a
misconception (number 4). They asserted that their approach had always been that
maintain a placement at a mainstream school, must be a full member of
the school community. Therefore, along with all other students,
responsible for his own actions. The respondent asserted that the complainants
failed to properly accord and dispassionately
assess the difficulties arising
with Daniel’s enrolment. It argues that this description is demonstrated
by Mrs Purvis’
regular description of Case Management Meetings as
“hostile” when none of its witnesses found them so.
On the other hand, the complainant alleged that he and Mrs Purvis throughout
the process adopted an open approach, that they were
proactive in making
suggestions for behaviour management strategies, that they participated in
meetings and were abreast of Daniel’s
daily activities through the
communications book. They were prepared to co-operate and work with the Case
Management team and tried
at all times to operate on a positive basis.
The respondent’s eighth alleged misconception is that any comments
as negativity,
concentrating on and exaggerating deficits, a gross distortion, and ignoring
Daniel’s obvious abilities. To
a large degree this mirrors the above
misconception. It contains the assertion of the Purvis’ as having a closed
It asserts that teachers were making professional judgements in
Daniel’s reports, and that Mr Purvis found the amount of derogatory
comments extraordinary.
The respondent asserts that the level of Daniel’s disabilities were
downplayed, but I find this hard to accept when considering
the numerous medical
and other professional reports provided to the School, and the recognition by
both Mr and Mrs Purvis in the
witness box of some of Daniel’s deficits.
This is also confirmed in notes of Mrs Purvis made available to the inquiry.
The respondent asserts that evidence on instances of Daniel’s behaviour
seeks to place responsibility on teachers, aides and
others. However, it could
equally be interpreted as attempting to find causes for the behaviour so that
appropriate strategies could
be put in place. In fact, the complainant did
propose calling on Mr Lord to assist with different behaviour management
strategies.
It would have been impossible for any of the participants in this issue to
come to it without some sort of history. The events took
place in a regional NSW
town, and Daniel’s acceptance at the School followed a previous rejection
and discrimination complaint.
Mr and Mrs Purvis had formed the view that a fully
integrated education would be the best course for Daniel. As parents quite
appropriately
absolutely committed to what they felt to be the best interests of
their son they worked towards this aim. Mrs Purvis’ assessment
of the Case
Management Meetings as hostile was, from her perspective, probably quite true.
She was a parent trying to persuade SGHS
and the Department to educate her son
in the way she thought best for him.
The aides who worked with Daniel were also deeply committed to what they saw
as his best interests.
On the other side Mr Bartley, and some teachers, adopted a positive approach
to the process. Mr Bartley committed a huge amount of
his time and energy to its
success. Some of the teachers were also very supportive, and prepared to give
Daniel’s integration
a go. However, other teachers had formed views
against Daniel’s integration (in most cases before even meeting him), and
them influence the way they acted as the year proceeded. Also, Mr Bartley
(and others who shared his approach) found the process
more difficult as the
year proceeded, and started to reassess their views of its likely success.
Further, whilst substantial amounts of financial and staff resources had been
committed to Daniel’s inclusion at SGHS, advice
of those with special
education skills was not sought until later in the process, and then not always
taken, and much of the information
available at Case Management Meetings did not
percolate down to the teachers in the classroom.
In this atmosphere (where Mr and Mrs Purvis were totally committed to their
view and would not compromise on it; and where many at
the School had a
different view, and there was therefore neither will nor skills in some cases to
succeed in the process) allegations
of negativity by the Purvis’, and
closed mindedness by the School, were bound to arise.
I find that the criticism - if it is a criticism - that can be levelled at Mr
and Mrs Purvis is that they were absolutely determined
to achieve what they
thought was best for Daniel. This at times caused a degree of inflexibility and
led to some unfortunate miscommunications
- the confusion about their
preparedness for Daniel to be assessed being one. Because they did not simply
adopt the perceived “accepted
wisdom” in parts of the school
community about where Daniel should go to school, they were seen as different
and difficult.
I find, as indicated above, that Mr Bartley and some of the teachers were
committed and positive about the success of Daniel’s
integration. However,
they were disadvantaged by the lack of expertise early in the process from
experts in special education, the
break down in communications between the case
management process and teachers on the ground, the negativity of some of the
in the process, and the unwillingness or inability to seek and then
implement alternative strategies when some processes were not
successful.
Given all of the above, and the complexities of the task to be undertaken, it
is not surprising that both sides assessed the other
as at fault.
6.1 Underlying objectives of the DDA
I accept the fundamental proposition by the complainant that “the
objectives of the Act are to promote equality of opportunity
for people with
disabilities”
Garity v Commonwealth Bank
(1999) EOC 92-966.
of the Act, its objects are stated as-
“(a) To eliminate, as far as possible, discrimination against persons on
the ground of disability in the areas of- education”.
“(c) to promote recognition and acceptance within the community of the
principle that persons with disabilities have the same
fundamental rights as the
rest of the community.”
I also accept the
complainant’s further proposition that, “in the context of
education, avoiding discrimination on the
grounds of disability means that
children with disabilities should have access to mainstream regular schools. It
is accepted that
segregation is discriminatory:
Penn. Assn. For Mentally
Retarded Children v Penn
334 F Supp. 1257
(1971) at 1266 and
Dalla Costa
v The ACT Department Of Health
(1994) EOC 92-633
The decision by Professor Alston in Dalla Costa states the situation
extremely clearly, and I extensively quote from it and adopt
decision. In so doing I reject the submission of the respondent that this
decision is distinguishable because it deals
with services provided by a
“special” school as it seems to me that, in making the comparison
between services provided
as part of segregated and inclusive education, it is
exactly on point.
Professor Alston states:
“This brings me to an issue which was addressed to only a limited extent
in the arguments put by counsel but which is of fundamental
importance. In the
area of disability the principle of “mainstreaming” is generally
accepted. Its premise is that persons
with disabilities should, to the greatest
extent possible, be enabled to integrate themselves into the mainstream of
society, especially
in relation to activities such as education and employment.
The principle represents a clear rejection of the practice of exclusion
has historically characterised policy approaches towards disability. (See
generally G. Quinn, M. McDonagh & C. Kimber,
Disability Discrimination Law
In the United States, Australia and Canada (Dublin, Oak Tree Press for the
National Rehabilitation
Board. 1993)). The principle has been expressed in the
following terms in the Introduction to “The Standard Rules on the
Equalization
of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities”, adopted by
the United Nations General Assembly in 1993 (Resolution 48/96 of
20 December
24. Equalization of opportunities means the process through which the various
systems of society and the environment, such as services,
activities,
information and documentation, are made available to all, particularly to
persons with disabilities.
26. Persons with disabilities are members of society and have the right to
remain within their local communities. They should receive
the support they need
within the ordinary structures of education. health, employment and social
Evidence was given during the hearing that the ACT Department of Health shares
this general philosophy, which is also the cornerstone
of the relevant Federal
legislation. ...
... This raises the question as to whether the effective inability of a child
who has attended Malkara to choose subsequently to
go to a mainstream school and
to seek access to CHADS services amounts to an exclusionary policy which is, per
se, discriminatory
within the terms of the Act. It is clear from the evidence
provided by the witnesses for the respondent that such an option would
merely be discouraged but would be prevented from being exercised. The
Department’s response, as expressed by counsel,
was that if the parents of
a child rejected the advice of Departmental officers to the effect that
attendance at a special school
was the best, and indeed the only, way in which
that child could obtain speech pathology services from the relevant ACT
and instead insisted on seeking to educate their child in a
mainstream school, then the only way in which the child could access
speech pathology services would be through parental payment for private
services. This was justified on the grounds that
the Department could not afford
to permit parents to choose an option which it believed to be clearly inferior
for that child under
the circumstances.
But this goes to the heart both of the philosophy of mainstreaming and, of more
direct relevance for the determination of this complaint,
the requirements of
the Discrimination Act and the concepts of equal opportunity and equal
citizenship which underlie this Act and
other Australian discrimination
legislation. This issue can be illustrated by reference to the situation of
girls in secondary schooling.
There is now an increasing body of opinion that
girls do better in a single sex school than in a mixed environment. But while it
is entirely acceptable for parents to choose to send their child to an all
girls’ school, it would be equally unacceptable
for the government to
prevent girls from attending mainstream (i.e. mixed) schools. The emphasis must
be on the maintenance of an
appropriate degree of choice on the part of parents
and, where appropriate, the child, and the rejection of policies that are per
exclusionary. It may be argued for the respondent in this case that the
situation differs from that analogy insofar as there is
an overwhelming expert
opinion that the mainstream option is inferior. But leaving aside the issue of
whether the respondent has
effectively demonstrated the existence of such a
consensus of expert opinion, the question is whether the mainstreaming option is
so unthinkable as to justify an exclusionary policy which simply does not
countenance the option. Unless absolute discretion is to
be vested in the
relevant Departmental officials, it would seem essential that some room be left
for parents, and, where appropriate,
the child to choose, even at the risk that
they will choose an option that the experts consider to be inferior.
The conclusion that exclusion from the mainstream service is discriminatory
unless justified by reference to an exception provided
by the Act does not
depend on an assessment of the service provided in the separate facility as
inferior (although the relative quality
of the services is relevant to the issue
of damage, to which I return below). Unless the respondent can demonstrate that
an exception
provided by the Act applies, the concept of “separate but
equal” - where separation is not a matter of choice - is no
more tenable
in relation to the concept of discrimination under the Discrimination Act than
the United States Supreme Court found
it to be under the U.S. Constitution in
Brown v. Board of Education
(347 U.S. Rep. 483 (1954)) in relation to
racially segregated education.”
The question
of exclusion from mainstream education is not directly relevant overall, as
Daniel was enrolled in a mainstream school.
However, this decision provides
valuable background, and may be relevant to the issue of Daniel’s
exclusion from SGHS.
The complainant also referred me in submissions to
Eaton v Brant County
Board Of Education
(1997) 1 SCR 241
at para 67-69, in which the Canadian
Supreme Court addressed the objectives of achieving equality of treatment in the
mainstream education for a child with a disability. I also include
this quote which is of assistance in establishing the background
on which this
decision is made.
“[67] The principal object of certain of the prohibited grounds is the
elimination of discrimination by the attribution of
untrue characteristics based
on stereotypical attitudes relating to immutable conditions such as race or sex.
In the case of disability,
this is one of the objectives. The other equally
important objective seeks to take into account the true characteristics of this
group which act as headwinds to the enjoyment of society’s benefits and to
accommodate them. Exclusion from the mainstream
of society results from the
construction of a society based solely on “mainstream” attributes to
which disabled persons
will never be able to gain access. Whether it is the
impossibility of success at a written test for a blind person, or the need for
ramp access to a library, the discrimination does not lie in the attribution of
untrue characteristics to the disabled individual.
The blind person cannot see
and the person in a wheelchair needs a ramp. Rather, it is the failure to make
reasonable accommodation,
to fine-tune society so that its structures and
assumptions do not result in the relegation and banishment of disabled persons
participation, which results in discrimination against them. The
discrimination inquiry which uses “the attribution of stereotypical
characteristics” reasoning as commonly understood is simply inappropriate
here. It may be seen rather as a case of reverse
stereotyping which, by not
allowing for the condition of a disabled individual, ignores his or her
disability and forces the individual
to sink or swim within the mainstream
environment. It is recognition of the actual characteristics, and reasonable
accommodation
of these characteristics which is the central purpose of s. 15(1)
in relation to disability.
[68] The interplay of these objectives relating to disability is illustrated by
the evolution of special education in Ontario. The
earlier policy of exclusion
to which I referred was influenced in large part by a stereotypical attitude to
disabled persons that
they could not function in a system designed for the
general population. No account was taken of the true characteristics of
members of the disabled population, nor was any attempt made to
accommodate these characteristics. With the change in attitude influenced
Williston Report and other developments, the policy shifted to one which
assessed the true characteristics of disabled persons
with a view to
accommodating them. Integration was the preferred accommodation but if the pupil
could not benefit from integration
a special program was designed to enable
disabled pupils to receive the benefits of education which were available to
[69] It follows that disability, as a prohibited ground, differs from other
enumerated grounds such as race or sex because there
is no individual variation
with respect to these grounds. However, with respect to disability, this ground
means vastly different
things depending upon the individual and the context.
This produces, among other things, the “difference dilemma” referred
to by the interveners whereby segregation can be both protective of equality and
violative of equality depending upon the person
and the state of disability. In
some cases, special education is a necessary adaptation of the mainstream world
which enables some
disabled pupils access to the learning environment they need
in order to have an equal opportunity in education. While integration
recognized as the norm of general application because of the benefits it
generally provides, a presumption in favour of
integrated schooling would work
to the disadvantage of pupils who require special education in order to achieve
equality. Schools
focussed on the needs of the blind or deaf and special
education for students with learning disabilities indicate the positive aspects
of segregated education placement. Integration can be either a benefit or a
burden depending on whether the individual can profit
from the advantages that
integration provides”
In a speech titled
“The Right To Belong” given by former Disability Discrimination
Commissioner Elizabeth Hastings in
Sydney in July 1997 she said –
Disability Discrimination Act
requires schools, teachers, planners,
policy-makers, funders to develop non-discriminatory mainstream educational
environments. It
means that parents, students and their associates can begin to
demand them. The offering of parallel or segregated systems will not
sufficient. This is not to say there may not be choice: some parents will prefer
to send their children to schools which
would be described under the DDA as
‘special measures’, just as some now prefer to send their children
(who may or may
not have disabilities) to private, religious, community,
experimental, Steiner or home-based schools. Now, however, all those schools
must, unless they can demonstrate unjustifiable hardship, provide a
discrimination free education to girls and boys who have disabilities.
It would be quite difficult, I imagine, for the multimillion dollar state system
to demonstrate that it would be an unjustifiable
hardship to provide an
education to students who have disabilities if they were obliged to respond to a
complaint under the DDA.”
Daniel’s disabilities
Daniel’s disability is described in detail in earlier parts of this
decision, and my findings on it are set out in
section 5.1
of this decision.
That Daniel has a disability for the purposes of the Act is not in dispute.
I note the evidence that some of the teachers at SGHS were not aware of the
nature of Daniel’s disability, or of some of the
disabilities which he
has. However, it is not necessary for them to have been aware, or fully aware,
of the disabilities in order
to have participated in alleged discriminatory acts
for which the respondent may be liable,
(1994) EOC 92-623.
I also made findings in the previous section based on evidence of Mr Lord
with regard to Daniel’s behaviour. I am satisfied,
from all of the
evidence before me, that Daniel’s behaviour occurs as a result of his
disability. Mr Purvis gave evidence that
Daniel’s intellectual disability
“may manifest itself in his behaviour”. The evidence of Dr Wise was
that Daniel’s behaviour and his intellectual disability
“all result from severe brain injury”. Dr Wise said “the
part of his difficult behaviour would be disinhibited and uninhibited
behaviour.” Mr Lord said “his behaviour quite
often is a way of
expressing himself, particularly when he’s finding it very difficult and
very emotional”.
I am satisfied that, in this case, Daniel’s behaviour is so closely
connected to his disability that if I find that less favourable
treatment has
occurred on the ground of Daniel’s behaviour then this will amount to
discrimination on the ground of his disability.
In making this finding I have
followed the decisions in
L v Minister for
(1996) EOC 92-787
Y v Australia Post
92-865. In Y’s case, the Commission said at 77-068:
“...To discriminate against a person suffering a mental disorder
because of the behaviour of that person which directly results
from that mental
disorder, is to discriminate against that person because of the mental
I note, in this context, the matter of
White v Crown Casino
(unreported decision of HREOC, 24 July 1997) where Mr White was refused
access to the Casino as a result of his disability. The Commissioner
case was satisfied that a person without acquired brain injury manifesting the
same behaviour and appearance would have been
refused access to the Casino.
White v Crown Casino
can be distinguished from the cases
mentioned in the previous paragraph and the matter currently under
consideration; the former
involved a security guard determining which patrons
should be admitted to a Casino based on a quite strict set of criteria while
latter cases are regarding situations of employment and education, where the
relationship between the parties is ongoing.
It has been argued in some quarters that the more appropriate approach in
cases where behaviour is the issue is to consider whether
the act of the
respondent is indirectly discriminatory, pursuant to
of the Act, as in the
R9715697 (unreported decision of HREOC 23 July 1997) This
would make unlawful the imposing or application or maintenance of a rule,
requirement, condition, practice or other treatment which
a person with a
disability did not or could not comply with;
had the effect
of disadvantaging a person with a disability compared to the effect which it had
or would have on persons who do not
have that disability; and
reasonable.
In such situations, what is unlawful and what is
reasonable have to be considered in the circumstances of each case. Automatic
application
of a standard penalty, such as suspension for fighting or other
disruptive behaviour, may not always be reasonable where a disability
the behaviour. Equally, however, the fact that a student has, or is regarded as
having, a disability does not necessarily
excuse the student from complying with
reasonable application of reasonable rules. In such situations, all relevant
circumstances
would be considered in making such a determination.
Secretary Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade v Styles
[1989] FCA 342
, Bowen CJ and Gummow J in the Federal Court, (in a passage adopted on
a number of occasions by the High Court) speaking of the equivalent
provision in
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth) said at page 263 that the test of
reasonableness
“is less demanding than one of necessity, but more demanding than one of
convenience... The criterion is an objective one which
requires the court to
weigh the nature and extent of the discriminatory effect on the one hand against
the reasons advanced in favour
of the requirement or condition on the other. All
the circumstances of the case must be taken into account.”
The importance of the purpose of the rule or
requirement - protection of the safety or rights of students or staff and the
effectiveness
of the learning environment- are clearly important and legitimate
purposes for an educational authority. A particular way of achieving
even a compelling purpose, is not reasonable to adopt or to maintain if, in the
circumstances, other means of achieving
the purpose are reasonably able to be
identified and implemented which would not have the same disadvantaging or
excluding effect
on students with a disability. The nature and extent of the
disadvantage resulting from the rule may impact on the level of justification
a severe sanction such as suspension or exclusion may require stronger
justification.
The complainant in this matter did not argue
This was because, as set
out in submissions,
“there must be a condition or requirement which was imposed on Daniel. He
must demonstrate that he has been unable to comply
with the condition, while a
substantially higher proportion of students without his disability were able to
comply. In this case
the condition or requirement with which Daniel has not been
able to comply has not been imposed on other students. In 1997, Daniel
required to comply with the standards and practices of the school insofar as
those standards and practices related to discipline
and welfare. Daniel had a
personalised welfare and discipline policy which he was required to comply with.
On each occasion that
he was suspended, Mr Bartley said that he was suspended in
accordance with Daniel’s policy. So, because the standards applicable
Daniel were not imposed on any other student the indirect discrimination model
is inapplicable.”
6.3 Discrimination
The complainant alleges that a number of actions of the respondent during
Daniel’s attendance at SGHS constitute less favourable
treatment in breach
(1) of the Act. The section has been set out in
decision, and defines discrimination as less favourable treatment on the ground
of the person’s disability in circumstances
that are the same or not
materially different. Subsection (2) of the section provides that circumstances
are not materially different
because of the fact that different accommodation or
services may be required by a person with a disability. This allows a person
with a disability to receive services (including education services) which are
not exactly the same as those received by a person
without the disability
(needing to be different or having a different range or intensity as a result of
their disability) and not
be excluded from coverage by the Act.
When determining whether less favourable treatment has occurred I must be
satisfied that there is a connection or causal nexus between
the treatment
suffered by the aggrieved person and the disability of that person. Without the
causal nexus the statutory requirement
of “on the ground of” is not
met. The phrase implies a relationship of cause and effect between the
disability and the
less favourable treatment:
Human Rights And Equal
Opportunity Commission v Mount Isa Mines Ltd
(1993) 118 ALR 80
at page 99,
cited with approval in
Commonwealth v Human Rights And Equal Opportunity
(Dopking No. 1)
[1993] FCA 547
(1993) 46 FCR 191
at page 223. There must be some
factor which distinguishes the operation of the decision or action between
people without the disability
and the person with the disability: Dopking No. 1
at page 208.
The accepted test is the “but for test” as described by Kirby J
IW v City Of Perth
(1996-7) CLR 1
“The object of the Act is to exclude the unlawful and discriminatory
reasons from the relevant conduct. This is because such
reasons can infect that
conduct with prejudice and irrelevant or irrational considerations which the Act
is designed to prevent.
Because persons faced with allegations of
discrimination, genuinely or otherwise, assert multiple and complex reasons, and
affirmative proof of an unlawful reason is often difficult, the Act has
simplified the task for the decision-maker. It is enough
that it be shown that
the doing of the Act was by reason of or on the ground of the particular matter
in the sense that the unlawful
consideration was included in the alleged
discriminators reasons or grounds. It must be a real reason or ground. It is not
to show that it was a trivial or insubstantial one. But once it is shown
that the unlawful consideration truly played a causative
part in the decision of
the alleged discriminator that is sufficient to attract a remedy under the
I accept the submissions of the
complainant that what I have to determine in applying
(1) of the Act is:
(i) Is there an act or incident which involved SGHS treating Daniel in a
certain way;
(ii) Does Daniel have a disability as defined in
of the Act;
(iii) Has Daniel’s disability or disabilities truly played a causative
part in SGHS’S reasons for treating Daniel the
way it did;
(iv) Has SGHS’ treatment of Daniel resulted in Daniel being treated
less favourably than SGHS treats or would treat a student
without the disability
in circumstances that are the same or not materially different.
I have already determined the second question in the affirmative. Clearly
there are incidents which fall into the category described
by the first
question. I must address questions (iii) and (iv) in considering each particular
A School v Human Rights And Equal Opportunity Commission
1455 FCA Mansfield J observed:
defining direct discrimination requires a comparison to be made
between the way in which the school treats or would treat a student
disability and the way in which it treated AJ, in the circumstances. In that
sense, it does not impose an obligation upon
the school to treat AJ more
favourably than it would treat a student without a disability. If there is
discriminatory treatment it
must be on the ground of the disability. If one of
the reasons for such treatment is the disability of that person then the conduct
constituting the discriminatory treatment is taken to be done because of that
reason. .. Such discrimination, if it is found by the
Commission to have been
made out, is unlawful if it encompasses any one or more of the three matters
addressed by
(2) (a) (b) or (c).”
goes on to say-
“... it is in my view desirable that I make some further observations
I do not wish to be taken as accepting that the obligation not to discriminate
against a person with a disability under the DD Act
does not involve some
obligation to take positive action with respect to a disabled person. Section 7,
8 and 9 recognise circumstances
will exist that involve a person with a
disability needing to be treated differently. They provide that the treating of
with a disability less favourably because of such a need will itself
constitute discrimination. The accommodation of that need may
well require some
positive action to be taken. The particular provisions indicating the
relationships or events which attract the
operation of the DD Act in Pt 2 of the
Act then variously contain within them provisions which, in effect despite the
definitional
provisions of discrimination in ss 5-9, seek to make allowance for
particular problems which might arise in the circumstances by
the inflexible
application of those provisions. For example, in the case of discrimination in
employment, s 15(4) in broad terms
removes the direct operation of those
provisions if the person because of the disability is unable to carry out the
inherent requirements
of the particular employment, or the action necessary on
the part of the employer to accommodate the disability would impose an
“unjustifiable
hardship” on the employer (the term
“unjustifiable hardship” is defined in s 10 (sic)): see
Commonwealth v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
Similar provision is made in ss 16(3), 17(2) and 18(4). There are
provisions with a like purpose, but in different terms in ss 19(2),
21(2), 22(3)
and (4), 23(2), 24(2), 25(3), 27(3) and 28(3). I observed above that the
“exempting provisions” in s 22,
in particular that the provision of
services and facilities required to accommodate a particular student’s
disability would
impose an unjustifiable hardship on the educational authority,
apply only with respect to the obligation to accept a person with
a disability
into the educational institution, or the terms of that acceptance, under s
22(1), and not to the way in which that person,
once admitted to the educational
institution, must be treated under s 22(2).
Section 5, including subs(2), is a provision which applies across the spectrum
of relationships and circumstances expressed in Pt
2 of the DD Act. The
determination of what is less favourable treatment for the purposes of s 5(1)
must be measured in circumstances
that are not “materially
different”, and s 5(2) provides that the fact that a person with a
disability may require different
accommodation or services does not provide a
basis for making out that material difference. Thus, it is not necessarily the
that, where the DD Act applies to a particular relationship or
circumstance, there is no positive obligation to provide for the need
person with a disability for different or additional accommodation or services.
To the extent that to do so would produce hardship,
the particular provisions
seek to make allowance for that, including s 22(4).
The absence of any “exempting” provision, such as s 22(4), in
respect of the positive obligation which s 22(2) imposes
itself gives rise to
difficult questions.
There may be circumstances where the educational authority may have been
entitled to decline to admit a person with a disability
under s 22(4), but did
not exercise that opportunity through a common misunderstanding as to the extent
of the disability. There
may be circumstances where the disability comes on only
after admission. It may be that the procedure envisaged by s 55 is then to
brought into play.”
The issue of less
favourable treatment is dealt with by Commissioner Nettlefold in
Commonwealth Bank of Australia
(supra). He concluded that the principle of
reasonable accommodation “...should be regarded as a central principle of
discrimination law. The proper construction of the Act shows that the
principle of reasonable accommodation is contained in it.”
Commissioner
Nettlefold’s view here was that the use of the word
“favourably” in s 5 (1) adverts to the notion
of giving aid or help.
He said that a mere mechanical measure of the aid or help given, which ignores
disparate capacities, needs
and circumstances is not sufficient. The accepted
approach by the courts is that the respondent has an obligation to make a
proportionate response to the person’s disability:
Community College v Davis
[1979] USSC 119
(1979), and comments by Kirby P as he
then was in
Jamal v Secretary Department Of Health
(1988) 14 NSWLR 452.
This is the course that I have adopted in this decision. The respondent, in its
submissions, argued that it acts
in accordance with
a broad range of
responsibilities, and that some actions are taken not in compliance with the
discrimination laws,
but to meet broader
obligations to students with a
disability and the general community. It asserts that the application of the
laws is being
confused with that of discrimination law when the
complainant seeks to rely on the reasonable accommodation test when
there is in
fact no statutory basis for such an exhortation apart from the limited terms of
s 5 (2). It asserts that special treatment
to Daniel is given not because
of the obligation in s 5 (2) but for other statutory and policy reasons.
Therefore to continue
that special treatment, or to introduce further
special treatment, is not an act of unlawful discrimination. The complainant
issue referred me to
Haines v Leves
(1987) 8 NSWLR 442
at page 456,
where Street CJ quoted from the Tribunal’s decision:
“... (the Minister’s) duty is to provide the services and benefits
incidental to a public school education to all students
of an appropriate age
who require it. Moreover, he must do so within the framework of the relevant
regulatory legislation of the
day, including anti-discrimination legislation. He
cannot evade responsibility under that legislation by saying he has delegated
his functions to another person in the educational hierarchy. The duty is his,
and he must remain responsible for the manner of its
implementation.”
I accept this response, and agree with the
complainant that a similar view is expressed in
Kinsela v Queensland
University Of Technology
(unreported decision of HREOC, H97/47).
Commissioner McEvoy, in her decision in
AJ v A School
, remitted to the
Commission following Mansfield J's decision in the Federal Court referred to
above, said on page 26-7
“However, what obligation is placed on a respondent is raised by the
expression in section 5(1) “to treat...less favourably”:
concepts of equality and discrimination applied in Australian law (and indeed by
common sense) make it clear that people can
be treated in exactly the same way
but this can nevertheless amount to less favourable treatment for one of those
persons because
that person has a disability. In the context of constitutional
law, which includes discrimination as a constitutional concept, the
High Court,
in cases such as
Castlemaine Tooheys Ltd v South Australia
[1990] HCA 1
(1990) 169 CLR
, has considered this issue. At 478, Justices Gaudron and McHugh considered
in what circustances a law could be discriminatory within
the meaning of the
Constitution:
“A law is discriminatory if it operates by reference to a distinction
which some overriding law decrees to be irrelevant or
by reference to a
distinction which is in fact irrelevant to the object to be attained; a law is
discriminatory if, although it operates
by reference to a relevant distinction,
the different treatment thereby assigned is not appropriate and adapted to the
or differences which support the distinction. A law is also
discriminatory if, although there is a relevant difference, it proceeds
though there is no such difference or, in other words if it treats equally
things that are unequal - unless, perhaps, there is
no practical basis for
differentiation.”
Although this analysis of
the concept of discrimination was there applied in the context of constitutional
law, it is relevant to
apply generally in developing a theory of discrimination
to apply to the relevant Commonwealth legislation, which includes this Act.
Section 5(2) can provide some assistance in determining what obligation is
imposed on a supplier of (as in this case) educational
services, in
relation to
a person with a disability in establishing the appropriate level of behaviour
which will truly not amount
to less favourable
treatment.”
She later says (at p.31):
“So how does section 5(2) operate to assist in the interpretation of
section 5(1), and in particular the “less favourable”
discussions to which I have referred above indicate a general view
that section
5(2) does not provide just a description
of what amounts to material
differences: rather, it assists in determining how to make circumstances
disability not materially
different. That is, in some circumstances there may
be some positive obligation on a respondent to
take steps in order to ensure
there is no material difference between the treatment accorded to a person with
a disability and the
treatment accorded to a person
in similar circumstances but
without a disability. Mansfield J alludes to this in his judgment in
matter. It is my view that
without this interpretation of section 5(2), it
would be difficult to establish direct discrimination under the Act, except in
most blatant circumstances, and a person subjected
to discriminatory
treatment within the intention of the Act would most often have
section 6 and establish indirect
discrimination.”
The following useful passage
is at page 31:
“It is my view the substantial effect of section 5(2) is to impose a duty
on a respondent to make a reasonably proportionate
response to the disability of
the person with which it is
dealing in the provision of appropriate
accommodation or other support
as may be required as a consequence of the
disability, so
that in truth the person with the disability is not subjected to
less favourable
treatment than would a person without a disability
circumstances.”
The respondent has submitted
that its actions in providing services to Daniel were motivated by other policy
considerations, but I
agree with the complainant that the rationale for the
provision of those benefits is irrelevant. As the complainant has submitted,
once the Department undertakes or agrees to provide such services and
facilities, those services and facilities are benefits. Having
recognised that
Daniel has disabilities which require special services and facilities to
function at school, the respondent agreed
to provide those services and
facilities. They are benefits for the purposes of s 22 (2) of the Act which the
School provides to
Before considering each individual incident I will deal with some other
issues raised regarding discrimination generally. The first
of these is s 10 of
the Act. This section provides that if an act is done for more than one reason,
provided that one of the reasons
for the doing
of the Act is the disability of
the person, then the act is taken to be done for that reason. This is the case
if the reason
is not the dominant or substantial reason. As long as part of
the reason for the doing of the act is the disability
of the person
then the law
Further, the motives or intentions of the respondent in doing any act are not
relevant to the question of whether that act is discriminatory.
Therefore, even
where the respondent is motivated by what it considers to be in the interests of
the aggrieved person these motives
are not relevant,
Haines v Leves
(supra) at 471.
It is also important to bear in mind that the less favourable element of
“less favourable treatment” is subjective. Wilcox
Commonwealth v Human Rights And Equal Opportunity Commission
[1993] FCA 547
at 152 said:
“I do not think it is legitimate to deny that a person is treated less
favourably simply because someone else might prefer
the treatment offered by the
alleged discriminator than that provided to persons of a different marital
status. Where there are both
advantages and disadvantages of each course of
treatment, whether one alternative is more or less favourable than the other
usually be a matter of personal preference. Where there is a mixture of
advantages and disadvantages it is not for the employer or
the Commission to
impose a preference.”
The relevance of this
issue is clear. Where the respondent, for instance, may see attendance by Daniel
at the Support Unit as more
beneficial for him this is not a relevant
consideration when assessing his exclusion from SGHS as this view was not held
by Mr Purvis.
Irrespective of whether the respondent is of the view that it
would be more beneficial for Daniel, it could still constitute less
treatment for the purposes of the Act.
6.4 Exclusion
My findings of fact on this issue are set out in section 5.20 of this
decision. Noting my findings in section 6.2 above regarding
behaviour, it is clear that Daniel’s exclusion from SGHS was on the
ground of his disability.
Mr Bartley’s decision was taken as a result of Daniel’s
behaviour, which Mr Bartley believed impacted on the safety and
Daniel, other students and staff. It was also taken, in Mr Bartley’s view,
as a result of Daniel’s inability
to cope with the stresses of high school
life as a result of his disability. Whilst I am sure that Mr Bartley took this
for what he saw as Daniel’s best interests, nonetheless it was in
breach of ss 5 and 22 (2) of the Act.
Exclusion is clearly less favourable treatment, as Daniel is prevented from
attending the School, and denied access to the benefits
provided by the School.
This would fulfil the requirements of s 22 (2) (a) of the Act. I also accept the
submissions of the complainant
that if “expel” is given its ordinary
meaning, rather
than the meaning prescribed to it in the Department’s
then Daniel has also been expelled from SGHS in breach of s 22 (2) (b).
For the purpose of establishing a comparator under the Act the complainant
must establish that Daniel was treated less favourably
than another year 7
student at SGHS without his disability. No other student in that year was
excluded from school in 1997. The respondent’s
submissions, which take the
comparator as another student who may have hit a member of staff, confuse the
comparator (being a person
who does not have Daniel’s disabilities) with
the circumstances in which the comparison is made. As the complainant says in
submissions:
“The only purpose of making a comparison is to determine whether the
treatment is less favourable. This does not require a
finding that the person
without the disability has been treated more favourably. Rather that when
compared to the student without
a disability Daniel has been deprived of a
choice he values.”
Commissioner McEvoy in her
decision in
AJ v A School
(supra) says at page 32-33 that:
“I am quite satisfied a proper reading of section 5 does not establish
any positive obligation on the respondent to take affirmative
action towards
Fleur, but the respondent certainly
could not necessarily treat Fleur the same
as another student without a disability
who was away from school for a long
that comparator would never be sufficiently precise to take into
account the consequence
of Fleur’s disability. Fleur’s
meant not only that she was away from school for long periods and therefore
behind in her school work, it also meant
when she was at school she often worked
downstairs, she lost touch with her peers and
she, as well as having the other
consequences
of her illness and disability such as loss of energy and pain, had
also lost confidence.
A student who is away from school for long
periods, for
example because he or she is engaged in elite sports training, is a comparator
in one sense (the absence from school),
but is unlikely to be a sufficiently
precise comparator in relation to Fleur’s particular
circumstances
consequential upon
her actual disability.”
In my view it can also be argued by analogy that Daniel can be compared to
another student who did not have a disability and who was
excluded from school
because he hit or kicked teachers aides or other students. The treatment of two
such children would not necessarily
be the same and, indeed, would need to be
different given that Daniel’s behaviour was a manifestation of his
disability. Even
in such a case the comparator would be imprecise.
I note that Commissioner McEvoy says in
AJ v A School
on page 37:
“The issue of the comparator student is to some extent a red herring in
the light of the view I have taken in relation to the
obligation on the School
to make a reasonably proportionate response to Fleur’s disability.
However, there is in any event,
little evidence of any differential treatment of
Fleur compared with the way a student without a disability but in similar
circumstances
may have been treated. It is clear Fleur’s circumstances
were different by virtue of the fact that she was often not at school.
was at school she was severely inhibited in going upstairs and as a consequence
was behind in her work, and when she was
at school was isolated in the library
to some extent. However, there is no evidence as to how the comparator student
without a disability
but in similar circumstances was treated by the School.
The primary evidence that is before me, which I accept, is that the School
an individual assessment of the needs of each student, including Fleur, and
engaged in its educational relationship with each
student on that basis.
However, I have concluded above that mere lack of differentiation between the
way in which Fleur was treated, and the treatment accorded
to a non-disabled
student, might not be enough. The School’s response must be such that,
while not requiring positive discrimination
in favour of Fleur, it must behave
proportionately and appropriately to ensure Fleur was not subjected to less
favourable treatment
than the hypothetical comparator would have
I must next examine whether the
treatment occurred in circumstances which are the same, or not materially
different. I cannot do this
by reference to the actual incident or conduct
itself, because this would defeat the operation of the section. It must be the
in which the less favourable treatment has occurred. For the purposes of
this case, it seems to me that the setting is the circumstances
person would be excluded from a high school. Such circumstances may not be the
same for a year 7 student as for one in
year 12, because of the difference in
age and maturity. Also, the time would be relevant as different staff may
implement policies
differently from year to year. Therefore, the circumstances
would be those of being a year 7 student at SGHS in 1997.
It is important to ensure that the disability itself does not become the
basis for determining that there are no same or similar circumstances.
illustrated by Toohey J in
IW v City Of Perth
(supra) at page 33
“The illustration given in the course of argument before the Court is apt.
On the construction for which the respondents contended
if dangerousness was a
characteristic imputed to a paranoid or schizoid personality, there could be no
discrimination against persons
with those personalities.” This was
reiterated in
Commonwealth v Human Rights Commission
(supra) and
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission v Mount Isa Mines Ltd
To accept the formulation proposed by the
respondent (separating Daniel’s behaviour somehow from his disability)
that no student with behaviours caused by or integrally linked to
their disability could be discriminated against because manifestation
disability is disturbed behaviour which could pose a risk of injuring others.
Any action then taken by a school to suspend
or exclude such a child because
they posed a safety risk would be permissible. This would circumvent the clear
legislative intent
to make unlawful discrimination against a person because of a
disorder, illness or disease that results in disturbed behaviour:
It is important to be clear that, in making this finding, I do not propose
that the alternative extreme should prevail – that
is, that no action can
be taken in these circumstances. One must look to the legislation for solutions.
Y v Australia Post
(supra), where a finding was made in favour of the
respondent, the Act provided an exemption in the area of employment because of
an inability to perform the inherent requirements of the job. This reasoning was
confirmed in
Commonwealth v Human Rights Commission and X
(1999) HCA 63
where the ability to perform a job safely was found to be an inherent
requirement of the job. Mansfield J discussed this question
relevantly to these
circumstances in
(supra) quoted above. The option of seeking an
exemption under s 55 of the Act was open to the respondent, but this was not
Margaret Thornton in “The Liberal Promise” in 1990, refers to an
illustrative article by Erica Bell in the Fordham Law
[51 Fordham Law
Review 168]
which considers the way in which discipline, behaviour and
disability has been addressed by the American courts. Thornton concludes
where behaviour is an issue, what must be assessed is the cause of misconduct.
She states that a distinction is drawn between
misconduct which is a
manifestation of the behaviour caused by the disability, and misconduct which is
not. In this case, my findings
of fact clearly indicate that this case clearly
involves the former.
Mansfield J. and Commissioner McEvoy’s decisions in
referred to above both indicate that the actions of the respondent must be
reasonably proportionate to the disability, and that the
respondent is not
required to positively discriminate in favour of the complainant. Their are
three actions which, in my view, the
respondent could have taken to make its
actions reasonably proportionate.
Firstly, it should have more broadly consulted in the development of
Daniel’s discipline and welfare policy. Rather than being
developed only
by Messrs Donsworth, Bartley and by members of staff, input should have been
allowed from Mr and Mrs Purvis, but more
importantly from experts in special
education such as Mr Field, and in behaviour management such as Mr Lord.
Secondly, once the policy was in place and being followed, the respondent
should have been more prepared to be flexible in allowing
changes. Behaviour
management in such circumstances can best be conducted based on experience, and
Mr Field and Mr Lord (not to mention
Mr and Mrs Purvis) were willing and very
well able to suggest changes which may well have avoided later suspensions and
the exclusion.
Thirdly, the advice of special education experts should have been taken more
generally. The Callan and Gerard report is probably the
clearest example. The
withholding of these recommendations by Mr Phillips meant that, at the most
difficult time of the placement,
Mr Bartley was left to make complex decisions
with no advice from the experts in the area who had visited the school and
the situation. Another example is the non-provision of training in
special education issues for teachers at SGHS. This is dealt with
Had the respondent acted differently in these three areas suspensions and
exclusions may not have occurred. Whilst it is impossible
to know this with
certainty, I am satisfied that, had they done so, and had the same events
occurred, their actions would have been
reasonably proportionate in the
circumstances, and discrimination would not have taken place.
The decision to exclude was Mr Bartley’s. However, it was not in
dispute that Mr Bartley, as Principal of SGHS, was acting on
behalf of the
Department, and so the Department is vicariously liable pursuant to s 122.
I find that, in excluding Daniel from SGHS, the respondent was in breach of
ss 5 and 22 (2) of the Act.
6.5 Suspensions
My findings of fact on this issue are set out in section 5.19 of this
decision. It is clear from that section, and section 6.4 on
exclusion, that I am
satisfied that the five suspensions of Daniel whilst a student at SGHS in 1997
constituted discrimination
breach of ss 5 and 22 (2) of the Act.
The suspensions constituted the less favourable treatment, as Daniel was
deprived of the benefit of attending school. The same or
similar circumstances
were as set out in 6.4 above. The treatment, as a result of Daniel’s
behaviour, was on the ground of
his disability. Evidence of a comparator is set
out in section 5.19. Once again, the Department is liable for Mr Bartley’s
6.6 Other Detriments
6.6.1 Failure to properly assess Daniel’s needs on admission
This issue is dealt with in sections 5.7 and 5.10 above. Based on my findings
of fact there is no basis for an allegation of discrimination
to be made out.
The fact that
Daniel was not assessed was caused by miscommunication, and was as
much the responsibility of Mr and
Mrs Purvis as that of the respondent.
6.6.2 Failure to provide Daniel with orientation on commencement
This issue is also dealt with in 5.7. Once again, on my findings of fact, I
am not satisfied that the actions of the respondent constituted
a detriment for
the purposes of the Act.
6.6.3 Failure to implement Principal’s recommendations to
accommodate Daniel at SGHS
Again, this issue is dealt with in 5.7. For the reasons set out in my
findings of fact I am not satisfied that this constituted a
6.6.4 Failure to adjust Welfare and Discipline Policy to address
Daniel’s needs and behavioural patterns
This issue is dealt with in 5.13 and 6.4 above. As indicated in those
sections, I am satisfied that the Department failed to be flexible
modification of Daniel’s Discipline and Welfare Policy. This is a serious
issue, as it was this policy on which suspension
and exclusion decisions were
eventually made, as indicated above.
The complainant, in his submissions, argued that this constituted a detriment
for the purposes of s 22 (2) (c) of the Act:
“Having accepted Daniel’s enrolment at SGHS and admitting him as a
student, the respondent recognised that he would require
special services and
facilities...
“Those services were benefits provided by the school and it was obliged to
continue to provide those special services and facilities
to the extent that it
enabled him to participate in regular school life on an equal footing with other
students. Failing to provide
the guaranteed services and facilities, such as
those set out in Mr Bartley’s plan, subjected Daniel to a detriment .. by
to make such reasonable accommodations.”
This argument was supported by reliance on
The complainant continued:
“This failure resulted in Daniel being denied the ability to enjoy the
same standard of care enjoyed by other students. It
is accepted that the
respondent owes a duty of care to its students and also to its staff members.
Daniel was also entitled to the
benefits of a duty of care. This duty requires
the school to devise and institute a reasonable system of sufficient supervision
young children:
Grey by his Tutor v State of NSW
(unreported) SC NSW
Grove J, 27 February 1998. To achieve this duty it may require a school to be
proactive, and implement new systems
of procedures. A duty of care will not be
satisfied by inaction or passivity.”
complainant also relied on the acceptance in harassment jurisprudence that
failure to implement policies and take a proactive
role in preventing
discrimination, or avoiding a detriment, will result in a finding of less
favourable treatment:
Sekhon v Ballarat College
(1993) EOC 92-552.
The respondent, on the other hand, argued that
“the degree of adjustment and special treatment required by Mr Purvis for
Daniel to remain at the school goes far beyond of
the terms of section 5. The
concept of less favourable treatment was not intended to be extended in the way
argued by the complainant.”
The respondent
argued that the substantial resources it provided went far beyond the
requirements of the statutory scheme of the DDA.
Once it was clear that the path
chosen for him was not suitable, either educationally or socially, then the
respondent was bound
to provide another path which it did.
I accept the complainant’s arguments on this issue. I am satisfied that
the inflexibility of the Discipline And Welfare Policy,
and the impact which
that had in later decisions made to suspend and exclude Daniel, constituted a
detriment in terms of the Act.
I rely for this finding on the findings in the
previous sections on suspensions and exclusion. The question of whether the
of this detriment, being the breaches of the Act described above, is a
cause for separate relief will be considered later. However,
it is not relevant
for this finding.
6.6.5 Failure to develop guidelines in accordance with the Welfare and
Discipline Policy
It is not clear to me what the complainant is referring to in this part of
his claim. The complainant’s submissions do not provide
further details. I
have therefore made no finding on this head of the claim.
6.6.6 Failure to provide teachers with training or awareness program
This issue is dealt with in 5.7 above. I have noted what in my view is a
major concession by the respondent in its submissions on
this issue.
I do not accept that in all of Daniel’s classes the vast majority of
the teaching was done by the teachers’ aides. However,
this is true of
some, and in others they certainly played a major role. The uncertainty of the
teachers about how to teach Daniel
as a member of their class reinforces my
finding of fact that teachers were not provided with adequate training prior to
It should also be noted that, based on the respondent’s admissions,
Daniel was taught, in the main, by teachers’ aides,
whereas other children
at SGHS were taught by teachers. This, too, would constitute a detriment. The
clear comparator here is other
students in year 7, and the lessons are the same
or similar circumstances. Even though Daniel had DESU material it did follow the
standard curriculum, and I do not accept the arguments of the respondent that it
was so different and at such a lower level as not
to constitute following the
same curriculum.
The respondent argued that this complaint was made against the Department,
not SGHS, and that the services of teachers trained in
education” were available at the Support Unit at Grafton High School.
However, to accept this submission in
isolation would be to reject the findings
Dalla Costa
(supra) and others set out in section 6.1 above. Weighed
against the undoubted merits of teachers trained in “special
must be the discrimination by
exclusion entailed in attending
at the Support Unit.
The complainant made a choice to send Daniel to his local school. In so doing
he knew that the services of teachers trained and experienced
in “special
education” would not be available. However, I am satisfied that the
limited attempts by SGHS to make training
available to Daniel’s teachers
constitutes a further detriment in terms of s 22 (2) (c) of the Act. This is a
matter which
does not flow to suspensions and exclusion, and thus clearly
constitutes a ground for
separate relief.
6.6.7 Failure to obtain assistance of experts in special education or
This issue is dealt with in 5.17 and 6.4 above. My findings are clear that
this did not occur until late in Daniel’s placement,
and that when it did
most of the recommendations were not acted upon.
Once again I am satisfied that this constitutes a detriment for the purposes
of s 22 (2) (c). Apart from the continued input of the
DESU, such input was
sadly lacking in the placement. For a placement with such complexities
have thought that the advice
of such experts would be a major component. I am
satisfied that this failure, in part, led to
the eventual ending of the
In finding that the complainant has suffered a detriment here I have
again accepted the complainant’s
arguments as set out
in section 6.6.4.
6.6.8 Failure to assess Daniel between 18 September and 3 December 1997
This issue is dealt with in 5.20 above. The only assessment of Daniel which
was carried out in this period was by Ms Donsworth. She
prepared a report as
described above.
Whether or not the complainant accepts the result of that assessment, on the
facts it was carried out. Therefore, based on my findings
of fact this head
cannot constitute a detriment for the purposes of the Act.
6.6.9 Failure to inform Daniel and the complainant that Daniel had been
excluded from school
This issue is dealt with in 5.20 above. Based on my findings of fact there is
no basis for a finding of detriment on this issue.
6.6.10 Failure to follow school policy for dealing with excluded students
This issue is dealt with in 5.20 above. I am satisfied that, as a finding of
fact, the School failed to follow the Departmental policy
with regard to
exclusion of students.
The complainant argued that the result of this failure is that Daniel has not
attended school since his exclusion on December 3, 1997.
However, the respondent
asserts that a place has always been available at the Support Unit of Grafton
High School.
The respondent’s failure here does constitute a detriment as an
alternative placement was not made available. However, in reality
it adds little
to the finding in 6.4 above, as the only placement which the respondent would
have notified, had they done so, is
the placement at the Support Unit of Grafton
High School. This was not acceptable to the complainant. Therefore, the results
detriment, and the exclusion, are the same. The question of whether this
failure allows me to make a direction that Daniel be returned
to SGHS as a
student is more relevantly dealt with in the section on relief.
6.6.11 Modifying Discipline and Welfare Policies thus denying opportunity
for Daniel to be dealt with according to applicable school
This issue was not raised in the original Statement of Issues by the
complainant, but was claimed as a detriment at the end of the
hearing after the
giving of evidence had been completed. The respondent asserted that this was a
breach of procedural fairness because
the respondent came to meet the claim put
against it, and that the complainant’s Statement of Issues should have set
claim. This is particularly so, the respondent said, when the
complainant had been represented by competent counsel throughout the
proceedings.
The complainant argued that these submissions respond to the matters raised
in the course of the inquiry, and also to the respondent’s
Statement of
Issues. He argued that, given the nature of the inquiry process, the extensive
evidence led by the respondent, and the
length of the hearing, it could not be
said that the respondent suffered any disadvantage by these submissions.
Whilst it is true that Commission inquiries are more informal, and that the
Commission may inform itself of any matter that it considers
appropriate, this
particular inquiry was conducted very much in the nature of an adversarial
proceeding. Whilst I do not totally
reject the right of a complainant to raise
new issues I do in these circumstances. Detailed Statements of Issues were
prepared by
both parties, and both parties were represented by counsel well
versed in the operations of this jurisdiction. In such a large case,
points were energetically contested, I am not prepared to depart from more
formal legal procedure on this issue. I have
therefore not considered the
complainant’s arguments on this head of his claim.
Following my findings of law above it only remains for me to determine the
relief to be awarded.
7.1 Introductory Comments
I accept the submissions of the complainant that "Daniel has suffered loss
and damage as a consequence of the respondent’s conduct,
and by reason for
(sic) the conduct of the respondent Daniel has lost the enjoyment of attending a
mainstream school and accessing
mainstream education. He has lost friends, he
has lost the ability to maintain the opportunity to interact with his peers. He
lost the companionship of peers and he has lost the opportunity to attend a
school of choice."
The complainant seeks the following orders-
(i) A declaration that the State of NSW has engaged in unlawful disability
discrimination within the terms of s 22 (2) of the Act.
(ii) A declaration that the State of NSW revoke the decision dated 3
December 1997 to exclude Daniel Hoggan from South Grafton High
School and follow
the terms of the relevant Department policy with respect to the resolution of a
decision to exclude a student.
(iii) A declaration that the State of NSW makes arrangements to facilitate
Daniel Hoggan's return to SGHS.
(iv) A declaration that the respondent undertake a proper assessment and
evaluation of Daniel's needs to identify the special services
and facilities he
requires to attend South Grafton High School as a student.
(v) A declaration that the respondent provide the facilities and services
required by Daniel to participate as a student at South
Grafton High School.
(vi) A declaration that the State of NSW appologise to Daniel Hoggan and his
foster family for the humiliation and distress caused
to them by the
respondent's unlawful conduct.
(vii) Damages for the injury to feelings and humiliation experienced by
Daniel Hoggan from being excluded from South Grafton High
(viii) Damages for the additional expenses incurred by Mr and Mrs Purvis in
maintaining Daniel's education at home.
The first order sought relates to a declaration of unlawful conduct in breach
of s 22 (2) of the Act which I will make based on my
findings in section 6
The rest of the orders deal with three issues:
Daniel's return
to SGHS (orders ii to v);
(order vi); and
the awarding of
damages (orders vii and viii).
I will deal with the issues in that
7.2 Daniel’s return to SGHS
Following the making of a declaration pursuant to s 103 (1) (b) (i) I am
provided with six alternatives for further declarations.
The relevant
declaration in these circumstances for consideration
is subparagraph (ii),
“a declaration that the respondent should perform any reasonable act or
course of conduct to redress any loss or damage suffered
complainant;”
The complainant argues that “what is a reasonable act must have regard
to the Objects and purposes of the Act. Further, the
Commission construing
remedial legislation to promote the Objects of the Act may take into account the
international instruments
which underpin the Act.” I agree with this
submission. The complainant goes on to draw my attention to Article 26 (3) of
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This provision states
“Parents have a prior right to choose the kind of education that shall
be given to their children.”
This provision, along with the Objects of the Act themselves, taken in
conjunction with the comments of Professor Alston referred
Dalla Costa
above, provide clear support for the return of Daniel to SGHS.
I further accept the submissions of the complainant that "it is not the
Commission's role to determine what is the best education
for the particular
child, whether there are alternative placements, and what may be a better
placement."
L v Minister For Education
(QLD ADT No. 39 of 1995,
unreported, 18 January 1997) is authority for this. In fact, inquiring into the
merits of the educational
programs on offer would not be a proper inquiry for
the Commission, and would exceed my functions under s.103 which was contained
the Act at the time of this Inquiry and prior to the enactment of the
Rights Legislation Amendment Act 1999
The respondent argued that I should take into account a document which was
originally produced during the proceedings as terms of
a proposed settlement,
and which set out a basis for Daniel’s continued education at the Support
Unit of Grafton High School
with possible later return to SGHS. However, for the
reasons clearly stated in
Dalla Costa
I am not prepared to consider what
amounts to “separate but equal” or segregated education. I am
satisfied that such education
is, by its nature, discriminatory. Whilst I am
aware of the Department’s obligations under the
Education Act
my comments
above, supported by the findings in
cases (supra), indicate that this must be within the context of not breaching
discrimination legislation.
I am satisfied that I do have the jurisdiction to make orders which would
mean that Daniel would return to South Grafton High School.
Both Mr Jackson for
the complainant, and Professor Parmenter for the respondent, gave extensive
evidence of the benefits of mainstream
education for children with disabilities.
Also in that context David Mcrae’s report on this issue titled “The
Integration/Inclusion
Feasibility Study (Exhibit 26) was referred to. It clearly
sets out the benefits of educating children with an intellectual disability
mainstream setting. The respondent asserts that no evidence was before me to
support the assertion that children classified
as IS (indicating severe
intellectual disability) benefit from such education. This does not accord with
Mr Jackson's evidence. Further,
as Professor Parmenter explained, that view was
once held with regard to IM children (those with moderate intellectual
disability)
and that view has now changed. It seems clear from Professor
Parmenter's evidence that there are no studies which allow a finding
that mainstream education does not benefit IS children.
Professor Parmenter, in his evidence, outlined the elements necessary for
successful integration. When these were put to Mr Bartley
he agreed with them.
Mr Bartley indicated that employment of a teacher with Special Education
expertise would have been the main
thing he would do differently if the
opportunity occurred. He also acknowledged that if changes to the timetable were
required this
would be possible.
It appears to me that the Department has the resources to support Daniel's
relevant - must be
considered in the context of the budget allocation for the whole of the State.
Finally, I am not persuaded that Daniel would have to re-enrol at SGHS. My
findings are clear that he was excluded in breach of the
Department's policy,
and it is clear from the evidence that he was not expelled. Therefore,
re-enrolment is not necessary. The Department's
policy is clear that, where a
suitable placement is not found (in conjunction with the parents) within a
specified period of time,
as is the case here, then the student returns to the
However, I am not minded to make the orders sought by the complainant which
would facilitate Daniel's return to SGHS. My decision
is based on one factor,
and that is the length of time which has elapsed since Daniel's exclusion at the
end of 1997. Had Daniel
continued at SGHS he would now (in November 2000) be at
the end of year 10. Decisions would be being made as to whether he was going
complete schooling at this time or go on to years 11 and 12. Whilst this is a
most unfortunate and very regrettable situation,
where Daniel was in his
development and education at the end of year 7 in December 1997, as where in
contrast with he may be now
(and where his age-appropriate peers are now) are so
disparate that it would be totally inappropriate to return him to that
The point at which he left the School and the point at which he would
return are also very different for the School. It would be
equally inappropriate
for me to propose that he commence year 8 in 2001 when he was in year 7 in 1997.
This would be unreal and unfair
for Daniel.
This part of my decision has been a very difficult part, because, having
found that Daniel was discriminated against by being suspended
and then excluded
from SGHS, I am again going to be the instrument of his exclusion. The reason
for this further exclusion is nothing
more than the effluxion of time. Delays of
many years have been, sadly in my experience, the bane of discrimination
complainants.
None could be more evocative of dismay and distress than the loss
of three years of high school education, with all of its related
development and interaction. Life time friendships are made in this time, and
status - particularly in a rural city - is established.
It is something that
none of us can return to Daniel.
However, the circumstances between those times have changed so much that I
cannot direct Daniel's return to the school. I cannot form
the view that doing
so could constitute a "reasonable act or course of conduct" by the respondent.
Because of the effluxion of time
I am not satisfied that such a return now would
"redress any loss or damage suffered by the complainant."
7.3 Apology
The complainant submits that this is an appropriate case for an apology to be
made, and relies on
Gibbs v Australian Wool Corporation
This case suggests that apologies are more suited to cases where the
discrimination has occurred in the public arena. This case would
certainly fall
into that category. Daniel’s suspensions and exclusion would have been
common knowledge in the school community,
and no doubt generally discussed in a
community such as Grafton. Although some of the broader publicity around the
exclusion was
sought by the complainant and Mrs Purvis when they put out their
press release, the knowledge was general well before that time.
The respondent submits that an apology is not necessary because “the
complexities of the case and the issues surrounding the
attempt at integration
involved considerable stress and work on all sides. There was no endeavour to do
anything other than the right
thing by Daniel.”
I accept the submissions of the respondent with regard to the good intentions
of Departmental staff. It is also true that much work
was put into Daniel's
placement, and that the issues surrounding it were complex. Both Mr Bartley and
Mr Phillips have expressed
their regret at what they regard as the failure of
the placement. I am not persuaded that a public apology will, in reality, add
anything to these genuine expressions of concern and disappointment.
7.4 Damages
I turn now to the final possible remedy provided for in s 103(1)(b).
Daniel Hoggan was the only child excluded from SGHS in 1997. The exclusion,
as a result of Daniel's behaviour and “in his best
categorised him in a way that no other child in the school was characterised. I
accept the complainant’s submissions
that "if this is the sanction a
disabled child faces because of his disability, it is an extremely humiliating
and degrading position
to place him in."
Whilst Daniel was not the only student suspended from SGHS in 1997 I would
reiterate the comments above with respect to the treatment
of Daniel. To
continue to be removed from the school community in which inclusion was sought
must have had a major impact on his
level of comfort in that community, and on
his self-esteem.
On the subject of other detriments I firstly turn to SGHS's inflexibility
with regard to the amendment of Daniel's discipline and
welfare policy. I
indicated in section 6.6.4 of this decision that I would consider later the
question of whether this detriment
should be the subject of separate relief. I
am satisfied that it should be. Whilst the impact of this inflexibility led to
the suspensions
and the exclusion, it also had other results. The failure itself
has been described above, but it was cause for concern by Mr and
Mrs Purvis as
neither their input, nor the input of experts in special education in general,
and John Lord in particular, were able
to be made. It placed Daniel in a
generally more restrictive and negative regime made worse by the fact that it
did not change after
suspensions occurred.
With respect to the failure to provide teachers with training or awareness
programs considered in 6.6.6 above, again this impacted
on the treatment which
Daniel received at the School. The different approaches taken by various
teachers clearly reflect this. Whilst
this was not in the same category of
seriousness as exclusion or suspension, it must be taken into account that its
effect spanned
the whole of the time that Daniel was at SGHS. Its unavailability
also meant that negative views about teaching children with disabilities
some teachers were not challenged in a positive way which could have assisted
those teachers concerned to reassess such views.
The detriment discussed in 6.6.7 relates to the failure to consult with
experts in special education. My comments here are similar
to those in the above
paragraph. This failure impacted throughout Daniel's time at SGHS, and had some
bearing on the suspensions
and exclusion. However, its separate impact, in terms
of the benefits that could have been gained through more positive and informed
strategies, affected Daniel throughout his time at SGHS.
The detriment found in 6.6.10 relates to a failure to find Daniel an
alternative placement. However, as indicated, that is very bound
up with the
consequences of exclusion. Whilst it is, in fact, a separate detriment, for the
purposes of relief I have considered
damages as flowing on from the exclusion,
and dealt with this as a consequence.
There is a general principle clearly accepted in human rights law that
damages awards should not be so low as to diminish respect
for the public policy
implicit in remedial and human rights legislation. This is confirmed in cases
Horne and anor v Press Clough Joint Venture
(1994) EOC 92-591
Elliot v Nanda
(1999) EOC 92-988.
Loss of opportunity has also been long recognised in anti-discrimination law
as a head of damages:
Squires v Qantas Airways Ltd
(1985) EOC 92-135
Najdovska and ors v AIS
(1988) EOC 92-223.
Whilst there are no
cases directly relating to loss of opportunity in school education, it is
clearly a basis for such an award
to be made.
In a further analogous situation cases have also recognised loss of enjoyment
of working environment:
Nowland v TNT Skypak and anor
(1993) EOC 92-509
Bovill v RZ Mines (Newcastle) Pty Ltd
(1995) EOC 92-708.
Following this
theme, cases have also recognised loss of employment prospects and capacity
v Australian Red Cross
(1999) EOC 92-972.
Whilst, again these are not
directly on point, the analogies are valid ones.
Daniel’s suspensions and then exclusion meant that he lost
opportunities to attend school, both during the time he was at SGHS
the exclusion. For the reasons set out previously in this decision - and very
Dalla Costa
(supra) - I am not prepared to consider the offer
of a place at the Grafton High School Support Unit as a basis for minimising
damages. Daniel has been required, since the time of the exclusion, to do
DESU work at home, thus losing the enjoyment of the school
environment. The fact
that he has been out of that environment for such a long period of time has
caused me to form the view that
I should not make directions that he be returned
to it. Therefore, his prospects of continued education have also been affected.
I am satisfied that damages should be awarded under the following heads:
the suspensions
and exclusion fall under the head of the loss of the environment of attending
school with consequent benefits such
as access to library, classroom,
recreational and other school facilities; access to normal peer interaction
which is analogous
to loss of enjoyment of normal working environment;
loss of the
opportunity to complete secondary education at school and the affect of
exclusion on life chances including future employment
chances and earning
opportunities;
loss of the
expectation of receiving a secondary education in a regular and local school
environment; and-or
loss of the
right to obtain the benefit of such an education.
The Australian
Law Reform Commission report 84 “seen and not heard” in chapter 10
“Children In Education”
deals saliently with the effects of
exclusion from school. It states:
“10.61 Excluding children from school, on a short or long-term basis can
have a serious effect on their education and life
chances. A child disrupted
from school suffers a number of detriments including disruption to education and
a blow to that child's
self-esteem. Expulsion is also likely to be felt as
rejection. The language used by students – “kicked out of
or “thrown out” is an indication that exclusion is
seen and felt as a hostile and oppressive act, and many children give
education system after being excluded from school.
“10.62 There is strong anecdotal evidence to suggest that a substantial
proportion of youth offending starts with exclusion
from school. While no hard
statistical data is available regarding the long-term effects of alienation and
exclusion on the lives
of young people who leave school before the legal leaving
age, there is little doubt that there is a strong correlation between early
leaving and criminal activity, poverty, unemployment and
Such heads of damage would need
to be countered by the possibility that Daniel may not have continued at school
for some other reason.
However, given normal practices for children in NSW
Daniel would most likely have stayed at school until the legal leaving age, if
not to the completion of year 10. It is unlikely, given the strength of view and
purpose of Daniel's parents, that he would have
been withdrawn from school and
continued to study at home had not the decisions at the heart of this case been
made. I therefore
do not regard these as minimising a damages award to any great
I have also taken into account the fact that Daniel has continued to receive
education through the DESU. He has therefore not been
totally deprived of his
opportunities for education. However, he has been deprived of the opportunity to
enjoy that education in
his local school with his peers.
I have also considered the question of burden of proof in the awarding of
damages. Some commercial cases involving the assessment
of damages for lost
opportunity raise the interesting issue of whether the complainant must prove,
on the balance of probabilities,
that a benefit would have been derived from the
opportunity had it not been lost, and the extent of that benefit. Alternatively,
does the complainant simply have to show that there was a possibility that he
would take the opportunity had it not been lost. In
my view, bearing in mind the
remedial and beneficial nature of the relevant legislation, the latter test is
the appropriate one for
this matter and this jurisdiction.
The level of quantum in analogous employment cases for loss of opportunity
seems to range between $3500 and $10000. However, in my
view this analogy must
be taken as the lower end of the scale, because in such cases the recipients
have already commenced, and in
some cases been well into, their careers. In this
case the loss of opportunity relates to education, which is the foundation not
only for possible employment but for many other facets of life.
The only cases relating to the awarding of damages equal to or similar to
this situation are my decision on relief in
Finney v The Hills Grammar School
(unreported decision of HREOC, No. H98/60 dated 13 June 2000) and the
decision of Commissioner Carter in
Murphy and Grahl on behalf of themselves
and Sian Grahl v The State of New South Wales (Department of Education)
(unreported decision of HREOC No. H98/73 dated 27 March 2000). In
I declared that the school should pay the sum of $42628; $37628 of which was
for the difference between a primary private and public
school education, and
$5000 of which was for general damages. I based the first of these findings on
the private school fees for
the years in question, which is not directly
relevant, but which does give a general value to cases such as this in the
Murphy v Grahl
Commissioner Carter awarded $25,000 damages.
However, in this decision, Sian Grahl was able to continue her education at a
primary school.
I have made the following awards of damages for the various incidents of
discrimination based on my appreciation both of the facts
and of the appropriate
awards of damages in this area.
For the first
two suspensions, which were short suspensions, I have awarded $2000 each.
For the next
three suspensions, which were long suspensions, I have awarded $5000 each.
exclusion, and the consequential loss of opportunity and enjoyment of school
environment described above I have awarded $20000.
inflexibility regarding the amendment of Daniel's discipline and welfare policy
I award $2000.
diminished opportunity provided to Daniel by the respondent’s failure to
provide teachers with training or awareness
programs I award $4000.
diminished opportunity provided to Daniel by the respondent’s failure to
consult with experts in special education I
award $4000.
This is a total
damages award of $49000 to be paid within 28 days of the date of this
In the Finney decision (supra) I also said
"As indicated earlier although Mr and Mrs Finney lodged this complaint it is
Scarlet who was aggrieved. I can award damages for the
impact of the
discrimination on the aggrieved person, but I can only award the damages to the
complainants.
"However, I make the award to Mr and Mrs Finney as trustees for their daughter
Scarlet, as it was Scarlet who was aggrieved by the
discrimination of the
I am of the same view in this matter, and
my award of damages will be to Mr Purvis as trustee for his son Daniel.
8. CONCLUSION
This case has been another example of the long and arduous route which people
must travel to obtain redress for discrimination against
them. It reinforces the
need, particularly in the area of disability discrimination complaints, to find
broader solutions to policy
and systemic issues than the individual private
inquiry process.
The case is also unfortunate in that, whilst many people at SGHS and in the
Department (most notably Mr Bartley, the Principal of
the school) made genuine
and unstinting efforts to make Daniel’s placement at SGHS a success, it
was unsuccessful. In the main
this lack of success was due not to lack of
commitment, but to misguided decisions based on inflexibility and a lack of
information. Whatever the cause, the consequence for Daniel Hoggan
has been that he has not had the benefit of a secondary education
with his peers
and neighbours. In fact, as with many other people with disabilities before him,
he has been excluded from that opportunity.
This exclusion has been a great loss
to Daniel, and will affect him for the rest of his life.
The education system throughout Australia is currently attempting to come to
grips with this issue. Many more children with disabilities
are being included
in regular schools, and the sector is considering Education Standards under the
DDA which will address the issues
raised in Daniel’s case as well as many
others. Success in this venture will provide benefits not only for people with
disabilities
seeking to participate or already participating at all levels of
education. Finally it will be beneficial to teachers attempting
to provide the
best possible assistance to students. It will also provide benefits to all
Australians so participating, who will
gain from the enriched environment that
the participation of all Australians will provide. As this case has
demonstrated, such inclusion
will not always be easy. But the reward of
including everyone in our education system cannot be gained without hard work,
and flexible planning and implementation, and a continued positive
attitude to what can be achieved by people with disabilities.
I make the following declarations –
the respondent has discriminated against the complainant on the grounds of the
disability of the aggrieved person in breach
of s 5 and 22 (2) of the Act.
pursuant to s 103 (1) (b) (iv) of the Act the respondent pay to the complainant
the sum of $49000 as compensation.
Dated this day of November 2000
Graeme Innes AM
Inquiry Commissioner
RTF format (670 KB)
Signed PDF/A format