Review Applicant: Tracey Amro Visa Applicant: Yasser Amro IRT Reference: S98/00863 #number 13384 [1999] IRTA 13384 (29 January 1999)
IMMIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND
REASONS FOR DECISION
IRT Reference: S98/00863 13384.doc
REVIEW APPLICANT: Tracey AMRO
VISA APPLICANT: Yasser AMRO
TRIBUNAL: Michael RADIN
Senior Member
DATE: 29 January 1999
PLACE: Adelaide
DECISION: The Tribunal pursuant to Section 349(2) of the
Migration Act
remits this application for reconsideration with the direction that the visa
applicant has satisfied all the prescribed criteria
for the grant of a Subclass
309 (Spouse-Provisional) visa with the exception of the prescribed public
interest criteria and the provision
of an acceptable assurance of support.
REASONS FOR DECISION
On 7 May 1998, Ms Tracey Amro
('review applicant')
applied to this
Tribunal for a review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
('Minister')
at the Australian
Embassy in Beirut on 30 June 1997 to refuse her spouse Mr Yasser Amro
applicant')
a Subclass 309 (Spouse-Provisional) visa to enable him to
migrate to Australia. The decision was affirmed by the Migration Internal
Review Office
on 3 March 1998.
Mr Yasser Mohammed Amro, the visa applicant, was born in Lebanon on 2 March
1956 and he is a citizen of that country and ordinarily
resident there. He
currently resides in Lebanon with members of his family. His spouse and
nominator, the review applicant Tracey
Amro, is an Australian citizen who is
not gainfully employed at the present time.
On 14 February 1997, the visa applicant lodged a completed application (Form
47) seeking to migrate to Australia as the provisional
spouse of an Australian
citizen. The application was accompanied by the relevant sponsorship form
(Form 40) signed by the review
applicant. The visa applicant was subsequently
interviewed by an officer of the Department in Beirut, and a report of the
appears on the Departmental file.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
On 30 June 1997, a decision was made at the Australian Embassy in Beirut to
refuse the visa applicant's application for a Subclass
309 (Spouse-Provisional)
visa. A copy of the decision record was attached to the letter notifying the
visa applicant of the reasons
for refusal of the application.
Subsequently, the review applicant made application to the Migration Internal
Review Office
in Adelaide on 16 September 1997 seeking review
of the primary decision. However, the primary decision was affirmed by MIRO on
March 1998. The MIRO review officer in the reasons for decision stated in
'...The review applicant first met her husband at his brother's house on 20
November 1996...they claim the relationship became serious
after approximately
2 weeks...they subsequently married two months after meeting...on 21 January
1997...and resided together until
the applicant's departure...three weeks
...The onus of proof of claims submitted in relation to an application rests
with the applicant...in this case the evidence submitted
to support the above
claims was in the form of a few letters written by both parties to each
other...a photograph...some telephone
accounts...and supporting
statements...
...I have interviewed the review applicant and examined the additional
documentation provided...the review applicant has not provided
any evidence of
financial or other commitments shared by her and the visa applicant...
...the review applicant and the visa applicant have not provided any evidence
of having at any time shared a common household...no
evidence has been
forthcoming other than an electricity bill issued in both names, one month
after the visa applicant's departure
from Australia...
...the review applicant maintains that she and her husband are genuine...she
again reiterated the very serious attitude with which
the visa applicant treats
his religion...she also stated that his brothers were very strict in their
Muslim beliefs...she maintained
that her husband did not mention or push for a
traditional wedding...
...I find that the answers provided...are not consistent with the claims
...although professing to be in a genuine and continuing relationship...I find
that the chronology of events and the individual claims
presented...are
inconsistent with the facts of the case as they relate to the circumstances of
both parties...
...the visa applicant is therefore unable to satisfy one of the requirements
for grant of a Subclass 309...visa...'.
Subsequently, on 7 May 1998, the review applicant sought review of the previous
decisions by making application to the Immigration
Review Tribunal at its South
Australian registry.
RELEVANT LAW
The relevant prescribed criteria for a Subclass 309 (Spouse-Provisional) visa
were at the relevant time set out in Part 309 of Schedule
Regulations 1994
. So far as is relevant to the present application, those
criteria are set out as follows:-
SUBCLASS 309 - SPOUSE (PROVISIONAL)
309.1 INTERPRETATION
309.111 In this Part:
"intended spouse" means the person referred to in subparagraph 309.211 (3) (a)
(i), (ii), (iii) or (iv);
"woman-at-risk visa" means:
(a) a Subclass 204 (Woman at Risk) visa; or
(b) a Class 204 (woman at risk) visa within the meaning of the Migration (1993)
Regulations; or
(c) a woman at risk visa (code number 204) within the meaning of the Migration
(1989) Regulations; or
(d) a transitional (permanent) visa granted on the basis of an application for
a visa of a kind referred to in paragraph (b) or (c).
309.2 PRIMARY CRITERIA
309.21 Criteria to be satisfied at time of application
309.211 (1) The applicant meets the requirements of subclause (2) or (3).
(2) The applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if the applicant is
the spouse of:
(a) an Australian citizen; or
(b) an Australian permanent resident; or
(c) an eligible New Zealand citizen; or
(d) a person who, on entry to Australia, will be the holder of a special
category visa and intends to be usually resident in Australia.
309.212 (1) The spouse, or intended spouse, of the applicant is not prohibited
by subclause (2) from being a sponsor.
(2) The spouse, or intended spouse, is prohibited from being a sponsor if:
(a) the spouse, or intended spouse, is a woman who was granted a woman-at-risk
visa within the 5 years immediately preceding the
application; and
(b) on the date of grant of that visa:
(i) the applicant was a former spouse of that woman, having been divorced from
that woman; or
(ii) the applicant was the spouse of that woman and that relationship had not
been declared to Immigration; or
(iii) the applicant was permanently separated from that woman.
309.213 (1) If the applicant is an applicant referred to in subclause 309.211
(2), the applicant is sponsored:
(a) if the applicant's spouse has turned 18 - by that spouse; or
(b) if the applicant's spouse has not turned 18 - by a parent or guardian of
that spouse who:
(i) has turned 18; and
(ii) is an Australian citizen, an Australian permanent resident or an eligible
(2) If the applicant is an applicant referred to in subclause 309.211 (3), the
applicant is sponsored:
(a) if the applicant's intended spouse has turned 18 - by that intended spouse;
(b) if the applicant's intended spouse has not turned 18 - by that parent or
guardian of that intended spouse who:
(i) has turned 18; and
(ii) is an Australian citizen, an Australian permanent resident or an eligible
309.22 Criteria to be satisfied at time of decision
309.221 The applicant continues to satisfy the criterion in clause 309.211.
309.222 The sponsorship referred to in clause 309.213 has been approved by the
Minister and is still in force.
309.223 In the case of an applicant who meets the requirements of subclause
309.211 (2), the applicant continues to be the spouse
of the person referred to
in paragraph 309.211 (2) (a), (b), (c), or (d) who was the applicant's spouse
at the time of the application.
309.225 The applicant satisfies public interest criteria 4001, 4002, 4003,
4004, 4007 and 4009.
309.227 If so requested by the Minister, an assurance of support in relation to
the applicant has been given, and has been accepted
by the Minister.
309.228 (1) Each member of the family unit of the applicant who is an applicant
is a person who:
(a) satisfies public interest criteria 4001, 4002, 4003, 4004, 4007 and 4009;
(b) if he or she has previously been in Australia, satisfies special return
criteria 5001 and 5002.
(2) Each member of the family unit of the applicant who is not an applicant is
a person who:
(a) satisfies public interest criteria 4001, 4002, 4003 and 4004; and
(b) satisfies public interest criterion 4007, unless the Minister is satisfied
that it would be unreasonable to require the person
to undergo assessment in
relation to that criterion.
309.229 If either:
(a) the family unit of the applicant includes a dependent child who made a
combined application with the applicant; or
(b) a child who:
(i) is usually resident with the applicant; and
(ii) has not turned 18;
made a combined application with the applicant;
the Minister is satisfied that the grant of a Subclass 309 visa to the child as
a member of the family unit of the applicant would
not prejudice the rights and
interests of any other person who has custody or guardianship of, or access to,
The definition of
at the relevant time was contained in Part
1.15A as follows:-
Regulation 1.15A. Spouse
1.15A. (1) For the purposes of these Regulations, a person is the spouse of
another person if the 2 persons are:
(a) in a married relationship, as described in subregulation (1A); or
(b) in a de facto relationship, as described in subregulation (2).
(1A) Persons are in a married relationship if:
(a) they are married to each other under a marriage that is recognised as valid
for the purposes of the Act; and
(b) the Minister is satisfied that:
(i) they have a mutual commitment to a shared life as husband and wife to the
exclusion of all others; and
(ii) the relationship between them is genuine and continuing; and
(iii) they:
(A) live together; or
(B) do not live separately and apart on a permanent basis.
(2) Persons are in a de facto relationship if:
(i) are of opposite sexes; and
(ii) are not married to each other under a marriage that is recognised as
valid for the purposes of the Act; and
(iii) are not within a relationship that is a prohibited relationship for the
purposes of
subsection 23B
Marriage Act 1961
(b) they are full age, that is:
(i) if either of the persons is domiciled in Australia-both of them have turned
(ii) if neither of the persons is domiciled in Australia-both of them have
turned 16; and
(c) the Minister is satisfied that:
(i) they have a mutual commitment to a shared life as husband and wife to the
exclusion of all others; and
(ii) the relationship between them is genuine and continuing; and
(iii) they:
(A) live together; or
(B) do not live separately and apart on a permanent basis; and
(d) subject to subregulation (2A), where either of them is an applicant for a
permanent visa, an Extended Eligibility (Temporary)
(Class TK) visa or a Spouse
(Provisional) (Class UF) visa-the Minister is satisfied that, for the period of
12 months immediately
preceding the date of application of the party relying on
the existence of the relationship:
(i) they had a mutual commitment to a shared life as husband and wife to the
exclusion of all others; and
(ii) the relationship between them was genuine and continuing; and
(iii) they had:
(A) been living together; or
(B) not been living separately and apart on a permanent basis.
(2A) Paragraph 2 (d) does not apply if:
(a) the applicant is applying as:
(i) the spouse of a person who:
(A) is, or was, the holder of a permanent humanitarian visa; and
(B) before that permanent humanitarian visa was granted, was in a relationship
with the applicant that satisfies the requirements
of subparagraphs (2) (c)
(i), (ii) and (iii) and of which Immigration was informed before the visa was
granted; or
(ii) a member of the family unit of a person who is an applicant for a
permanent humanitarian visa; or
(b) the applicant can establish compelling and compassionate circumstances for
the grant of the visa.
(3) In forming an opinion whether 2 persons are in a married relationship, or a
de facto relationship, in relation to an application
(aa) an Extended Eligibility (Temporary) (Class TK) visa; or
(ab) a Family (Residence) (Class AO) visa; or
(ac) a General (Residence) (Class AS) visa; or
(ad) a Spouse (Migrant) (Class BC) visa; or
(ae) a Spouse (Provisional) (Class UF) visa;
the Minister must have regard to all of the circumstances of the relationship,
including, in particular:
(a) the financial aspects of the relationship, including:
(i) any joint ownership of real estate or other major assets; and
(ii) any joint liabilities; and
(iii) the extent of any pooling of financial resources, especially in relation
to major financial commitments; and
(iv) whether one party to the relationship owes any legal obligation in
respect of the other; and
(v) the basis of any sharing of day-to-day household expenses;
(b) the nature of the household, including:
(i) any joint responsibility for care and support of children, if any; and
(ii) the parties' living arrangements; and
(iii) any sharing of responsibility for housework;
(c) the social aspects of the relationship, including:
(i) whether the persons represent themselves to other people as being married
or in a de facto relationship with each other;
(ii) the opinion of the persons' friends and acquaintances about the nature of
the relationship; and
(iii) any basis on which the persons plan and undertake joint social
activities;
(d) the nature of the persons' commitment to each other, including:
(i) the duration of the relationship; and
(ii) the length of time during which the persons have lived together; and
(iii) the degree of companionship and emotional support that the persons draw
from each other; and
(iv) whether the persons see the relationship as a long-term one.
(4) In forming an opinion whether 2 persons are in a married relationship, or a
de facto relationship, in relation to an application
for a visa of a class
other than a class specified in paragraph (3) (aa), (ab), (ac), (ad) or (ae),
the Minister may have regard
to any of the factors set out in subregulation
(5) If 2 persons have been living together at the same address for 6 months or
longer, that fact is to be taken to be strong evidence
that the relationship is
genuine and continuing, but a relationship of shorter duration is not to be
taken not to be genuine and
continuing only for that reason.
The issue before the Tribunal in this instance is whether the marriage entered
into by the visa applicant and review applicant is
one which is recognised as
valid for the purposes of the Migration Act, and whether the marriage was
genuine and continuing as at
the date of application and beyond.
In assessing the question of what is a genuine and continuing spousal
relationship the Tribunal is guided by the Federal Court decision
Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs v Dhillon
(Full Court of the Federal Court,
(1990) 14 FCR 351)
, where the Full Court in
determining whether a marriage was genuine stated:
'...People enter marriages with a variety of purpose and motives, hopes and
anticipations so that it is not possible to classify
some purposes etc as
according to what may be described as community expectations. It is not
necessarily inconsistent with a genuine
marriage relationship that it was
entered into by one or both parties with a view to material benefit or
advancement, as for example
with a hope of becoming eligible to reside in a
particular country.
The true test, we would suggest the only test, is
whether at the time at which the matter has to be decided it can be said that
parties have a mutual commitment to a shared life together as husband and
wife to the exclusion of others'.
Furthermore, consideration needs to be given to the cultural context and
background in which the marriage takes place. For example,
in the Tribunal
decision of
(IRT Decision No 51, delivered 10 January 1991), it
was stated that '
the Tribunal in assessing what constitutes a genuine and
continuing relationship cannot ignore multicultural variations in marriages
providing that such marriages comply with the
Marriage Act
Lynham v the Director-General of Social Security
(1983) 52 ALR 128
131 per Fitzgerald J, it was stated that in the task of determining whether a
marriage is genuine:
'...It is, in my view, important that the departmental officers or Tribunal
charged with the task at least take into account what
is the norm for the peer
group of the applicant. Only in this way can the legislation be fairly and
justly accommodated to a multi-racial
and otherwise diverse society'.
EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS
The Tribunal gave consideration to relevant documentation submitted as a part
of the application in this matter, including a written
submission from the
review applicant. Other miscellaneous documentation related to contact between
the parties, some photographic
evidence, and evidence of transactions.
Further, the Tribunal had available to it the Departmental file which was
forwarded in accordance
with Section 352 of the Act. A preliminary meeting was
convened with the review applicant on 8 July 1998, and subsequently, at the
review applicant's request, a hearing was convened in the Tribunal's Adelaide
registry on 11 August 1998. The review applicant Tracey
Amro attended and gave
sworn evidence.
Tracey Amro was born on 24 October 1972 at Woodville, South Australia. She is
presently aged 25 years. Her natural parents have
separated and remarried.
She has one sibling and a step-sibling.
She has a child from a previous relationship who is now aged some 9 years and
attends school. Ms Amro is not employed, but receives
a supporting parent's
benefit which is her only form of income. She at present resides with her
mother and step-father in premises
at Taperoo, and has been living there since
December 1997.
She told the Tribunal that she has never previously married nor has she had any
longstanding relationships. Previously, she was
involved with the father of
her child for a period of some six months.
She explained to the Tribunal that she has some knowledge of French, which she
learnt briefly at school. Since meeting her spouse
and his family, she has
learnt to communicate in very basic form in Arabic.
She told the Tribunal that she knew her spouse's sister-in-law, and therefore
attended at her place on 20 November 1996 where she
met her spouse. He was
then visiting Australia.
'...I was introduced to Yasser at that time, but he didn't know any English.
So we didn't really communicate. However we saw each
other a few days later,
and I had been impressed by what I saw of his personality. We had a
conversation at that time while we had
a meal with other members of the family.
We did our best to talk, and we sometimes had another person available to
She told the Tribunal they engaged in very general conversation, and he told
her about his family in Lebanon, and that he was one
of ten children. He had
never previously married. He told her that he worked in the fashion industry.
'...After this, we spoke to each other in basic form on the telephone, and
then I saw him again at his brother's place. I found him
very physically
attractive, and I expressed my feelings to his sister-in-law. I kept seeing
him at their place, and I then gathered
the courage to invite him to my parents
place at Taperoo on Christmas day. I then took him to my father's place at
Wingfield for
dinner. My family responded well to him, and the day was very
Prior to this time however, in around mid December, he had proposed marriage to
the review applicant. She told the Tribunal that
'...all this was usually
done in the presence of his family. We were rarely alone. But we picked out
21 January 1997 for our marriage.
Between the proposal, and the marriage
itself we saw each other on a daily basis, but we were most often "chaperoned"
of his family. After we decided to marry, we picked out a flat at
Payneham, and I moved in there before Christmas. I had been staying
at Plympton until then. We started seeing each other at the flat, and this was
the only time that we had any privacy.
He spent a lot of time with me at the
flat, but took his meals with his family'
Ms Amro told the Tribunal that they developed a sexual relationship before
Christmas 1996. Approximately one week prior to their
wedding in the middle of
January 1997, he moved in with her, and they shared a bedroom.
got on really well with my child, and used to take her to school'
Members of both families attended the marriage ceremony which took place in the
Adelaide Registry office. For her part, her mother
and step-father, father,
siblings, and a friend were there, while Mr Amro's brother attended.
really couldn't afford a lavish wedding, so we just had a quiet celebration and
went for a long drive I think. We have some
pictures of the marriage, and
other family occasions'
. These were produced to the Tribunal.
She told the Tribunal that her husband left for Lebanon on 9 February 1997,
'...as his visa was about to expire. He was only allowed to stay here for
three months, and this was his first visit here'
While staying together briefly at the flat,
'...he took my kid to school,
and we shared all the household responsibilities. He actually paid the bond
and first month's rent
for the flat, and bought some items of furniture. He
had some money with him, and in fact most of the bills were paid by him.
we both put in for the shopping. After he left I stayed at that flat
for most of the year, then I moved into my parent's place at
Taperoo around
Christmas time in 1997. I had become ill, and so had my daughter, so we needed
the extra care. I am still staying
with Mum at present'
She explained that she and her husband continue to exchange letters and
'...his cousins over there who speak English help him with the letters. We
also speak to each other weekly by telephone. Our communication
The review applicant produced copies of such correspondence to the Tribunal.
She concluded her evidence by saying
'...Yasser works as a tailor in
Lebanon. He would like to get similar work here when he comes. We desperately
want to be together.
After staying at my parents for a while, we will
eventually move to our own place. If he is not approved, I will go to Lebanon.
I love him, and we want to be together'
She discussed with the Tribunal gifts that the visa applicant has sent to her,
together with
'...a sum of money, about $490 I think'
She indicated that they intend to have children, and this has been discussed,
despite her ill health. She occasionally has contact
with his family here.
She told the Tribunal that
'...about the religious ceremony, I asked my
Minister to sanction our marriage, but he refused, because Yasser is a Muslim.
decided not to complicate things and have a religious ceremony. Although
the family does follow Islamic religion, Yasser is a bit
more comfortable than
other members of his family. By this I mean in relation to living together,
and having sexual relations before
marriage and so on. This has not been a
major problem for him'
The Tribunal took sworn evidence from Elaine Margaret Bass, who is the review
applicant's mother. She was born in Adelaide on 10
September 1949. She was
married previously, and divorced in 1984. She has since remarried, and lives
with her partner at Taperoo.
She told the Tribunal that presently
daughter Tracey and my granddaughter are living with us'
. She explained to
the Tribunal that she met Yasser Amro
'...at our Christmas lunch in 1996.
Tracey told me about the relationship with him beforehand, and I must admit
that I was initially
sceptical, with him being a visitor and all. Plus there
are some differences. But when I saw them together, I was very accepting,
because they seemed very affectionate and genuine with each other. We had a
lovely day on Christmas day. I am very supportive of
the marriage, and I know
that Tracey has always preferred older men. The father of her child is much
older than she'
She told the Tribunal that
'...The cultural and religious aspects do not
worry me, or other members of our family. We are very comfortable with
She confirmed that only a small group were present at the marriage, and that
there was no major celebration
'...because of Ramadan, the month of fasting
for Muslims'
She concluded her evidence to the Tribunal by stating that
'...Tracey is
very fond of him, and she wants to be with him in the future. Having met him a
few times now, and especially given
my early doubts, I am now equally convinced
of his good intentions. For anyone that has any doubts, you only need to see
them together
to know otherwise'
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
The principal issue for the Tribunal to determine in the present case is
whether the marriage entered into by Tracey Amro and her
spouse in Adelaide on
21 January 1997 is a
'genuine and continuing'
The issue of determining genuineness is a question of fact to be resolved from
the evidence before the decision-maker, see
Re Canangga
(IRT Decision
34, 5 December 1990). In this respect, it is well established law that an
administrative tribunal must base its decision
on evidence which tends
logically to show the existence or non-existence of facts relevant to the issue
to be determined. Implicit
in this principal, as Deane J. in the
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Pochi
[1980] FCA 85
'...are both the requirement that the finds of the material fact of a statutory
tribunal must ordinarily be based on logically probative
material and the
requirement that the actual decision of such a tribunal must, when relevant
questions of fact are at issue, ordinarily
be based on such findings of
material fact and not on mere suspicion or speculation.'
In the matter of
Broussard v Minister for Immigration, Local Government and
Ethnic Affairs
(1989) 19 ALD 477
, it was held that where the only evidence
before the Tribunal was the claims of the applicant, and there is nothing to
those claims, the Tribunal may properly treat those claims as having
probative value. However, where there is conflicting evidence,
the Tribunal
may not simply discount the claims of the applicant. Rather, it must reach
firm conclusions about those facts relevant
to its decision. The latter point
was made in the
Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic
Affairs v Dhillon
(see above) at pages 9 and 10.
The issue of genuineness in respect of a marital relationship has been
discussed at length by the Tribunal in numerous matters, including
(IRT Decision 238, 29 July 1991), and on appeal,
Bretag v Immigration
Review Tribunal and Another
, Federal Court, 29 November 1992, and
(IRT Decision 2630, 23 September 1993). In these matters, the
Tribunal relied on the evidence provided by the parties themselves
attempting to determine whether
mutual commitment to a shared life as
husband and wife to the exclusion of others'
existed at the relevant
The Tribunal has given careful consideration to the evidence in this matter.
It has found Tracey Amro to be a reliable witness.
She was forthright in her
testimony, and was able to openly engage the Tribunal about why the
relationship, in its constituent elements,
may be regarded somewhat sceptically
by persons.
However, she recounted in consistent fashion the circumstances leading to the
formation of her relationship with Yasser Amro, who
was in Adelaide at that
time for a 3 month stay visiting members of his family. She was immediately
attracted to him, both physically,
and in terms of his personality.
Communication was seemingly difficult, particularly during the first few
meetings, but she told
the Tribunal that with her knowledge of a little French
and Arabic, they were able to develop a suitable method of exchanging their
views and aspirations. With the blessing of the families concerned, the couple
agreed to marry, and moved into a joint residence
in Payneham for a brief time
prior to that marriage. Sexual relations commenced, and an element of sharing.
By and large, Mr Amro
was introduced to the review applicant's family at
Christmas time in 1996. Since the visa applicant's departure to Lebanon in
1997, they have maintained regular contact, by telephone, and the
occasional exchange of letters and cards. Such evidence has been
provided to
the Tribunal, in addition to some photographs, evidence of a final transaction,
and other miscellaneous documentation.
Ms Amro also adequately explained to the Tribunal the circumstances surrounding
the lack of a formal religious ceremony. She had
approached her Minister for
religion, who was unable to sanction the marriage given the religious
differences. In any event, she
gave clear evidence about her husband's
attitude towards his religion, which was perhaps different from the
understanding gleaned
by the previous decision-makers. She described his
relative comfort, as distinct from certain members of his family, with
such as sexual relations and cohabitation prior to marriage.
The Tribunal was also impressed by the evidence given by the review applicant's
mother, Ms Elaine Bass. She shared with the Tribunal
her initial scepticism of
the relationship, believing that the same was unlikely to work given some of
the acute differences present
in the age, social, cultural and religious
spheres. However, upon being introduced to the visa applicant at a family
function, her
scepticism diminished when, in her own words
'...I saw how
affectionate they were together'
It is apparent that there is no sound nor legitimate basis upon which the
Tribunal can dispute the claims made by the parties in
this instance. Further,
there is little reason to accord significant weight to some of the minor
discrepancies pointed out by the
previous decision-makers. The basis of the
negation of the parties claims in this instance appears to be the 'unlikely'
the relationship, and the circumstances surrounding its formation.
As such, based on the aforementioned Federal Court and Tribunal authorities,
this Tribunal is not in the business of speculative
assessments about the
matrimonial behaviour of the parties in this case, or in any other case for
that matter. There is no solid
or reliable evidence upon which the Tribunal
can refute the claims made in the present instance. In the Broussard authority
above), the Federal Court made it clear that unless there is evidence
which can be accorded significant weight and relied upon to
information provided by an applicant, then a decision-maker is required to
accept the claims made by that person. It
is clearly insufficient to simply
hold that an applicant has failed to discharge an evidential onus in relation
to such claims.
In summary therefore, there is sufficient evidence before the Tribunal upon
which the Tribunal can rely attesting to the establishment
and course of
development of the relationship, and particularly given the cultural context.
The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that
the marriage entered into by the
parties on 21 January 1997 in Adelaide is a genuine and continuing one, in the
manner envisaged
by the Dhillon authority (see above). The Tribunal is
satisfied that the parties have the necessary mutual commitment, and intend
live together on such basis in Australia.
In relation to the balance of the relevant legislative criteria, it is a
requirement that at the time of application, the visa applicant
is sponsored by
her spouse, and that sponsorship is approved by the Minister. The Tribunal
finds that these criteria are satisfied.
All that remains therefore is for the
Department to continue processing the matter with respect to public interest
issues, and the
provision of an acceptable assurance of support. For these
purposes the file shall now be returned to the Department.
The Tribunal pursuant to Section 349(2) of the
Migration Act
this application for reconsideration with the direction that the visa applicant
has satisfied all the prescribed criteria
for the grant of a Subclass 309
(Spouse-Provisional) visa with the exception of the prescribed public interest
criteria and the provision
of an acceptable assurance of support.
I certify this and the preceding 18 pages are a true copy of the Decision and
Reasons for Decision of Michael Radin, Presiding Member
of the Tribunal.
Assistant Registrar
RTF format (78 KB)
Signed PDF/A format