Private R Army v Chief of Army [2022] ADFDAT 1 (1 April 2022)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Private R Army v Chief of Army
File number:
DFDAT 2 of 2021
Judgment of:
LOGAN J (president), PERRY j (member) AND BARR
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
DEFENCE AND WAR
– appeal against
conviction by Defence Force Magistrate – whether verdict was unreasonable
or could not be supported,
having regard to the evidence – whether in all
the circumstances of the case the verdict was unsafe or unsatisfactory –
where appellant alleges various inconsistencies and implausibilities in the
evidence before the Defence Force Magistrate –
where role of the Tribunal
in exercising appellate criminal jurisdiction is to assess record to determine
if the Defence Force Magistrate,
acting rationally, ought to have entertained a
reasonable doubt as to the proof of guilt – where Defence Force Magistrate
the complainant to be a credible, honest and reliable witness –
where examination of evidence demonstrated that the case was
not one in which
the Defence Force Magistrate rationally must have entertained a reasonable doubt
as to the commission of the offense
– appeal dismissed
– appeal against conviction by Defence Force Magistrate
– whether there as a material irregularity in the course of the
– whether a miscarriage of justice occurred – where appellant
alleges failings in the conduct of the trial
by the assigned legal officers
– where appellant represented by two assigned legal officers – where
one of the assigned
legal officers continued to act for the appellant in the
Tribunal – where the appellant seeks to raise new arguments on appeal
– where there is a societal interest in the finality of litigation
concerning service offences – where appellant ought
to be held to forensic
decisions made by his assigned legal officers at trial – where prosecutor
engaged in cross-examination
which implied that the appellant was obliged to
explain why certain matters were not put to the complainant – where
party made mention of impugned cross-examination in closing submissions
– where the Defence Force Magistrate did not refer
to impugned
cross-examination in reasons – where viewing trial objectively and as a
whole discloses no substantial miscarriage
of justice – appeal dismissed
DEFENCE AND WAR
– appeal against conviction by Defence
Force Magistrate – whether the Defence Force Magistrate made a wrong
decision on
a question of law – whether conviction was wrong in law
– whether a substantial miscarriage of justice occurred –
the Defence Force Magistrate erred in exercising discretion to not allow an
adjournment of the proceedings – where
appellant must establish error of
principle of the kind described in
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
– where Defence Force Magistrate made discretionary judgment reasonably
open upon application of relevant principles –
no error of principle
established – appeal dismissed
DEFENCE AND WAR
appeal against conviction of Defence Force Magistrate – whether there as a
material irregularity in the course of the
proceeding before the Defence Force
Magistrate – whether miscarriage of justice occurred – whether
absence of “new”
evidence led to a miscarriage of justice –
where “new” evidence goes only to issue of credit – where
to lead evidence did not result in a substantial miscarriage of justice
– appeal dismissed
DEFENCE AND WAR
– practice &
procedure – extension of time to lodge appeal against conviction by
Defence Force Magistrate –
where appeal lodged outside time stipulated in
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
where delay in instituting appeal attributable to prospective appellant awaiting
outcome of the automatic review conducted
pursuant to
Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) – where application not opposed by the
Chief of Army – extension granted
DEFENCE AND WAR
practice & procedure – suppression orders – application by
Commonwealth for pseudonym be assigned to appellant
– appropriate
evidentiary basis for order pursuant to
Defence Force
Discipline Appeals Act 1955
(Cth) – where appellant serving member of
a Special Forces unit – where evidence in support of application initially
given by Brigadier and then Major General – importance of open justice in
appeals and related need for suppression applications
to be supported by
Ministerial or other high level policymaker evidence – where evidence in
support subsequently given by the
Chief of the Defence Force – where
evidence of the Chief of the Defence Force discloses risk to appellant of
becoming target
to of State and non-State actors – application
DEFENCE AND WAR
– practice & procedure –
suppression orders – suppression of complainant’s identity –
where complaint
made in relation to sexual offenses – where permitting the
identification of complainant can be antithetical to the willingness
complainant to make a complaint to authorities or give evidence concerning the
commission of a sexual offence – where
no competing public interest in
naming the complainant – complainant’s name
– principles applicable to award of costs
pursuant to
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
– application for costs by successful Chief of Army – where Chief of
Army contends costs should follow the event
– where purpose of Tribunal is
to assist in the securing and maintaining service discipline – where
securing and maintaining
service discipline would be undermined in circumstances
where a defence member with an arguable case faced the risk of adverse costs
order – where appellant Private granted legal aid for the purposes of
prosecuting appeal – where grounds of appeal were
at least arguable
– where appeal could not be described as frivolous or vexatious –
where circumstances of case not fit
to make cost order in favour of successful
party – no order as to costs made
Legislation:
Constitution
Defence Act 1903
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Jervis Bay Territory Acceptance Act 1915
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code
(Qld) s 668E
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Regulation 2016
(Cth) reg 9
Courts Martial Appeal Regulations
Army Act 1881
Rules of Procedure 1907
(UK) r 87, r 88
Cases cited:
AJP v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 224
Barry v Chief of Naval Staff
[1994] ADFDAT 3
Boyson v Chief of Army
[2019] ADFDAT 2
Chief of Navy v Angre
[2016] FCAFC 171
(2016) 244 FCR 457
Crampton v The Queen
(2000) 206 CLR 161
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
Fulton v Chief of Army
[2005] ADFDAT 1
Hamilton (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2021] HCA 33
(2021) 95 ALJR 894
Hofer v The Queen
[2021] HCA 36
(2021) 95 ALJR 937
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
Mahmood v Western Australia
[2008] HCA 1
(2008) 232 CLR 397
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR
Nudd v The Queen
[2006] HCA 9
(2006) 80 ALJR 614
Orreal v The Queen
[2021] HCA 44
(2021) 96 ALJR 78
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
Pell v The Queen
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 268 CLR 123
Private R v Cowen
[2020] HCA 31
(2020) 94 ALJR 849
R v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
Randall v Chief of Army
[2018] ADFDAT 3
Re Colonel Aird; Ex parte Alpert
(2004) 220 CLR 308
Sankey v Whitlam
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
Sekyere-Boakye v Whitney
[2013] WASC 147
Stuart v Chief of the General Staff
[1994] ADFAT 2
Tomlinson v R
[2022] NSWCCA 16
Yewsang v Chief of Army
[2013] ADFDAT 1
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission filed by the Respondent:
Date of last submission filed by the Appellant:
Date of hearing:
2 – 3 December 2021
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr W Terracini SC with Ms T O’Rourke
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Benjamin & Leonardo Criminal Defence Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr C Gunson SC with Ms J Sawyer
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Office of the Director of Military Prosecutions
Solicitor for the Intervener, Commonwealth of Australia:
Australian Government Solicitor
Table of Corrections
In paragraph 95, “at one stage” has been inserted before
“acting as solicitor”.
DFDAT 2 of 2021
PRIVATE R ARMY
CHIEF OF ARMY
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRLIA
LOGAN J (PRESIDENT), PERRY J (MEMBER) AND BARR J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
1. Insofar as the same may be necessary, the appellant be granted the
requisite extension of time within which to appeal and leave
to amend his notice
of appeal in terms of the amended notice of appeal filed in the Tribunal.
2. The appeal be dismissed.
3. The respondent’s application for costs be refused.
4. There be no order as to costs.
REASONS FOR DECISION
THE TRIBUNAL:
Introduction
1 The present appeal is a sequel to constitutional
writ proceedings in the High Court of Australia in which the appellant, Private
R, sought, unsuccessfully as it transpired, to prohibit a Defence Force
Magistrate (DFM) from dealing with a charge alleging his
commission of a service
offence of an assault occasioning actual bodily harm on a member of the
permanent air force, brought pursuant
Defence Force
Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) (DFDA):
Private R v Cowen
[2020] HCA 31
(2020) 94 ALJR
2 The offence concerned was alleged to have occurred on 30 August 2015, in a
hotel room in Fortitude Valley, Brisbane. The bodily
harm particularised in the
charge was bruising to the female complainant’s throat.
3 At the time, Private R and the complainant were each members of the
Australian Defence Force (ADF), although neither was then on
duty or in uniform.
Then as now, Private R was a member of the Regular Army. The complainant was a
member of the component of the
Royal Australian Air Force known as the Permanent
Air Force. She and Private R had, in the past, been in an “exclusive
relationship”.
Thereafter, they had, on occasion, casually engaged in
sexual relations.
4 The effect of
of the DFDA is to incorporate by reference and make a
service offence conduct which takes place outside the Jervis Bay Territory
which, had it occurred in that territory, would be an offence in that territory.
Assault occasioning bodily harm is criminalised
in the Jervis Bay Territory by
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT), which applies in that
territory by virtue of the
Jervis Bay Territory Acceptance Act 1915
5 The High Court’s judgment settles in favour of the respondent Chief
of Army the earlier question as to whether s 61(3) of
the DFDA had lawful
application to the conduct which was the subject of the charge laid by the
Director of Military Prosecutions
against Private R. It is unnecessary further
to consider that question.
6 The High Court’s judgment was delivered on 9 September 2020. A trial
in respect of the alleged offence was then consequentially
conducted before a
DFM in December 2020 over 5 days (from 1 December 2020 to 7 December 2020). On 8
December 2020, for reasons delivered
, the DFM convicted
Private R. On 23 February 2021, the DFM sentenced Private R to 120 days of
detention, with a suspension of 90
days of that term and made a strong
recommendation that he remain in the Army.
Extension of Time
Defence Force Discipline Appeals
(Cth) (Appeals Act), provision is made for an appeal to the
Tribunal against such a conviction. There is no right of appeal against
consequential sentence. By s 21(2) of the Appeals Act, it is provided that the
“appropriate period” for the lodgement
of an appeal in relation to
proceedings before a service tribunal that have resulted in a conviction (or a
prescribed acquittal)
is the period of 30 days commencing immediately after:
(a) the day on which the results of a review under s 152 of the DFDA of the
proceedings are notified to the convicted person (or
the prescribed acquitted
person); or
(b) the last day of the period of 30 days after the conviction (or prescribed
acquittal);
whichever is earlier.
8 Private R did not lodge an appeal within the earlier of these periods. He
did not lodge an appeal in the Tribunal until 18 June
2021. There were good
reasons for this, explained by affidavit, relating to awaiting the result of the
review mandated by the DFDA.
9 Other asserted reasons for the delay relating to the earlier proceedings in
the High Court were also mentioned in the supporting
affidavit material.
However, the charge under the DFDA only proceeded to hearing and, in the result,
conviction, after the final
determination of the proceedings in the High Court.
The question resolved by the High Court was, undoubtedly, of pervasive
to the service discipline system for which the DFDA provides.
However, that earlier phase is not explanatory of subsequent delay
institution of an appeal.
10 The review of a conviction for which s 152 provides, informed as it is by
a report prepared pursuant to s 154 of the DFDA by a
legal officer appointed by
the Chief of the Defence Force or a service chief on the recommendation of the
Judge Advocate General,
is no mere formality. Rather, it is an important
internal assessment of the legality of a conviction by a service tribunal by a
qualified legal practitioner, who is expected to furnish an independent
opinion for the benefit of the reviewing authority. The Tribunal
has in the past
recognised that it is appropriate for a prospective appellant to await the
outcome of a review before instituting
proceedings in the Tribunal:
Chief of Army
[2019] ADFDAT 2
), at [11] and [44].
11 It appears that Parliament envisaged that such reviews ought usually to be
completed well within the 30 day period mentioned in
s 152 of the DFDA, thus
allowing any appeal to the Tribunal to be filed within that period. Our
collective experience is that, while
the conduct of such reviews is approached
with the expedition that, for good reason, ought to attend the disposal of
service discipline
cases, it is by no means uncommon for a s 152 review not to
be completed within the 30 day period. Given the expectation of independence
that attends the preparation of a s 154 report, which is a condition precedent
to a review under s 152 of the DFDA, it would often
be wasteful of public
resources devoted to the administration of the Tribunal, including the
consideration of any legal aid application,
for an appeal to be filed prior to
the outcome of the s 152 review becoming known to the convicted defence member
and his or her
legal representatives. So it may very well be that this case
highlights a law reform issue in relation to the period for which s
21(2) of the
Appeals Act presently provides which might commend itself to the Attorney
General, as the Minister administering the
Appeals Act. A more suitable
“appropriate period” might be achieved by omitting “whichever
is the earlier”
from s 21(2) of the Appeals Act and replacing it with
“whichever is the later”.
12 As it is, in the present case and taking into account the explanation
given by and on behalf of Private R and also the absence
of active opposition by
the Chief of Army, we were disposed at the hearing to grant Private R the
requisite extension of time.
Use of a pseudonym for the appellant and suppression of the
complainant’s name
13 In the ordinary course of events, the substantive
hearing of an appeal (or related extension of time application) is required to
be held in public: s 18(1) of the Appeals Act. However, s 18(2) of the Appeals
Act provides that the member presiding at the sitting,
or, if the Tribunal is
constituted by a single member exercising the powers of the Tribunal, that
member, may, if he or she considers
it necessary in the interests of the defence
of Australia, the proper administration of justice or public morals:
(a) order that some or all of the members of the public shall be excluded during
the whole or a part of the sitting; or
(b) order that no report of or relating to the whole or a specified part of the
proceedings of the Tribunal at the sitting shall
be published.
14 The Commonwealth of Australia, via the Australian Government Solicitor,
sought and was granted leave to intervene in the proceeding
so as to make
application for a pseudonym to be assigned to the applicant and later appellant
and for related restrictions in relation
to reporting.
15 Private R is a member of a Special Forces unit. Initially, the reasons for
this application were explained in an affidavit by a
Brigadier and later by that
of a Major General, each of whom held an appointment within the ADF’s
Special Operations Command.
The application was supported by Private R and,
unsurprisingly, the Chief of Army.
16 Section 18 of the Appeals Act falls for application according to its terms
in circumstances as wide and variable as those giving
rise to cases falling
within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and thus with respect to conduct
amenable to the operation of the DFDA.
17 An important feature of the subject matter, scope and purpose of the
Appeals Act is that the establishment of the Tribunal was
Australia’s
response to a general recognition throughout the Commonwealth of Nations in the
1950s, informed by the experience
of the millions of non-career members of the
several armed forces of the United Kingdom, Australia and other members of the
British Commonwealth and Empire during the Second World War, that greater
independence and transparency was both desirable and necessary
in respect of
challenges to convictions for service offences. Review within the chain of
command with the theoretical and limited
recourse to the courts on
exercised in practice
and more limited in scope than an appeal to a court of
criminal appeal in respect of a civilian criminal offence, was no longer
to be sufficient.
18 In the United Kingdom, for example, the resultant parliamentary response
saw the establishment of the Court Martial Appeals Court
with an appellate
criminal appeal. In Australia, it seems
that then prevailing views about the
judicial power of the Commonwealth and also the apprehended greatly variable
nature of the volume
of appellate business with which the Tribunal was expected
to deal, saw Parliament opt for a tribunal comprised of term appointees
within the Executive Branch, rather than a court established under Ch III of the
Constitution
but nonetheless with an appellate jurisdiction analogous to
a civilian court of criminal appeal. Self-evidently, the high public
objective of these widespread reforms was that recourse to a body outside the
service chain of command was considered conducive
to greater confidence in a
service discipline system and thus to service morale and operational efficiency
as buttressed by that
system. The confidence concerned is not confined to
defence members themselves but extends to their families and the community
19 Although the tribunal so established exercises executive, not judicial,
power in respect of appeals against convictions for service
offences (and
prescribed acquittals) and, within the Executive Branch, sits at the apex of
Australia’s service discipline system,
it is a civilian tribunal, entirely
outside the chain of command of the ADF. In modern times, membership of the
Tribunal has been
confined to superior court judges who, with the permission of
their Head of Jurisdiction, volunteer to serve, without any additional
remuneration, as members upon the recommendation of the Attorney-General to the
Governor-General in Council. That the Appeals Act
has always been consigned by
the Governor-General in the prevailing Administrative Arrangements to the
administration of the Attorney-General,
rather than to the Minister for Defence,
is another indication of the institutional independence expected of the
20 Given the high public policy purpose mentioned, the general prescription
in s 18(1) of the Appeals Act for the Tribunal to exercise
its jurisdiction in
public is unremarkable. A civilian court of criminal appeal also usually sits in
public in the exercise of judicial
power. As with a civilian court of criminal
appeal, it is no small thing to depart from that position.
21 In the sense that every case coming before the Tribunal concerns a
conviction (or prescribed acquittal) in respect of a service
offence, and thus
the conduct of a member of the ADF (or other person to whom the DFDA may apply),
every such case touches upon the
defence of Australia. Formally, the defence of
Australia is the responsibility of the Governor General, as the Queen’s
representative
and commander in chief: s 61 and
Constitution
(and note also the duty imposed on the Commonwealth by
Constitution
to protect the several States from invasion). By convention,
that role is undertaken on the advice of the Federal Executive Council
Constitution
). More particularly and in terms of statutory provision,
Defence Act 1903
(Cth) (Defence Act), by s 8, vests the general
control and administration of the ADF in the Minister (the Minister for Defence
the prevailing Administrative Arrangements). That section also
subordinates the Secretary and the Chief of the Defence Force to the
of the Minister. Subject to this,
Defence Act
vests the command of
the ADF in the Chief of the Defence Force (CDF) and tasks the CDF with advising
the Minister in relation to
the command of the ADF. Also subject to this,
Defence Act
vests the general administration of the ADF in the Secretary
to the Department of Defence and the CDF jointly.
22 As can be seen, in none of this does either any Brigadier or any Major
General, including the authors of the affidavits concerned,
have any public
policy or determinative responsibility for the defence of Australia and what is
in the interests of the defence of
Australia. In this sense, each of the
deponents mentioned is a relatively junior officer. As was apparent from their
respective affidavits,
each has a subordinate, operational responsibility within
the ADF chain of command. Their views and experience might well inform
determination of policy in relation to what is in the interests of the defence
of Australia but neither officer determines such
23 There are analogies to be drawn between the usual practice in relation to
claims for public interest immunity by the Executive
in the courts and a claim
that the Tribunal should exercise its power under s 18(2) of the Appeals Act. In
the courts, the usual
practice is that such a claim is supported by an affidavit
made by the responsible Minister or other high official (or both): see
[1978] HCA 43
(1978) 142 CLR 1
, at 44 per Gibbs ACJ. Even then, the views
expressed by such high public officials, while relevant and to be respected, are
not determinative.
It is for the court concerned to determine the merits of such
a claim, balancing it against other public interest considerations,
principally
open justice.
24 Similarly so it is in relation to any claim for restriction in reliance on
s 18(2) of the Appeals Act where the ground of the interests
of the defence of
Australia is relied upon. Sometimes, and again by analogy with public interest
immunity, the very subject matter
of a claim relating to the defence of
Australia and a consequential need for some form of restriction of publication
or privacy of
hearing may be sufficiently apparent and persuasive just by the
very subject of the claim. There can be no hard and fast rule of
practice and
procedure as to what is a sufficient evidentiary foundation.
25 All of the matters just referred to informed the Tribunal’s
intimation to the solicitor for the Commonwealth at the commencement
hearing that he may wish to consider the evidentiary foundation for the
application under s 18(2) of the Appeals Act and the
weight as to maters of
policy which might be afforded to evidence from officers who had no policy
determinative responsibility. The
Commonwealth took up this intimation and came
to file and rely upon an affidavit made by the CDF. The CDF is, for reasons
above, an officer who has either direct responsibility for policy in
the command of the ADF or for advising the Minister in relation
matters of policy. It is quite apparent from the CDF’s affidavit that an
unfortunate feature of the times in which
we live and thus of some of the
operations on which those members of the ADF assigned to Special Forces come or
may come to serve
is that, even after return to Australia, such members may come
to be targeted by State or non-State actors in ways and at times that
unpredictable. Private R has undertaken such service and continues to be a
member of a Special Forces unit. Having regard to
the affidavit of the CDF,
which takes up and endorses at a relevant policy level, views expressed by the
Brigadier and Major General
as subordinate, operational officers, we considered
it appropriate to afford Private R a pseudonym.
26 Although, in the final result, whether to make a restriction was not
controversial, occasion to consider matters of practice and
procedure in
relation to s 18 of the Appeals Act does not often presently arise, especially
with respect to a ground based on the
interests of the defence of Australia. We
therefore considered it opportune to make the foregoing observations. Another
factor which
informed our making them was an apprehension that there may,
initially, have been a degree of reluctance on the part of those advising
Commonwealth, or perhaps just a lack of understanding as to the need, to
approach those with personal policy responsibility,
i.e. the Minister or the
CDF, with a view to their manifesting such responsibility by the making of an
27 Ultimately, each case must be decided on the evidence to hand but where
the restrictive ground concerned is the interests of the
defence of Australia,
the weight one gives that evidence is necessarily influenced by the policy
responsibility, if any, of a given
deponent. Sometimes, of course, especially at
an interlocutory stage but in any event in circumstances of some urgency, it may
necessary to act on other than evidence from a Minister or other senior
official with policy responsibility.
28 There was a quite separate occasion for making other restrictions under s
18(2) of the Appeals Act in this case. That occasion
is to be found by analogy
in the contemporary practice of the civilian criminal courts in relation to
suppression of the identity
of a complainant in a case where the charge
concerned has sexual aspects. Permitting the identification of a complainant by
in a report of a case or disclosing that name in reasons for decision can
be antithetical to the willingness of a complainant to
make any complaint at all
to authorities in respect of the alleged commission of such an offence or to
give evidence concerning such
an offence. We did not consider that there was any
competing public interest served by naming the complainant in the
reasons. Neither party to the appeal submitted otherwise.
Accordingly, the complainant’s name has also been supressed.
29 We should also record that, although the Appeals Act consigns the power to
make a restrictive order under s 18(2) to the presiding
member, the foregoing
represents our collective view, not just that of the President as the presiding
member. It may be that the
text of s 18 and its allocation of power to the
presiding member reflects an earlier era in the history of the Tribunal when not
all of its members were superior court judges.
Grounds of Appeal
30 The grounds of appeal underwent quite some
revision after the initial filing of a notice of appeal.
31 As amended, the grounds sought to be raised by Private R were as
1. The DFM's verdict was unreasonable or could not have been supported having
regard to the evidence, pursuant to s 23(l)(a), and
further, or alternatively,
that in all the circumstances of the case, the conviction of the applicant was
unsafe and unsatisfactory,
pursuant to s 23(1)(d);
2. That incompetence of Counsel occasioned a miscarriage of justice, pursuant to
s 23(l)(c);
3. The DFM erred at law in denying the applicant procedural fairness by refusing
the application for an adjournment of the hearing,
made on 5 November 2020,
pursuant to s 23(1)(b);
4. The absence of “new” evidence led to a miscarriage of justice,
pursuant to s 23(l)(c) of the Appeals Act.
32 As so expressed, these grounds were wanting in particularity. However,
particulars were furnished and each of these grounds was,
to say the least,
fully argued. As particularised and as counsel for Private R correctly conceded,
the grounds were not confined
to a question of law but entailed questions of
fact and thus, as s 20(1) of the Appeals Act requires, a grant of leave.
ground 4 was added after the initial amendments to the notice of appeal
and also required a grant of leave to amend.
33 It is in the interests of justice that all such leave as is required be
34 Although this ground alleges two bases separately
specified in s 23 of the Appeals Act upon which an appeal might be allowed, each
party was agreed that, at least in the circumstances of any application in the
present case, no relevant distinction was to be drawn
between the grounds
specified in s 23(1)(a) and s 23(1)(d) of the Appeals Act. The Tribunal has in
the past and by reference to authority
in the High Court concerning analogous
provisions in the civilian criminal justice system, remarked on the overlap
between these
paragraphs of s 23(1):
Fulton v Chief of Army
[2005] ADFDAT
), at [55], and
Randall v Chief of Army
[2018] ADFDAT 3
), at [26]. A comprehensive collation and discussion of
authorities pertinent to an unreasonable verdict ground was recently offered
Brereton JA (N Adams J and Cavanagh J agreeing) in
Tomlinson v R
, at [72] et seq. It is not necessary to repeat what is there stated.
The pertinent principles, as derived by the Tribunal in
Yewsang v Chief of
[2013] ADFDAT 1
), at [56] – [59], from such
analogous authority are:
(a) The Tribunal must address the question whether, upon the whole of the
evidence, it was open to the DFM to be satisfied beyond
a reasonable doubt that
the applicant was guilty?
(b) To address that question, the Tribunal must make an independent assessment
of the sufficiency and quality of the evidence.
(c) The conviction must be set aside if the Tribunal decides that the DFM
, not might, have had a reasonable doubt about the appellant's guilt,
even if there is sufficient evidence in law to support it.
(d) A doubt experienced by the Tribunal will be a doubt which a DFM ought also
to have experienced, except where the DFM’s
advantage of seeing and
hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by the
were decided, the
High Court has emphasised, by the following explanation in
[2020] HCA 12
(2020) 268 CLR 123
), at 144 – 145, [37] –
[38], that a court exercising appellate criminal jurisdiction undertakes a
different function
from the primary tribunal of fact (a jury in that case) in an
assessment of the evidence and must not usurp the function of that
tribunal of
[T]he assessment of the credibility of a witness by the jury on the basis of
what it has seen and heard of a witness in the context
of the trial is within
the province of the jury as representative of the community. Just as the
performance by a court of criminal
appeal of its functions does not involve the
substitution of trial by an appeal court for trial by a jury, so, generally
the appeal court should not seek to duplicate the function of the jury
in its assessment of the credibility of the witnesses where
that assessment is
dependent upon the evaluation of the witnesses in the witness-box. The jury
performs its function on the basis
that its decisions are made unanimously, and
after the benefit of sharing the jurors' subjective assessments of the
witnesses. Judges
of courts of criminal appeal do not perform the same function
in the same way as the jury, or with the same advantages that the jury
the discharge of its function.
... The assessment of the weight to be accorded to a witness' evidence by
reference to the manner in which it was given by the witness
has always been,
and remains, the province of the jury.
[Footnote references omitted]
36 A like position prevails in relation to the respective functions of this
Tribunal and the tribunal of fact functions of a service
tribunal exercising
case, a DFM. Further and as
with a civilian judge or magistrate trying a case
alone and unlike a civilian jury or a court martial panel, a DFM is obliged to
expose his or her reasons for convicting the person charged.
37 Another passage from the joint judgment in
, at 145, [39], is
also in our view applicable,
mutatis mutandis
, to the function of the
Tribunal on an appeal where, as here, reliance is placed on 23(1)(a) of the
Appeals Act to challenge a conviction
by a service tribunal:
The function of the court of criminal appeal in determining a ground that
contends that the verdict of the jury is unreasonable or
cannot be supported
having regard to the evidence, in a case such as the present,
proceeds upon
the assumption that the evidence of the complainant was assessed by the jury to
be credible and reliable
. The court examines the record to see whether,
notwithstanding that assessment – either by reason of inconsistencies,
discrepancies,
or other inadequacy; or in light of other evidence – the
court is satisfied that the jury, acting rationally, ought nonetheless
entertained a reasonable doubt as to proof of guilt.
[Footnote reference omitted – emphasis added]
38 As with a judge or magistrate trying alone a charge in the civilian
criminal justice system, the acceptance by a DFM of the credibility
reliability of a complainant is not just a matter of assumption but must be, and
was in this case, exposed in the reasons given
by that DFM. At times, some of
the submissions made on behalf of Private R in relation to Ground 1 seemed to us
to solicit, contrary
to the emphasised observation by the High Court in
, our making our own assessment of whether the evidence of the
complainant was credible and reliable.
39 Counsel for Private R put forward the following in support of Ground
(a) The complainant’s evidence was said to be irreconcilable with the
independent evidence of Mr Burke, the Security Guard
at the Limes Hotel.
(b) Related to (i), the timeframe of the intervention of the Security Guards was
said to be irreconcilable with the complainant’s
evidence. (This was said
also to be relevant also to Ground 4).
(c) An alleged absence of corroborating medical evidence as to the
complainant’s account of the alleged offence (Also said
to be relevant to
(d) An alleged lack of support for the complainant’s evidence as to the
bruising to her throat in the evidence of the prosecution
witnesses Mr Boland
and Sergeant (SGT) Steege.
(e) Delays and inconsistencies in the evidence as to the complainant’s
complaints.
(f) Alleged irreconcilable inconsistencies within the complainant’s
(g) An alleged inclusion by the complainant of misleading evidence in her
statements to Australian Defence Force Investigation Service
(h) An alleged non-responsiveness and evasiveness by the complainant in cross-
examination.
(i) Alleged inconsistencies between the independent and prosecution witnesses'
evidence that of the complainant.
(j) That the evidence of the complainant was undermined by the evidence as to
her intoxication.
(k) Alleged support in the independent and prosecution witnesses’ evidence
for that of Private R.
(l) A contention that Private R was unshaken in his evidence.
40 In addition, Private R came to allege, under the guise of Ground 1, that
an impermissible, uncorrected violation of criminal procedure
and practice had
occurred when Private R was cross-examined by the prosecuting officer as to why
particular parts of his evidence
had not been put to the complainant. In this
regard, reliance was placed for Private R upon the High Court’s recent
Hofer v The Queen
[2021] HCA 36
(2021) 95 ALJR 937
this, there is much force in the submission made for the Chief of Army that it
requires a very liberal reading indeed of
Ground 1 to regard it as embracing
this additional point. The point sought to be raised would more readily
constitute the particularity
of a ground based on s 23(1)(c) of the Appeals Act
(material irregularity and resultant substantial miscarriage of justice). Ground
4 raises an issue under s 23(1)(c) but is not particularised by reference to
this additional point.
41 Our examination of the record of proceedings before the DFM confirms that
there is a foundation for the point, which is to say
nothing in itself as to
whether it has any merit. We are satisfied that the Chief of Army was given
sufficient notice of the point
such that, in conjunction with the afforded
opportunity to file written submissions supplementing oral submissions, no
unfairness has been visited upon him. We therefore consider it to be
in the interests of justice to address this additional “Hofer”
on its merits and do so below.
42 Turning to the particularised foundation for Ground 1, it was never
controversial that, on the evening of 30 August 2015, Private
complainant had been together for a time in a room in Limes Hotel, Fortitude
Valley, following socialising with others
earlier that evening to mark the
complainant’s birthday.
43 It was in issue whether Private R had engaged in the conduct with which he
was charged whilst in the hotel room with the complainant.
It is axiomatic that
it was always for the prosecution to prove the offence charged beyond reasonable
doubt. No onus of proof fell
on Private R.
44 The DFM gave comprehensive,
reasons for convicting
Private R. In so doing, he explicitly found the complainant to be an honest,
credible witness (Transcript
(T), p 467):
To my mind she was a credible, honest, reliable witness doing her best to recall
events and there is significant evidence to support
her account.
45 The “Mr Burke” referred to in Private R’s
particularisation of Ground 1, is a defence witness, Mr Derrek Burke.
evening of 30 August 2015, Mr Burke was employed as a security staff supervisor
by Best Security, the security contractor
for both the Limes Hotel and a
nightclub and restaurant, the Alfred & Constance, situated some 50 metres
away from the hotel,
separated by another building. In that capacity, Mr Burke
supervised subordinate security staff providing security at both the Limes
and the Alfred & Constance.
46 Mr Burke outlined, by reference to a company supervisor’s weekly
incident report prepared by him and tendered in evidence
(Exhibit 13), a
practice whereby incidents involving physical contacts by or with security staff
employed by Best Security were required
to be entered in that report. The report
in evidence included coverage of the evening 29/30 August 2015. Mr Burke
particularly recalled
an incident that evening in which a subordinate security
officer who was a personal friend had had his nose broken in the course
incident at the Limes Hotel. However, he had no recollection of being called to
any other incidents at the hotel that evening
(T 325). The effect of his
evidence was that, as supervisor, he had a roving brief for a shift, not fixed
to any one of the two venues.
He also stated in his evidence in chief that, an
incident would not be entered in the weekly incident, “if it didn't
the specific items removed physically or injured, destroyed criminal act
and general disturbance, if it didn't have those then I
wouldn't have reported
it” (T 326).
47 In relation to access to any particular room at the Limes Hotel, Mr Burke
stated that security staff did not themselves have a
master key but rather
obtained an access key as and if required from the hotel’s on-duty
receptionist.
48 In her evidence in chief, the complainant related a heated incident
between her and Private R in a room at the Limes Hotel in the
early hours of 30
August 2015 in which she had stated to him she was going home, sought to
telephone a lift for that purpose using
her mobile phone and had that phone
forcibly removed from her by Private R who told her she was not going home. She
described a two-staged
assault in which, initially, she had been pinned against
a wall by him with his hands around her throat and then, after she had broken
... [My] head was in between the door where the door is and the wall and he was
on top of me with his full weight and had his hands
around my throat. I remember
thinking that I couldn't - I didn't want to bring attention to it because I
didn't want anything to
come - I didn't want him to lose his job, and then I
realised I couldn't breathe and I couldn't scream so the only thing I could
was just knock the door and knock the wall with my hands and I'm not sure how
long that went on but at some point two security
guards came barged through the
door and I just crawled around the door and crawled in across the way to a
different - some two girls
had their door open who I assume reported or called
for the security guards because they heard it, and I ran into their room and
that was the last time I ever seen him.
49 In his evidence, Private R did not dispute that two security guards had
attended at the room but stated he had let them in on request.
50 The point made for Private R both at trial and pressed on appeal which was
said, necessarily, to occasion a reasonable doubt was
that an incident as
described by the complainant would necessarily have been entered in the weekly
51 Having found the complainant to be an honest, credible witness and made
reference, as we later shall, to the contents of text messages
later sent by
Private R to the complainant which the DFM found to be corroborative of her
evidence, the DFM addressed squarely the
subject of Mr Burke’s evidence
and, related to that, the absence of an incident entry in the weekly report. The
DFM stated:
Does the evidence about the security guards cause me to have any doubt about the
prosecution case? I found the evidence of the security
guard, Mr Burke, whilst
on the face of it he was an honest witness doing his best to recollect events,
he was after all referring
It is not clear in my mind that it was not possible for other security guards to
have been there, or they had been there, or the
complainant may have been
mistaken as to who got up and how they got in the door. Her evidence was clear
in the cross-examination
that she could not see what was happening on the other
side of the security guards. While she conceded in a statement she had used
word tackled she did go on to say that she could not say what they were doing
and that they entered the room and the defendant
was on the other side of
So there is no direct evidence that they laid hands on the defendant at all and
the real question is then how did they get into the
room? To my mind, whilst the
complainant was adamant that they let themselves in it may well be, to my mind,
she is mistaken about
that, that the defendant did open the door. As I find the
facts to be she had been throttled by that stage, up against the wall,
highly traumatic experience.
It was submitted by the learned defence counsel that she somehow managed to
recall lots of details during that part but the expression
your life passing
between your eyes is not unknown to the human condition. And I did not find
anything untoward in her evidence about
saying she was able to recall specific
events in her life or concerns at that moment. But the medical evidence may be
relevant at
that stage is that if she could not scream, as she said, because she
was being throttled then that is indicative of the amount of
force had been
applied to her.
It was clearly a very fluid event and the issue is not determinate, to my mind,
of who it was who let the security staff into the
room, it is she clearly got
out of that room, it is not determinate of any issue as to how she got out of
the room either whether
she crawled or ran.
52 By reference to the whole of the evidence, and that is the required
approach in relation to this type of appellate jurisdiction,
the case was not
one in which the DFM, rationally, must have entertained a reasonable doubt as to
the commission of the offence charged
by Private R. For the purposes of this
ground of appeal, the whole of the evidence is the whole of the evidence led at
before the DFM.
53 The DFM found the complainant to be credible in her account as to:
(a) Private R’s angry, drunken behaviour at a venue elsewhere in Fortitude
Valley where the complainant’s birthday celebration
took place. There he
made a particularly spiteful and vitriolic outburst against the complainant at
the time when, intoxicated, he
was being evicted from that venue.
(b) The complainant’s statement that Private R’s behaviour was
provoked by her rejection of his amorous advances and
her indication to him that
there would be no sexual intercourse between the two that evening. (Private
R’s account was that
he was motivated not by sexual rejection, but by the
complainant’s lack of emotional support and empathy.)
(c) Private R’s ongoing, angry state of mind, in respect of which his
earlier angry drunken conduct at the venue provides “transactional
evidence” as to his ongoing state of mind. (Private R stated that he had
cooled down between being evicted from the venue and
his return to the hotel
room where the alleged assault took place.)
(d) The two stage assault, initially held up against a wall with Private
R’s hands around her throat and, after she broke free,
his then being on
top of her with his hands around her throat, her banging walls and doors, his
screaming “What have you done?
What have you done?”
(e) An arrival of two security guards (in itself, an uncontested fact).
(f) Her sustaining bruising to the neck, on either side of her throat in the
area of her Adam’s apple.
(g) Her attendance on Dr Shane Smith, a medical officer at RAAF Base Amberley on
the following Tuesday, that is two days after the
alleged offence on the early
morning of 30 August. Dr Smith noted bruising to the neck.
(h) Her strong response in a message to Private R via Facebook Messenger on 8
September 2015 (part of the bundle comprising Exhibit
1), calling out Private R
for falsity in a counter-narrative he put forward, shortly after the incident in
the hotel room, on Facebook
Messenger in which he stated that she was on drugs
at the time and had charged at him in the hotel room.
54 The DFM analysed in detail, as we have as part of our review of the whole
of the evidence, the Facebook Messages from Private R
which, on 8 September
2015, preceded and immediately followed this response from the complainant to
him. It is desirable to set out
from the reasons of the DFM the collation he
offered of excerpts from the replies sent by Private R to the complainant after
message. This is not just because we find the collation to be accurate and
fair but also because the excerpt exposes the use made
of this evidence by the
DFM. We have added an annotation to the transcript of this part of the
DFM’s reasons so as to differentiate
evidentiary excerpts from the
DFM’s related, reasoned commentary and findings:
There is a reply from the defendant at 1602 on 8 September:
[Familiar name for the complainant], I cannot take anything back now, the sick,
soul crushing feeling I've had 27/7 will never leave
me. Either fact it came to
a head. It will haunt me forever as I'm sure it will to you as well.
[DFM] Just pause there to note the defendant is talking about something that is
going to haunt him forever and an acceptance that
something happened that is
going to haunt her forever. And I reject the defendant's evidence or submissions
by his counsel that this
was referable to an event in the nightclub which
concerned only verbal abuse. That verbal abuse of course was bad by itself but
abuse would not cause something to haunt somebody.
He said, “I’m so much more remorseful for what I did to you”.
He then went on to say, “I don’t want,
deserve, or expect sympathy,
this evil person turns out is woven into my fabric and I'm truly horrified that
after all the time of
not knowing and leading a good life that this is who I am.
I hate myself. I hate that this is a part of me. I hate that after everything
I’m the type of person I despise. I have barely eaten, can’t stop
shaking, can't sleep, feel sick, can’t concentrate
on anything other than
what I have become. I’m embarrassed and ashamed
I have now dropped the
hammer on my toe
and it’s come to light the depths of my evil. I don't
know how to live with myself”.
Then further on, “I thank you for not throwing me to the wolves”.
I consider quite comfortably all of those are references to an event far more
serious than that which the defendant would have me
believe. And the reference,
as I have already said, all of that reference about hating himself, depths of
his evil, is a reference
to something that is very serious that has happened.
And not throwing to the wolves is a reference to not reporting to authorities.
And on his version, all he did was swear at her in a nightclub. And that would
not require, or he would not expect being reported
to the authorities for
calling his ex-partner names in a nightclub.
[Emphasis added]
55 To give context to the reference by Private R to, “I’m
embarrassed and ashamed I have now dropped the hammer on my
toe”, it is
necessary to quote this extract from the complainant’s message to him
earlier on 8 September 2015, to which
Private R is replying:
My doctor explained your behaviour to me - having seen it hundreds of times
before. He said it’s not that people change. That
trait was always there,
it’s just taken a serious of events to erode your inhibitions. He said if
you know someone who never
and then one day they drop a hammer on
and say fuck. It wasn’t that they never thought it or that
it wasn't in their character – because it was, they just never
it. It took the hammer to expose what had probably crossed their mind multiple
times. Maybe everything that has happened
in your life thus far is the hammer
and Saturday night was the moment it dropped on your toe.
[Emphasis added]
56 The DFM continued, with reference to this “dropping a hammer on the
toe” subject:
And then despite the defendant’s evidence in the witness box that he did
not want anything further to do with her he follows
it up saying he is now
slipping into his own personal hell, “
I refuse to be typecast by your
. I’ve hurt you in the worst way I possibly could. I'm begging
you with tears running down my face to forgive me and not let
this define me.
I’ll never be able to apologise enough and nothing I’ve said here is
to justify nor excuse what happened”.
All of those to my mind are indicative of accepting that something far more
significant has happened and it has happened at the hands
of the defendant.
[Emphasis added]
57 The medical officer, Dr Smith, gave evidence. Also in evidence (Exhibit 6)
was the clinical note he made on 1 September 2015 when
the complainant attended
- Ex-partner allegedly assaulted member on Saturday night
- Grabbed her around the neck
- She was very fearful, couldn’t yell due to strangulation so hard to bang
- Was rescued by some people in the hallway
Presents today very distressed
- Long discussion with patient
- No other injuries or sexual assault
- Very upset
- No thoughts of self harm
- Feels safe as person responsible has returned to Townsville
- Has no desire to report this assault at this stage
Examination
- Brusing [sic] around neck consistent with hands and fingers
- No other bruising
58 Before the DFM, Private R, by his defending officers (Flight Lieutenant
(FLT LT) Dewar, in particular), made an express concession
(T156) that there was
no issue as to Dr Smith’s ability to give expert evidence. By the time of
trial, Dr Smith had been in
active general medical practice for some 19
59 Dr Smith related in his evidence that, although he had examined the
complainant on 1 September 2015:
The examination I conducted was somewhat limited. It was more of a medical
examination rather than a forensic one, and the reason
for that was at the time
she told me she didn't really want to take this further legally and usually when
patients tell us that we
then just focus on the clinical exam rather than try to
be more thorough forensically.
In that examination, he noted that:
... she was speaking normally which tells me that there was no acute trauma to
her larynx or her throat, there was no oedema or anything
like that, there was
no change in her voice from what I normally have seen her in previous times
from. So there was that information;
she was not breathing in a distressed way,
again tells us that there's no acute injury there that’s of any life
threatening
or acute nature.
Dr Smith related that he:
... then examined her neck and there was bruising around her neck and there was
no petechial haemorrhages that I saw, although I
wasn't looking at her eyes and
other places that we'd normally find that. There was some tenderness in her
neck, but other than that,
there was nothing much to find.”
60 As to the bruising he observed, Dr Smith related that it:
... had a particular pattern to it. It appeared in stripe-like formation.
It’s a bruising that we tend to see when people have been grabbed
around the neck
. People say it’s finger-like bruising. Other things
I’m sure could cause it but it was consistent with the story she
telling me that she’d been grabbed around the neck.
[Emphasis added]
61 When asked about the consistency between the history of the incident as
related to him by the complainant and the bruising he observed,
There was some interesting parts to her story. The first part she mentioned,
that she was unable to scream, she was unable to vocalise,
that indicates that
we’ve got airway constriction. That is a fairly significant amount of
force that needs to happen for that
to occur, and then of course the bruising.
Now, bruising is an inconsistent finding. Some people bruise a whole lot easier
than others
but it was there nonetheless, but more my concern was the fact that
she said she was unable to vocalise. That tells me there’s
significant force applied.
Was the bruising generally consistent with what she was telling you or was it
inconsistent with that?---It would have been consistent.
[Emphasis added]
62 In cross-examination, Dr Smith agreed that it was unusual in his practice
for him to be consulted by someone who complained of
strangulation and that the
complaint made by the complainant was, to his recollection, the only one that
year. He related that, over
his years in practice, he had encountered 20-30
cases entailing a complaint of domestic violence. He stated that, in his
experience,
it was not unusual for a patient in such a case not to wish to
pursue it with authorities.
63 In cross-examination, Dr Smith stated that, over the course of his career,
he had only encountered about a dozen domestic violence,
neck injuries. He
accepted that petechial haemorrhaging could be a sequel to strangulation and
stated that he had not seen evidence
of this on the complainant. He also related
that this sign was more common in ligature rather than manual strangulation. He
“The science behind bruising, as far as trying to elicit force and
to elicit timeframes and that sort of thing, is reasonably
poor.” Dr Smith
qualified the opinions he expressed by stating that he was not a forensic
pathologist and was relating his
understanding.
64 When asked why he had not reported this case to the complainant’s
chain of command, Dr Smith stated that, although he had
served as a
military medical officer from 2004 to 2008 so as to fulfil a return of service
obligation after completing his medical
studies, in 2015 he was conducting his
practice at the Amberley Medical Centre as a civilian. Given that he did not
understand the
complainant to be at imminent risk of harm, his obligation of
patient confidentiality and her then expressed desire not to pursue
a complaint
to authorities, Dr Smith stated that he considered he was not required himself
to report the complaint to her chain of
65 SGT Brooke Amy Steege, referred to in Ground 1 of the notice of appeal,
was a witness called by the prosecution. SGT Steege related
that, as at August
2015, she was a Corporal, posted, like the complainant, to RAAF Base Amberley.
She and the complainant were friends.
SGT Steege was an attendee at the
complainant’s birthday celebration in Fortitude Valley on the evening
29/30 August 2015.
This was the first occasion on which she had met Private R.
Although she observed at one stage Private R yelling at the complainant,
was in a loud nightclub. She and some others went off onto the dance floor. She
did not observe the incident which saw him ejected.
However, when she came back
to the complainant at the nightclub, she noticed that she was crying and the
complainant related to her
the incident which saw Private R ejected.
66 When the birthday celebration concluded in the early hours of the morning,
SGT Steege was part of a group, including the complainant,
which left the last
venue visited but she and the complainant went their separate ways, SGT Steege
directly home with the complainant
being walked back by another friend (not
Private R) to Limes Hotel. She understood that the complainant was going to the
collect her belongings and then go home. When she last saw the
complainant that evening, SGT Steege observed her to be, “tipsy,
having – enjoying a good night, enjoying her birthday. She could very much
still have a conversation.”
67 SGT Steege stated in cross-examination that she had brought a birthday
cake to the complainant’s house on 31 August 2015,
which was the
complainant’s actual birthday. There she saw the complainant playing with
her young daughter and, “She
was being a mum.” At that time, the
complainant “seemed pretty normal” to SGT Steege. The complainant
did not discuss
events at the Lime Hotel after they had parted in the early
hours of 30 August with her on 31 August 2015. This, SGT Steege related,
complainant had not done until approximately a week, perhaps a few weeks
afterwards.
68 Another attendee at the complainant’s birthday celebration on the
evening 29/30 August 2015 who gave evidence was Mr Timothy
Boland. Mr Boland is
also mentioned in Ground 1.
69 Mr Boland had served in the Army from 1999 until his discharge on medical
grounds in 2008. Towards the end of his time in the Army,
Mr Boland had served
in the same infantry unit as Private R. Although that meant that he knew of
Private R, Mr Boland stated that
the two of them had not actually been
introduced until 2009, after he had left the Army. They were each members of a
particular group
of soldiers or veterans who socialised together.
70 Mr Boland and the complainant had been partners from 2009 until 2011. This
was after Private R and the complainant had ceased their
relationship. Mr
Boland is the father of the complainant’s daughter. He stated that he saw
the complainant daily in a shared
parenting role and was on good terms with her.
Mr Boland also stated that, by the evening of 29/30 August 2015, he was aware
the complainant had resumed seeing Private R again.
71 Mr Boland related having heard Private R refer to the complainant more
than once at the nightclub as “that fuck head”
and to having
remonstrated with him about that. He did not witness the event which saw Private
R ejected from the nightclub, this
being later related to him at that venue by
the complainant, who was “visibly upset”. This was the last time
that evening
he particularly recalled seeing the complainant. At that time, he
observed her to be drunk “but it’s not like she was
control of her actions”. Mr Boland parted from the group and went to stay
at the home of one of the complainant’s
friends (because it was closer to
the inner city).
72 When he woke later on the morning of 30 August 2015, Mr Boland stated
that, having recharged his phone, he noted missed calls and
messages from the
complainant. Mr Boland stated that he telephoned the complainant straight away
and that she stated that Private
R had attacked her but did not give details.
She informed him that, because she had not been able to contact him, she had
the home of another of her friends. Mr Boland then went there to pick
her up. He noticed that she was “shaken, visibly upset”.
stated that he took her home. He then arranged with Private R to pick up from
him gear which the complainant had left at
Limes Hotel. This was undertaken by
Mr Boland texting Private R once he was outside Private R’s house. There,
Private R brought
the complainant’s gear out to Mr Boland’s car.
Neither of them went into any detail about events earlier that morning
Hotel, although Mr Boland noticed that Private R was “visibly
shaken”. All that Private R said, so Mr Boland
stated in evidence was
that, “It’s not him. He don’t know why it happened and –
you know – and I spoke
to him and said that maybe it would be a good idea
with everything that had happened previously to him, military service and
overseas” that he see the veterans’ counselling service.
73 In cross-examination, a version of events at Limes Hotel that Private R
came to relate in evidence was put to Mr Boland in this
“[The complainant] went wild in the room and she struck me in the
face”, and charged at him. Do you remember him saying
that?---No, I do not
Is it possible that he has said that?---It is possible
When asked in re-examination about whether he had any recollection at all of
Private R saying what had been put to him in cross-examination,
replied, “No”.
74 The DFM was not obliged to, and as is apparent from his reasons did not,
accept all of the complainant’s evidence.
75 As accepted by the DFM, it did not necessarily follow from the
complainant’s evidence, considered in the context of the whole
evidence, that he must have had a doubt as to the commission of the alleged
offence, having regard to the absence of any incident
report in the security
company supervisor’s weekly report. The weekly report was that of a
supervisor and the evidence of the
supervisor on the night, Mr Burke, did not
even necessarily place him at that time at the Limes Hotel. As he confirmed
under cross-examination,
he just had no recollection of an incident in a hotel
room in the early hours of the morning of 30 August 2015. It was perfectly
conformity with the evidence which Mr Burke gave that, if two subordinate guards
had attended and, to their mind satisfactorily
resolved an incident in a hotel
room there without any particular physical contact, or at least contact that
they thought unnecessary
to report to him, that Mr Burke would not have made any
consequential report.
76 Looking at the whole of the evidence in the present case, it is, for
example, very different from the circumstances in
. In that case,
the unchallenged evidence of the movements of Cardinal Pell and others following
the conclusion of Sunday solemn
Mass was inconsistent with acceptance of the
complainant witnesses’ account, notwithstanding that the jury found that
complainant
witness to be a credible and reliable witness, such that the
evidence as a whole was not capable of excluding a reasonable doubt
Cardinal Pell’s guilt. The evidence in this case is also very different
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
M v The Queen
the uncorroborated evidence of the complainant daughter of the
appellant was inconsistent with the evidence of one of the prosecution’s
medial witnesses as to the alleged occurrence of sexual intercourse, to say
nothing of, most importantly, “the improbability
of the appellant acting
as he was alleged to have done in the circumstances prevailing on that night,
namely, on a squeaky bed in
an unlocked bedroom which was only a short distance
from, and within hearing distance of, another bedroom occupied by the
appellant’s
wife, in a fully occupied, small house” (at 500).
77 Sometimes, of course, there can be a sharp difference of views in an
appellate court or tribunal as to whether, on the whole of
the evidence, a
reasonable doubt must have been entertained.
M v The Queen
example of such a case. In this Tribunal,
offers another. But the
was also informed by what appeared to have been a
confession by the appellant to a third party, notwithstanding an interrogative
note sounded as to the physical possibility of the charged conduct and the ready
access by anyone at any stage to the location where
the alleged conduct had
occurred (the male ablution area of an officers’ mess).
78 Unlike the position with a jury or court martial panel, the DFM’s
reasons reveal exactly what part of the complainant’s
reasons he accepted
as reliable and credible. The DFM’s reasons for discounting her account as
to how the security guards entered
the room are revealed and, with respect,
rational. Taken in conjunction with what the DFM was entitled to regard, as we
do, Private
R’s Facebook Messenger reply on 8 September 2015 as relating
to the occurrence on the evening of 29/30 August 2015 of something
serious than verbal abuse by him of the complainant and Dr Smith’s noting
of bruising to the complainant’s neck,
there is nothing otherwise in the
evidence which must have occasioned a reasonable doubt as to whether the
prosecution had proved
the offence charged. For reasons we have mentioned,
absence of an entry in the relevant weekly security report is neutral.
79 The complainant made a fresh complaint of an “attack” by
Private R to Mr Boland, albeit without descending into detail.
Mr Boland noted
both the complainant and Private R to be “visibly shaken”. That
observation and the statements made to
Mr Boland by Private R later on the
morning of the alleged assault are consistent with the content of Private
R’s message to
the complainant on 8 September 2015, quoted by the DFM.
80 SGT Steege’s evidence as to her observation of the complainant when
she delivered the birthday cake to her on 31 August 2015
is not an observation
with the same immediacy, relative to the alleged offence, as that of Mr Boland.
Further, she was not asked
either in chief or in cross-examination whether she
had observed any bruising to the complainant’s neck. Yet further, her
is that the complainant did come to give her an account in 2015 of
Private R’s conduct consistent with the offence charged.
81 The complainant’s complaint to Dr Smith was also fresh. Dr Smith
allowed in cross-examination for the possibility that the
bruising he noted was
self-inflicted but that she had done this was never put to the complainant.
Further, read as a whole, Dr Smith’s
evidence allowing of such a
possibility is sceptical of its actuality.
82 The complainant’s then decision not to report the incident to her
chain of command is contemporaneously noted by Dr Smith.
The DFM must be taken
to have accepted the complainant’s evidence as to a change in command
personnel impacting upon her decision
only later to report the incident. The
impact of the delay in the reporting of the incident to the change of command
and resultant
investigation and charging on Private R’s ability to defend
the charge was the subject of express self-direction by the DFM.
83 Assertions about so-called inconsistencies in the complainant’s
account to ADFIS of the incident and her evidence and other
accounts, or of time
lines on the evening for the attendance of security guards if they had to let
themselves into the room at Limes
Hotel via a key obtained from reception, are,
with respect, solicitations for the Tribunal to undertake a tribunal of fact
in relation to her credibility. Yet further, they ignore a general
consistency between the complainant’s evidence before the
DFM and what she
put to Private R more than five years beforehand in her message “calling
out” his counter-narrative.
84 As to Ground 1, it only comes to this. On the whole of the evidence and on
the basis of such of the complainant’s evidence
assessed by the DFM to be
credible, we are not satisfied that the DFM, acting rationally, must have had a
reasonable doubt as to
Private R’s guilt in respect of the service offence
charged. The submission of the Chief of Army to this effect should be
85 By s 137(1), the DFDA imposes on the CDF an
obligation, to the extent that the exigencies of service permit, to “cause
accused person awaiting trial by a court martial or by a Defence Force
magistrate to be afforded the opportunity to be represented
at the trial, and to
be advised before the trial, by a legal officer”. That qualified
obligation, in its specification of the
affording to an accused person, of
representation and advice by a legal officer, is much more understanding of the
importance of
such advice and representation than was once found in a
predecessor regime for the Australian Army if on active service, the
(UK) (1881 Act) (subject to modifications made under then Australian
subordinate legislation). Under the 1881 Act, an accused was
to be given
“full opportunity” to communicate with his witnesses or legal
advisor or other friend, if available: s 33.
If that “friend” was an
officer, he was entitled to undertake the role of advocate but, if not, the
friend’s role
was akin to that of a McKenzie friend: r 87,
Procedure 1907
(UK) (RP 1907). Although counsel could appear at a court
88, RP 1907)
, there was no right to a legally qualified defending
officer, even subject to the exigencies of service.
86 A recollection of Australian military history offers a notorious example
of how, in predecessor service discipline systems to the
DFDA, the exigencies of
service could operate in practice under operational conditions. In 1902, during
the Boer War in South Africa,
Major (MAJ) J F Thomas, an Australian Reservist
Light Horseman who was also a Tenterfield solicitor, was assigned to conduct the
defence before a court martial convened under the 1881 Act, of the Australians,
Lieutenants (LT) Peter Joseph Handcock, George Ramsdale
Witton, and Harry
“Breaker” Morant on capital charges of murder: see G Crowden,
Major Thomas
, Affirm Press 2019, for an account of the trial and
sentences, as well as the impact thereafter on Thomas’ career and life.
Each, along with a LT Picton, was convicted, with sentences of death in respect
of LT Handcock and LT Morant being confirmed on
review within the chain of
command and carried into execution by firing squad.
87 It is not necessary to revisit any of the subsequent controversy
concerning that court martial and sentence, but only to note that,
more than a
century later and in peacetime Australia, the exigencies of service did not
prevent the assignment pursuant to s 137
of the DFDA of two defending officers,
each legal practitioners, to Private R’s defence. They were FLT LT Dewar
and MAJ Mooy.
88 That Private R was afforded qualified legal representation also means that
it is not necessary in the present case to consider
any interplay between the
exigencies of service qualification in s 137 of the DFDA and the common law of
Australia in relation to
the impact which an absence of legal representation for
an accused charged with a serious offence in the civilian criminal justice
system may have on an accused’s right to a fair trial (qv
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292)
and the fairness of a proceeding before a
service tribunal where an accused is not represented by a legal officer.
89 Whatever any such interplay might be, what is clear from the specification
in s 23 of the Appeals Act of the permissible bases
upon which a conviction in
respect of a service offence might be quashed is that none of those bases makes
any express allowance
for the exigencies of service. Instead if, for example, it
appears to the Tribunal there was a material irregularity in the course
proceedings before the court martial or a DFM and a substantial miscarriage of
justice has occurred (s 23(1)(c), Appeals Act),
the conviction must be quashed.
That is so irrespective of whether, for example, the material irregularity and
related substantial
injustice were caused or contributed to either by the
incompetence of an assigned legal officer or by an absence of representation
the accused by a legal officer, because of the exigencies of service. That
position is in keeping with the high public purpose
of the reform made by the
Appeals Act to the service discipline system.
90 In another recent judgement,
Hamilton (a pseudonym) v The Queen
[2021] HCA 33
(2021) 95 ALJR 894
) Kiefel CJ, Keane and Steward JJ made these
observations about forensic value judgments made by defence counsel in the
civilian criminal
justice system:
(a) at [49]:
A rational decision by defence counsel as to the conduct of a criminal trial
that can be seen to have been a legitimate forensic
choice that competent
counsel could fairly make will not give rise to a miscarriage of justice within
s 6(1) of the
Criminal Appeal Act
. The adversarial system does justice
through the diligent exertions of competent counsel in coming to grips with the
special circumstances
of the particular case.
(b) at [54]:
Within our system of justice, save for exceptional cases, ‘parties are
bound by the conduct of their counsel, who exercise
a wide discretion in
deciding what issues to contest, what witnesses to call, what evidence to lead
or to seek to have excluded,
and what lines of argument to pursue’.
The authorities cited by their Honours for the latter proposition are
[2006] HCA 9
(2006) 80 ALJR 614
), at [9] and
R v Baden-Clay
(2016) 258 CLR 308
91 In our respectful view, these observations in
application in relation to the conduct of a defence by a legal officer before a
service tribunal.
92 Further, as Gleeson CJ stated in
, at [9], “in most cases
... a complaint that counsel’s conduct has resulted in an unfair trial
will be considered by
reference to an objective standard, and without an
investigation of the subjective reasons for that conduct”.
93 In relation to an appeal to this Tribunal, one basis upon which Ground 2
was particularised and pressed on behalf of Private R
was by reference to
alleged failings by “counsel” to seek a myriad of self-directions
from the DFM. These were submitted
to “include”:
(a) an unreliable evidence warning as to the complainant being criminally
(b) a complaint direction;
(c) a “Mahmood” direction (the latter said to be referable to
Mahmood v Western Australia
[2008] HCA 1
(2008) 232 CLR 397
, at [37]); and
(d) a consciousness of guilt or silence as evidence of guilt direction.
94 MAJ Mooy and FLT LT Dewar did not chose to divide their responsibilities
such that FLT LT Dewar only acted as counsel and MAJ Mooy
only acted as
instructing solicitor. FLT LT Dewar cross-examined the complainant but it was
MAJ Mooy who cross-examined Dr Smith.
Unquestionably, they were entitled to
divide their responsibilities in this way. Each was, for the purposes of the
DFDA, a defending
officer in relation to the proceeding before the DFM. Evidence
admitted on the hearing of the appeal discloses that they were each
standard Reservist legal officer pay rates, not just to appear before the DFM
but to conduct extensive pre-trial preparation
and investigation.
95 Given Ground 2 and its disparate allegations of incompetency, there was,
with respect, a certain irony in MAJ Mooy, in his civilian
legal professional
capacity, at one stage acting as solicitor for Private R in the proceeding
before the Tribunal.
96 However this may be, that none of these directions particularised under
Ground 2 was sought of the DFM does make pertinent observations
made by Gleeson
Crampton v The Queen
(2000) 206 CLR 161
, at [15] to [19], to which
our attention was directed by the Chief of Army in submissions, in relation to
the exceptional position
with respect to the raising of issues for the first
time in a criminal appeal:
15 First, there is what was referred to by L’Heureux-Dubé J in the
Supreme Court of Canada as “the overarching
societal interest in the
finality of litigation in criminal matters” when she said:
“Were there to be no
limits on the issues that may be raised on appeal, such finality would become an
illusion. Both the Crown
and the defence would face uncertainty, as counsel for
both sides, having discovered that the strategy adopted at trial did not result
in the desired or expected verdict, devised new approaches. Costs would
escalate and the resolution of criminal matters could be
spread out over years
in the most routine
16 Secondly, it is common for appellants in criminal appeals to retain counsel
different from the counsel who (by hypothesis, unsuccessfully)
conducted the
trial. This increases the tendency to look for a new approach to the case, and
carries the danger that trial by jury
will come to be regarded as a preliminary
skirmish in a battle destined to reach finality before a group of appellate
17 Thirdly, it is usually difficult, and frequently impossible, for a court of
appeal to know why trial counsel did, or failed to
do, something in the conduct
of the case. Decisions as to the conduct of a trial are often based upon
confidential information,
and an appreciation of tactical considerations, that
may never be available to an appellate court. The material upon which a judge,
either at trial or on appeal, may form an opinion as to the wisdom of a course
taken by counsel can be dangerously inadequate, and,
when it is, the judge may
have no way of knowing that. Ordinarily, a barrister knows more about the
strengths and weaknesses of
his or her client's position than will appear to a
judge, whose knowledge of the case is largely confined to the evidence.
18 Fourthly, as a general rule, litigants are bound by the conduct of their
counsel. This principle, which is an aspect of the adversarial
system, forms
part of the practical content of the idea of justice as applied to the outcome
of a particular case. For that reason,
courts have been cautious in expounding
the circumstances in which an appellant will be permitted to blame trial counsel
is said to be a miscarriage of justice.
19 Fifthly, in a common law system the adversarial procedure is bound up with
notions of judicial independence and impartiality.
A criminal trial is
conducted before a judge (sitting with or without a jury) who has taken no part
in the investigation of the
offence, or in the decision to prosecute the
offender, or in the framing of the charge, or in the selection of the witnesses
called on either side of the case, and whose capacity to intervene in the
conduct of the trial is limited. One of the objects of
a system which leaves it
to the parties to define the issues, and to select the evidence and arguments
upon which they will rely,
is to preserve the neutrality of the decision-making
tribunal. Courts are hesitant to compromise features of the adversarial system
which have implications fundamental to the administration of justice.
[Footnote references omitted]
97 The service discipline system for which the DFDA provides likewise
contemplates a system of adversarial justice. The observations
made by Gleeson
are similarly applicable to the service discipline system
and to the exercise of appellate jurisdiction in respect of convictions
resultant from that system. To those observations might be added the following,
having regard to the subject matter, scope and purpose
of the DFDA and the
Appeals Act.
98 The subject matter, scope and purpose of the DFDA is to prescribe a code
of conduct for the Australian profession of arms and for
a related system for
the just enforcement of that code according to law. The service discipline
system, and thus the related exercise
of appellate jurisdiction in respect of
convictions (and prescribed acquittals), must be workable in practice in war as
peace, in the field as well as in barracks and courtrooms. The system
and the provision for appeals both buttress the chain of command
of the ADF,
essential for its efficiency in war as well as in peace and gives confidence to
defence members and the wider community
that charges in respect of service
offences will be dealt with fairly. To achieve these purposes, proceedings
before a service tribunal
must be as proximate as prevailing exigencies of
service and the interests of justice permit to the alleged service offence.
to the Tribunal are, for like reasons, desirably heard and determined
with expedition.
in all of these circumstances, there is a
societal interest in the finality of litigation concerning an alleged service
99 In the present appeal, Ground 2 offers a paradigm example within the
appellate jurisdiction sequel to a conviction within the service
system of a plethora of issues being raised for the first time on appeal by
counsel not responsible for the conduct of
the defence before the service
tribunal (although they are instructed by one of those who was).
100 The transcript of proceedings before the DFM records that after the DFM
had recorded what were, on any view, relevant and extensive
self-directions,
both the prosecuting and the defending officers were expressly asked by him
whether any further direction was sought.
Each replied in the negative. These
were deliberate, forensic choices on behalf of each party by which that party
was bound, save
in exceptional circumstances. Further, the trial was conducted
by DFM, not court martial. The particular DFM was not just, as he
had to be, an
officer enrolled as a legal practitioner who had been so enrolled for not less
than 5 years, appointed by the CDF on
the nomination of the Judge Advocate
General (s 196, DFDA), but a Queen’s Counsel. When one views the course of
proceedings
and the whole of the evidence objectively, none of the asserted
further directions was necessary in order to ensure a fair trial.
101 Private R made an affidavit highly critical of FLT LT Dewar in particular
and offering his subjective observation of and views
proceedings. The relevance of this is truly moot. It is but a subjective
opinion. In any event, it is apparent
that the complainant was cross-examined to
the end of seeking to highlight what were put as inconsistencies as between what
to the ADFIS in 2018 and her evidence in chief, the degree of her
intoxication on the evening 29/30 August 2015, the unreliability
of her memory,
her alleged fickleness, the history of ongoing, episodic, sexual intimacy with
Private R, tensions as between Mr Boland
and Private R and, most importantly,
Private R’s version of the events which had occurred on the evening 29/30
August 2015.
Viewed objectively, it was not an incompetent cross-examination.
The cross-examination reflected Private R’s version of events
Dewar’s tactical forensic value judgements. Some might characterise it as
prolix but the fairness of a trial is
not measured by violation of a touchstone
of perfection.
102 It was put that an inference ought to be drawn against the Chief of Army
because he had failed to lead evidence from FLT LT Dewar
on this appeal. With
respect, this misconceives upon whom the onus lies to prove such a departure
from the requirements of a fair
trial so as to yield a substantial miscarriage
of justice. That onus fell upon Private R, not on the Chief of Army. And it is
an onus lightly discharged. It was always open to Private R to call FLT LT
Dewar. But no inference is to be drawn against him for
not so doing. That is
because, as Gleeson CJ also observed in
, at [10], “To the
extent to which it is reasonably possible, the focus of attention should be the
objective features of the
trial process.” Further, the critical question
as to whether or not there has been a fair trial such that a substantial
miscarriage
of justice has resulted is answered by regard to what did happen at
the trial, not why it occurred.
103 It was also submitted for Private R that the following were indicative of
a substantial miscarriage of justice:
(a) Counsel’s failure to cross-examine the complainant in accordance with
the Private R’s instructions.
(b) Counsel’s failure to cross-examine Prosecution witnesses in accordance
with the Private R’s instructions;
(c) Counsel’s failure to object to irrelevant and prejudicial evidence;
(d) Counsel’s failure to have called for cross-examination an ADFIS or DMP
(Director of Military Prosecutions) witness;
(e) Counsel’s failure to appropriately lead evidence of character on
behalf of Private R;
(f) Counsel’s failure to press the admissibility of Mr Gain’s
evidence; and
(g) Counsel’s failure to adduce available expert evidence of Dr Collins
challenging the credibility of the complainant and
the credibility of the
Prosecution expert Dr Smith, and Dr Robertson in challenging the credibility of
the complainant.
104 The last mentioned of these alleged deficiencies was also developed in
submissions in relation to Ground 4 but it is convenient
to address it under
105 Once again, and with all due respect, these several alleged failures have
also a defending officer.
Further, of the two defending officers, it was MAJ Mooy who assumed the role of
cross-examining Dr Smith.
Given this division of responsibility, one might have
thought he gave consideration to the report then to hand from Dr Collins.
further, these alleged failings also offer an example of the ingenuity of
counsel who did not undertake the responsibility of
being a defending
106 As already indicated, FLT LT Dewar did put the essence of Private
R’s version of events to the complainant and did so in
the context of a
considered exploration of subjects which might rationally be thought to affect
her credibility. As in the civilian
criminal justice system, it was open to
Private R at any time during the proceeding before the DFM to terminate the
instructions
of his defending officers and to assume personally, for better or
for worse, the role of defending himself. This he did not do. It
was not for him
to dictate exactly how either FLT LT Dewar or MAJ Mooy conducted their
cross-examinations of any witness. Further,
the precise instructions given by
him, be they the “post notes” generated at trial as mentioned by him
and MAJ Mooy in
their affidavits or otherwise are not in evidence. Yet further,
for the reasons mentioned in
, this type of detailed examination
of the background to the conduct of a defence is not to be encouraged. Private R
was and is bound
by the conduct of his defending officers, for reasons already
set out above. Once again, viewing the whole of the proceedings and
the evidence
led objectively, there was no resultant substantial miscarriage of justice.
107 The evidence upon which the DFM chose to act in deciding to convict
Private R is fully disclosed in his reasons. In this regard,
the position is
quite different from a verdict reached by a court martial panel. The reasons of
the DFM disclose that the evidence
upon which he chose to act was certainly
prejudicial to Private R in that it was rationally capable of leading to a
conclusion that
the service offence alleged had been proved beyond reasonable
doubt by the prosecution but also that it was relevant and thus admissible.
reasons of the DFM disclose that, in combination with evidence from other
witnesses as to events earlier on the evening of 29/30
August 2015, those parts
of the complainant’s evidence which he accepted as credible, the Facebook
Messenger text exchanges
as between Private R and the complainant and Dr
Smith’s evidence persuaded him that the prosecution had proved the service
offence beyond reasonable doubt. Whatever other prosecution evidence was before
him, whether strictly inadmissible but not objected
to or otherwise, was not
decisive. Regard to the whole of the evidence, viewed objectively, does not
disclose any resultant substantial
miscarriage of justice by the admission of
any irrelevant (but unobjected to) evidence.
108 As to the calling of a witness from the ADFIS, regard to the transcript
of the proceeding before the DFM on 1 December 2020 discloses
that a summons had
been issued at the request of Private R’s defending officers for the
production of the investigation file.
This was one of a number of summonses for
production returnable that day. Other summonses had been obtained and returned
at the behest of Private R’s defending officers, as the transcript
of an interlocutory phase before the DFM on 23 November
2020 reveals.
109 Impressionistically from the transcript of proceedings on 1 December
2020, there is something of a quality of “fishing”
summonses. In any event, they yielded production of documents. The occasion for
the delay in the issuing of the summons
to the ADFIS was, as explained by MAJ
Mooy to the DFM, an understanding that, given the gravity of the alleged
offence, it must have
been reported to the Queensland Police Service. Only when
it became clear that it had neither been so reported nor even referred
to the Queensland Police did an apprehended need for the ADFIS investigation
file emerge. The investigation file was produced.
That having occurred, no
witness from the ADFIS was called on behalf of Private R. He should be held to
that forensic value judgment.
110 As to the DMP, this, looking to an exchange which occurred between the
defending officers and the DFM on 1 December 2020 is, seemingly,
is a reference
to the then DMP personally, Brigadier (BRIG) J Woodward. They were operating
under an understanding that there had
been some sort of exchange between the
complainant and BRIG Woodward personally which preceded the formal complaint and
investigation.
This subject, apparently, remained in the realm of the
speculative. Whatever the reasons for this may be, they entail issues and
forensic value judgments which, as the observations of Gleeson CJ in
highlight in the analogous context of a civilian court of
criminal appeal, may never fully be known to the Tribunal and certainly
on the evidence to hand. In the result, neither BRIG Woodward nor any other
member of her office was called as a witness.
Private R should be held to that
forensic value judgment.
111 What is apparent from the transcript of proceedings is that the
prosecution had, as far back as 2019 when the charge sheet was
signed by the DMP
and served on Private R, also served on him and made available to his then
defending officers the requisite brief
of evidence. The transcript of
proceedings on 23 November 2020 discloses that the ADFIS had identified that,
after leaving Limes
Hotel in the early hours of the morning on 30 August 2015,
the complainant had gone to the premises of a Corporal (then and also
a member of the ADF). That Corporal had declined to furnish a statement. The
transcript of proceedings that day also discloses
that inquiries had been
pursued of Best Security to the end of identifying the security guards on duty.
This endeavour had been complicated
by the company concerned going into
receivership in the interval which had passed between the alleged offence and
that interlocutory
hearing. In the result, only Mr Burke came to be called as a
witness with the supervisor’s weekly report and prevailing instructions
being tendered in evidence.
112 Also apparent from the transcript of proceedings that day is that
particular forensic value judgments had been made in 2019 by
those then acting
for Private R as defending officers to pursue the constitutional challenge to
his amenability to being dealt with
under the DFDA in relation to the conduct
alleged, rather than additionally pursuing particular lines of inquiry at that
is in the nature of an exercise of judicial power that it has a quality
of clarity and conclusiveness in respect of an issue that
consideration of that
issue in prospect may, quite reasonably, not yield. Regard to the judgments
delivered in an earlier case concerning
the application of the DFDA,
Colonel Aird; Ex parte Alpert
(2004) 220 CLR 308
, discloses that whatever
might have been the position as found in that case in relation to a defence
member deployed overseas but
on short term leave overseas, the application of
the DFDA to an event in peacetime Australia outside barracks between two persons
neither on duty nor in uniform but coincidentally each members of the ADF could,
quite reasonably, have been regarded as moot. To
pursue the valid application of
the DFDA was not an unreasonable step but it did introduce an additional lapse
of time not just from
when the charge was laid but from when the alleged conduct
113 The transcript of proceedings before the DFM discloses that he was
acutely aware of the difficulties presented by the delay. It
is desirable to set
out that self-direction in full. The DFM directed himself in these terms:
In an exchange with counsel, I accept that none of the delay has been the
responsibility of the defendant. These additional circumstances
require comment.
These include:
The delay in instituting the prosecution;
The possibility of distortion in human recollection;
The nature of the allegations, the fact that the delay meant not only other
people’s, including the complainant’s, ability
to recall facts less
able to be accurately tested and therefore less liable;
No video evidence could be seized, for example, if there was video at the Limes
Hotel and Prohibition nightclub at the Up Bar, any
on street cameras showing
people’s gait walking between the venues, for example.
The tracing of the two security guards, for which it seems the parties were in
agreement two security guards attended, who those
security guards were;
Whether the security guards, one of them was indeed Mr Burke who has given
evidence, whether, in fact, it was two other security
guards whilst Mr Burke was
dealing with something else;
The accuracy or reliability of the records of the security company;
Whether any receptionist could have been found and traced who may or may not
have given access to the security guards as asserted
by the complainant;
The two females the complainant that she sought solace in;
Any phone records that might have existed relevant to the case. One of the
matters advanced by one of the defending officers was
there might have been some
phone records about her acquisition of drugs, for example.
I direct myself that these difficulties put the defendant at a significant
disadvantage in responding to the prosecution case, either
in testing the
prosecution evidence or in bringing forward evidence himself to establish a
reasonable doubt about his guilt or both.
The delay means that evidence relied
upon by the prosecution cannot be as fully tested as it otherwise might have
Had the allegations been brought to light and the prosecution commenced much
sooner, it would be expected that particularly the complainant’s
for details would have been clearer. This may have enabled her evidence to be
checked in relation to those details against
independent sources so as to verify
it or disprove it.
The complainant, and it is not just her memory at stake here, it is all of the
other witnesses in the case, the complainant or the
other witnesses’
inability to recall precise details of the circumstances surrounding the
incident, makes it difficult for
the defendant to throw doubt on her evidence,
in particularly, by pointing to circumstances which may contradict her. Had the
learnt of the allegations at a much earlier time, he may have been
able to recall relevant details that could have been used by his
cross-examination of her.
Another aspect of the defendant's disadvantage is that had he learned of the
allegations at a much earlier time he may have been
able to find witnesses or
items of evidence that might have contradicted the complainant or supported his
case, or both.
He may have been able to recall with some precision what he was doing and where
he was at particular times and to have been able
to bring forward evidence to
support him. I take into account that because of the delay the defendant has
lost the opportunity to
bring forward such evidence that I highlighted before
because he has been put into a situation of significant disadvantage he has
prejudiced in the conduct of his defence.
As a result I warn myself that before I can convict the defendant I must give
the prosecution case the most careful scrutiny. In
carrying out that scrutiny I
must bear in mind the matters that I have just been speaking about; the fact
that the complainant's
evidence has not been tested to the extent that it
otherwise could have been and the inability of the defendant to bring forward
evidence to challenge it or to support his defence.
All of the difficulties occasioned by delay and highlighted by the defending
officers both at an interlocutory stage and at the trial
itself have been fully
assimilated and taken into account by the DFM. That they have been so
highlighted is hardly indicative of
incompetence on the part of the defending
officers, rather the reverse.
114 Evidence of Private R’s good character was led. The reasons of the
DFM disclose that the fact that Private R had no previous
criminal convictions
was in evidence and taken into account by him. Regard to the whole of the
evidence, which necessarily includes
the evidence as to Private R’s
behaviour early on the evening of 29/30 August 2015 culminating in his being
removed from the
premises from where the birthday celebratory group was
gathered, discloses that the subject of Private R’s character was likely
fraught one for those defending him. Private R should be held to the forensic
choice made at the trial before the DFM as to the
character evidence led. Viewed
objectively on the whole of the evidence, that choice did not yield a
substantial miscarriage of justice.
115 A report from Dr Byron Collins dated 26 November 2020, addressed to MAJ
Mooy was in the possession of Private R’s defending
officers prior to the
commencement of the trial. Dr Collins was not called as a witness in the defence
case. Looking at the contents
of the report, there are quite rational, forensic
value judgment reasons why such a course might have been followed.
116 True it is that, based on his particular training and lengthy experience
as a forensic pathologist, Dr Collins makes a number
of criticisms of views
expressed by Dr Smith in his report. These are based on his review of Dr
Smith’s clinical note made
in 2015, a statement which Dr Smith provided in
the course of the investigation by the ADFIS in 2018, and other statements drawn
from the brief provided by the prosecution. But there are also features of Dr
Collins’ report which might rationally sound
a cautionary note in relation
to calling him. For example, amongst the statements made by Dr Collins in this
report are these:
On the information presently to hand, I am not in a position to properly
assess the accuracy of the descriptions of the Complainant's
neck injuries, as
contained in the clinical notes or the statement
as, unfortunately, to put
it at its very best, there are no accompanying body line-drawings or
photographs, which would have greatly
assisted me in this process. ...
I do accept that an individual who has been subjected to an episode
of manual neck compression, may sustain a variety of skin injuries,
bruising of different shapes
including “finger tip” and
abrasions, for example scratch-like in outline.
If it were accepted that the Complainant’s neck bruising was bluish in
colour, then it could be consistent with trauma being
sustained in the time
frame of this case
, although not necessarily so and it could have resulted
from an appropriate incident post the alleged event, whether by self­
infliction or another individual.
[Emphasis added]
117 Looking at these excerpts and especially the passages emphasised, there
is a discernible, rational forensic risk that, had Dr
Collins been called, the
general practitioner views expressed by Dr Smith may have ended up being
regarded as supported by views
expressed by an experienced forensic pathologist.
No substantial miscarriage of justice resulted from the failure to call him.
118 The defending officers were also in possession of a report dated 10
November 2020 furnished to MAJ Mooy by Dr Michael Robertson
pharmacologist and forensic toxicologist. Based on statements of witnesses in
the prosecution brief as to consumption of
alcoholic drinks by the complainant
on the evening of 29/30 August 2015, Dr Robertson expressed the opinion that,
likely BAC (blood alcohol concentration) of the complainant at
the time of the alleged incident would have been approximately 0.15%”.
Robertson voiced a number of opinions as to the effects which alcohol
consumption had on the human body and behaviour, including
Whilst memory loss is generally associated with alcohol-related intoxication,
there is no accepted concentration at which memory loss will or will not
occur in any individual
. Nor is there any accepted type, number or severity
of observable signs or symptoms of intoxication that would be associated with
memory loss. ....
A BAC of 0.15% is consistent with the impairment of some (i.e. fragmented) or
all (i.e. en-bloc) memory. As such whilst
it cannot be determined when or to
what extent memory loss may have occurred
, it is certainly possible that the
complainant had impaired recollection of events in the hotel at the time the
subject incident
took place.
[Emphasis added]
We note in this context that there were a number of observers of the complainant
on the night who gave evidence as to her remaining
coherent and functional.
Looking at Dr Robertson’s report as a whole we consider that, while some
of the opinions expressed
might have assisted the defence case as to the
reliability or otherwise of the complainant’s evidence of the relevant
some may not have (for example, the passages quoted, especially the
parts emphasised). There was no definitive expression of opinion
by Dr Robertson
that the complainant’s memory would have been (as distinct from might have
been) impaired, let alone significantly
impaired in relation to accuracy.
Looking at Dr Robertson’s statement, we discern rational forensic reasons
for not calling
him. His evidence, being equivocal, may not have assisted the
defence case. For example, the fact that a person has a ‘fragmented
memory’ of a series of events does not mean that those parts which are
remembered are not accurately remembered. Dr Robertson’s
could even have damaged the defence, in circumstances where the evidence of
witnesses generally suggested that Private R
had consumed a very significant
amount of alcohol during the evening, resulting in a level of intoxication
characterised by disinhibition
and a level of anger which led to a bitter
recriminatory outburst directed at the complainant. Dr Robertson could have been
cross-examined
to provide an opinion as to the unreliability of Private
R’s own memory of the incidents in the complainant’s hotel room
result of his intoxication. Even if he had not been so cross examined, the DFM
would inevitably have reflected on the nature
of the evidence given by Dr
Robertson in relation to the complainant in considering the accuracy and
reliability of the evidence
of Private R. In all the circumstances, we consider
that no substantial miscarriage of justice resulted from the fact that Dr
was not called to give expert evidence.
119 Viewed objectively, and against the whole of the evidence and the course
of proceedings, none of the alleged failings of counsel
resulted in a
substantial miscarriage of justice.
The “Hofer” Issue
120 The impugned cross-examination might briefly be
summarised as follows. Based on certain matters not having been put to the
complainant
(“eyes like dinner plates” etc), the prosecutor asked,
“This material wasn’t put to her because you’re
making it up
right now; that’s the truth, isn’t it?” The appellant denied
the suggestion.
121 In his outline of supplementary submissions filed on 24 December 2021,
Chief of Army contends,
, as follows:
The impugned cross examination was so inconsequential that it did not attract
the attention of the appellant’s lawyers who
drafted the appellant’s
petition and the original notice of appeal, or the s 154 officers who provided
the legal reports for
the automatic review of the appellant’s conviction
and for consideration of the appellant’s petition. It was not the
of closing submissions by either the prosecutor or the appellant’s
defending officers. It was not mentioned by the
DFM in his careful and
comprehensive reasons.
122 Private R acknowledges in reply submissions filed 21 January 2022 that
the DFM did not specifically refer to that evidence, but
submits that he did not
state that he did not give weight to the cross examination, or that he did not
take it into account.
123 The prosecutor’s cross examination in
similar suggestion (on the basis of matters not having been put by defence
counsel in cross examination of Crown witnesses)
that the accused was making his
story up as he went along (‘recent invention’). That was followed by
a submission to
the jury that two particular matters had not been put by defence
, at [24], although the prosecutor did not repeat the
suggestion of recent invention or invite the jury to infer recent fabrication
, at [38]. The trial judge made no mention of the parts of the
appellant's cross examination relevant to possible recent invention,
nor did the
judge give any directions, including as to what inferences the jury could
legitimately draw. Neither prosecution nor
defence counsel sought such mention
or directions.
124 In the High Court, the majority (Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson JJ) said
this, at [41] – [42]:
[41] A miscarriage of justice to which s 6(1) of the Criminal Appeal Act refers
includes any departure from the trial according to
law to the prejudice of the
accused. ...
[42] The questioning undertaken by the prosecution of the appellant departed
from the standards of a trial to which an accused is
entitled and the standards
of fairness which must attend it. The questioning was such as to imply that the
appellant was obliged
to provide an explanation as to why matters had not been
put to C1 or C2. This suggested he possessed information which he had not
counsel by way of instructions. The unfairness in this regard was compounded
when the appellant was not permitted by the trial
judge to provide an answer and
by defence counsel not informing the court that he had those instructions. The
attack upon the appellant’s
credit by assertions of recent invention was
based upon an assumption which was not warranted. All of these matters were
highly prejudicial
to the appellant.
125 Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson JJ held that the cross examination had
resulted in a miscarriage of justice [46], [48], [49], particularly
With this conclusion, Gordon J agreed: at [126] and [127]. The prejudice to the
appellant was not addressed by the trial
judge, who did not put the submissions
into perspective and did not explain other possible reasons for matters not
being put to the
jury by defence counsel:
, at [33], [47].
126 Having determined that there had been a miscarriage of justice, the
majority then considered the application of the proviso [49].
They ultimately
found that the prosecution’s “impermissible contention of recent
invention” was of little significance
in the determination of the real
issue in the trial. The issue was not that his evidence was recently invented
but that his account
was a demonstrably obvious fabrication, and that whether it
was recent or not was “beside the point” [76]. The majority
that the appellant's conviction did not involve a substantial miscarriage of
justice within the meaning of the proviso.
127 It is apparent that the majority in
determined the
miscarriage of justice in isolation, that is, by reference to the departures
from regular practice, without regard
to the significance of the miscarriage in
the ultimate outcome. They looked at the ultimate significance of the
miscarriage only
at the stage where it was necessary to determine whether there
had been a substantial miscarriage of justice (and whether the proviso
128 On our reading of
, Gageler J adopted a different approach.
His Honour described what had happened at trial as an “irregularity”
and “essentially
one of unfairness”: [117]. Expressing his
agreement with the majority, he explained that the overall prejudicial
consequence
was that there was a “real chance” that the jury in
reaching its verdict of guilty on eight of 10 counts had inferred
appellant invented some parts of his evidence between the time his counsel cross
examined the complainants at the trial
and the short time later when he came to
give his evidence:
129 The difference between the approach of Gageler J and that the majority
was that Gageler J, having held [121] that the miscarriage
of justice inquiry is
factual, went on to say this, at [123]:
Except in the case of an error or irregularity so profound as to be
characterised as a ‘failure to observe the requirements
of the criminal
process in the fundamental respect’ [referring to
Maher v The
], an error or irregularity will rise to the level of a miscarriage of
justice only if found by an appellate court to be of a nature
and degree that
could realistically have affected the verdict of guilt that was in fact returned
by the jury in the trial that was
had. Only if that threshold is met is the
miscarriage of justice established. Only then can a further issue arise of the
court going on to the consideration of the proviso to ask and answer
the distinct question of whether the court is satisfied that
no substantial
miscarriage of justice actually occurred.
130 In the present case, if the “
” issue had any
merit at all, it would be as a ground of appeal under the ‘substantial
miscarriage of justice’ ground
referred to in s 23(1)(c) of the Appeals
131 Although the root of the problem in the present appeal was the
prosecutor’s impermissible cross-examination, the context
of the present
appeal is different from that in
. An obvious difference is that, as
we have already highlighted in another context above, the tribunal of fact in
was a jury, whereas in the present case the tribunal of fact was a
DFM. Jury verdicts are inscrutable, and hence the great significance
courts of appeal to the directions given by the trial judge. In this case, the
reasoning of the DFM has been fully exposed.
We do not see why we should not
infer that the DFM did not take the impugned cross examination into account, for
the reason that
– in his detailed assessment of the appellant’s
credit – he made no mention of it let alone a finding that it detracted
from the appellant’s credit.
132 We are not satisfied that there was a miscarriage of justice in the trial
before the DFM. The offending cross examination was
very brief and the matter
impermissibly raised was not pressed in further cross examination or in
submissions. No directions were
sought by defence counsel, and it appeared to be
completely irrelevant to the resolution by the DFM of the real issues at trial.
133 However, if the prosecutor in his cross examination of the appellant
departed from the standards of the trial to which the appellant
was entitled and
from the standards of fairness which must attend a fair trial, then that would
constitute a miscarriage of justice
in the sense explained by the majority in
. However, such a miscarriage of justice would have little relevance
to the present appeal unless it were a
substantial
miscarriage of
134 In reference to the proviso in s 668E(1A) of the
Criminal Code
Orreal v The Queen
[2021] HCA 44
(2021) 96 ALJR 78
, Kiefel CJ and Keane J
observed, at [20]:
An appellate court must be persuaded that evidence properly admitted at trial
establishes guilt to the requisite standard before
it can conclude that no
substantial miscarriage of justice has actually occurred. It must consider the
whole of the record of the
trial and the nature and effect of the error which
gives rise to the miscarriage of justice in the particular case.
135 The real difficulty facing Private R, as with Mr Hofer, was not on
account of the suggestion that his evidence may have involved
recent invention
but rather that the prosecution case was strong. The evidence of Private R may
not have been glaringly improbable
to the same extent as the evidence of Mr
Hofer, but the evidence of the complainant, properly admitted, was clearly
regarded by the
DFM as compelling. Moreover, it was supported by post-offence
conduct on the part of Private R (the Facebook Messenger exchange)
observations made by Dr Smith.
136 There is no merit in Private R’s “
137 This ground challenges a discretionary value
judgment made by the DFM on 5 November 2020 to refuse an application by Private
by his defending officers to adjourn the trial then fixed to commence on 5
November 2020.
138 It is obvious from the reasons which the DFM delivered
that day that he was well aware that he had a discretion to exercise and with
relevant considerations attending the exercise of that
discretion. The DFM
referred to a number of authorities of which two warrant particular mention.
The DFM derived the following considerations
Sekyere-Boakye v
[2013] WASC 147 (Hall
(a) The decision to grant or refuse an adjournment is a discretionary one;
(b) Where the refusal of an adjournment would result in serious injustice to one
party, an adjournment should be granted, unless
in turn this would mean serious
injustice to the other party;
(c) It is fundamental to the administration of justice that accused persons are
given the full opportunity to present their defence.
An adjournment should be
granted if it is necessary to enable the accused person to properly present that
(d) It is proper to reject an application for an adjournment to allow a defence
witness to be brought from elsewhere. If the court
reaches the conclusion upon
reasonable grounds that such a witness would be unlikely to give evidence
tending to exculpate the accused;
(e) Adjournments are not available for the asking. In criminal proceedings, it
is necessary to take into account interests than those
of the accused. These
include the interests of the community in the prompt disposal of charges. It
undermines the orderly disposal
of the work of the courts when criminal trials
are adjourned unnecessarily;
(f) The refusal of an adjournment may amount to a denial of procedural fairness
if it is likely to deny a defendant a reasonable
opportunity to present his or
139 These considerations are indeed relevant in relation to deciding whether
to adjourn the hearing by a service tribunal of a charge
alleging an offence
against the DFDA. They are not exhaustive. We have already highlighted above the
societal interest in the prompt
disposal of such charges.
140 The DFM also referred to the following observation made by the Victorian
Court of Appeal in
AJP v The Queen
[2010] VSCA 224
It has long been accepted that an application for the adjournment of a trial
should be based on evidence. Mere assertions from the
Bar table leave a judge
without the means to properly assess the merits of an application, and are
likely to result in its rejection.
141 In relation to service tribunals, it is possible to envisage
circumstances arising from the exigencies of service, particularly
on operations
overseas, when a rigid insistence on an evidenced basis for an adjournment, in
the face of an uncontroversial statement
from the Bar Table, might yield a
denial of procedural fairness if an adjournment were refused. But the
circumstances pertaining
to this trial were far removed from this and the DFM
clearly regarded the position outlined in this authority as but stating the
general position.
142 An allegation that the refusal of an adjournment is, for the purposes of
s 23(1)(b) of the Appeals Act, the result of a wrong
decision on a question of
law, or of mixed law and fact, with a resultant substantial miscarriage of
justice arising from a denial
of procedural fairness necessarily entails a
challenge to the exercise of a quasi-judicial discretion. Mere disagreement by
the Tribunal
with the result of the exercise of that discretion, because the
Tribunal might have exercised it differently on the merits would
sufficient. Instead, an error of principle of the kind described in
(1936) 55 CLR 499
would have to be demonstrated. Such an error was
demonstrated in relation to the refusal of an adjournment in
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR 332.
In that case,
notwithstanding the exacting standard that attends a conclusion of
unreasonableness, a denial of an adjournment of
concluding a merits review
hearing for a short time so as to enable readily obtainable evidence to be
secured to cure an obvious
deficiency in an applicant’s case was set aside
as unreasonable.
143 We have already referred to the history of this case after the charge
sheet was signed and served. The DFM addressed that history.
As at 5 November
2020, more than a year had elapsed since then. As we have mentioned, that was
the result of forensic value judgments
made by Private R on advice. Those
forensic value judgments had to that point evidently entailed putting all of the
in the constitutional law point “basket”. As at 5
November 2020, summonses had yet to be issued at the behest of the
officers and interviews with potential witnesses yet to be conducted. No
indication could be given to the DFM as to the
content of evidence expected to
be obtained. The DFM was aware of the impact of public health restrictions
relating to the pandemic
in terms of travel and face-to-face communication and
that that was not the only possible mode of communication. The trial was
to commence in almost a month’s time. As we have highlighted,
the DFM addressed himself to relevant principles. All that he
did, in applying
these principles, was to make a discretionary judgment reasonably open to him on
the facts before him weighing up
the relevant factors. No error of law is
disclosed in his refusal of an adjournment.
144 We should add that, as it happened, at the start of the trial an
application for adjournment was not pressed. This, too, was a
forensic value
judgment by the defending officers, MAJ Mooy included. By that stage, the
defence had been able to obtain expert reports
from Dr Collins and Dr Robertson,
as well as identify Mr Burke as the supervisor on duty and obtain some records
of Best Security
relating to the evening of 29/30 August 2015. The prospect of
identifying exactly who were the security officers on duty that evening
attended at the room at Limes Hotel had been addressed but there was nothing to
indicate that a statement from such a person
was obtainable at all, much less
imminent. The impact of the resultant delay on the case was well understood by
the DFM, as the self-direction
quoted above attests. It seems to us that Private
R was well-served by his defending officers, each of them, in the period which
followed the refusal of the adjournment. That the application was not further
pressed at the start of the trial did not, objectively,
occasion a substantial
miscarriage of justice.
145 Subsection 23(2) of the Appeals Act does not
limit the operation of the Act in facilitating proof of a fact in issue in the
arising under s 23(1)(c), that fact being whether the convictions were a
product of a material irregularity in the course of the
proceeding:
Navy v Angre
[2016] FCAFC 171
(2016) 244 FCR 457
). The evidence sought to be
adduced was that of Dr Collins and Dr Robertson. To the extent that the Chief of
Army objected to the
reception of evidence from each of these persons on the
basis of s 23(2) of the Appeals Act that the evidence was reasonably available
at the time of the proceedings before the DFM (which it was), although we
acknowledge that the requirements of s 23(2) are cumulative,
dictates we must reject the objection.
146 We have already made observations above in relation to the opinions
expressed in the identified reports of Dr Collins and Dr Robertson.
persuaded that considered either alone or in conjunction did the failure to lead
evidence from either (of which these
reports would have formed but the evidence
in chief) resulted in a substantial miscarriage of justice. There was an
endeavour to
supplement the earlier report from Dr Collins with a further
report. Even were that admissible, that does not mean that a reasonable
must be entertained that the bruising identified in a contemporaneous clinical
note made by Dr Smith on 1 September 2015 originated
from the conduct charged.
At most, all of this evidence goes only to issues of credit. As we have
indicated above, objectively speaking,
there are discernible, rational forensic
reasons why neither of these witnesses were called.
147 To the extent that the same is necessary,
Private R should be granted leave to appeal on the grounds specified in his
notice of appeal. The appeal should be dismissed.
148 In the event that the appeal was dismissed, the
Chief of Army sought an order for costs on the basis that costs should follow
149 The Tribunal is granted a power to award costs by s 37 of the Appeals
Act, which provides:
(1) Where the Tribunal allows an appeal, it may, if it thinks fit, direct the
payment by the Commonwealth to the appellant of such
sums as appear to the
Tribunal reasonably sufficient to compensate the appellant for expenses properly
incurred by him or her in
the prosecution of his or her appeal, and any
proceedings preliminary or incidental to the appeal, or in carrying on his or
her defence
against the charge or charges out of which the appeal arose.
(2) The Finance Minister shall pay to an appellant, out of moneys provided by
the Parliament for the purpose, any sum which the Commonwealth
is directed to
pay to the appellant under subsection (1).
(3) Where the Tribunal dismisses an appeal or an application for leave to
appeal, it may, if it thinks fit, order the appellant to
pay to the Commonwealth
the whole or any part of the costs of the appeal or application, including
allowances paid to a witness under
section 34 and the costs of copying or
transcribing any documents for the use of the Tribunal.
(4) An order made under the last preceding subsection may be enforced in such
manner as is prescribed.
150 This power to award costs has been present in the Appeals Act since its
commencement. Since then, only minor and presently immaterial
amendments have
been made to the original conferral of that power. A survey of cases decided by
the Tribunal on and from its establishment
reveals that it is truly exceptional
for a respondent service chief to seek an order for costs in the event that an
appeal or application
for leave to appeal is dismissed. This is a matter of
necessary inference from the absence of any reference in the Tribunal’s
reasons in most such cases to any need to consider the subject and the
consequential absence of any order as to costs in addition
to an order of
151 Exceptionally, however, a respondent service chief did apply for costs in
one, unreported case,
Barry v Chief of Naval Staff
[1994] ADFDAT 3
); DFDAT No 1 of 1994 (Northrop, Cox and Gallop JJ), 26 August
1994. In that case, upon the pronouncement of an order of dismissal
appeal, apparently after the delivery of ex tempore reasons for decision,
counsel for the respondent made an application for
costs. In refusing that
application, the then President, Northrop J, referring to s 37(3) of the Appeals
Act, observed that “there
is no doubt that the Tribunal has a power to
award costs, a power which must be exercised judicially and pursuant to
appropriate
considerations”. His Honour then stated:
Attention is drawn to the [Appeals Act], s 22 which contains provisions dealing
with what are described as frivolous or vexatious
appeals. It is not suggested
by counsel for the respondent that this appeal was frivolous or vexatious.
Reference is made also to
the fact that the appellant did receive an order for
the payment of the costs of the appeal under the
Courts Martial Appeal
Regulations
, reg. 11. One of the requirements for such an order being made
which is relevant to the present case is that if the Tribunal is satisfied
it appears desirable in the interests of justice that legal aid should be
granted to the appellant under the regulation the
Tribunal may make such an
order. One of the considerations to be taken into account in the exercise of
that discretion is whether
the appeal is frivolous or vexatious or has some
merit to it. That was done in this case.
In all the circumstances although the appeal was dismissed without calling upon
counsel for the respondent it cannot be said that
this appeal was completely
unmeritorious. [I]t did raise a number of difficult and arguable points and in
all the circumstances this
is a case where I would not exercise my discretion in
favour of the respondent.
In expressing his concurrence with these reasons and such an outcome, the then
Deputy President, Cox J, observed that “there
should exist some sound
reason” why the costs discretion should be exercised as sought by the
respondent and that in his view
no such reason had been established. The
remaining member of the Tribunal as constituted for that appeal, Gallop J, also
with the reasons of the President and the proposed no order as to
costs outcome, adding:
There is nothing about the conduct of the appellant which has brought about this
appeal in any way, that is conduct in the course
of the trial or conduct between
conviction and appeal to this Tribunal. True it is that there is a discretion in
s 37(3) but in the
absence of some such circumstances of the kind to which I
have adverted and I do not by any means purport to be able to indicate
short oral reasons what other circumstances could justify the making of an order
for costs against an unsuccessful appellant
who has been convicted by court
martial, in my opinion the implementation of s 37(3) should not be such as to
require an appellant
such as the present appellant to bear the financial burden
which might be quite substantial of trying to exculpate himself by succeeding
an appeal and having his convictions set aside unless, as I say, in some way he
has contributed to the necessity to appeal. I
would commend to the Chief of the
Naval Staff that one of his officers in the position such as this appellant
should not have to
expose himself to financial burden in order to test legality
and correctness of his trial at court martial.
There are important questions of principle involved on this application for
costs and in the exercise of my discretion I would likewise
refuse an order for
152 Slightly earlier in time and unreported on the subject of whether to make
a costs order in the exercise of the discretion conferred
by s 37 of the Appeals
Stuart v Chief of the General Staff
[1994] ADFAT 2
); DFDAT No 1 of 1993, (Northrop, Gallop and Badgery-Parker JJ, 27
July 1994). The costs application in that case was one made by
a successful
appellant. Although the Tribunal was divided as to whether, in the circumstances
to award costs to the appellant (by
majority, it did),
present relevance for the unanimous rejection by each of the members, in light
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
, of a view earlier expressed in
the Tribunal that there was nothing in s 37 of the Appeals Act which displaced
the generally accepted
position at common law in criminal matters, which is that
costs are neither awarded in favour of or against the Crown. We respectfully
agree with the conclusion reached on this subject in
. The presence
of a statutory power to award costs necessarily means that there can be no
, assumption that costs will not be awarded against an
unsuccessful party to an appeal or application for leave to appeal to the
153 Even in relation to an exercise of judicial power by a court, any power
to award costs is wholly a consequence of statutory provision.
An example of
such provision is
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Subject to exceptions in particular types of case, the power conferred by that
provision, as with most conferrals on courts
by statute of a power to award
costs, is discretionary and not fettered. Accordingly, such provisions do not
confer on a successful
party a right to an award of costs. Even so, the
discretion so conferred is one which must be exercised judicially and the usual
way in which an unfettered costs discretion is exercised is that costs follow
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
154 Flowing from the use of the word “may” in each of
, the power to award costs conferred on the Tribunal by s 37 of the
Appeals Act, either to an appellant or as the case may be to a
respondent, is
discretionary but it is not unfettered. In each subsection, “may” is
qualified by the conditional clause,
“if it thinks fit”.
155 The presence of that qualification suggests that occasion for the
awarding of costs in the exercise of the discretion conferred
is not to be found
just by the adoption of a default position that costs should follow the event.
This is reinforced by a consideration
of the subject matter, scope and purpose
of the Appeals Act.
156 We have already referred above to the fundamental nature of the reform to
the service discipline system represented by the Appeals
Act. As Kiefel CJ, Bell
and Keane JJ observed in
Private R v Cowen
[2020] HCA 31
(2020) 94 ALJR 849
[It] is s 68, and not Ch III, which provides the institutional framework within
which the disciplinary code enacted under s 51(vi)
is to be enforced. ... [The]
system of military justice pursues the specific purpose of securing and
maintaining discipline within
the armed forces rather than the general purpose
of punishing those guilty of criminal conduct.
157 It bears repeating that specific purpose of the Appeals Act is to
buttress the securing and maintaining of discipline of the ADF
by giving all
defence members, irrespective of rank, confidence that, within the executive
branch, the final determination of whether
a conviction in respect of a service
offence is lawful is no longer vested in the ADF chain of command but rather in
an independent,
civilian tribunal wholly constituted (in modern times) by
judicial officers pursuant to an Act administered not by the Minister for
Defence but rather the Attorney-General, Australia’s First Law Officer.
The achievement of this purpose would be rendered hollow
if the price of a
defence member having an arguable case that his or her conviction under the DFDA
in respect of a service offence
was amenable to being quashed on one or more of
the bases specified in s 23 of the Appeals Act, were subjection to a potentially
financially crippling costs order in that event that his or her appeal or
application for leave to appeal to the Tribunal were not
successful. In our
respectful view, it is impossible to overstate the importance of this
consideration for confidence in a service
discipline system so essential to the
efficient conduct of military operations in war and in peace.
158 The present appeal offers a paradigm example of how the achievement of
this statutory purpose might be subverted. As a Private,
the appellant holds the
lowest rank in the Australian Army, also equivalent to the lowest rank in each
other arm of the ADF: see
s 21 and Schedule 1, item 21,
Defence Act 1903
(Cth). The inequality of financial resources available to him and the Chief of
Army could not be starker. Private R requested a grant
of legal aid for the
purposes of his application and any consequential appeal. That application was
approved pursuant to reg 9 of
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Regulation
(Cth), the present equivalent of reg 11of the
Courts Martial
Appeal Regulations
. Factors which told in favour of that approval were
Private R’s relative impecuniosity, having regard to the prospective costs
of legal representation in any application or consequential appeal to the
Tribunal and that his proposed grounds were at least arguable.
Likewise, none of
the grounds as they came to be amended could be characterised as not at least
arguable. Neither as instituted nor
prosecuted by Private R could the present
proceeding be described as either frivolous or vexatious. The proceeding
undoubtedly raised
a number of important issues concerning the conduct of
proceedings before a service tribunal by a defending officer and the
consequences
of forensic choices made by a defending officer. Those are issues
of systemic importance to the service discipline system.
159 Perhaps because the Tribunal’s decision in
reported, perhaps because of generational change within the senior echelons of
the ADF and those responsible for the furnishing
of legal advice to them but
not, it is to be hoped, because of a lack of understanding in those same senior
echelons of the importance
of confidence by all ranks in the fairness and
integrity of the service discipline system, the commendation by Gallop J in
to a service chief in relation to the seeking of costs appears to
have been forgotten, as the present application for costs attests.
respectfully agree with his Honour’s commendation. We would thus commend
to the respondent Chief of Army that one of his
soldiers in the position such as
Private R should not have to expose himself to financial burden in order to test
the legality of
his trial at court martial or before a DFM.
160 There undoubtedly are cases in which it would be appropriate for the
Tribunal to make an order for the payment by an unsuccessful
appellant or
applicant, either in whole or in part, of a respondent service chief’s
costs but the present is not such a case.
In the circumstances of the present
case, and for the reasons given, we do not consider it fit to make any order for
costs against
Private R. The application for such an order by the respondent
Chief of Army is, accordingly, refused. Instead, there should be no
order as to
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
sixty (160) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
the Honourable
Justices Logan, Perry and
Dated: 1 April 2022
RTF format (584 KB)
Signed PDF/A format