New World Resources Limited 02 [2025] ATP 21 (14 July 2025)
Reasons for Decision
New World Resources Limited
[2025] ATP 21
Catchwords:
Decline to make a declaration – frustrating action –
placement – on-market acquisitions – efficient, competitive
informed market – ASIC Market Integrity Rules
Corporations Act 2001
sections 602
ASIC Market Integrity Rules (Securities Markets) 2017, rule
Metals Exploration Ltd v Samic Ltd
(1994) 123 ALR 289
Samic Ltd v Metals Exploration Ltd
(1993) 11 ACSR 84
Guidance Note 12: Frustrating Action
Southern Cross Media Group Limited [2023] ATP 13, Virtus Health Limited
04R [2022] ATP 13, Virtus Health Limited 03 [2022] ATP 10,
Midwest Corporation
Limited 02 [2008] ATP 15, Skywest Limited [2004] ATP 17
Interim order
IO undertaking
Declaration
Final order
Undertaking
INTRODUCTION
Panel, Sylvia Falzon, Jon Gidney, and Philippa Stone (sitting President)
declined to make a declaration of unacceptable circumstances
in relation to the
affairs of NWC. The application concerned whether a proposed placement to CAML
frustrated the auction for control
of NWC and whether acquisitions of NWC shares
by CAML on 20 June 2025 contravened certain provisions of the
Corporations Act
or were otherwise contrary to an efficient, competitive and informed market.
The proposed placement was terminated after the application
was made, which
sufficiently addressed the Panel’s concerns in relation to it. The Panel
had concerns regarding the delay
in the market being notified of CAML’s
offer price increase (which resulted from CAML’s first acquisition on 20
2025). However, the Panel was not satisfied that the effect that the
circumstances have had, or are having, was sufficient to justify
the making of a
declaration.
these reasons, the following definitions
ASIC Market Integrity Rules
ASIC Market Integrity Rules (Securities Markets) 2017
Central Asia Metals PLC
Kinterra Capital GP Corp. II in its capacity as general partner of the
Kinterra Critical Materials & Infrastructure Opportunities
New World Resources Limited
Proposed Placement
has the meaning given in paragraph
Special Crossing
has the meaning given in paragraph
Subscription Agreement
has the meaning given in paragraph
Virtus Health Limited 03
[2022] ATP 10
Virtus Health Limited 04R
[2022] ATP 13
is an ASX-listed company (ASX code: NWC) which explores and develops mineral
resources projects in North America.
is a Toronto-based private equity firm.
is a company listed on the Alternative Investment Market of the London Stock
Exchange (AIM code: CAML) which is a base metals
producer with operations in
Europe and Central Asia.
21 May 2025, NWC announced that it had entered into a Scheme Implementation Deed
with CAML under which it was proposed that CAML
would acquire all of the shares
in NWC by way of an Australian scheme of arrangement for cash consideration of
$0.05 per share.
16 June 2025, Moelis (Kinterra's financial adviser) held discussions with NWC
representatives during which (according to Kinterra)
it was made clear to NWC
that Kinterra was considering a number of options, including a potential
takeover bid for NWC.
17 June 2025, NWC entered a trading halt pending “
a potential material
variation, including a proposed increase in Scheme Consideration, to a change of
control transaction involving
. The trading halt was to last
until the commencement of trading on 19 June 2025 (or earlier announcement to
the market).
on 17 June 2025, Kinterra lodged a notice of initial substantial holding
disclosing that it had acquired voting power in NWC
of 11.99%, which it obtained
via a series of on-market purchases of shares or special crossings between 6
June to 16 June 2025.
19 June 2025 at 10:38 am, NWC entered a voluntary suspension pending NWC making
an announcement to the ASX in relation to:
(i) a potential
material variation, including a proposed increase in Scheme consideration, to a
change of control transaction involving
[NWC]; and (ii) a placement of
approximately $10 million to enable [NWC] to continue advancing the Antler
Project towards development,
including meeting regulatory bonding requirements
for Arizona State Mining Permits over the course of Q3 & Q4 2025 due to an
accelerated State permitting process and to finalise acquisition of key project
land parcels
The announcement also stated that NWC expected that it would execute
transaction documents before commencement of trading on 20 June
19 June 2025, following NWC going into voluntary suspension, Allens (on behalf
of Kinterra) wrote to NWC confirming that Kinterra
considering a takeover bid for NWC”
and stating that the placement
is designed to and will likely frustrate our client’s intentions
in this regard.”
on 19 June 2025, Kinterra made an application to the Panel by way of a letter
titled “Application for interim orders and
declaration and final orders in
relation to NWC’s Proposed Placement” which stated that Kinterra
undertakes to make a
formal application to the Panel in respect of the matters
described in the letter. In its letter, Kinterra sought interim orders
prevent NWC from making a placement prior to Kinterra's application being heard
by the Panel.
Acting President considered Kinterra’s request on an urgent basis in the
evening of 19 June 2025. NWC informed the Acting
President that it
“negotiated a term of the placement that completion is
conditional on NWC not receiving, during the 14 days following the
agreement, a competing proposal from a third party which the NWC board
subsequently determines is or may reasonably be expected to
become a Superior
. The Acting President decided not to make any interim order,
noting that a sitting Panel could deal with any unacceptable aspects
proposed placement by making interim or final
The Panel published a
media release in relation to the application and the Acting President’s
decision before market open
20 June 2025 at 9:19 am,
released an ASX announcement titled “NWC Enters into Revised Proposal with
CAML including Increased Cash Consideration
and Conditional Placement”.
The announcement stated (among other things) that:
(a) CAML had increased the cash consideration offered by it under the scheme
from $0.05 per share to $0.053 per share.
(b) NWC and CAML had agreed to modify the transaction structure so that it now
included a concurrent off-market takeover bid by CAML
for NWC (also at $0.053
per share), subject to the failure of the scheme or the termination of the
Scheme Implementation Deed and
a 50.1% minimum acceptance condition.
(c) CAML had “
committed to provide A$10.0
million in funding via a placement of new shares in New World at $0.053 per
share (representing c.5% of
New World), conditional on either no Competing
Proposal being received by New World in the next 14 days (by 5.00pm Sydney time
4 July 2025), or if a competing proposal is received within that time, the
Directors of New World have not determined that it is
or may reasonably be
expected to become a Superior Proposal
This funding enables New World to meet bonding requirements in
relation to the Arizona State Permits, driven by a faster-than-expected
permitting timeline.
20 June 2025 at 11:13 am, CAML acquired 176,709,950 NWC shares by way of a
single special crossing at $0.055 per share (
Special Crossing
Following the Special Crossing and prior to market close, CAML acquired a
further 2,090,106 NWC shares via on-market acquisitions
at $0.055 per
20 June 2025 at 6:03 pm, NWC announced that it had been notified by CAML
[f]ollowing market close today ... that it had bought on market today
a total of 178,800,056 New World shares, representing approximately
5.0% of the
issued capital of [NWC] at $0.055 per New World share
CAML has also advised that it proposes an increase to the cash
consideration payable by CAML under both the Scheme and Takeover Offer
$0.053 to $0.055 per New World share.
23 June 2025, Kinterra lodged a substantial holding notice disclosing that its
voting power in NWC had increased from 11.99% to
on 23 June 2025, as announced by NWC in response to media speculation, Kinterra
submitted a non-binding indicative proposal (
) to NWC for the
acquisition by Kinterra of all of the shares in NWC that it does not already own
by way of an off-market takeover
bid at a price of $0.057 per share, subject to
due diligence and a number of other conditions.
26 June 2025, Kinterra announced its intention to make a takeover bid for all of
the ordinary shares it did not already own in
NWC at a price of $0.057 per
share, subject only to ‘no prescribed occurrences’. It also lodged
its bidder’s statement
27 June 2025, before market open:
(a) NWC announced that “
following market close on 26 June
“notified by CAML that it had bought after
market close a total of 253,018,511 New World shares, representing approximately
7.1% of the issued capital of [NWC]... at $0.062 per New World share
immediately after that purchase
”, CAML had advised
NWC that it proposed an increase to the cash consideration payable under its
scheme and takeover bid for
NWC from $0.055 to $0.062 per NWC share and
(b) CAML lodged a substantial holding notice disclosing that its voting power in
NWC had increased from 5.00% to 12.08%.
30 June 2025, Kinterra announced an increase to the offer price under its
takeover bid for NWC from $0.057 to $0.062 per share.
It also announced that it
intended to vote any NWC shares it holds at the time of the CAML scheme meeting
against the CAML scheme.
APPLICATION
application dated 1 July 2025, Kinterra sought a declaration of unacceptable
circumstances. Kinterra submitted (among other things)
(a) NWC and CAML had sought to frustrate the auction for control of NWC,
including by entering into the placement agreement with
knowing of Kinterra's objections and the fact that Kinterra was actively
considering a takeover bid for NWC, and despite there
being no immediate need
for the funding
(b) CAML had acquired the shares that it held in NWC in contravention of various
provisions of the
Corporations Act
, including those relating to insider trading,
market manipulation, and misleading and deceptive conduct.
submitted that the effect of the circumstances was that the auction for control
of NWC was not taking place in an efficient,
competitive and informed market,
contrary to
section 602.
sought interim orders that NWC not undertake the Proposed Placement, and
that CAML not acquire any further NWC shares, pending determination
application.
sought final orders that NWC not undertake the Proposed Placement and that CAML
dispose of its 12.08% shareholding in NWC.
have considered all the material, but address specifically only that part of the
material we consider necessary to explain our
Interim orders request / undertaking
that the condition precedent to the Proposed Placement was due to expire on 4
July 2025, we considered the interim orders request
on an urgent basis. We were
concerned that the Proposed Placement could potentially close imminently and
before we had had the chance
to make further enquiries. Accordingly, we were
minded to make an interim order to prevent NWC from completing the Proposed
to CAML in order to maintain the status quo pending our determination
of the application and we communicated this to the parties.
However, this
became unnecessary as we received an undertaking from NWC in substantially the
same form, which we decided to accept
(see Annexure A).
did not consider it appropriate on the materials before us to make an interim
order preventing CAML from acquiring further NWC
shares, noting this would
preclude normal market activity.
Preliminary submission and decision to conduct
proceedings
received a preliminary submission from CAML, submitting that there was no basis
for any of the allegations against CAML and that
we should decline to conduct
proceedings. In particular, it submitted (among other things) that:
[A]t the time of the release of the Revised Proposal Announcement,
it had no intention to effect the Special Crossing nor to increase
price from $0.053 per NWC share to $0.055 per NWC share. The increase in the
offer price was entirely a function of the
acquisition of shares on-market above
$0.053 per NWC share. For instance, if CAML had not acquired any NWC shares
above $0.053, then
it would not have increased the offer price under the
Takeover Offer and the Scheme.
(b) CAML was not in possession of material non-public information at the time it
acquired its NWC shares, and therefore had not contravened
the insider trading
provisions of the
Corporations Act
(c) CAML had not contravened any provisions of the
Corporations Act
Market Integrity Rule 5.13.1,
relation to its purchases of NWC shares on 20 June 2025.
application raised issues which we considered warranted further enquiry. We
were troubled by the Proposed Placement, including
the timing of it and the
proposed raising of capital by this method noting a placement had recently been
conducted by NWC in March
We were concerned the
Proposed Placement could potentially have the effect of frustrating
Kinterra’s takeover bid for NWC.
We also had concerns about CAML’s
acquisitions of NWC shares on 20 June 2025. ASIC Market Integrity Rule 5.13.1
a market announcement prior to a bidder (through its broker) offering
to buy bid class securities on-market during the bid period
for a price that
varies from the consideration offered under the bid. While the bid period under
CAML’s takeover offer had
not commenced and hence it did not appear that
ASIC Market Integrity Rule 5.13.1 applied, we queried whether the conduct could
nonetheless
potentially be contrary to
section 602
or potentially raise insider
trading issues. We decided to conduct proceedings.
Proposed Placement
had a number of preliminary concerns in relation to the Proposed Placement,
including in relation to:
(a) whether ASX Listing
applied in the circumstances
(b) the process undertaken by NWC which led to its decision to undertake the
Proposed Placement
(c) how and when the need for the funds to be raised were first identified
(d) why NWC made no mention of a capital raising in its request to ASX for a
trading halt on 17 June 2025
(e) why funds could not have been raised by another means, such as by a pro-rata
rights issue or through debt funding
(f) why it was only made available to CAML and
(g) whether it was a frustrating action under the Panel’s frustrating
action policy.
response to submissions on interim orders, we received a copy of the
subscription letter agreement of 20 June 2025 in relation
to the Proposed
Placement (
Subscription Agreement
). The subscription termination
condition as set out in the Subscription Agreement contained provisions relating
to the condition
precedent of the Proposed Placement that were not referred to
explicitly in NWC’s ASX announcement of 20 June 2025 at 9:19
Relevantly,
the Subscription Agreement stated that “
[i]f a Competing Proposal is
received by the Company prior to the Competing Proposal Deadline
(a) the Company’s directors determine that the Competing Proposal is
not and may not reasonably be expected to become a Superior
Proposal and/or
terminate engagement with the proponent of the Competing Proposal (including
where the Subscriber has exercised its
rights under clause 12.6 of the SID
(Response to Competing Proposal and Counter Proposal)), then the Subscription
Condition shall
be deemed satisfied on the later of the date of such
determination or termination and the Competing Proposal Deadline; or
(b) the Company’s directors make the determination contemplated in
clause 12.8(a) of the SID in relation to the Competing Proposal
and all of the
Subscriber's rights under clause 12.6 of the SID have been exhausted and the
Company directors determine that the
Competing Proposal constitutes a Superior
Proposal, then this letter will automatically terminate and the Subscription
will not proceed.
12.6 of the Scheme Implementation Deed included a 5-business day matching right
in favour of CAML, which per clause 12.8, was
subject to NWC’s
directors’ fiduciary obligations.
the market may have interpreted the condition precedent as being subject to the
matching rights regime under the Scheme Implementation
Deed, it was not clear
that NWC’s ASX announcement had accurately described the only condition
precedent to the Proposed Placement.
At the time we were considering a brief,
we were within the 14-day window referred to in NWC’s 20 June ASX
announcement, and
NWC had not publicly responded to Kinterra’s NBIO
received on 23 June 2025 nor its increased revised offer under its proposed
takeover bid dated 24 June 2025, which left the status of the condition
precedent uncertain.
4 July 2025, we issued a brief which included questions concerning the above
7 July 2025, before submissions from the parties were due, NWC announced that
NWC and CAML had mutually agreed to terminate the
Proposed Placement, and that
CAML had agreed to instead provide a US$6.5 million unsecured loan facility.
on 7 July 2025, NWC asked whether the Panel wished to revise the brief because
of the events detailed in the announcement. We
asked for submissions from the
parties about whether we should remove the questions relating to the Proposed
Placement. None of
the parties objected to this course of action. Accordingly,
we amended the brief to remove the questions concerning the Proposed
noting that we considered that our concerns in relation to the Proposed
Placement had been sufficiently addressed by its
termination.
CAML’s acquisitions of NWC shares on 20 June
asked at what time on 20 June 2025 NWC was informed that CAML had acquired
shares at $0.055 per share and how long it took NWC
to inform the market, and
CAML confirms that, on 20 June 2025 at 1:52pm
(AEST) (4:52am UK time), [a representative of CAML], called [a representative of
to inform him that CAML had acquired shares at $0.055 per share. At the
same time (i.e. 1:52pm (AEST)), [a representative of] BMO
Capital Markets
(CAML's financial adviser) called [a representative of] Sternship Advisers
(NWC's financial adviser) to inform him
that CAML had acquired shares at $0.055
Following confirmation that CAML and BMO had informed NWC and Sternship
(respectively), at 2:02pm (AEST) on 20 June 2025, [a representative
of] Clayton
Utz (CAML's Australian legal adviser) called [a representative] of Hamilton
Locke (NWC's Australian legal adviser) to
inform him that CAML had acquired
shares at $0.055 per share. Subsequently, at
(AEST) (8:44am UK time),
[a representative of CAML] emailed [a representative of NWC] to confirm the
final quantum of NWC shares
purchased during the trading
Just before 2pm on 20 June 2025,[a
representative of NWC] received a telephone call from [a representative of
CAML]. [The representative
of CAML] said that CAML had been buying [NWC] shares
on market that day, and that the special crossing earlier in the day at $0.055
was bought by CAML. [The representative of CAML] did not say the number of
shares that CAML had purchased, and he told [the representative
of NWC] that
CAML would advise the final number and the highest price paid after the market
CAML’s financial adviser, BMO, made a telephone call to
[NWC’s] financial adviser, Sternship, at the same time, and conveyed
essentially the same message.
Following that call, [NWC] immediately began preparing an ASX announcement
pending confirmation of the volume purchased by CAML and
the price or prices
The first written information received by [NWC] was an email from [the
representative of CAML] to [NWC] and its advisers at 4.44pm.
Figure received from our broker just moments ago:
178,800,056 NWC at 5.5c.
[NWC] was still unsure at that point what prices had been paid by CAML, as
some ASX trades had taken place at different prices that
day. [NWC’s]
advisers at Sternship therefore emailed [the representative of CAML] at 4.52pm
asking whether all buying was at
[The representative of CAML] replied by email at 4.54pm confirming all
purchases were at 5.5 cents.
[NWC] then finalised its draft ASX announcement, provided it to CAML for
confirmation of factual accuracy, and released it to ASX
so that it was publicly
available at 6.03pm.
In the circumstances, where [NWC] did not know of CAML’s intention
to purchase shares until after the on market purchases had
already occurred and
did not receive written information of any kind until 4.44pm, we submit that
[NWC] acted promptly and with regard
to ensuring the market had factually
information.
also supplied, at our request, details of the times and volume of trades after
11:13 am on 20 June 2025 which showed that CAML’s
first on-market purchase
occurred 28 seconds after the Special Crossing and was followed by a further 40
purchases, the last of which
occurred at 3.58 pm.
also asked the parties whether references to the bid period in section 671B(6)
and section 651A suggest a legislative policy that
there is less urgency for the
market to be informed of material trading outside of the bid period and, if so,
what relevance that
might have here.
submitted that the fact that these provisions reference the bid period
not suggest that market integrity issues are any less
important when an off-market takeover bid had been announced, but the bid period
has not technically commenced because the bidder’s statement has not been
served, than when the bid period has commenced.
” Kinterra submitted
that the market was trading on an uninformed basis after 11:13am on 20 June
2025, because CAML had announced
an off-market takeover bid for NWC at $0.053
per share before market open that day so that the operation of section 631 meant
there was “
for all intents and purposes... a bid in the market at
that price from before market open.
” From 11:13am, Kinterra submitted,
market participants were trading on the basis that CAML’s offer
price was $0.053 per share, when it was actually $0.055 per
submitted that:
(a) the references to “bid period” in these provisions clearly
suggests a legislative policy that there is less urgency
for the market to be
informed of material trading outside of the bid period as compared to the market
being kept informed during
a bid period and
(b) had the legislative intent been for there to be increased urgency following
the proposal to make a takeover bid but before the
bid period commences, the
relevant provisions would have made it clear that they applied from the date
that the bidder “proposes
to make a takeover bid” rather than from
the “bid period”.
submitted that before the bid period starts, “
there is no policy
evident in the
Corporations Act
that a trade which affects a proposed
bidder’s bid price must be announced on an accelerated timetable or before
” and that “
[i]n the absence of a
‘truth in takeovers’ statement that a proposed bid price is best and
final, market participants
cannot reasonably expect that a bidder will not
increase its bid price, including by activating the minimum bid price
also submitted that the
“Panel in the [Virtus 03] and [Virtus 04R]
matters noted that target company shareholders who sell on market are willingly
the risk that they will be unable to sell into a potential higher bid
later, and that prior notification of an on market purchase
is not required for
an efficient, competitive and informed
agree that it follows from the
that prior notification of an on market purchase is not required for an
efficient, competitive and informed market. In
those decisions, the bidder had
informed the market that it had appointed a broker to acquire Virtus shares on
market at prices equal
to, below, or higher than its bid price. As discussed
further below, the dispute related to whether it should also have disclosed
amount of the price increase before acquiring Virtus shares above its bid
rebuttals, Kinterra submitted that CAML’s off-market takeover bid was
“live” as soon as it was announced, because
it couldn’t then
be withdrawn without breaching
section 631
; the market was entitled to and did
treat it as being live; and that the conduct was not less misleading or
egregious because CAML
had not yet served a bidder’s statement.
submitted that “
are expressions of
the principles of
, the fundamental principles of
do not have a valence
for less urgency in respect of an informed market outside of a bid period.
Sections 671B(6)
should be read in that context—particularly in
circumstances where the primary control transaction, at least at the time, was
members’ scheme of arrangement which does not have a defined bid period
but must still take place within an efficient, competitive
and informed
also asked the parties whether it was unacceptable for CAML to acquire NWC
shares via the Special Crossing and on-market at $0.055
per share from 11:13 am
on 20 June 2025 onwards and to continue to acquire shares at $0.055 while
the market understood its offer
price to be $0.053 per share.
submitted that the acquisitions were unacceptable noting that in addition to its
earlier submissions concerning market integrity,
all persons who sold NWC shares
on the ASX between the time of the Special Crossing at 11.13 am and NWC's
announcement at 6:03 pm
fundamentally misled as to CAML's
true offer price
sold their shares thinking that they
were selling at a premium to the CAML offer price, not at the CAML offer
” Kinterra submitted that, had these persons known that CAML
had already increased its bid price over the $0.053 per share
announced earlier
that morning, they would have held their shares. Kinterra also submitted that
CAML had breached the insider trading
provisions by purchasing shares on 20 June
2025 after 11:13 am because it was “
in possession of material price
sensitive information, namely, that its offer price had been
rejected any assertion that the acquisitions were unacceptable, including
because ASIC Market Integrity Rule 5.13.1 does not
apply to bidders prior to the
bid period and nor is there any policy which would suggest that this rule
applies to a bidder before
its bid period has commenced. It also made
submissions to the effect that extending the legislative or regulative
requirements in
question would be detrimental to the certainty that all
participants in takeovers and schemes have in those requirements and when
have application. It further submitted that the shareholders who sold to it on
market suffered no loss as they sold at the
price to which the bid was
subsequently increased.
also reiterated its submission that it was not in possession of any material
non-public information at the time of acquiring
any NWC shares and therefore
there was no material information disparity between the information known by
CAML and the information
known to the market. It further submitted that
[i]n any event, even if CAML acquiring NWC shares at $0.055 may be
considered material (which is by no means apparent given the marginal
in the bid price of $0.002), the ‘own intentions’ exception in
section 1043I
Corporations Act
would apply to the acquisition of those
” In rebuttals, Kinterra disputed that CAML had the benefit of
the ‘own intentions’ defence here, submitting that
the exception
only applies to the knowledge of entry into a transaction and does not extend to
any other information.
submitted that it did not believe the acquisitions gave rise to unacceptable
circumstances noting that the bid period had not
commenced. It also submitted
that CAML had not made a ‘best and final’ or other statement that it
would not purchase
NWC shares on market at prices above its proposed offer price
that would have led market participants to believe that such purchases
submitted that from “
11:13am until market close, the market for NWC
shares was uninformed that CAML’s offer had automatically increased to
Selling shareholders may have chosen not to sell if they were
informed—for example, if they were put on notice that CAML reserved
right to purchase, or if an announcement about the increased offer were made
immediately after the 11:13am acquisition. That
uninformed market may have
enabled CAML to acquire a larger stake, than it otherwise may have been able to
acquire, before competing
acquirers were in a position to respond on an even
playing field. To the extent the principles of a competitive and informed market
were undermined the market for control of NWC was an inefficient one.
also confirmed in its submissions that ASIC Market Integrity Rule 5.13.1 was not
enlivened but submitted that “
to uphold the principle of an informed
, which is always enlivened in control transactions
was open for CAML in its revised proposal announcement of 9.19 am on
20 June 2025 to put the market on notice that CAML
may make on-market
purchases in NWC or reserve CAML’s right to do so. ASIC further submitted
that once CAML formed the intention
to effect the Special Crossing it was again
open for CAML to disclose voluntarily that it may acquire shares on market,
the risk that an automatic increase to its offer may not be
immediately disclosed (which is what
in circumstances
where NWC had told the market two hours earlier CAML’s offer was
rebuttals, CAML reiterated that it had no intention to purchase NWC shares at
$0.055 until the point in time that it had the opportunity
to do so under the
Special Crossing which occurred only during the course of trading. It further
...before the market had opened, CAML placed an
on-market buy order at $0.053 per NWC share which was in line with the increased
price as disclosed in the Revised Proposal announcement earlier on 20 June
2025. In the first hour of trading on ASX from 10:00am
(AEST) onwards, NWC
shares were consistently trading at $0.055 per NWC share, while CAML's buy order
remained at $0.053. At a time
shortly before 11:00am (AEST), CAML was presented
with an opportunity to acquire NWC shares at $0.055 which was in line with the
market price of NWC shares at that point in time. At 11:13am (AEST), CAML
acquired 176,709,950 NWC shares via the Special Crossing
at which point CAML's
buy order was revised from $0.053 to $0.055 per NWC share. As a result of the
standing order at $0.055, an
additional 2,090,106 NWC shares were acquired at
$0.055 per NWC share during the balance of the trading day...
appears that CAML did not expect that there was any prospect that it would
increase its offer above $0.053 per NWC share when it
announced that increased
offer price before market opened on 20 June 2025 and that the Special Crossing
opportunity arose at the
last minute.
Prima facie
this first trade did
not appear to us to be unacceptable, but we were less certain about the
subsequent trades and considered carefully
the existing regulatory and policy
requirements for disclosure.
noted above, the Panel has previously considered the operation of ASIC Market
Integrity Rule 5.13.1 in
. In that matter, BGH had included in
its bidder’s statement disclosure for the purposes of rule 5.13.1
reserving the right
to buy shares on market at prices different to its bid price
(without specifying the varied price). The applicant, competing bidder
submitted that rule 5.13.1 prevented BGH’s broker from buying shares
on-market at a price higher than BGH’s
prevailing bid price without BGH
first announcing that price to the market. The Panel declined to decide the
interpretation of rule
5.13.1 noting (among other things) that, as submitted by
ASIC, there was uncertainty as to the rule’s application.
further submitted that failure to inform the market of the amount that the bid
price was to be increased before Virtus shares
could be purchased on behalf of
BGH would be contrary to an efficient, competitive and informed market. The
Panel, however, disagreed,
stating “...
but for any
application of the principles in
section 602
to the contrary:
(a) Chapter 6 permits the on-market acquisition of shares
during the bid period by a bidder under an off market takeover bid that
conditional only on prescribed occurrences at a price above the bid price,
without any prior disclosure of the price at which
it intended to acquire the
(b) there is no requirement in Chapter 6 for a bidder to announce that it
may increase the offer price under a takeover bid prior
to the increase being
section 651A(1)(c)(i)
specifically contemplates that an on-market
acquisition may be made by a bidder at a price above the offer price under its
Panel was only concerned about the potential delay in BGH
disclosing to the market that it had acquired Virtus shares on-market at
the bid price. The Panel accepted undertakings from BGH which, in effect,
required them to make such an announcement immediately
(and before any further
on-market acquisitions) which satisfactorily addressed the
unacceptable
circumstances”
review Panel in
agreed with the conclusions of the initial
Panel and declined to conduct proceedings.
circumstances in
, while similar to the present facts, can be
distinguished in that the matter involved a bidder disclosing an intention to
at the time of the application, had yet to do so) shares on-market at a
price potentially higher than its bid price
its bid period had
the circumstances in
clearly engaged ASIC Market Integrity Rule
5.13.1 (which does not apply here), the Panel considered that the focus of its
should be on whether any of the principles underpinning Chapter 6
section 602)
and we consider that
should be our focus here as well.
we agree that there is clear legislative intent that once a bid period has
commenced there are accelerated disclosure requirements,
in the case before us,
where a takeover bid has been announced but the bid period is yet to commence,
the principles in
section 602
may assume particular importance. More so
perhaps, as ASIC highlighted, where the primary control transaction at the
relevant time,
was a scheme of arrangement without a defined bid period.
agree with ASIC that CAML could have, on its own volition, disclosed its
preparedness to acquire shares on market prior to doing
so on 20 June 2025. We
consider that the lack of such prior notice increased the importance of timely
disclosure following the 11.13am
acquisition.
acknowledge the observation in
that shareholders who place sell
orders on-market do so accepting the risk that a higher price might be paid by
another buyer.
However, as ASIC
pointed out in its submissions, in this instance, after 11.13 am on 20 June the
increase to CAML’s offer
was not a mere possibility and while selling
shareholders accepted a risk that a higher price might be paid by another buyer,
were not informed that CAML’s offer had in effect been
Accordingly,
in the circumstances, we consider that there was a delay in the market being
notified of the offer price increase. It
was open to CAML to have advised the
market immediately after 11:13 am on 20 June that its offer price had been
increased to $0.055
per share by providing an announcement to NWC in a form
suitable for immediate release. Instead, it delayed advising NWC of its
purchase for over two and a half hours and expected NWC to announce the change
in price. Similarly, if NWC felt it did not
have sufficient confidence
following oral notification during trading hours of the purchase above the offer
price, it was open to
it to seek a trading halt pending written confirmation.
Instead, NWC allowed the market to trade on an uninformed basis for a further
concerns in relation to this delay led us to consider making a declaration of
unacceptable circumstances. However, we were not
satisfied that the effect of
the circumstances on the control, or potential control, of NWC, or on the
acquisition of a substantial
interest in NWC (or otherwise), was sufficient to
justify the making of a declaration of unacceptable circumstances here. While
there may have been an uninformed market during the period between 11.13 am and
6.03 pm on 20 June 2025, that had been cured by NWC’s
announcement at
6.03 pm that day. We considered whether the circumstances may have enabled CAML
to secure a form of competitive
, such as by acquiring
a larger stake in NWC, than it otherwise may have been able to acquire.
However, if, for example, an announcement
immediately after the 11:13 am acquisition on 20 June 2025, we cannot know
definitively whether
those persons who sold to CAML that day would have held
their shares. In any event, the quantum of shares CAML acquired on-market
June 2025 following the Special Crossing represented approximately 0.058% of
NWC’s issued shares at the time. We also
cannot know if the persons
selling to CAML may have subsequently sold their shares for a higher price if
they had held their shares,
but this is always a risk sellers take. We do know
that the persons who sold to CAML received $0.055 per share for their shares
being the same price to which CAML’s bid was increased and, in that sense,
did not suffer a detriment. Having regard to the
materials before us and all
the circumstances including the developments since 20 June 2025 and the state of
play in relation to
Kinterra and CAML’s competing approaches for NWC at
the time of our decision, we considered that any effect of the circumstances
we considered that even if the circumstances were unacceptable, it was unlikely
that there were any orders we could have
made which would have appropriately
remedied them (having regard to the relatively small number of NWC shares
acquired by CAML on
20 June 2025 after the Special Crossing). We also noted that
disclosure of the 7.1% of NWC shares subsequently acquired by CAML after
on 26 June 2025 and consequential price increase to CAML’s scheme and
takeover had been, based on NWC’s announcement,
also took into account CAML’s and NWC’s submissions concerning their
compliance with the legislative requirements and
the market integrity rules.
The Panel has not, to our knowledge, previously declared similar circumstances
to be unacceptable and
the Panel’s guidance does not deal directly with
similar circumstances. Accordingly, in the particular circumstances of this
matter, we considered this to be a relevant factor concerning whether it would
be in the public interest to make a declaration of
unacceptable
circumstances.
consider that the question of whether ASIC Market Integrity Rule 5.13.1 ought to
be extended to operate from when an off-market
bid has been announced (rather
than from when the bidder’s statement has been served), and potentially
from a scheme of arrangement
proposal being announced, is a matter for ASIC.
That said, following this matter we intend to raise for consideration by the
Panel whether it should provide guidance to the market in dealing with
similar circumstances.
did not consider it appropriate to make further enquiries in relation to whether
CAML had breached the insider trading provisions
in connection with its
acquisitions of NWC shares on 20 June 2025, as we were not satisfied that
further investigation was likely
to lead to a finding of unacceptable
circumstances. We note that the Panel is not concerned with the enforcement of
the insider
trading provisions
themselves.
the reasons above, we declined to make a declaration of unacceptable
circumstances. We consider that it is not against the public
interest to decline
to make a declaration and we had regard to the matters in
that we made no declaration of unacceptable circumstances, we make no final
orders, including as to costs.
Philippa Stone
of the sitting Panel
Decision dated 14 July 2025
given to parties 2 September 2025
Reasons published 9 September
Moelis Australia
Hamilton Locke
Sternship Advisers
Clayton Utz
BMO Capital Markets
Canaccord Genuity
AUSTRALIAN SECURITIES AND
INVESTMENTS COMMISSION ACT 2001
UNDERTAKING
NEW WORLD RESOURCES LIMITED 02
New World Resources Limited (
) undertakes to the Panel that it will
not, without the prior consent of the Panel, issue any NWC shares to Central
Asia Metals PLC
or any of its associates pursuant to the placement announced by
NWC on 20 June 2025.
This undertaking ceases to apply on the earlier of:
(i) the determination of the proceedings in the matter of New World Resources
Limited 02; and
(ii) 2 months from the date of this undertaking.
by Nicholas Woolrych, Managing Director & CEO of
World Resources Limited
by authority of its directors
NWC contested this and stated
that it was not informed of Kinterra’s intention to make a takeover
The 19 June application was superseded by Kinterra’s subsequent
application (see
All times are in AEST unless otherwise
A further 4,958,229
NWC shares traded through the day at $0.055 per
Unless otherwise
indicated, all statutory references are to the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) and all terms used in Chapter 6, 6A or 6C have the meaning given in the
relevant Chapter (as modified by
Rule 5.13.1 (Acquisition
of Cash Market Products by Bidder) provides that
“[a] Market
Participant acting on behalf of a Bidder must not offer to buy on behalf of the
Bidder Cash Market Products in the
Bid Class On-Market during the Bid Period for
a price that varies from the consideration offered under the Takeover Bid unless
until an announcement has been made to the Market where Cash Market Products
in the Bid Class have been granted Official
submitted, in the context of the 19 June application, that the placement was
due to imminent funding requirements in relation to the
permits for [NWC’s] Antler Copper Project, which [were] arising sooner
than expected even at the time of the March 2025
restricts issues of equity during takeovers, subject to certain
See generally GN
See paragraph
CAML clarified in
rebuttals that the email was sent at 4:44 pm
The names of
individuals have been
The names of
individuals have been
In particular, NWC
referred to the review Panel’s comment (at [21]) that “
on-market during a takeover bid always give up the opportunity to accept an
improved off-market bid
that because the bid period had not commenced, these acquisitions did not
trigger an automatic increase in the bid consideration
section 651A.
However, the minimum bid price rule in
section 621(3)
would have the same
Corporation Limited 02
[2008] ATP 15 [2008] ATP 15 at [71]. See
Samic Ltd v Metals Exploration Ltd
(1993) 11 ACSR 84
Metals Exploration Ltd v Samic Ltd
(1994) 123 ALR 289
Cross Media Group Limited
[2023] ATP 13 at
[2004] ATP 17 at [47]
RTF format (7.28 MB)
Signed PDF/A format