Quirk and Comcare (Compensation) [2024] AATA 3621 (11 October 2024)
Quirk and Comcare (Compensation) [2024] AATA 3621 (11 October
Division: GENERAL DIVISION
File Number(s):
2021/8667, 2022/0493, 2022/9102, 2023/0196
Jacqueline Quirk
R Cameron, Senior
Pursuant to s 43 of the
Administrative
Appeals Act 1975
(Cth), the Tribunal ORDERS that:
first reviewable decision is set aside and in substitution the Tribunal finds
that the applicant suffered an aggravation of an
underlying condition of carpal
tunnel syndrome to 2 September 2021.
second reviewable decision is affirmed.
third reviewable decision is set aside and in substitution the Tribunal finds
that the applicant suffered an aggravation of an
underlying condition of right
elbow epicondylitis to 2 September 2021.
fourth reviewable decision is
.................................
.......................................
R Cameron, Senior Member
COMPENSATION – commonwealth employee – applicant claimed
compensation under four different applications –
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
– definition of
‘injury’ under
subsection 5A(1)
SRC Act - aggravation of underlying
carpal tunnel syndrome - De Quervains tenosynovitis not significantly
contributed to by employment
- aggravation of underlying lateral epicondylitis
– permanent impairment not significantly contributed to by employment -
whether each of these illnesses were related to her work with
Respondent.
Legislation
Administrative Appeals Act 1975
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
Ellison v Comcare (2022)
[2022] FCA 95
Secondary Materials
Bruce Connolly and John McKessar, ‘Carpal tunnel syndrome. Can it be a
work related condition?’ (2009) 38(9)
Australian Family Physician
Rogier M van Rijn et al, ‘
Associations between work-related factors
and the carpal tunnel syndrome-a systematic review’
(2009) 35(1),
Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment & Health
L Solomon, D Warwick, & D Nayagam, (eds), Apley's System of Orthopaedics
and Fractures (CRC Press, 9th ed, 2010)
REASONS FOR DECISION
R Cameron, Senior Member.
INTRODUCTION
are four applications before the Tribunal of which the applicant seeks
Application No: 2021/8667 - Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
first application seeks review of a decision made by an authorised delegate of
the Chief Executive Officer of the respondent on
the first reviewable decision’). The first reviewable
decision affirmed a previous determination made on 17 September 2021 which
determined that the respondent was not liable to pay compensation to the
applicant under
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
(Cth) (‘the SRC Act’) in respect of Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
(claimed for the applicant’s right arm) or aggravation
Application No: 2022/0493 - De Quervain’s
Tenosynovitis (‘DQT’)
second application seeks review of a decision made by an authorised delegate of
the Chief Executive Officer of the respondent
on 17 January 2022 (‘the
second reviewable decision’). The second reviewable decision affirmed a
previous determination
made on 8 December 2021 that the respondent has no
present liability for the applicant’s injuries described as
‘Aggravation
of De Quervain’s tenosynovitis of the right
thumb’ pursuant to ss 16 and 19 of the SRC
Application No: 2022/9102 - lateral
epicondylitis
third application seeks review of a decision made by an authorised delegate of
the Chief Executive Officer of the respondent on
6 October 2022 (‘the
third reviewable decision’). The third reviewable decision affirmed a
previous determination made
on 5 August 2022 that the respondent is not liable
for the applicant’s injuries, described as, ‘right sided lateral
epicondylitis,
sustained on or around 30 March 2020, pursuant to s 19 of the SRC
Application
No: 2022/0196 - permanent impairment
fourth application seeks review of a decision made by an authorised delegate of
the Chief Executive Officer of the respondent
3 January 2023 (‘the fourth
reviewable decision’). The fourth reviewable decision affirmed a previous
determination made
on 29 November 2022 that the respondent is not liable for the
applicant’s permanent impairment and non-economic loss claim,
of the condition of right-hand wrist impairment Carpal Tunnel Syndrome sustained
on or around 30 March 2020, pursuant
to ss 24 and 27 of the SRC
THE EVIDENCE BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL
was both viva voce and documentary evidence before the Tribunal.
documentary evidence consisted of a joint tribunal book (‘JTB’)
prepared by the parties to the applications together
with the ‘T’
documents in each matter which were received in evidence.
following witnesses gave viva voce evidence:
(a) The applicant;
(b) Ms Kristy-Lee Young a Service Support Manager at Services
(c) Dr Tracey Molloy a General Practitioner;
(d) Mr Ash Moaveni a Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon;
(e) Dr Neela Janakiramanan a Hand and Wrist Surgeon;
(f) Dr Avanthi Mandaleson an Orthopaedic Surgeon;
(g) Dr Simon Journeaux a Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon;
(h) Dr Reza Sabetghadam an Occupational Physician;
(i) Dr Mark Floyd a Consultant Occupational Physician; and
(j) Dr Gautam Khurana a Neurosurgeon.
CONCESSIONS MADE BY THE APPLICANT AT THE OPENING OF THE
for the respondent at the commencement of the hearing made several concessions
which is appropriate to record at this juncture.
With respect to application No.
2021/8667 which he described as the ‘carpal tunnel claim’ and No.
2022/9102 described
by him as the ‘right elbow claim’, whilst
denying any liability, conceded that the applicant suffered a time-limited
aggravation of such injuries running from 31 March to 2 September
BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal considers that the issues arising for its determination have been
and Contentions
(‘SFICs’) lodged with it by the applicant on 19 June 2023. They are
as follows:
(a) What are the diagnoses of the applicant’s right upper limb
injury/condition sustained on:
(i) 30 March 2020; and
(ii) 9 March 2021?
(b) Has the applicant suffered an ‘injury’ within the meaning of s
5A of the SRC Act?
(c) If yes to the above, did the injury result in any incapacity for work and/or
impairment pursuant to s 14 of the SRC Act?
(i) If so, has the applicant reasonably required medical treatment because of
the injury pursuant to s 16 of the SRC Act?
(ii) If so, has the applicant been incapacitated for work as a result of the
injury pursuant to s 19 of the SRC Act, since that injury
and presently?
(d) If yes to all or part of the above, has the applicant suffered an injury
resulting in permanent impairment pursuant to s 24 of
the SRC Act?
(i) If so, when assessed in accordance with the approved Comcare guide (Edition
2.1) is the impairment at least 10 per cent?
(ii) If so, what is the percentage impairment relevant to the injury and what
are the appropriate non economic loss (‘NEL’)
scores referable to
the Comcare Guides?
SOME OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE LAY WITNESSES
is appropriate to make some observations concerning the evidence given by the
two lay witnesses from the witness box at the hearing
of the applications.
applicant was searchingly cross examined. Whilst overall her evidence was given
in a forthright and truthful manner the Tribunal
considers that on occasion, she
exhibited a tendency towards some level of embellishment or exaggeration and on
other occasions reconstruction.
There were several instances where these
features of her evidence occurred. Some of those occasions were where the
applicant was
confronted with a patient history, recorded by some of the expert
medical or other practitioners who conducted assessments of her,
which differed
from the evidence she gave with respect to her work tasks, achievements, and the
onset of her various conditions.
There were occasions too where business records
in evidence did not corroborate what she had told several expert medical
practitioners
who examined her.
way of example, several doctors recorded in the history or description of the
applicant’s occupation or work duties that
she was processing up to 800
claims a working day (to Dr Moaveni) and which usually consisted of a
four-to-five-hour period. Similarly,
Dr Floyd recorded in his report and noted
that the applicant informed him that most days she processed 800 claims over a
four-to-five-hour
period. Dr Journeaux in his report of 29 November 2022
recorded her stating that, ‘[h]er job involves claims processing and
typical day she would process approximately 800
There were in
evidence business records described as a ‘KPI Productivity Tracker’,
being in the form of a spreadsheet
which contained entries recording the number
of claims (known as ‘eclipse claims’) processed by the applicant on
day. An examination of the entries contained in the KPI Productivity
Tracker reveal a different story to that portrayed by the applicant
doctors. The applicant’s evidence put a gloss on, or embellished, the
number of claims she processed every day. Whilst
there were days when she did
process in excess of 800 claims a day, this was comparatively infrequent, and
did not occur anywhere
near every day of the working week as she portrayed it
when giving a work history to those doctors.
Mandaleson recorded that the applicant informed her that, ‘[t]he work
involved processing private hospital claims, processing
800-1000 claims per
To Mr Khurana, she said
that she processed up to 1000 hospital claims a
The evidence revealed that at
no time did the applicant ever process 1000 hospital claims a day. There were,
as noted previously,
very infrequent working days where she processed up to 800
Mark Floyd a Consultant Occupational Physician in a report of 29 June 2020,
recorded the applicant reporting to him in the section
‘Mechanism of
Alleged Injury/Sequence of Events’,
reported that she had brief “pings” on and off over time with keying
and using her keyboard and mouse
She described these would be brief. She
would notice a sharp pain around her wrist like a “stabbing” around
border not into the thumb. This was not ongoing and nothing major.
She required no time away from work or restriction, was not having
then recorded that in March 2020, Ms Quirk described that she was undertaking
her normal work, known as ‘keying’. These
tasks involved the use of
a keyboard and a mouse which were performed whilst she sat at an L-shaped desk
at a computer with two screens
in front of her positioned side-by-side. Usually,
she used her right-hand when making such keyboard entries or using the computer
mouse. On that day, she developed sudden severe pain to the radial border of
her wrist which referred into her hand and upper elbow,
she felt that she lost
strength in the right upper limb. Yet to several other doctors and in her
evidence, she stated that she had
no symptoms prior to 30 March 2020, or that
she first noticed the symptoms in March of
Floyd was cross-examined on this aspect of his report and the history that he
recorded. It was not suggested in such cross-examination
that the applicant did
not use the words recorded in his report, alternatively that he had recorded the
history incorrectly, or was
in some way mistaken in recording what the applicant
said to him. He presented as an experienced medical practitioner and consultant
occupational physician whose overriding duty was to assist the Tribunal. He also
presented as a professional and careful expert witness.
careful re-examination by Mr Clark, Dr Floyd explained that where he had
recorded words in inverted commas, as he did in his report
with respect to the
words ‘pings’ and ‘stabbing’ they were quotes and
something that the applicant had said.
Dr Floyd also explained in detail what
his usual practice was when taking a patient history. By way of example, he
stated that in
such a case as this, he would explain to the patient that they
were looking at her right wrist and ask, ‘when did you first
start having
trouble with your right wrist?’ He further explained that often people
will start by referring to when they made
their claim prompting him to reply
with words to the effect, ‘did you have any trouble prior? This is the
question he asked
the applicant which prompted him to record what he did in the
paragraph concerned. Having had the opportunity to observe Dr Floyd,
Tribunal concludes that he was indeed informed by the applicant when he saw her
that her symptoms were ‘brief “pings”
on and off over
time’ and that ‘she would notice a sharp pain around her wrist like
a “stabbing” around the
radial border not into the thumb’ as
he recorded in his report which was in evidence.
an Ergonomic Evaluation Report prepared on 4 May 2020, Ms Richards, the author
of the report in a section entitled ‘Brief
history of injury and current
status’, recorded that ‘Mrs Quirk reported that
the onset of the right wrist pain symptoms was,
“on and off for a while”, however, increased approximately a few
ago with the use of a new keyboard’. She was also recorded as
reporting symptoms on the right wrist which radiated to the right
right shoulder.
observations recorded in the Ergonomic Evaluation Report of 4 May 2020 by Ms
Richards were specifically put to the applicant in
cross examination. She was
specifically asked if she told the Occupational Therapist who compiled that
report that her right wrist
pain symptoms were on and off for a while. Her
evidence when probed shifted. Initially, her response was that she made it clear
there were no symptoms prior to the injury incurred on 30 March. However,
when further probed and the contents of the report put
specifically to her, she
conceded that she may well have said
account recorded by Dr Floyd in his report that she had brief
‘pings’ on and off over time was not put to the applicant
examination. However, when in the witness box, this aspect of Dr Floyd’s
report was not challenged during his cross
examination.
Tribunal also acknowledges that whilst the applicant in cross examination was
challenged searchingly about the number of claims
she processed per day, by
reference to the entries recorded in the KPI Productivity Tracker, the specific
references about the number
of claims per day that she processed referred to
above in the reports of the several doctors was not specifically put to her.
Nonetheless,
the Tribunal observes that on the evidence before it, those doctors
were not given accurate information by the applicant.
seems to the Tribunal more probable than not, that both Dr Floyd and the author
of the Ergonomic Evaluation Report, Ms Richards,
would not have recorded a
largely similar history, as they did from the applicant, unless she had provided
them with such history.
the applicant in one passage of cross-examination stated that after these
symptoms in her right wrist, arm and elbow evolved
on 30 March 2020, there was
an expectation in the workplace to keep going and take a rest if her arm hurt.
Ms Young, who gave evidence
and was a most impressive and fair witness,
disagreed with this and emphasised that there was no such expectation. The
Tribunal accepts
Ms Young’s evidence on this topic.
Young, who as noted is still employed as an acting
Service Support Manager at Services Australia,
presented as a thoroughly decent witness. She spoke in glowing terms of the
applicant’s
capacity as a worker at Services Australia and described the
applicant as exceeding her KPI’s at all times and as a ‘great
performer’. She emphasised that after 30 March 2020, the applicant was
offered other work duties to accommodate her medical
restrictions. However, it
was ultimately left to the applicant to decide what she would do. Ms Young
stated that despite the applicant
having been told to slow down, she continued
to process claims at a very high pace and indeed at her usual place. Ms Young
this was not expected of her and anything the applicant asked for would
have been accommodated. She only needed to ask. This evidence
from Ms Young is
accepted by the Tribunal. It cannot accept the applicant’s evidence that
if she started to experience symptoms
in her right arm that it was an
expectation from her employers that she simply had to keep on going regardless.
Such evidence has
a degree of manifest
had the opportunity to observe the applicant in the witness box, who presented
as someone very much alive to protecting her
interests, one would have thought
that if the applicant experienced pain, stress, or inconvenience in the ways she
described it as
occurring on 30 March 2020 she simply would not have continued
to process claims at the very high pace as she did. This is particularly
the impressive evidence of Ms Young, which the Tribunal accepts, that the
applicant was offered other work duties to accommodate
her medical restrictions
and that she only needed to ask. It is behaviour or conduct on the part of the
applicant that is inconsistent
with her stated condition.
was another dimension to the applicant’s evidence when in the witness box
which is of concern to the Tribunal. On 9 March
2021, the applicant had a second
intraneural injection to her carpal tunnel region on the deep aspect of the
right median nerve.
In evidence
before the Tribunal was a report from the specialist, Dr Poynter who
administered the right carpal tunnel injection under
ultrasound control to the
applicant on that day. In that report, which was addressed to the
applicant’s treating general practitioner
Dr Molloy, Dr Poynter briefly
explained the process and recorded that ‘the procedure was
uneventful’.
should be noted that the applicant had in approximately August or September 2020
previously received a cortisone injection into
her right wrist. She explained
that she found this treatment eased her pain and enabled her to experience
increased movement in a
the applicant’s witness statement concerning the second cortisone
injection she described the experience as completely different
when compared to
the first occasion. In her words;
it felt like I had been
“struck by lightning”. There was a feeling like electricity. I also
felt numbness in my index
finger, which spread to my other fingers. The Monday
after the second injection, the pain was so bad, that I was unable to use my
hand. I informed my employer and stopped
They were, on her version of the injection procedure, extremely serious
symptoms that the applicant suffered. At the outset, the Tribunal
should observe
that this contradiction between what Dr Poynter recorded in his report of 9
March 2021 that the procedure was uneventful
and the very strong words used by
the applicant in her witness statement to describe the pain and numbness that
she experienced,
is very difficult to reconcile.
applicant did consult Dr Molloy the next day on 10 March 2021. The symptoms she
described to Dr Molloy were somewhat different
from the version recorded in her
witness statement. She described to Dr Molloy experiencing pain whilst the
injection was being done,
numbness and tingling in tips of all her fingers and
that her wrist was throbbing. She also explained experiencing electric shocks
the wrist and palm, together with some shooting pain up to the elbow. There was
also reduced strength in her hand, and she couldn’t
lift cups or wipe her
bottom and so on. In fairness to the applicant, she was not probed on this
aspect of the evidence in cross
examination. However, if she experienced the
relatively extreme pain and discomfort as described in her witness statement, or
that matter when in the witness box, one would have expected her to have
recounted this fact to her long-standing treating general
practitioner with whom
she clearly had a very good doctor-patient relationship.
should also observe that it is somewhat surprising, given the serious and
immediate reaction that the applicant had to the injection,
as she described it,
that having raised it with Dr Molloy the very next day, Dr Molloy did not inform
Dr Poynter of the fact. Given
that the first injection clearly did not cause the
applicant any problems, and on her version the second one did cause significant
problems, one might have expected it to have been raised with the specialist Dr
contradiction between the contents of her witness statement and the report of Dr
Poynter, was carefully probed when the applicant
The cross examiner
suggested to her, as had been recorded by Dr Poynter, that the procedure was
uneventful. The applicant then disputed
the suggestion, reiterating that the
second injection was very different to the first one. Further, she stated that
she telephoned
the doctor’s rooms the next day in relation to the symptoms
she was experiencing. Apparently, she spoke to a nurse and was
told that it was
going to be painful, so she did expect some level of pain. Then she confirmed in
her evidence, at the time of the
injection, a nurse assisting during the
procedure had to hold her hand when she nearly vomited. Once again, this
evidence from the
applicant is extremely difficult to reconcile with what has
been recorded in Dr Poynter’s report of 9 March 2021 that the procedure
was uneventful. It is hardly uneventful if the applicant required assistance and
was on the verge of vomiting as the applicant had
would have expected that if the applicant was so profoundly affected that she
was nearly vomiting and had to have her hand held
by a nurse, a responsible
medical specialist would not have said the procedure was uneventful. Further,
once again, having had the
opportunity to observe the applicant over some time
in the witness box, one finds it exceptionally unlikely that if she had
experienced
the quite extreme symptoms that she said she did immediately upon
the administration of the second cortisone injection, that she
would not have
told that treating medical specialist precisely the nature and type of pain and
other extreme inconvenience such as
vomiting or nausea, that she was
experiencing at the time. One would also have expected her to have told Dr
Molloy that she nearly
vomited and had to have her hand held by a nurse. She
clearly reposed great trust and confidence in Dr Molloy as a medical
professional.
Such facts were clearly matters that should have been brought to
her attention. It should be repeated that the applicant presented
in the witness
box as an individual with an acute awareness of acting to protect her own
is also surprising indeed, given the contents of Dr Poynter’s report of 9
March 2021 that the procedure was uneventful, being
diametrically opposed to the
experience that the applicant recounted when giving her evidence, that neither
the applicant nor Dr
Molloy took steps to correct the record with
applicant commenced work in the year 2005 with a Commonwealth Government agency
now known as ‘Services Australia’.
Initially, she was employed on a
part-time basis working approximately 21.75 hours per week. In approximately
January 2020, the applicant
became a full-time employee. Usually, the applicant
commenced working at approximately 8.00 AM until 4.00 PM. She took a 15-minute
morning break, 30 minutes for lunch and on most days a 15-minute afternoon
duties undertaken by the applicant were described by her as process work
carrying out various tasks for Medicare. Mostly the applicant
undertook data
entry tasks, usually processing Medicare ‘Eclipse’ claims for
payment, that were performed using a keyboard
and a ‘mouse’, or as
she put it ‘keying’. Most of her workdays were spent sitting at an
L- shaped desk at
a computer with two screens in front of her positioned
side-by-side. Her evidence was that she generally used her right-hand when
making keyboard entries or using the computer mouse. She described using and
manipulating her fingers, hands, and wrists for sustained
time spans, when so
using the keyboard and the mouse.
Eclipse claims were claims made by private health providers. Usually, such
claims were processed with a 24-hour turnaround time.
To commence processing an
Eclipse claim the keyboard operator would select an individual claim from a
‘queue’ of pending
claims in the computer that required processing
on that day. Processing of Eclipse claims required the reviewing officer, having
selected the individual claim, to check such claim to verify that it satisfied
the applicable rules with respect to the Medicare
item number for such a claim.
If the keyboard operator was satisfied that the claim complied with the
applicable rules for the item
number of the service provided by the health care
provider, it would be approved.
software used by Medicare did include several prompts for the operator to adopt
when processing an approved claim. This enabled
detailed information to be
considered by the operator as part of the process.
her evidence, the applicant did suggest that approximately more than 50% of the
claims that she received were what she described
as ‘complex
claims’. By way of example, she stated that if there was a claim made by
one patient for surgery, performed
on several occasions, it took much longer to
process because the system required checking and crosschecking to confirm that
the correct
item number had been allocated to the specific surgery undertaken.
This task did frequently require the applicant to navigate between
screens to complete an appropriate review of such claim. She described it as
requiring significant use of the mouse and
multiple entries by use of
keystrokes.
stated that the number of keystrokes required for each entry varied from claim
to claim, usually several keystrokes per claim,
but occasionally only a few.
Once the data entry had been keyed in by this process the result was displayed
on a computer screen
in front of her. Such tasks were undertaken by the
applicant predominantly using her right-hand. Occasionally, but fairly rarely,
she would use her left hand.
time to time the applicant as part of her duties did undertake what she
described as some ‘telephone work’.
was made by the applicant to the fact that she was set various benchmarks or
performance targets and indicators. These were
frequently referred to as
‘KPI’s’. Her evidence was that she frequently met and often
exceeded the KPI’s
with respect to the number of claims that she was
required to process. She stated that her performance and efficiency were
acknowledged
by her superiors in the office from time to time. Also concerning
the applicant’s performance was the fact that she, due to
her detailed
knowledge of processing Medicare claims, had conducted classroom training, and
in-service training of other staff employed
by Medicare. Also, it is apparent
that the applicant was a “go to” person that many other staff
members would consult
when they had doubts about the legitimacy or
appropriateness of a claim or some other query. Usually, this related to more
claims. The applicant estimated that she would on a typical workday
assist other colleagues with up to 10 claims in such a way. She
stated it was a
rare occurrence for her to need to seek assistance from others when it came to
processing any Medicare claim, let
alone a complex claim.
events that led to this claim being made by the applicant; she says first
occurred on 30 March 2020. The applicant was undertaking
her customary keyboard
duties processing Medicare Eclipse claims. She described suddenly experiencing a
searing pain through her
wrist and thumb, up to her elbow. It was, she
explained, suddenly as if her right wrist, ‘gave way’. Initially,
she attempted
to continue working but was unable to do so because the pain, she
said, was unbearable.
the sudden onset of pain, the applicant reported what had happened to her. Ms
Young, whom the Tribunal found to be a very
credible witness, stated that when
the matter was brought to her attention, the applicant was offered a variety of
other duties to
accommodate her situation. Ms Young observed that despite being
advised to slow down the applicant largely did not do so. Ms Young
also stated
that the applicant was not expected to continue in the way she did and that
anything she asked for would have been accommodated.
the end of the day on 30 March 2020, the applicant described her arm as still
being painful. The pain she experienced extended
up to her elbow and into her
shoulder. She stated that she had a difficult night, was unable to sleep and
described being ‘in
Consequently,
on the next day, 31 March 2020, she consulted her general practitioner Dr
Molloy. Dr Molloy informed the applicant that
she likely had De Quervain’s
tenosynovitis and referred her for an ultrasound.
ultrasound was conducted on 3 April 2020 which confirmed the diagnosis of De
tenosynovitis.
applicant, at the request of the respondent’s claims agent, was examined
by Dr Floyd on 17 June 2020. As noted earlier,
he recorded in his report that
the applicant had clinical signs to support a diagnosis of possible Carpal
Tunnel Syndrome, but also
had some ulnar nerve irritability and tight neural
tension. He noted, as was the case, that the applicant was due to have a nerve
conduction study and that further consideration of such diagnosis could occur
after receipt of those
Molloy subsequently referred the applicant to
Seneviratne, a neurologist who reviewed the applicant on 8 July 2020. The
applicant presented for further evaluation of right arm
pain and paraesthesia. A
nerve conduction study was conducted on that day. The applicant was observed to
have prolonged right median
motor and sensory latencies. Right ulnar nerve
studies, right radial sensory response and left median nerve studies were
Dr Seneviratne prepared a report to Dr Molloy on that
In that report, in the
section entitled ‘Impression’, it was stated that the author
suspected some of the symptoms were
related to a right-sided Carpal Tunnel
Syndrome which was confirmed on electrodiagnostic tests, electrophysiologically
it was moderate.
There was no evidence of a right ulnar neuropathy. The author
also suspected there was superimposed musculoskeletal/soft tissue injuries
affecting the hand down the forearm. This report of Dr Seneviratne appears to be
the first occasion on which the possibility of the
applicant suffering from
right-sided Carpal Tunnel Syndrome was raised.
further nerve conduction study was undertaken by Dr Seneviratne of the applicant
on 3 September 2020, details of which were contained
in a report to Dr Molloy of
Amongst other things,
in the section of the report entitled ‘Impression’, Dr Seneviratne
reported that there had been
a significant clinical and electrophysiological
improvement of the applicant’s right-sided Carpal Tunnel Syndrome which
described as ‘mild now’.
Eventually,
the applicant ceased work with Services Australia on or about 9 March 2021 and
has not worked since.
THE MEDICAL EVIDENCE
Dr Janakiramanan
Janakiramanan, a hand and wrist surgeon, gave viva voce evidence at the hearing
of the application.
treated the applicant since approximately May 2021. There were in evidence
several reports (or perhaps more accurately letters),
from her concerning the
applicant dated 20 May 2021,
November 2021,
23 February
and 8 August
The applicant had been
referred to her initially, in May of 2021.
Janakiramanan’s first two reports were comparatively short and addressed
to the applicant’s treating general practitioner.
The third report was
prepared in response to a specific letter of instruction sent by the
applicant’s lawyers.
her report of 20 May 2021, Dr Janakiramanan recorded a brief patient history.
This history included a background of fibromyalgia,
which had been diagnosed in
2004 for which the applicant had seen a rheumatologist in the past. Its symptoms
included a general degree
of pain and fatigue. Also recorded in the patient
history taken by her was her right-hand issues in March 2020. The applicant
that her wrist felt like it had given way with a marked increase in
pain. This was coincident with an increase in work duties switching
part-time to full-time with an increased workload. Reference was also made in
that report to the fact that she was being treated
for De Quervain’s
tenosynovitis with a splint. The diagnosis by the neurologist of carpal tunnel
syndrome was recorded. A first
steroid injection which had given her marked
improvement in approximately September 2020 was referred to. The applicant
to Dr Janakiramanan that there was a recurrence of her symptoms in
early 2021 with increased pain. She underwent another steroid
injection and
immediately experienced what was described as ‘electric pain’
immediately at the time of the needle going
in and numbness to the index finger.
Janakiramanan made a diagnosis of right carpal tunnel syndrome and possible
intraneural steroid injection in March 2021. She concluded
that it was hard to
say what component of the applicant’s then current symptoms were due to
persistent untreated carpal tunnel
syndrome and what were due to a likely
intraneural steroid injection. Either way she concluded that the nerve needed to
be released
(open carpal tunnel release). Finally, she concluded that given the
applicant symptoms were made worse by work, even though carpal
tunnel syndrome
is common in women of the applicant’s age, she did conclude that work was
a significant contributing factor
to her symptoms.
Dr Janakiramanan of 23 February 2023 noted
that the applicant had several conditions including carpal tunnel syndrome, a
nerve injury
relating to a steroid injection to treat such syndrome, De
Quervain’s, an element of tennis elbow and basal joint arthritis.
considered that if the applicant were to resume work it would be likely to
aggravate the carpal tunnel condition. Further,
it was recorded that the
applicant had developed a degree of complex regional pain syndrome in the limb.
Dr Janakiramanan also observed
that the second steroid injection that the
applicant received had most likely caused a nerve injury which may have led to a
of permanent impairment.
her report of 20 April 2023, Dr Janakiramanan expressed the opinion that the
applicant’s issues (De Quervain’s, tennis
elbow and carpal tunnel)
were occupationally related. She noted that they had settled down at that time
and further observed that
if the applicant were to return to her previous work
there would be a risk of such issues flaring up again. At that time, she did
believe the applicant required surgery. Further observations were made
concerning what she described as the applicant’s
symptoms’. In particular there was reference to neuropathic pain
associated with the right median nerve likely
as a result of an intraneural
injection. She further observed that an intraneural injection can lead to
permanent damage to the nerve
which needs to be considered as a likely permanent
issue. She recommended consulting a pain physician for long-term management of
such issue.
report of 8 August 2023 from Dr Janakiramanan provided a more detailed
background concerning the applicant’s patient history.
She described first
consulting the applicant in May 2021. Details of the account that the applicant
provided concerning the second
intraneural injection that she received in
February 2021 were recorded by Dr Janakiramanan. The applicant described
electric shooting
pain at the time of the injection followed by increased pain
and numbness in the index finger. Dr Janakiramanan expressed the view
an account was strongly suggestive of an injection into the median nerve, rather
than into the space around it which is
the correct and appropriate place to
administer a steroid injection for carpal tunnel syndrome. On that occasion, Dr
Janakiramanan
also recorded that the applicant reported ongoing numbness in the
index finger and that her pain was much worse.
Janakiramanan further stated in that section of her report that although carpal
tunnel syndrome is common in older women, in this
circumstance she felt that the
applicant’s work was a significant contributor. This assessment was based
in part on the nature
of the applicant’s work and in part on the basis of
her symptoms being worse at and after work. It She observed that as a surgeon
she notes that frequent repetitive movements especially with their hand and risk
in certain positions (such as using a keyboard and
mouse, especially for
high-volume work without breaks) can certainly induce carpal tunnel
the witness box, amongst other things, Dr Janakiramanan largely confirmed the
contents of her several reports. In doing so she
explained several tests that
were applied to the applicant with respect to particularly, the condition of
carpal tunnel syndrome.
Dr Janakiramanan explained why she considered that this
condition experienced by the applicant was work-related. She observed that
the applicant stopped working the nerve conduction study then demonstrated that
the condition had gotten better. Dr Janakiramanan
readily acknowledged that
carpal tunnel syndrome is often age-related. She then, in response to a
question, said that the questions
she asks to differentiate between whether
someone has gotten carpal tunnel syndrome because of their age or whether there
is a work-related
component, is whether their symptoms are worse after work,
whether their symptoms are alleviated when they go on holidays and whether
symptoms have improved after they have ceased working. As she put it, those
things put together provide an indication of which
patients for whom work might
be a related issue and for which people it might not be. She did emphasise that
it is a very nuanced
condition, and every patient is different. However, in the
case of the applicant she believed it was work-related.
Janakiramanan was searchingly probed about the reference in the Ergonomic
Evaluation Report of 4 May 2020 which recorded the
applicant informing the author of that report that the onset of right wrist pain
symptoms were ‘on and off for a
It was expressly
put to her that the applicant did not tell her of that. In response to one
question, she stated that she did not
see it as a very different history to the
one that she was given. She later said that she was not informed of this fact
because she
had not documented it. However, had she been given such a history it
would not have changed her assessment of the applicant at that
time. She then
finally accepted that she was probably not told that the applicant had the
symptoms on and off for a while.
was then very specifically put to Dr Janakiramanan that if a history provided by
the applicant that the symptoms had been on and
off for a while prior to 30
March 2020, that it was more reflective of an age-related, non-work-related
onset of carpal tunnel syndrome.
Her firm response was that she did not accept
that. She stated that work-related carpal tunnel syndrome can either be very
or acute, or can progress a little more slowly. Either of those options
are possible. She further stated that the time frame over
which carpal tunnel
syndrome develops is not actually relevant to the condition.
aspect of Dr Janakiramanan’s evidence from the witness box should be
referred to. She stated if a patient has age-related
constitutional carpal
tunnel syndrome their symptoms might improve but they would not completely
resolve. Whereas if the condition
is largely occupationally related, the removal
of that occupational contribution may actually lead to a complete resolution of
issue. She repeated that it is a nuanced thing. Therefore, she accepted the
proposition that if the applicant’s carpal tunnel
syndrome was largely
occupationally related that when she stopped working it would be resolved; which
one would not expect to occur
if she had a significant age-related
constitutional component to her carpal tunnel syndrome.
Moaveni gave evidence from the witness box. There were also two medical reports
from him that were tendered. They were made on
31 March 2022 and 11 December
He is a Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon. Also, it should be noted that, amongst
other things, he is a specialist with sub-specialist
interests in Upper Limb
Orthopaedic Surgeon at the Alfred Hospital & St Vincent’s Private
Hospital. He has specialties
with respect to upper limb orthopaedic surgery
including shoulders, elbows, wrists and hands.
noted, the report following an assessment that he conducted of the applicant
after a face-to-face interview with the applicant
on 31 March 2022 was in
evidence. The contents of that report are referred to in their entirety for
their full force and effect.
Several portions of it will be briefly summarised
for the purposes of these reasons.
his report of 31 March 2022, Mr Moaveni recounted what may be described as a
patient history under several subject headings including
‘Mechanism of
Injury’ and ‘Initial and Subsequent Treatment’. Whilst the
patient history recorded by him
in the report could be described as
comparatively spartan, it does largely accord, or dovetail, with the evidence
given by the applicant
both in her witness statement and from the witness
Moaveni then recorded in the report details of a ‘Functional
Assessment’, physical examination which included the elbows
motion), wrists (wrist motion) and thumbs (thumb motion). Additionally, the
report contained a section entitled ‘Investigations’
which included
an ‘Impairment Assessment - Comcare 2.1’, and subheadings regarding
elbows (elbow motion), wrists (wrist
motion), ‘Right Carpal Tunnel
Syndrome’, stability, and apportionment together with a summary.
Tribunal should observe that Mr Moaveni assessed the applicant’s Whole
Person Impairment for the right wrist at 0%. He assessed
the applicant’s
Whole Person Impairment for her right wrist Carpal Tunnel Syndrome as 16%. A
summary was then provided by him
with respect to her combined Whole Person
Impairment for the Muscular Skeletal system as
Right Elbow
Right Wrist
Right Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
Moaveni then provided a specific response to a series of questions that were
asked of him in a letter of instruction furnished
to him by the
applicant’s solicitors. It is appropriate to largely reproduce most of
these responses for the purposes of these
diagnoses of the applicant’s injuries and conditions made by Mr Moaveni
included a right elbow lateral epicondylitis (tennis
elbow), right wrist De
Quervain’s tenosynovitis, and right carpal tunnel syndrome.
respect to the prognosis of the applicant’s conditions,
Mr Moaveni considered that taking into account the
applicant’s diagnoses as well as ongoing symptoms and response to
so far, the prognosis in his opinion for further recovery was
treatment to date for the claimed injuries as diagnosed by him he recorded that
the applicant had required treatment with
her General Practitioner, Occupational
Therapist, Physiotherapist and a Neurologist. Additionally, he observed that the
had required ultrasound-guided injections for her carpal tunnel
Moaveni was also asked a question specifically concerning the relationship
between the applicant’s injuries and her employment
with Services
Australia. He was also requested to advise whether he believed that her
employment had caused, aggravated or accelerated
any underlying condition and
whether he believed that her injury was consistent with the stated cause. In
response to this line of
questioning, he expressed the opinion that the
applicant’s employment had caused and aggravated the diagnosis of her
which had been previously referred to, namely right elbow lateral
epicondylitis (tennis elbow), right wrist, De Quervain’s
tenosynovitis,
and right carpal tunnel syndrome. Therefore, he expressed the opinion that the
applicant’s injuries were consistent
with the stated cause. In support of
this opinion, or perhaps as the foundation for it, he stated that the
applicant’s work
was highly repetitive, involving processing up to 800
claims over a 4-5 hour period, requiring her to use the function and tab keys
her keyboard. He stated that in his clinical experience, this can cause
diagnoses including carpal tunnel syndrome, De Quervain’s
tenosynovitis
and lateral epicondylitis.
in his opinion, Mr Moaveni considered that the applicant’s employment with
Services Australia had significantly contributed
to her stated conditions as
previously identified. He also recorded that these symptoms in the
applicant’s right upper extremity
were significantly different to those
from which she suffered from as a result of her pre-existing fibromyalgia.
Moaveni concluded in his first report that the applicant does not have a
capacity for her pre-injury employment. He considered
her condition to be
permanent and stable.
Moaveni’s second report dated 11 December 2023 was prepared by him
following a teleconference that he had with the applicant’s
lawyers. Prior
to that conference and since providing his earlier report in March 2022 he was
furnished with additional documentary
material as follows:
(a) The applicant’s witness statements of 6 June 2022, 20 June 2023 and 13
November 2023;
(b) Reports of Dr Journeaux dated 29 November 2022 and 1 February 2023 together
with a file note of a conference stated 1 December
(c) Reports of Mr Khurana of 31 August 2022 and 20 September 2023;
(d) A report of Dr Janakiramanan of 8 August 2023;
(e) Reports of Dr Seneviratne of 8 July 2020, 3 September 2020 and 3 November
(f) Copies of Electrophysiology Reports of 8 July 2020, 3 September 2020, 3
November 2021 and 13 April 2023.
Moaveni in the report of 11 December 2023 disagreed with a conclusion expressed
by Dr Journeaux that the applicant suffers from
both radial nerve entrapment and
lateral epicondylitis of the right elbow. He reached this conclusion because in
his opinion such
a condition is a rare diagnosis and if it was present one would
expect to see some changes with the radial nerve on the nerve conduction
which did not occur with respect to the applicant.
also disagreed with Dr Journeaux’s opinion that relevant scientific
literature including the ‘AMA Guides to the Evaluation
of Disease and
Injury Causation’ support the conclusion that the applicants right lateral
epicondylitis had not been caused
by her employment.
reiterated his earlier opinion that the applicant’s lateral epicondylitis
of the right elbow was significantly contributed
to by her employment.
the reports of Mr Khurana, Mr Moaveni disagreed with his conclusion that the
applicant’s right carpal tunnel syndrome
has probably not been caused by
her work. He reiterated his earlier opinion on the topic relying on the
following factors:
(a) The medical records of the applicant’s GP, Dr Molloy in his opinion
provide a clear outline of her injuries, which are
consistent with carpal tunnel
(b) The neurologist’s nerve conduction studies clearly showed signs of
carpal tunnel syndrome;
(c) When the applicant had her first steroid injection into the carpal tunnel
her symptoms markedly improved, before coming back
when the steroid wore off;
(d) There is evidence in the scientific literature that highly repetitive work
can be a risk factor for developing carpal tunnel
cross examination, Mr Moaveni was probed about several aspects of his report. He
confirmed that his understanding was that on 31
March 2020 the applicant’s
symptoms became quite apparent. As he put it, the highly repetitive nature of
the applicant’s
work exceeded her threshold, being her physiological
threshold and she suffered the relevant injuries. He repeated that it was his
understanding that on that one day the applicant had a very high level of
repetitive work. Therefore, on that one day processing
up to 800 claims over a
four-to-five-hour period not only caused but aggravated the three
conditions.
probed on another question concerning prior symptoms experienced by the
applicant, whilst acknowledging they might have occurred,
he repeated that it
really was on 31 March 2020 that the applicant’s symptoms became as he
called it, ‘quite apparent’.
Which then prompted her to see Dr
Molloy her general practitioner.
in cross-examination
Mr Moaveni was taken to Dr
Molloy’s clinical note of the surgery consultation with the applicant on
31 March 2020. It was put
to him that those clinical notes did not mention any
pain spreading into the hand. It was also suggested to him that carpal tunnel
syndrome normally affects the operation of the hand which was not present on
that day when the applicant was examined by Dr Molloy.
Mr Moaveni then conceded
that typically one would expect carpal tunnel to present with numbness and
tingling in the fingers. He also
acknowledged that Dr Molloy never made a
diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome.
Moaveni further in his cross-examination agreed that carpal tunnel syndrome is
more prevalent in women. He also accepted absolutely,
that other conditions such
as diabetes can cause carpal tunnel syndrome. Wrist fractures and inflammatory
conditions can also be
associated with carpal tunnel syndrome.
another part of cross-examination,
Mr Moaveni was
referred to an article from the Australian Family Physician, ‘Carpal
tunnel syndrome. Can it be a work related
condition?’
This article
was referred to by Mr Khurana in his first report. A passage from that article
was shown to him. That passage stated
that in most cases carpal tunnel syndrome
is a constitutional condition. It also stated however that in some patients,
work activities
generating increased force and pressure on the carpal tunnel
over a lengthy period must be regarded as a substantial contributing
the condition by the increase in carpal tunnel pressure. It also said that
work-related factors may coexist with any of
the constitutional risk factors.
After this passage was shown to him in cross-examination, Mr Moaveni was asked
whether a causative
work-related activity had to be both prolonged and more
strenuous than computer keying. It was suggested such factors were different
what he had postulated based upon the applicant’s one day of excessive
keying. His response was that his opinion was based
on the history that the
applicant gave, which he stated was very clear in terms of what she had to do on
30 March 2020 and what symptoms
were following the incident concerned. Then he
referred to what he described as the subsequent investigations and treatment
the applicant undertook.
response was repeated by Mr Moaveni on several occasions during his
cross-examination. He reiterated that the view he formed
was based on his
understanding that the applicant performed 800 claims in the space of four or
five hours. She was possibly undertaking
100 or 200 claims per hour which is
more than a claim per minute. He also explained that some claims were not
straight forward and
involved multiple item numbers which required the applicant
to apply a number of different keystrokes. That to him was highly repetitive
work alone.
Moaveni was then probed in cross examination about De Quervain’s
tenosynovitis. He repeated his opinion that one day’s
activities, at the
level described by the applicant, had been the primary cause of such a
condition, which was still persisting more
than two years later. Reference was
then made to an extract from the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of Disease and
Injury Causation.
The extract addressed ‘De Quervain’s
In a subsection
of that extract entitled, ‘“Occupational Risk Factors for De
Quervain’s Disease’, amongst
other things, it identifies as risk
factors ‘Highly repetitive work alone with other factors: some
evidence’ and ‘Keyboard
activities: low risk evidence’. The
cross examiner then put to Mr Moaveni that the applicant’s work would not
be a primary
cause, but could aggravate the underlying condition, perhaps up to
6 or 12 months.
His response was
that he agreed with the proposition that work could be an aggravator, as opposed
to the view he had previously formed
which is that it caused and aggravated the
injuries. This response was qualified by him stating that he did not agree with
the proposition
that it would be a short-term aggravation which is what indeed
happened to the applicant.
Moaveni repeated that the injury experienced by the applicant was above her
threshold for recovery. Therefore, she was not able
to recover from the injuries
she had sustained.
Dr Mandaleson
gave evidence from the witness box and by
way of a medical report. She is also an Orthopaedic Surgeon. A report dated 25
August 2022
produced following an assessment of the applicant conducted by her
on 1 July 2022 was in
most expert medical reports, Dr Mandaleson’s report of 25 August 2022 was
broken up into a series of subject headings,
not all of which need to be touched
on for the purposes of this consideration. She was furnished with an array of
material, including
several medical reports and medical records for her
consideration. There was in the report, a patient history, which was
comparatively
brief. Reference should be made to the section of her report
entitled “education and employment”. In that section
Dr Mandaleson has recorded that the applicant was
employed in a full-time capacity, working an average of 38 hours per week. Her
in the role were described as computer-based work. Further, Dr Mandaleson
recorded that the applicant, when performing those computer-based
work duties,
was processing between 800-1000 claims per day. It has already been observed
that the evidence does not support a conclusion
that the applicant was
processing this volume of claims every day. Dr Mandaleson in cross examination
readily conceded that she did
not record the duration of time spent on these
tasks nor confirm whether the applicant was undertaking that level of activity.
also conceded that the duration of time that such work levels were
undertaken was an important factor. This response was also qualified
by what she
described as the relationship between what the applicant was telling her she was
doing at the time and the onset of her
the section of her report entitled ‘Mechanism of Injury’ it records
that the applicant stated on 31 March 2020, she
was engaged in her usual work
activities of claims processing. It describes her feeling a sudden onset of pain
and wrist weakness.
The sensation was that the ‘wrist was giving
way’. There was no reference to a wrist condition being on and off for a
while as recorded by the author of the Ergonomic Evaluation Report of 28 April
2020 or similar observations recorded by Dr Floyd
in his report.
the section of her report under the heading ‘Diagnosis’,
Dr Mandaleson recorded the applicant as suffering
from the following conditions:
(a) Right wrist De Quervain’s tenosynovitis;
(b) Right wrist carpal tunnel syndrome or pronator syndrome, with possible
intra-neural median this nerve steroid injection at the
(c) Right thumb carpometacarpal mild osteoarthritis.
was a section of the report headed ‘Prognosis’. In that section Dr
Mandaleson concluded that the prognosis for the
applicant’s right-hand
symptoms, if left untreated, was fair. She observed that she was likely to
continue to experience pain
and dysfunction relating to her median nerve
dysfunction. Further, she recorded that her De Quervain’s tenosynovitis
stable and mild, and considered it is unlikely to deteriorate further,
he expressed the opinion that her prognosis following surgery
was unknown.
the applicant’s ‘Future Management’, Dr Mandaleson opined that
right open carpal tunnel and De Quervain’s
release was planned.
a section of the report headed ‘Employment
Dr Mandaleson expressed the opinion
that the applicant’s employment capacity was limited due to the
aggravation of her symptoms
by repetitive typing. She recommended that she limit
the use of her right-hand. Additionally, she suggested that guidance regarding
the duration of activity and employment type would most suitably be guided by
recourse to an occupational physician, as had been
outlined in a report with
which she was furnished that had been prepared by Dr Bones. She also recommended
that there be further
review by a treating and independent pain specialist.
Mandaleson then in an additional section of her report provided specific answers
to questions that had been asked of her in a letter
of instruction with which
she was furnished by the applicant’s solicitors. It is not necessary to
reproduce each of the questions
and her responses. Several of them, nonetheless,
will be referred to.
expressed the opinion that the nature of the applicant’s work and the
temporal relationship between her work-related activity
and the onset of her
symptoms, suggested that the diagnosis of right wrist De Quervain’s
tenosynovitis and right carpal tunnel
syndrome is partly or wholly caused by,
and aggravated by, her employment with Services Australia. She further expressed
the opinion
that such injury was consistent with the stated cause. Therefore,
she considered that the applicant’s employment with Services
Australia had
significantly contributed to her condition. Dr Mandelson’s evidence when
in the witness box during cross-examination
was consistently to a similar
Dr Mandaleson expressed the opinion that based upon the applicant’s
current condition, she believed that she did not
have the capacity to work in
her preinjury role at her preinjury hours. She also considered that the
applicant may have some partial
capacity, however, this would best be guided by
an occupational physician. She referred to recommendations referred to in a
of Dr Bones, an occupational physician of 29 October 2021.
cross-examination, Dr Mandaleson outlined details of several tests that she
applied to the applicant in order to diagnose the
conditions from which she
suffers. She also readily conceded that the outcome of some of those tests were
contingent upon what the
patient told her.
was in evidence a report dated 14 June 2023 from Dr Molloy to the
applicant’s lawyers.
Molloy who is a very experienced general practitioner gave evidence that she has
treated her for approximately 30 years. It should
also be recorded that a
significant number of Dr Molloy’s clinical notes taken on many occasions
when she has treated the applicant
for her claimed conditions were also in
that report of 14 June 2023 Dr Molloy gave a diagnosis of the applicant’s
injuries as being De Quervain’s
tenosynovitis,
carpal tunnel syndrome, a nerve injury relating to the second steroid injection
used to treat the carpal tunnel syndrome
in what she described as ‘an
element of lateral epicondylitis ([t]ennis elbow)’.
patient history was recorded in that report by Dr Molloy. She stated that the
applicant presented on 31 March 2020. Further, it
was recorded that the
applicant gave a history of pain in her right wrist. She had informed Dr Molloy
that she processed more than
3,000 claims in the preceding week (between Tuesday
and Friday) and that she had processed approximately 800 claims in the morning
prior to her consultation. During that timeframe she had noticed that her wrist
was becoming painful. The pain was described as starting
at the wrist travelling
up the arm to the elbow. Her right elbow was described as very uncomfortable. Dr
Molloy stated that the history
and examination was consistent with a diagnosis
of De Quervain’s tenosynovitis which was subsequently corroborated when an
ultrasound was conducted. Dr Molloy, when in the witness box, confirmed the
history of processing claims furnished to her by the
applicant and her diagnosis
of the De Quervain’s tenosynovitis condition.
Molloy further recorded that she continued to see the applicant after 31 March
2020. Subsequently, the applicant had been treated
by a physiotherapist and hand
therapist. They had both raised concerns, it would appear to Dr Molloy,
concerning whether or not the
applicant suffered carpal tunnel syndrome. These
concerns resulted in a nerve conduction study being undertaken on 8 July 2020
revealed electrophysiological evidence of moderate median neuropathy at
the wrist, consistent with the clinical diagnosis of carpal
the diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome, the applicant was regularly reviewed by
Dr Molloy. During these reviews Dr Molloy
reported that she consistently
described a history of pain, numbness, and decreased function in her
right-hand/wrist. Continuing
treatment with a physiotherapist and a hand
therapist did assist to alleviate with her symptoms.
June 2020, the applicant was referred for an injection into her right carpal
tunnel on the advice of her treating hand therapist
who apparently suggested
that it might help. This procedure was performed in early September 2020. The
applicant reported to Dr Molloy
that it seemed to make a difference over the
next few months, and she reported decreased symptoms in her hand. Further
physiotherapy
and hand therapy was undertaken but not as regularly as prior to
the injection.
Molloy reported that in early 2021 the applicant noticed that the symptoms in
her hand were flaring again. She reported to Dr Molloy
that she was experiencing
‘a throbbing pain in her thumb and little finger, as well as sensations of
an electric shock running
up her arm from the wrist.’ A second injection
into her carpal tunnel was undertaken. The applicant consulted Dr Molloy the
after that procedure was administered. The applicant gave a description of the
experience to Dr Molloy as developing severe pain
during the procedure.
Following then she experienced numbness and tingling in all of her fingers and
increased levels of pain. Additionally,
she described having poor grip strength.
Dr Molloy explained that such symptoms continued despite the applicant wearing a
and returning to the hand therapist for treatment. She described to Dr
Molloy that she was struggling with activities of daily living.
For instance,
she found it difficult to hold a mark in her hand, was struggling to attend to
her toileting needs as it was extremely
painful to use her hand. She was unable
to work at all due to the severity of her symptoms.
cross examination Dr Molloy was taken to several of her clinical notes
throughout March and April 2020. She confirmed that she
had not diagnosed the
applicant as suffering from carpal tunnel syndrome during those consultations.
She also conceded quite readily
that carpal tunnel syndrome is not a difficult
condition for an experienced general practitioner, such as her, to
in her evidence Dr Molloy stated that ‘tennis elbow’ or right
lateral epicondylitis was not diagnosed by her
but emerged during the
applicant’s consultations with other specialist medical
practitioners.
Molloy was in cross examination referred to a clinical note of a surgery
consultation she had with the applicant on 29 October
Amongst other things, one
of the matters recorded in that clinical note concerned the applicant’s
experiencing of menopause
at that time. Dr Molloy conceded that it is a health
issue which was productive of some anxiety at that time. She also accepted the
proposition that generally carpal tunnel syndrome is more common in women of the
age of the applicant, regardless of any occupational
factors. Additionally, she
also conceded that carpal tunnel syndrome can be common in women experiencing
Khurana gave evidence from the witness box and there were two medical reports
also in evidence prepared by him. He is a highly
qualified neurosurgeon. A
report dated 31 August 2022 was produced by him following a video-based
assessment of the applicant that
he conducted, via an internet video platform
known as ‘Zoom’ (sometimes referred to as a ‘telehealth
assessment’),
on 1 August 2022 was in evidence. A supplementary report of
20 September 2023 from him was also in evidence.
Khurana’s report of 31 August 2022 was divided into several subject
sections as follows:
(a) History;
(b) Neurological Examination;
(c) Review of Document Portfolio;
(d) Summary and Assessment;
(e) Responses to your Schedule of Questions;
(f) Expert Witness Code of Conduct Statement; and
(g) My Qualifications.
addition to a letter of instruction from the respondent’s lawyers, Mr
Khurana was furnished with a vast array of documents
comprising more than 1,100
pages. His report of 31 August 2022 is quite extensive and comprises 27 pages.
It is not necessary for
the purpose of these reasons to condescend to
considerable detail concerning the contents of that report. Its essential
ingredients
can be distilled.
section 1 ‘History’ of Mr Khurana’s report of 31 August 2022,
he recounts in considerable detail the applicant’s
History’, ‘Index Incident/History’, ‘Present
Treatment’, ‘Current Status’,
‘Work Status’,
‘Present Activities’, ‘Past History’, ‘Family
History’ and ‘Personal
& Social History’. Whilst this
history occupies approximately nearly 6 pages of the report, overall, the
Tribunal found
it to be consistent with both the evidence of the applicant in
her witness statement and from the witness box, together with several
histories that she has furnished to an array of medical specialists, together
with her general practitioner over several
years with respect to the claimed
conditions from which she says she suffered. The Tribunal has found the
applicant to be a reliable
historian, and therefore, the patient history
recorded in that section of the report need not be reproduced for the purposes
is appropriate to record that Mr Khurana in the section of his report
‘Work History’ he noted the description of the
applicant’s
work in various ways. It was stated that her work was tedious and repetitive.
There was frequent use of a keyboard.
Such keyboard functions were described as
being used repetitively, with her right hand, and with together the mouse with
back-and-forth movements. He also observed that a single claim could
involve a few or hundreds of keystrokes. Additionally, there
was some phone work
and what was described as paper-based work. However, the applicant informed him
that the biggest components of
her tasks were computer and keyboard functions.
Apparently, the applicant demonstrated to
how she typically manipulated the computer mouse using her right-hand.
Khurana stated in his first report that the active diagnosis of the applicant,
from his perspective, was right carpal tunnel syndrome.
He recommended that
carpal tunnel decompression was clinically
indicated. When questioned as to what carpal tunnel decompression means he
explained that
it is surgery for the syndrome when the syndrome arises from the
wrist region. He further expressed the opinion that such condition
‘constitutional’ and he did not believe the condition to be
work-related. Indeed, he further described it as constitutional
work-unrelated from a causation perspective. He further explained that from the
point of view of the word ‘unrelated’
he meant that not to be
‘structurally/anatomically’ adversely affected by work in any
permanent or substantial way.
did recognise that any type of work, including office work, could be associated
with temporary or recurrent exacerbations of the
symptomology, if there is an
underlying condition/predisposition present, such as affecting the carpal
tunnel. He believed that this
was applicable to the applicant in relation to
carpal tunnel syndrome/symptomology. In the witness box, Mr Khurana readily
that increased keyboard work could lead to symptom exacerbation of
the applicant’s condition. He further explained that her
symptoms could be
exacerbated by use of the keyboard or the mouse because those tasks can irritate
the tendons. If the tendons are
irritated by such activities, they could become
inflamed. Indeed, he went so far as to say that it was well-known that office
could be associated with the temporary or current exacerbation of such
symptomology.
Khurana expressed the opinion that on or around March 2020 there was an
exacerbation of the carpal tunnel syndrome/symptomology
experienced by the
applicant. That exacerbation was attributed to the increased work duties and
tasks she undertook at that time.
He described it as a temporary and substantial
exacerbation of those symptoms. However, he noted the substantial improvement of
carpal tunnel syndrome symptomology after the first injection.
respect to the second injection in early 2021, Mr Khurana stated that there
appeared to be a temporary exacerbation/aggravation
associated with it. He was
not convinced that there had been any permanent damage to the median nerve from
that injection. This could
be confirmed by a further nerve conduction study. Mr
Khurana repeated that he did not believe the applicant’s employment was
responsible for the median neuropathy that she experienced from a structural
perspective. However, he did repeat that he recognised
applicant’s work probably did exacerbate this symptomology, at least
temporarily, for around a year from March 2020.
Mr Khurana reiterated this
opinion when he was in the witness box and cross-examined on the topic.
instructed to prepare his second report Mr Khurana was furnished with a copy of
the nerve conduction study dated 13 April 2023.
He observed that when compared
to the previous electrophysiological study of 3 November 2021, the right median
nerve electrophysiological
parameters remained the same without any improvement
or deterioration. Therefore, he concluded that it would appear,
electrophysiologically,
that the median neuropathy on the right side was
sustainably mild, which still improved from the ‘moderate’ median
identified in the pre-first injection nerve conduction study. It was
unchanged from what was noted to be mild previously, following
both the first
and later the second injections. He concluded that if there were permanent and
substantial damage from the second
injection, he would have expected there to be
worsening of the electrophysiological parameters, and certainly something beyond
previously noted ‘mild’. He was therefore unconvinced that there
was any objective injury or damage from the second injection,
as opposed to
persistence of improved right median neuropathy electrophysiologically,
following the pair of injections.
asked to describe carpal tunnel syndrome,
explained that physiologically, it is a dysfunction, and he further explained
the symptoms and signs pertaining to dysfunction
of the median nerve at the
wrist. When asked to explain what would cause such a syndrome to occur, he
identified several risk factors.
They could be a narrow carpal tunnel, an
inflamed carpal tunnel, something affected by diabetes or thyrotoxicosis, and it
be an injured carpal tunnel. These are, he described, sorts of
anatomical factors associated with the carpal tunnel syndrome and
potentially
related to carpal tunnel decompression.
matter touched on, when Mr Khurana was in the witness box, concerned whether or
not the symptoms might improve if a person
suffering from carpal tunnel syndrome
stopped work. He stated that the symptoms might improve unless there is some
other underlying
cause. It was explained by him that if someone is predisposed
to getting the relevant symptomology and they undertake activities
that increase
such symptomology, one would expect with the cessation of such activities the
symptoms would reduce. However, if the
patient is predisposed to such a
condition, which might arise as a result of excessive weight, menopause, age, or
some other physiological
characteristic, even the cessation of such work-related
activities may not lead to a cessation of the symptoms, especially if there
something that is progressing and underlying all that.
this setting, he also conceded that ‘the other side of the equation’
is that if the person returns to using their hands
again and undertakes the
activities that were previously causing them to experience the symptoms
complained of, such symptoms might
Khurana was probed quite extensively in cross-examination about the contents of
his second report and his conclusions about the
alleged damage to the
applicant’s median nerve damage caused by the second injection. He
explained that at the time he prepared
his first report, he considered it
possible that the result was intraneural. However, when he considered the
material furnished to
him for the purposes of preparing his supplementary
report, he considered that the possibility that it was intraneural, or any sort
of event that caused structural damage to the nerve, was negligible. The reason
for reaching this conclusion was that there was a
more recent nerve conduction
study undertaken by a neurologist, Dr Seneviratne. That nerve conduction study
revealed that there was
no change in the electro-physiology. One presumably
would have expected to have seen this in the event that there was an intraneural
event or damage to the nerve.
Janakiramanan’s opinion that there may have been nerve injury due to the
second injection was rejected by Mr Khurana in cross-examination.
Further, it
was put to him that until surgery was undertaken, one cannot be sure what damage
there was to the median nerve from such
injection. He reiterated that he did not
think there was any damage to the median nerve from the second injection. With
surgery, he said it will tell one if the median neuropathy or the
symptomology has improved following such surgery. Surgery itself
actually inform one in any way about the inherent state of the median nerve,
irrespective of the procedures that have been
undertaken. In terms of actual
pre-surgical dysfunction, it does not tell one about the causation of such
presurgical dysfunction.
disagreed with the opinion of Dr Janakiramanan which stated that until surgery
is undertaken it would not be possible to
know how much is a direct nerve injury
and how much is related to nerve compression. He described Dr Janakiramanan as
making a ‘leap’
in expressing her opinion. In doing so, Dr Khurana
stated that Dr Janakiramanan was saying that after the operation, the
applicant’s
median nerve damage may not be resolved because of the damage
done by the second cortisone injection, of which there was no scientific
Therefore, he had to say that he did not agree with her opinion.
Khurana was further probed as to what he meant by no scientific proof or no
scientific evidence. In response, he referred to both
electro-physiology studies
and ultrasonography. He explained that symptoms can vary from person to person
due to a number of factors.
The science then has to demonstrate whether the
symptoms fitted distribution, are if there are signs to accompany it.
Investigations
are undertaken to endeavour to support such symptoms,
particularly electro-physiology. However, he stated that he could not draw
conclusion scientifically that there had been damage to the nerve. He further
observed that ultrasonography was not very suggestive
of any substantial
difference between the two sides. He described that one has to look for
‘some form of objective investigational
validation of the symptoms’,
not just the symptoms alone. This pathway of reasoning was a fairly important
factor or foundation
for Mr Khurana reaching the conclusion that he did.
matter should be briefly touched on that arose during the cross-examination of
Mr Khurana. He was taken to two articles attached
to his first
The questions related to
occupation being a significant risk factor with the development of carpal tunnel
syndrome. He readily conceded
that the question about occupation being a
significant risk factor is still non-definitive and that there were papers or
for and against a conclusion. He also readily accepted that
contradictory findings had been reported for associations between computer
and carpal tunnel syndrome. He agreed that it was
‘controversial’.
Khurana, at another point in cross-examination when specific questions were put
to him, repeated that he had made it very clear
in his reports and from the
witness box that he believed that there had been no permanent physiological or
structural change injury
to, or aggravation, to the applicant’s median
nerve as a result of her work.
respect to the second cortisone injection of 9 March 2021, when it was put to
him that there was a permanent injury arising from
that injection, he repeated
that such a suggestion was an ‘unscientific conclusion.’
re-examination, Mr Khurana conceded that there was no consensus in the medical
literature in terms of drawing an association between
keyboarding activities and
as causative of the onset of carpal tunnel syndrome. He repeated that what he
said remained fairly indisputable
because in the medical literature are things
such as age, gender, menopausal status, and presence of endocrinopathy such as
thyroid, and acromegaly. What was more apparent from the literature is
that occupationally heavy-duty vibrational tasks and working
environments, albeit prolonged cold environments, are things that the medical
literature had come to a consensus about. However,
in terms of keyboarding, he
stated there was as yet no such consensus to his knowledge.
in re-examination Mr Khurana was taken to a report of 3 November 2021 prepared
by Dr Seneviratne following the performance
of a nerve conduction study on the
applicant that day.
He concluded
that the right nerve studies and right radial sensory responses and left median
sensory responses were all normal. Therefore,
he stated he was not convinced
that the applicant had an ongoing right sided carpal tunnel syndrome that was
contributing to his
symptoms. Mr Khurana was asked whether such observations
were consistent with a finding of only a right mild median neuropathy at
wrist. He responded that his interpretation was that the condition was mild and
even though it was found to be mild electro-physiologically,
what he was saying
was that he was not actually convinced that the applicant had an actual right
sided carpal tunnel syndrome contributing
to her symptoms.
were two reports in evidence from Dr
Journeaux, a consultant Orthopaedic
Surgeon. The first report from him is dated 29 November 2022 and a supplementary
medical report
from him is dated 1 February 2023.
first report of Dr Journeaux
Journeaux prepared his first report following an assessment of the applicant
that he conducted on 18 November 2022 following receipt
of a letter of
instruction with a vast array of documentation forwarded to him by the
respondent’s legal
the history section of his report, Dr Journeaux recorded the applicant informing
him that on a typical day she would process approximately
800 claims. He
described that to process a claim, the applicant would sit at her desk,
continuously using her right-hand on a mouse
and a keyboard with specific
keystrokes. Some claims require multiple keystrokes. The applicant informed Dr
Journeaux that on 30
March 2020, whilst working she noticed the
‘spontaneous onset of right radial wrist pain. The pain increased over the
24-hours, and she had significant difficulty in sleeping’.
the section ‘Current Symptomology’, Dr Journeaux recorded the
applicant describing three discrete areas of pain. These
were pains on the
radial side of the wrist, the hypothenar eminence, volar wrist, and the extensor
ward distal to the elbow.
the applicant’s other medical history recorded was, amongst other things,
that the applicant experienced fibromyalgia.
his review of the material that had been furnished to him by the
respondent’s lawyers, Dr Journeaux made reference to the
Evaluation report of 4 May 2020. In that reference he also recorded that the
applicant had reported that the onset of right
wrist pain symptoms were on and
off for a while, however, they had increased approximately a few months
beforehand with the use of
a new keyboard.
his first report in the section headed ‘Summary and Assessment’, Dr
Journeaux diagnosed the applicant as suffering
from the following conditions:
(a) Concerning her right elbow there was evidence of radial nerve entrapment.
There was also evidence of a concomitant right lateral
epicondylitis (tennis
(b) Right carpal tunnel syndrome with persisting irritation of the median nerve
with evidence of sensory impairment.
(c) De Quervain’s tenosynovitis of the right wrist.
Journeaux stated that the clinical examination findings were consistent with the
diagnoses in the clinical history and medical
documentation that had been
furnished to him.
was specifically asked for his diagnosis of the applicant’s then current
physical conditions and the aetiology. In response,
Dr Journeaux stated that in
respect of the right elbow, the applicant has evidence of two concomitant
pathologies, as noted above.
He further expressed the opinion that such
pathologies, in his view, had not been caused by the applicant’s
employment. He
stated that this contention was is supported by the scientific
literature. He referred specifically to the AMA Guides to Injury
Causation and
Journeaux then expressed the view that the nature of the applicant’s
employment, particularly those tasks that involve the
upper limb, would have
been an aggravating factor in symptomatic terms of such conditions.
the applicant’s carpal tunnel condition, Dr Journeaux expressed the
opinion that the underlying pathology had not
been caused by her employment, but
in his view, her employment in this case would be considered a significant
aggravating/contributing
factor. Further, he stated that it unfortunately
appeared that the applicant had suffered a complication from the second
into the carpal tunnel and has evidence of sensory impairment.
the condition of De Quervain’s tenosynovitis, he expressed the opinion
that the underlying condition had not been
caused by her employment, but her
employment was a significant aggravating factor in symptomatic terms.
Journeaux repeated his view that the applicant’s employment is an
underlying aggravating factor only in symptomatic terms,
but it is not causative
in terms of the onset of the conditions in terms of the pathology.
was further repeated by Dr Journeaux that it was his view that the conditions
suffered by the applicant represent an aggravation
and an acceleration in
symptomatic terms of constitutional pathologies.
asked a question about pre-existing conditions, Dr Journeaux stated that the
only pre-existing condition of relevance was that
of fibromyalgia. However, he
did not believe that the applicant’s right upper limb pathologies are
explained in any way by
such diagnosis.
Journeaux then made recommendations for future medical treatment in respect of
her conditions, which need not be reproduced for
the purposes of these
response to a question concerning the applicant’s physical capacity for
her preinjury hours and duties, Dr Journeaux expressed
the view that the
applicant does have physical capacity for preinjury hours, but not preinjury
duties as a service officer. Her main
restriction being the presence of pain,
her capacity and tolerance to that pain, and her motivation to work.
in response to another question, Dr Journeaux expressed the opinion that the
applicant does have the capacity to work at
least on a part-time basis with
appropriate breaks and duties. He expressed the view that the applicant would be
able to work four
hours a day on a five day per week basis.
The second report of Dr Journeaux
second or ‘supplementary’ report of Dr Journeaux is dated 1 February
2023 and was in evidence before the
Dr Journeux was
furnished with a further letter of instruction from the respondent’s
lawyers of 24 January 2023. In that letter
of instruction, a number of factual
matters were drawn to his attention. He was specifically asked whether those
further matters
altered his opinion regarding the applicant’s current
physical condition.
response, Dr Journeaux stated that he was of the view that there is still a
relationship to the nature of the applicant’s
employment, but that the
relationship would be non-significant and more likely than not, the
applicant’s symptoms, which occurred
at work, would be considered a
temporary aggravation (exacerbation) rather than an aggravation; which he
explained was a permanent
worsening of the condition either in symptomatic or
pathological terms.
Dr Journeaux, in response to the applicant not
having worked since March 2021, expressed the opinion that given there has been
real improvement in her conditions, this would rather indicate that work in
and of itself is not a significant contributing or aggravating
respect of her current musculoskeletal complaints.
in the witness box, Dr Journeaux adopted the contents of his reports. In cross
examination, the opinions and conclusions of the
medical specialists called by
the applicant were put to him. He disagreed with those opinions and
conclusions.
was specifically put to him that the applicant’s right lateral
epicondylitis was caused by her work, which Dr Journeaux expressly
Journeaux also had it put to him in cross examination that the applicant’s
work significantly contributed to her right De
Quervains tenosynovitis. He
rejected the suggestion and stated that it was an aggravation but not the
causation. Additionally, he
expressly rejected a suggestion that the
applicant’s work was the primary cause of her condition.
respect to the applicant’s condition of carpal tunnel syndrome, Dr
Journeaux rejected the proposition that the applicant’s
work significantly
contributed to such condition.
Journeaux was taken to an electro-physiology report (a nerve conduction study)
dated 13 April 2023, by the neurologist Dr Seneviratne,
which he readily
conceded post-dated his report.
He was asked to read the report. Having done so he conceded that such nerve
conduction study was consistent with a diagnosis of carpal
tunnel syndrome as at
Journeaux was probed about the second injection that the applicant received in
or around 9 March 2021. The symptoms that the applicant
reported which were
attributed to the injection were put to him. He responded by saying that such
symptoms could be attributed partly
to the injection and partly to the condition
being carpal tunnel syndrome suffered by her. He rejected a suggestion put to
the fact such symptoms experienced by the applicant persisted for 18
months after the second injection is suggestive that she suffered
a permanent
injury from the injection. In particular, he disagreed with the conclusions of
Dr Janakiramanan on this question. He
also repeated that he still held the
opinion that he agreed with Dr Khurana’s opinion that the second injection
was unlikely
to have caused any permanent damage, noting that it would have
shown up in the nerve conduction studies. When probed on what such
conduction studies would have revealed as to any permanent damage, he stated
that one would expect a deterioration in the electrophysiological
findings by
the neurologist so there might be a worsening in the latency, or things like
that, which would basically reveal a worsening
Sabetghadam
Sabetghadam is an occupational physician. He undertook a clinical assessment of
the applicant on 26 August 2021 and prepared a
report on 2 September 2021 which
was in evidence.
He also gave
oral evidence. Like the other expert medical practitioners retained in this
matter, Dr Sabetghadam was furnished with
an array of documentary material prior
to the conduct of the clinical assessment and preparation of his report. He
outlined a history
relevant to the injury that was provided to him by the
applicant. Other than to record that the applicant informed him that she noticed
pain in the right wrist and thumb area on 30 March 2020, little more of that
history need be repeated for the purposes of these reasons.
terms of the applicant’s current complaints and symptoms, Dr Sabetghadam
recorded the applicant as stating that she experiences
numbness in the tip of
her index finger. She suffers from pins and needles in the base of the thumb
extending to the ulnar side of
the wrist. She also reported that she has a
throbbing pain in the base of the thumb. The pain in the wrist and thumb was
as constant.
Sabetghadam provided details of his examination that he conducted on the
applicant. These included an apprehension test for De
tenosynovitis. There was also an apprehension test for right common extensor
tendinopathy. He also conducted Tinel
and Phalen’s
series of responses to specific questions contained in the letter of instruction
to Dr Sabetghadam were then provided. Several of
those responses will be
referred to hereunder.
concluded that the applicant’s current condition was not an aggravation,
acceleration or recurrence of any pre-existing,
degenerative, or underlying
medical condition. He expressed the opinion that the condition is the natural
progression of an underlying
medical condition. With respect to pain in her
right upper limb he considered it inconsistent and non-concordant with any
injury. He considered it highly unlikely to be caused, aggravated,
recurred, or accelerated by her occupational duties.
Dr Sabetghadam expressed the opinion that the applicant does not suffer from
carpal tunnel syndrome and does not suffer from
De Quervain’s
tenosynovitis. He considered her symptoms were inconsistent and non-concordant
with such diagnosis.
referred to the apprehension test as he conducted on the applicant. He stated
that the symptoms concerning carpal tunnel syndrome
in the right-hand
experienced by the applicant were inconsistent and non-concordant with classic
presentation of carpal tunnel syndrome.
Sabetghadam expressed the opinion that based on the evidence in medical
literature and on the scale of medical probabilities, the
applicant’s
symptoms were related to an underlying degenerative condition of the wrist,
thumb, or cervical spine and reinforced
by psychosocial factors.
also expressed the opinion that based on the AMA Guides to the Evaluation of
Disease and Injury Causation, working in office-based
duties does not contribute
to a significant degree to the development of De Quervain’s tenosynovitis,
carpal tunnel syndrome,
or any musculoskeletal injury in the upper limbs. With
respect to De Quervain’s tenosynovitis, which is known as a
bookkeeper’s
disease, he explained the forces required are a power grip or
a pincer grip between the thumb on the other fingers. He expressed
the opinion
that they are not the characteristics of a person who works performing typing
duties or operates a mouse.
Sabetghadam reiterated his opinion that the applicant’s occupational
duties were highly unlikely to have contributed to her
carpal tunnel syndrome.
He observed that the applicant ceased employment activity quite some time ago
and her symptoms have not changed
significantly.
also concluded that the applicant’s medical condition developed against
the background of possible degenerative changes in
her cervical spine or wrist
and thumb and was reinforced by psychosocial factors. Dr Sabetghadam then went
on to explain these extrinsic
psychosocial in his report.
the witness box,
Dr Sabetghadam adopted the contents
of his report as true and correct. He was searchingly cross-examined. It is not
unfair to him
to say that he was a moderately combative witness during his
cross-examination. Some expert witnesses do, from time to time, adopt
approach for a variety of reasons, for instance when, as in this case, to some
extent their professional opinions are seriously
challenged during robust cross
examination. The applicant’s closing submissions were critical of his
evidence and the conclusions
reached by him. Notwithstanding his combative
approach in cross examination, the Tribunal did not see Dr Sabetghadam as being
lacking in credibility or one whose evidence should not be accepted or
otherwise preferred, if it is appropriate to do so. Ultimately,
the Tribunal
found him to be a witness who understood his obligations being primarily to
assist the Tribunal.
Sabetghadam was probed about tests he conducted on the applicant for lateral
epicondylitis, including an apprehension test. His
response was that the
applicant did not complain of pain when he administered a test for lateral
epicondylitis. He stated that she
complained about a different group of muscles
as it was in a completely different area and so relevantly raised that the
complained of pain in the wrong spot. For example, she complained
concerned. In response to several questions, he reiterated that he was claiming
the applicant’s pain was not caused
by bilateral epicondylitis. He also
reiterated that in his opinion her pain was not caused by tennis elbow.
for De Quervain’s tenosynovitis, Dr Sabetghadam reiterated that it was his
opinion that the applicant did not suffer from
such a condition. When it was put
to him that an ultrasound conducted on 3 April 2020 did diagnose the applicant
as suffering from
De Quervain’s tenosynovitis, he conceded it was an
important piece of clinical information. He also stated that he assessed
applicant on the day in question and that the condition is one that could
resolve between the time the ultrasound was conducted
and when he conducted his
clinical examination in August 2021.
Sabetghadam readily acknowledged that the applicant did not report to him a
previous history of De Quervain’s tenosynovitis
prior to 30 March
was also suggested to Dr Sabetghadam in cross-examination that if in January
2020 the applicant changed from working part-time
to full-time, with no prior
history of complaints relating to the right wrist, and then she developed De
Quervain’s tenosynovitis,
it was consistent with being due to her
employment.
respect to the condition of carpal tunnel syndrome, Dr Sabetghadam, when
pressed, acknowledged that when the applicant had the
first injection her
symptoms improved and as such it is relevant to whether she in fact was
suffering from that condition.
another stage of his cross-examination, Dr Sabetghadam stated that the applicant
probably had ‘past carpal tunnel syndrome’
and considered that her
job did not cause the condition. He stated further that two months of increasing
work hours with office-based
duties does not cause the condition. He explained
that carpal tunnel syndrome is a multifactorial condition. He said practitioners
such as him consider competing causalities, age, and genetic predisposition all
play an important role. With that being said, he
stated there is insufficient
data in the medical literature to support that.
Sabetghadam rejected a suggestion that because the applicant continues to suffer
from symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome it would
strongly suggest that she
suffered a permanent injury from the second intraneural steroid injection. He
also stated that if she ceases
working her symptoms should settle. The fact that
her symptoms persevered, continued, and to some extent deteriorated despite
work, was to Dr Sabetghadam one of the most important points in
determining causality.
he did explain that the Tinel’s and Phalen’s tests he administered
are for the evaluation of carpal tunnel syndrome.
He further explained that
Phalen’s has a higher specificity whereas Tinel’s is very important
to validate a patient’s
Floyd is a Consultant Occupational Physician. As already noted, he prepared a
report of 29 June 2020 after conducting an assessment
of the applicant on 17
the section of his report concerning the applicant’s history and work
duties, Dr Floyd noted that from approximately January
2020 the applicant
switched to full-time duties having been a part-time employee for approximately
6 to 7 years previously. The applicant
explained to Dr Floyd that she did not
undertake long continuous periods of typing, but there was frequent keyboard
activity including
control and function keys and the use of a mouse with
extensive numeric input. Further, she explained that on most days she would
process 800 claims over a 4-to-5-hour period. She described such processes as
being very numeric along with the use of function keys
already noted above in the section of his report under the subheading
‘Mechanism of Alleged Injury/Sequence of Events’,
Dr Floyd has
recorded the applicant as right-hand dominant presenting for an assessment of
her right upper limb complaint. He noted
that she reported that she had brief
‘pings’ on and off over time with keying and using her keyboard and
mouse. She described
these would be brief. She would notice a sharp pain around
her wrist like a ‘stabbing’ around the radial border not into
thumb. He also recorded her explaining that this was not ongoing and nothing
major. She required no time away from work or restriction
and was not having any
applicant described to Dr Floyd the events in March 2020 as occurring when she
was undertaking her normal work, being that she
developed sudden severe pain to
the radial border of her wrist which referred into her hand and upper elbow, and
she also felt that
she lost strength in the right upper limb. The applicant
recalled this event occurring early in the morning when she had processed
approximately 400 claims. The applicant reported to him that the pain increased
over that day. She informed Dr Floyd that at the
time of the onset of such pain,
she was working her normal speed and apart from increasing her work hours to
full-time in the previous
December, there was no substantive change in her work.
He further recorded the applicant telling him that she continued in her work.
She reported tenderness from around the wrist to the radial border and up the
forearm. Also, she described the radial and ulnar deviation
as uncomfortable. A
further recollection was tenderness to palpitation around the wrist. She also
recalled feeling tension and tightness
in her shoulders.
Accordingly,
Dr Floyd recorded that the applicant saw her general practitioner the next day
and was given a day off work. There was
no resolution from that time. Shortly
afterwards the applicant underwent an ultrasound scan which identified De
tenosynovitis.
the section of his report entitled ‘Current Status’ it was noted
that the applicant reported that her right upper limb
complaint was not
changing. He recorded that she described to him experiencing diffuse pain and
symptoms throughout the upper right
limb. She described the pain as waxing and
waning. The applicant also described it being difficult to identify the area
the worst given that the areas affected could change around. Pain was
described just below the elbow around the lateral epicondyle.
experienced by her in her wrist and hand. A description was provided of an
electric type feeling into the palm and into
the thumb. A further description
was of a sharp pain with radial and ulnar deviation. Over time she stated she
had developed no new
the section of his report ‘Past Medical History’, Dr Floyd recorded
that the applicant had a history of several conditions.
These conditions
included fibromyalgia, hyperacusis, photosensitivity, chronic pain, fatigue, and
anxiety. With respect to the applicant’s
fibromyalgia, she informed him
that it affects her all over and is associated with fatigue and that it can
change by the day. She
described it as a deep body ache.
Floyd then in his report provided answers to a series of very specific questions
put to him. He stated from his assessment of the
applicant, the information
provided in the letter of referral, results of investigations, and clinical
assessment, that he was of
the opinion that the applicant had confirmed right
sided De Quervain’s tenosynovitis. As such he expressed the opinion that
the change in work hours had acted to bring on such symptoms. He also stated
that he was highly suspicious that she also had carpal
tunnel syndrome and
possibly ulnar nerve compromise at the elbow.
explained it is recognised that De Quervain’s tenosynovitis can be brought
on with highly repetitive wrist activity associated
with force, but is also well
known to occur spontaneously in middle-age and has been associated with
pregnancy. Dr Floyd also recorded
that orthopaedic texts often notice a history
of unaccustomed activity or coming on without clear trauma. Tenderness is
over the lip of the radial styloid with positive findings of a
Finkelstein’s test.
answering another question concerning the causative factors of his diagnoses, Dr
Floyd stated that while the causal relationship
with keyboard and mouse activity
is not fully established, it is plausible and probable that repetitive actions
at the wrist and
rapid increase in hand activity from 3 to 5 days a week would
act to aggravate the condition.
Floyd also stated that it was not possible to state with certainty that the work
exposure described by the applicant was primarily
causative of the condition.
However, he stated it was plausible and probable that repetitive actions at the
wrist and rapid increase
in hand activity from 3 to 5 days a week would act to
aggravate the condition. He repeated in another section that the changing work
exposure would act to aggravate the pathology leading to her symptoms.
in the witness box Dr Floyd adopted his report as being true and correct. As
already noted, he explained how he took a history
from the applicant.
cross examination, amongst other things, he reiterated his suspicions that the
applicant was suffering from carpal tunnel syndrome
and also possibly some ulnar
nerve irritability and tight neural tension. He stated he would have wanted to
see the results of nerve
conduction studies before confirming such a
specifically probed in cross examination about whether the increase in the
applicant’s duties from part-time to full-time
significantly caused the
onset of De Quervain’s, his response was that he did not know if he would
say that and that it depended
on what one’s definition of
‘significantly’ meant. However, he conceded that the association
between the applicant’s
condition and her work might be possible, but he
could not say that the applicant’s work would have caused her
answer to another question in cross examination, Dr Floyd stated that the
epidemiological literature, the science, and the research
would not fully
support a conclusion that keyboard and typing activity is causative, or
primarily causative, of De Quervain’s
tenosynovitis. When pressed in cross
examination, he stated the literature does not fully support a causal
relationship between keyboard
and typing activity and De
Quervain’s.
CONSIDERATION
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
applicant contends that the reviewable decision made by the respondent
carpal tunnel syndrome in her right arm
(application No 2021/8667) should be set aside by the Tribunal.
does so because she contends that the condition being carpal tunnel syndrome in
her right arm, is an injury, or aggravation of
an injury, that has arisen out of
her employment. It is therefore an injury within the meaning of ss 5A(b) or (c)
of the SRC Act.
Alternatively,
she contends that the condition is an ailment or aggravation of an ailment that
has been contributed to, to a significant
degree, by her employment. Therefore,
it is a ‘disease’ within the meaning of s 5B of the SRC Act.
Thereby, it is compensable
under s 5A(1)(a) of that Act.
the applicant invites the Tribunal to find that she has suffered the effects of
the right arm carpal tunnel syndrome since 30
March 2020 and continues to do
inviting the Tribunal to set the first reviewable decision aside and make orders
in the terms the applicant seeks; several grounds
are relied upon by her. They
will be addressed in the order of these submissions made.
first ground relied upon by the applicant is that the onset of the carpal tunnel
syndrome experienced by her is consistent with
it being caused by her employment
with Services Australia. In making this contention, she invites the Tribunal to
find that there
were no complaints of the conditions concerning her right arm
prior to 30 March 2023, in accordance with evidence given by her and
treating general practitioner Dr Molloy. It should be borne in mind that the
applicant has been a patient of Dr Molloy for many
years. This is not disputed.
Further, it is contended that the onset of the condition coincided with the
applicant’s transition
from part-time to full-time employment. This
transition resulted in any increase in the amount of time repetitive duties
right-hand were undertaken.
Tribunal does not accept this contention. There are several reasons for this.
There has already been a consideration of the references
by Ms Richards in the
Ergonomic Evaluation Report of 4 May 2020 and of Dr
Floyd in his report of 29 June 2020, which recorded the applicant experiencing
symptoms sometime before 30 March 2020. That consideration is referred to and
repeated. The Tribunal accepts that the applicant did
say that she experienced
symptoms which were ‘brief pings’ on and off over time and a sharp
pain around her wrist like
a ‘stabbing’ around the radial border.
These admissions by her are consistent with a condition existing prior to the
events of 30 March 2020. They are also consistent with such a condition existing
for quite a considerable time span prior to that
date and certainly well before
her transition from part-time to full-time employment. Further, it seems more
probable than not, that
these conditions experienced by her prior to that date,
as described, were consistent with a pre-existing condition. For these reasons
the Tribunal rejects the applicant’s evidence and the contention arising
from it that there were no complaints by her prior
to that date.
is more probable than not, given the absence of any reference to conditions
concerning her right arm prior to 30 March 2020 in
Dr Molloy’s clinical
notes, that no complaint had been made by the applicant to her concerning the
condition. However, that
does not mean that she did not experience them. The
fact that a description of a condition was given by the applicant to Ms Richards
who prepared the Ergonomic Evaluation Report of 4 May 2020 and to Dr Floyd are
indicative of her experiencing a condition before
that date. The Tribunal also
finds that it is highly unlikely that either Ms Richards or Dr Floyd were
mistaken in what they recorded
the applicant as saying to them, or otherwise
made such entries up.
applicant also contends than it is likely that the conditions suffered by her of
carpal tunnel syndrome, lateral epicondylitis,
and De Quervain’s
tenosynovitis were caused by her employment because it is inherently implausible
that such constitutional
conditions would occur in her right arm simultaneously.
Therefore, it is more probable than not that such conditions were caused
repetitive tasks particularly using the keyboard that she undertook at
are several reasons why the Tribunal cannot accept the applicant’s
contention that the three conditions arose simultaneously.
tunnel syndrome was not diagnosed for some considerable time after 30 March
2020. Dr Molloy’s clinical notes of a surgery
consultation recorded on 31
March 2020 were in evidence.
the “History” section of the clinical note the applicant described
processing more than 3000 claims from Tuesday to
Friday of the previous week. On
the previous day she processed 800 claims before lunch when her right wrist
started hurting. She
described ‘[p]ain shooting towards elbow from wrist,
pain starts in the wrist (thumb side) and travels up towards the
detailed examination was undertaken by Dr Molloy of the applicant. That
examination revealed the applicant to be very tender over
the extensor tendons
of the right wrist. It was further recorded that there was ‘slight
swelling no crepitus’. There
was pain on flexion and extension of thumb.
She was observed to be tender through the forearm (importantly Dr Molloy also
that the applicant had a background of fibromyalgia so in her opinion
it was not unusual for there to be trigger points.) Finally,
she recorded that
the applicant also experienced tenderness in the lateral epicondyle elbow. Her
assessment was
‘? Possible De Quervain
s’. Dr Molloy is a
vastly experienced general practitioner who presented as thoroughly competent.
Had symptoms of carpal tunnel
syndrome presented themselves, one would expect
that it would have been diagnosed then. If it was not diagnosed by her, which to
the Tribunal seems unlikely, particularly if the symptoms were indeed present,
nonetheless at the very least it would also have been
expected that Dr Molloy
might have made some reference to the possibility of such a diagnosis in her
clinical notes made when the
applicant first presented with those symptoms.
the surgery consultation between the applicant and Dr Molloy on 31 March 2020,
Dr Molloy prepared an imaging request to
Capital Radiology in Cheltenham for the
applicant. The imaging request sought an ultrasound to the applicant’s
right wrist
and questioned whether there was a condition of De Quervain’s
tendinitis. One also poses the question, if carpal tunnel syndrome
possible diagnosis, why there was neither a referral to either a specialist, or
for medical images to be taken, to determine
one way or another whether the
applicant suffered from such a condition. It seems that Dr Molloy did not
consider it to be a cause
of her condition, and certainly not on 31 March
diagnosis of possible De Quervain’s by Dr Molloy was indeed confirmed when
the applicant underwent an ultrasound on 3 April
2020. As previously noted, when
the results of the ultrasound conducted on the applicant’s right-hand and
wrist were furnished
to Dr Molloy, including the relevant medical image, the
applicant then had a telehealth consultation with Dr Molloy on 15 April 2020,
which they had a discussion concerning the results of that ultrasound. There was
no diagnosis by Dr Molloy of carpal tunnel syndrome
in that telehealth
consultation. Once again if carpal tunnel syndrome was a realistic possibility
as a cause of the applicant’s
symptoms, one would have expected it to have
been explored at this time, and if such a diagnosis possible, further tests and
images to have been ordered, and a referral to an appropriately
qualified specialist considered, if not undertaken.
Dr Molloy did not diagnose right-sided lateral epicondylitis at the consultation
of 31 March 2020.
applicant lodged her first claim on 19 May
The claimed conditions
were described as, ‘De Quervain’s tenosynovitis of the right thumb.
Thoracic Outlet Syndrome (right
arm)’. In that claim there was no
reference to the three relevant conditions being experienced at the same time,
contends. Had that been the case one would have expected such a
reference to have been made in the first claim form to all of those
conditions,
for the avoidance of any doubt. As has been previously observed, the applicant
presented as someone very alive to protecting
her interests. Had she experienced
the three conditions simultaneously, particularly on and from 30 March 2020, she
would have said
so at the time of that first claim.
this setting, it should be noted, that the applicant did not make a claim for
the condition of right-sided lateral epicondylitis
until 10 May 2022. This was
more than one year after she ceased work with Services Australia. It was over
two years after the events
of 30 March 2020. The Tribunal was not directed to
any medical opinion or diagnosis of such condition prior to this date. It should
be borne in mind that the applicant by this time had consulted several doctors
including medical specialists.
One would have expected this condition to have been diagnosed well before May
2022 if the applicant was experiencing symptoms of
it. As has been noted, the
applicant when in the witness box presented as someone who was very much alive
to advancing her interests
or protecting her position when the occasion called
for it. Had she experienced these symptoms of all three conditions
simultaneously,
as she now contends, one would have expected her to have drawn
this to the attention of the several medical professionals, including
qualified specialists that she consulted throughout the period from 30 March
2020 until May 2022 when the claim was made.
One would have expected that,
amongst all the treating medical practitioners that the applicant consulted, the
suggestion of all
three conditions occurring simultaneously would have seen the
light of day much earlier. It is telling that they did not. This is
reflection of the three conditions arising or occurring simultaneously as the
applicant now contends.
the applicant did not make a claim for carpal tunnel syndrome until she lodged a
Workers’ Compensation Claim for that condition
on 20 July 2021.
Once again, if
the applicant had suffered from all three constitutional conditions in her right
arm, wrist or thumb simultaneously,
as she now asserts, one would have expected
a claim for all such conditions to have been made much earlier with a clear
in such claims to the fact that all such conditions occurred
simultaneously.
best concerning this condition, Dr Floyd when conducting his assessment of the
applicant on 17 June 2020 recorded the applicant
experiencing pain just below
the elbow around the lateral epicondyle.
applicant contends that she has continued to suffer from the symptoms of carpal
tunnel syndrome since 30 March 2020. This, therefore,
it is contended, points
towards a conclusion that such condition was caused by her employment rather
than being an aggravation of
some other underlying condition. The Tribunal does
not accept this contention.
are several reasons for reaching this conclusion. Several of these reasons have
already been articulated. Therefore, brief reference
will be made to them.
were the observations made by the author of the Ergonomic Evaluation Report of 4
May 2020 that the onset of the right wrist
pain symptoms were, ‘on and off
for a while’. There were the observations of Dr Floyd in his report
‘that she had
brief “pings” on and off over time with keying
and using her keyboard and mouse’. There was also the reference
Floyd to the applicant telling him that she would notice a sharp pain around her
wrist like a ‘stabbing’ around
the radial border not into the thumb.
These are indicative of some condition, previously undiagnosed, occurring
beforehand and not
entirely caused by the incident on 30 March 2020 as she
recounted it.
condition of carpal tunnel syndrome was not diagnosed, or even contemplated by
Dr Molloy when conducting her examination of the
applicant on 31 March 2020.
Having had the opportunity to observe Dr Molloy and given her extensive
experience, it seems highly likely
that if the condition were likely experienced
by the applicant, some reference to the possibility of it existing would have
made in the treating doctor’s clinical notes.
Floyd examined the applicant on 17 June 2020. In the section of his report
headed ‘Summary and Assessment’, he stated
that the applicant had
clinical signs to support a diagnosis of possible carpal tunnel syndrome. His
assessment went no higher than
Seneviratne, a neurologist who had been treating the applicant, prepared a
report for Dr Molloy on 3 September 2020 after conducting
a nerve conduction
study on that day.
The contents
of that report are referred to in their entirety. However, he described the
applicant’s right-sided carpal tunnel
syndrome as mild. The remaining
symptoms were described as likely related to mild soft tissue injuries affecting
the arms. Her prognosis
was considered good and the applicant was described as
presently then working from home and tolerating her workload well. It should
also be observed that in the Electrophysiology Report of 3 September 2020
prepared by Dr Seneviratne, which contain the results of
the nerve conduction
studies undertaken on the applicant on that day, there is a section entitled
‘Interpretation’. In
that section it is recorded that there was
electrophysiological evidence of a mild right median neuropathy at the wrist
(previously
moderate from the nerve conduction studies in July 2020), compatible
with clinical diagnosis of mild right-sided carpal tunnel syndrome.
Further, it
was recorded that there was no electrophysiological evidence of a right ulnar
neuropathy or a left median neuropathy
at the wrist to account for the symptoms
described. There was a proviso to this interpretation that the study did not
musculoskeletal aetiology/soft tissue injury as a contributing cause
for the symptoms. This proviso to Dr Seneviratne’s report
reason why the Tribunal cannot conclude that the applicant’s right-sided
carpal tunnel syndrome is an injury that
has arisen out of her employment. It is
another reason for also preferring the conclusions or opinions expressed by Mr
Khurana and
Dr Journeaux.
clinical assessment of the applicant was undertaken by Dr Sabetghadam on 26
August 2021. He prepared a report on 2 September 2021
that was in evidence
before the Tribunal.
Sabetghadam when conducting his examination of the applicant applied an
apprehension test which did not reveal her to be suffering
from carpal tunnel
syndrome. He also administered Tinel’s and Phalen’s tests, which he
explained in his evidence as being
for the evaluation of carpal tunnel syndrome.
Further, he stated that the symptoms concerning carpal tunnel syndrome in the
applicant’s
right-hand were inconsistent and non-concordant with what he
described as a ‘classic presentation of carpal tunnel syndrome’.
Therefore, he concluded that in his clinical opinion the applicant does not
suffer from carpal tunnel syndrome. Notwithstanding the
considerable criticism
levelled by the applicant in submissions filed on her behalf concerning the
evidence of Dr Sabetghadam, these
findings are accepted by the Tribunal. Despite
fairly robust and searching cross examination, he did not waver from his view
the applicant did not have carpal tunnel syndrome and was able to draw
logical explanations as to how he came to such a view when
he examined the
was much debate between the parties, and the medical experts, on the status of
medical or scientific literature concerning whether
or not the work-related
activities undertaken by the applicant which involved repetitive keyboard
actions were causative of the condition
of carpal tunnel syndrome experienced by
her. It did indeed canvass some considerable amount of evidence from the expert
Further, it also occupied a not insignificant portion of submissions
lodged by the parties. It is not a question that the Tribunal
considers it can
completely resolve, nor is it obliged to do so for the purposes of resolving
this application.
Tribunal considers that the opinions expressed by Mr
Khurana in cross examination, on this topic, fairly
accurately encompass much of what the experts considered on the question. He
stated that currently there is no consensus in the literature that
activities such as keyboarding are causative of the onset of carpal
syndrome. He stated that what remains fairly indisputable in the medical
literature as causative of the condition, are factors
such as age, gender,
menopausal status, presence of endocrinopathy such as diabetes and thyroid,
acromegaly, obesity, and certain
occupational undertakings such as heavy-duty
vibrational tasks and working in prolonged cold environments. The medical
come to a consensus about these
factors being causative and this seemed to form the view held by all of the
specialists called to
give evidence at the hearing of the
application.
In terms of
keyboarding, there is as yet no such consensus. He expressed the opinion that
the applicant’s keyboard work could
temporarily increase the symptomology
in someone constitutionally predisposed, but in itself is probably not causative
of any permanent
physiological or structural change to the carpal tunnel/median
some extent, also Mr Khurana’s reference to other causes of carpal tunnel
syndrome such as age, gender, menopausal status
presence of endocrinopathy such
as diabetes and thyroid acromegaly, obesity, and certain occupational
undertakings to a significant
degree did accord with the acknowledgement made by
Dr Janakiramanan that carpal tunnel syndrome is common in older women.
Presumably,
older women such as the applicant, are more likely to be predisposed
to the condition by reason of such factors.
Janakiramanan gave evidence to a similar effect particularly when she was probed
She accepted that there
was conflicting evidence concerning the association of repetitive work and the
onset of the condition. She
even went so far as to say that there was
‘wildly conflicting literature’. In her view where the AMA Guide
stated that
there was insufficient evidence, it meant that the problem had not
been sufficiently studied so as to enable an absolute determination
Moaveni in cross examination was taken to some of the literature including the
AMA Guides and two of the articles attached to the
first report of Mr Khurana.
He expressed the view that there are differences of opinion in the literature.
Further, he stated that
in this case the available literature can be used to
support both points of view. He considered whilst it can be used to support
fact that carpal tunnel syndrome can be present after working in cold
environments or working with vibrating tools, it can also
in his opinion be
present when one undertakes highly repetitive work.
Tribunal has previously in these reasons considered the evidence that suggests
very strongly that the applicant did experience
some symptoms prior to 30 March
2020 as described. These symptoms are consistent with an underlying condition of
carpal tunnel syndrome
that she now complains of. Such a condition is, as Dr
Journeaux described it, a constitutional condition.
is ultimately one of the reasons that the Tribunal prefers the opinions
expressed by both Mr Khurana and Dr Journeaux concerning
the applicant’s
carpal tunnel syndrome. Mr Moaveni, to his credit, did concede that his opinion
was based on the history that
the applicant gave, which he stated was very clear
in terms of what happened on 30 March 2020. Also, Mr Moaveni conceded that
work-related activity had to be both prolonged and was strenuous to be
regarded as a substantial contributing factor to the condition
by the increasing
carpal tunnel pressure.
several medical experts readily conceded carpal tunnel syndrome is
multifactorial. There are several factors relevant to the applicant
appears were, more probably than not, contributors to the constitutional or
underlying condition. These factors include that
the applicant suffers from
fibromyalgia and has done so for many years. Her age is a factor, particularly
women of her age. Menopause
is also an acknowledged risk factor which as Dr
Sabetghadam recorded in his report the applicant was experiencing.
the Tribunal concludes, as contended for by the respondent that the applicant
suffered an aggravation of an underlying
condition of carpal tunnel syndrome
which had resolved by the time she was examined by Dr Sabetghadam on 2 September
The second cortisone injection 9 March 2021
applicant contends that further, and in the alternative,
she has suffered an additional compensable injury
caused to her right median nerve as a result of the second cortisone injection
9 March 2021. The foundation for this contention is that the second cortisone
injection was administered in the course of treatment
for her carpal tunnel
syndrome, as had been recommended by her treating medical practitioners. As the
treatment was for a compensable
injury, the injury is said to have arisen in the
course of her employment as contemplated by s 6 (f) (ii) of the SRC Act giving
to a liability under s 14 of that Act.
respondent on the other hand contends that no such liability arises because the
respondent, until the time of the reviewable decision
under consideration in
this application, had no notice of the applicant suffering an injury as a result
of the second cortisone injection.
developing this contention, the respondent relies on several events or steps
being taken with respect to the decision-making history
of this matter where
there was in effect a wall of silence concerning the alleged injury to the
applicant’s right median nerve
arising from the second cortisone injection
on 9 March 2021.
In short it is
contended that there was never an express claim to the respondent alleging that
the applicant had suffered a further
compensable injury under s 14 of the SRC
addressing the question of whether or not the Tribunal has jurisdiction to
consider whether or not the applicant suffered an additional
compensable injury
to her right median nerve as a result of the administration of the second
cortisone injection on 9 March 2021,
both parties referred to the decision of
Murphy J in
In resolving this
issue it is not necessary to embark upon a detailed excursion into the reasoning
adopted by Murphy J in that matter.
J emphasised the inquisitorial role that the Tribunal, and for that matter
the respondent (as a determining authority), have
under the SRC Act, which requires it to determine the substantive issues in the
application that arise from the material as placed before it. In this setting,
and discharging this function, the Tribunal as the
decision-maker applying the
operative provisions of the SRC Act engages in a process of progressive and
evolving decision-making.
This obliges the Tribunal and the respondent (as the
determining authority) to take into account any changes in events or
circumstances
that occur, with respect to the claim from time to time. The
subsequent presentation of various medical certificates, medical reports
other material may be sufficient to constitute a claim or put the respondent (as
the determining authority) on notice of a claim
or potential claim, as
contemplated by the applicable sections of the SRC Act.
J outlined several applicable principles that emerge from the authorities
concerning this question as
(a) a broad, generous and practical approach is appropriate in construing a
document purporting to be a notice of injury under the
(b) notice is taken to have been given even if the notice fails to comply
with the requirements under s 53 (1) where the failure is
caused by ignorance,
mistake or any other reasonable cause, or where the relevant authority would not
be prejudiced if the notice
is treated as sufficient: s 53 (3);
(c) strict compliance with the requirements of the prescribed claim form
under s 54 is not required; substantial compliance is sufficient:
(d) the notice of injury requirements by the legislation are to be construed
beneficially for claimants;
(e) medical diagnoses as to the nature and aetiology of an injury commonly
evolve over time;
(f) the statutory scheme allows for “progressive and evolving
decision-making” in the light of subsequent events and
circumstances;
(g) the purpose of requiring notice of injury is so that Comcare is
appropriately informed as to “the nature of an injury or
ailment and its
connection with the employment”;
(h) the purpose of requiring notice and of enabling the decision-maker to
have a fair opportunity to properly investigate the claim
are paramount
considerations when determining whether notice of injury has been given under
the SRC Act.
the considerations identified by Murphy J in
above into account
and applying them to this application the Tribunal concludes that it does have
claim for a nerve injury as a
result of the second cortisone injection administered to her on 9 March
is apparent from some of the material before the Tribunal that the respondent
was well and truly on notice about this aspect of
the applicant’s claim. A
medical certificate was provided by Dr Molloy certifying the applicant was unfit
to work from 11 March
to 1 April 2021.
certificate stated that the applicant was experiencing an exacerbation of
symptoms following a steroid injection administered
into the carpal tunnel. The
receipt and existence of this medical certificate from Dr Molloy was
acknowledged in an Employer Statement
made in response to a s 71 request by
Services Australia on 10 August
That Employer statement
was directed to a claims manager acting on behalf of the respondent. It is
appropriate to carefully examine
the contents of the employer statement. Such
document does record a relatively detailed history concerning the second
cortisone injection
that the applicant received on 9 March 2021. Specifically,
it is stated that the applicant consulted Dr Molloy on 25 February 2021
review her medical status. She was apparently deemed fit for suitable duties in
accordance with previous medical certificates
issued. At the same time Dr Molloy
issued a referral for the proposed second cortisone injection on 9 March 2021
with ‘I-Med
Radiology’.
provision of the medical certificate and reference to it in the employer
statement were acts undertaken in the process of progressive
and evolving
decision-making in the claims process as outlined above. Given the beneficial
nature of the SRC Act as explained by
Murphy J in
and the broad,
generous, and practical approach to be adopted insofar as the provision of
notice of a claim is concerned, the Tribunal
is satisfied that by reason of the
receipt of the medical certificate from Dr Molloy certifying the applicant as
unfit to work from
11 March to 1 April 2021 for at Services Australia, together
with the subsequent reference to it in the employer statement made on
2021 lodged with the respondent’s claims manager, the Tribunal is
satisfied that the respondent was on notice of
this aspect of the
applicant’s claim or a potential claim concerning this alleged
was other evidence concerning the claimed effects of the second cortisone
injection on 9 March 2021 on the applicant which was
provided to the respondent.
For instance, Dr Molloy issued a further medical certificate on 27 May 2021.
That medical certificate
stated that the applicant had no capacity for
employment from 27 May 2021 to 17 June 2021. The applicant was said to be
from the exacerbation of symptoms following a steroid injection into
the carpal tunnel.
evidence can only reinforce a conclusion that the respondent was well on notice
of this claim or potential claim, as has
now been made in this proceeding. It is
further evidence of the process of progressive and evolving decision-making in
process with respect to this claim by the applicant. Once again,
given the broad, generous, and practical approach to be adopted
insofar as the
provision of notice of a claim is concerned, this consistent provision of
medical certificates by the applicant to
her employer in the way that she did
satisfied the notice requirements with respect to this claim under the SRC
has been substantial material placed before the Tribunal for its consideration
concerning the question of whether or not the
applicant sustained nerve damage
as a result of the second cortisone injection administered on 9 March 2021. This
material consisted
of the applicant’s statement and several expert medical
reports from both her treating medical practitioners, and medicolegal
retained on her behalf including Mr Moaveni and Dr Mandaleson. Also, the
medicolegal experts retained on behalf of the respondent
gave evidence on the
topic. Insofar as the respondent’s medicolegal reports are concerned, the
principal report addressing
this question was that of Mr Khurana who addressed
the question professionally and in detail. However, the question was also
on to a significant degree by both Dr Journeaux and Dr Sabetghadam.
Those doctors called by the respondent also addressed the question
whilst in the
witness box. The question of nerve damage arising from the second cortisone
injection on 9 March 2021 could hardly
be said to have taken the respondent by
surprise. There appears to be no rational reason to the Tribunal, undertaking
the inquisitorial
role cast upon it as identified by Murphy J in
why it should not properly consider the question.
Tribunal is not satisfied on the material before it that the applicant has
suffered an additional compensable injury to her right
median nerve as a result
of the second cortisone injection on 9 March 2021. There are several reasons for
reaching this conclusion.
is the report from Dr Poynter, following the administration of the injection on
9 March 2021, to Dr Molloy which has been canvassed
in some detail earlier in
these reasons. That report recorded that the procedure was uneventful. The
Tribunal has made some observations
concerning the applicant’s evidence in
light of the contents of this report. Those observations are referred to and
for the purposes of the consideration of this aspect of the
applicant’s claim. Some considerable weight must be attached to
as also recorded above, when the applicant raised this question with Dr Molloy
on the next day on 10 March 2021, following
the procedure, she described
symptoms that were somewhat different from the version recorded in her witness
statement. Also, it should
be repeated that it is surprising that Dr Molloy did
not take the matter up with Dr Poynter. The Tribunal also attaches considerable
weight to these facts.
there were the observations of
Dr Janakiramanan in
her letter (or report) of 20 May 2021 in which she in which she diagnosed the
applicant with ‘possible intraneural
steroid injection’. In the same
report she also stated, ‘Hard to say what component of current symptoms
are due to persistent
untreated CTS and what are due to what sounds like a
intraneural steroid
injection’.
It is fair to
say that her opinion, expressed relatively shortly after the administration of
the injection to the applicant, is by
no means conclusive on this question. The
comments contained in that letter are at considerable variance, if not
inconsistent, with
the evidence that she gave in cross examination on the topic.
The opinion expressed by Mr Khurana which is outlined in other parts
reasons was that there was no injury flowing from the second cortisone
injection. When that was put to Dr
Janakiramanan in
the witness box, her response was extremely robust, saying that: ‘I
utterly dismiss that opinion’. This
lack of preparedness on the part of Dr
Janakiramanan to accept that there may not have been an injury flowing from the
second cortisone
injection, is a reason, although not the only reason, why the
Tribunal is inclined to prefer the evidence of Mr Khurana on this question.
is also the evidence of Mr Khurana in both of his reports on this topic. When
giving his evidence to the Tribunal he maintained
this position and was highly
persuasive. In his first report he stated that he was not convinced there had
been any permanent damage
to the median nerve from the injection. He then
stated, which to an unqualified observer seems quite obvious, that such a
could be confirmed by a repeat nerve conduction study. In any case he
did not believe that the applicant’s employment was responsible
median neuropathy from a structural perspective, although he recognised that her
work probably did exacerbate the symptomology,
at least temporarily for
approximately a year from March 2020.
his second report, Mr Khurana stated that if there was permanent and substantial
damage from the second cortisone injection, he
would have expected there to have
been worsening of the electrophysiological parameters, and certainly something
beyond the previously
noted ‘mild’. He was therefore unconvinced
that there was any objective injury or damage from the second injection; as
opposed to persistence of improved right median neuropathy
electrophysiologically, following the pair of injections. These opinions
expressed by Mr Khurana after he had been furnished with a further nerve
conduction study undertaken on 3 November 2021 and
another nerve conduction
study taken of the right upper extremity on 13 April
Both nerve conduction
studies undertaken by Dr Seneviratne recorded that there was
electrophysiological evidence of a mild right
median neuropathy at the wrist,
compatible with clinical diagnosis of right sided carpal tunnel syndrome. It was
further recorded
in the second electrophysiology report that, when compared to
the previous electrophysiological study from 3 November 2021, the right
nerve electrophysiological parameters remained the same without any improvement
or deterioration. It further recorded that
the study did not exclude a
contribution from the underlying chronic pain condition or a soft tissue
aetiology as a contributing
cause for the described symptoms. Clinical
correlation was recommended.
considered this nerve conduction study, Mr Khurana also observed that it would
appear, electrophysiologically, that the median
neuropathy on the right is now
again/sustainably mild, which is still improved from the moderate condition
referred to in the pre-first
injection nerve conduction study he quoted and is
unchanged from what was noted to be mild previously following both the first,
later the second, injections. This pathway of reasoning adopted by Mr
Khurana is persuasive and was not effectively rebutted or explained
away by any
of the experts who gave evidence on behalf of the applicant.
respondent also drew the Tribunal’s attention to several other matters
concerning this claim which are relevant to some
extent, although not
determinative, in the Tribunal, concluding that this claim is not compensable as
sought. The applicant lodged
a claim form with the respondent identifying the
condition of carpal tunnel syndrome on 20 July 2021. There is simply no
whatsoever in her claim form to the additional compensable injury
caused by the interneural injection she underwent on 9 March 2021.
surprising indeed given the evidence that the applicant has given about the
symptoms, which she described as very severe
indeed, that she alleges were
suffered as a result of her injection. It is also surprising given that she had
seen Dr Molloy about
the injection, who had granted her a medical certificate
stating that she was unfit for work, for a significant period from 11 March
April 2021.
It should be
recalled that this certificate stated that the applicant was experiencing an
exacerbation of symptoms following a steroid
injection administered into the
carpal tunnel. Several more medical certificates (which have been referred to
previously in these
reasons) were signed by Dr Molloy to the same effect stating
that the applicant was unfit for work for significant periods after
certificate. For someone who presented as being very alive to protecting her
interests, the failure to refer to this alleged
additional compensable injury at
that time when making her claim in July of 2021, after having been off work for
significant periods
for the reasons as described, it is difficult to accept that
no reference was made to this in such claim form. The Tribunal accepts
respondent’s contention that some positive reference to the injection and
the significant consequences the applicant says
she experienced arising from it,
over some time, would have been expected. It is telling that she did not do
applicant’s claim for right elbow epicondylitis was made on 10 May 2022.
Once again, there was no reference to the consequences
of the second cortisone
injection on 9 March 2021. One might have expected, for the same reasons
articulated above, that if there
had been no previous reference to it, for the
sake of completeness an appropriate claim or notice of a further compensable
would have been given.
considered all these matters, the Tribunal prefers the opinion expressed by Mr
Khurana concerning the second cortisone injection.
It does so because it is
persuaded by the pathway of reasoning adopted by him and in particular his
opinion expressed after being
furnished with another nerve conduction study
taken on 13 April 2023. His opinions also were not inconsistent with the views
Dr Janakiramanan in her report of 20
May 2021, where she concluded that it was hard to say what component of the
applicant’s
current symptoms were due to persistent untreated CTS and what
were due to what sounded like a likely intraneural steroid injection.
relevant or salient point (of overlap) isthat Dr Janakiramanan was not prepared
to go so far as to conclude in her opinion that
the applicant had suffered an
additional injury caused to her right median nerve as a result of the second
cortisone injection 9
March 2021, for which she now contends.
Tribunal is also persuaded to accept the opinion expressed by Mr Khurana because
of the contents of the report of Dr Janakiramanan
of 20 May 2021 in which she
candidly stated that it was hard to say what component of the symptoms then
experienced by the applicant
were due to the injection concerned. To this
extent, such a view is not inconsistent with the opinion expressed by Mr
Tribunal’s position is also arrived at in part due to the findings made
earlier in these reasons concerning the applicant’s
evidence about the
symptoms she experienced when the second cortisone injection was administered.
It considers that it is more probable
than not that the report of Dr Poynter of
9 March 2021 stating that the procedure was uneventful is a more accurate
account of what
actually occurred.
in reaching the conclusion that it does on this aspect of the applicant’s
claim, arising from the administration of
the second cortisone injection, whilst
not decisive or conclusive, the Tribunal finds it surprising that when
subsequent claims were
made by the applicant in July 2021 and May 2022, this
matter did not see the light of day. This is notwithstanding the symptoms that
the applicant described experiencing following the administration of the
injection, and also the medical certificate given by Dr
Molloy which stated that
she was unfit for work from 11 March to 1 April 2021 because the applicant was
experiencing an exacerbation
of symptoms following a steroid injection
administered into the carpal tunnel, not to mention the several subsequent
certificates,
as previously mentioned, stating that she continued to be unfit
for work due to the same symptoms. This was collectively a significant
work caused by such an alleged injury.
Right elbow
epicondylitis
applicant contends that the third reviewable decision should be set aside
because the right elbow epicondylitis experienced by
(a) is an injury, or an aggravation of an injury, that has arisen out of her
employment, and therefore, is an “injury”
under s 5A(b) or (c) of
the SRC Act; and/or
(b) further and in the alternative, is an ailment or an aggravation of an
ailment that has been contributed to, to a significant
degree, by her
employment, thereby making it “a disease” under s 5B of the SRC Act,
and thereby in turn, a compensable
injury under s 5A(1)(a) of the SRC
the other hand, as already recorded, the respondent concedes that the
applicant’s work duties did lead to a time-limited
aggravation of an
underlying condition of right elbow epicondylitis, such aggravation and
concomitant symptoms having resolved by
2 September 2021, being the date of the
report prepared by Dr Sabetghadam.
applicant relies on several grounds in support of her contentions with respect
to this claim.
it is contended that the condition is consistent with being caused by her
employment. This is because she had no previous
history of such complaints, and
the onset of her symptoms coincided with transition from part-time to full-time
Tribunal cannot accept this contention because there was no immediate medical
evidence that directly stated that this condition
occurred as a result of the
events of 30 March 2020. It was not referred to by Dr Molloy in her clinical
notes of the consultation
she had with the applicant on 31 March 2020. The
earliest reference to this possible condition in the medical material is in Dr
report of 29 June 2020 in which he records the applicant informing
him that she was experiencing pain just below the elbow around
the lateral
epicondyle. Dr Molloy recorded the applicant experiencing tenderness under the
lateral epicondyle on 7 July 2020. Interestingly,
Seneviratne prepared a report dated 8 July 2020 after seeing the applicant in
his rooms on that day. He records the applicant presenting
to him for further
evaluation of right arm pain, amongst other things. It seems unlikely that if
the applicant was experiencing right
elbow epicondylitis, it did not see the
light of day during that consultation. Presumably, if the applicant was
experiencing symptoms
consistent with such a condition, she would have drawn
them to the attention of Dr Seneviratne when the clinical examination was
undertaken on that day. The section of Dr Seneviratne’s report entitled
‘Examination’, amongst other things, documents
symptoms of mild
tenderness in the wrist region and forearm on the right.
ground relied upon by the applicant is that it is inherently implausible that
the applicant would suffer from three constitutional
conditions affecting her
right arm simultaneously. The Tribunal has already rejected this contention. For
the reasons explained,
it cannot conclude that the three constitutional
conditions did affect her right arm simultaneously.
Sabetghadam who examined the applicant in September 2021, did not identify her
as suffering from right elbow epicondylitis. He
arrived at this conclusion after
he conducted a test for such condition, being an apprehension test for common
extensor tendinopathy,
which he described as lateral epicondylitis.
this context it should also be repeated that the applicant did not claim for
this injury until May 2022 over two years after the
incident at work on 30 March
2020 and another year after she had finished working with Services Australia in
March of 2021. This
significant time lapse in making the claim is surprising
given the attributes of the applicant that have been previously outlined.
also should be viewed with a degree of realism that if the applicant had been
diagnosed with this condition, at the same time
as the other conditions for
which she has made claims, and it was caused by her work activities, it seems
remarkable that a claim
only emerged two years after the incident that is said
to have triggered the onset of such condition.
the concession made by the respondent, the Tribunal accepts that the third
reviewable decision will be varied to find that the
applicant suffered an
aggravation of an underlying constitutional right elbow epicondylitis condition
to 2 September 2021.
De Quervains Tenosnovitis
under s 14 of the SRC Act for an injury suffered by the applicant, being the
aggravation of De Quervains tenosnovitis of the
right thumb sustained on 31 March 2020, was previously admitted by the
respondent.
second reviewable decision, as noted, made a determination that the respondent
has no present liability for an injury described
as ‘Aggravation of De
Quervain’s tenosynovitis of the right thumb’ pursuant to ss 16 and
19 of the SRC Act.
applicant contends that the Tribunal should set aside the second reviewable
decision because her De Quervains tenosnovitis of
the right wrist thumb:
(a) is an injury, or an aggravation of an injury, that has arisen out of her
employment. Accordingly, it is an ‘
’ under s 5A(b) of
the SRC Act; and/or
(b) further and in the alternative, is an ailment or an aggravation of an
ailment that has been contributed to, to a significant
degree, by her employment
with Services Australia, making it a ‘
’ under s 5B of
the SRC Act, and in turn, a compensable injury under s 5A (1)(a) of that Act.
Additionally,
the applicant contends that a finding should be made that she has continued to
suffer the effects of the claimed condition,
being De Quervains tenosnovitis
since 30 March 2020, and continues to suffer from the effects of such condition
as at present and
is contended on behalf of the applicant that the Tribunal should reach the
conclusion contended for by her for essentially the
same reasons relied upon
with respect to her claim for carpal tunnel syndrome and
lateral epicondylitis.
first ground relied upon by the applicant is that, as with the other conditions,
she submits that there was no previous history
of right-hand and wrist
complaints, and that the onset of her symptoms coincided with her transition
from part-time to full-time
work. As has already been considered in several
parts of these reasons previously, the Tribunal cannot accept the contention
there was no previous history of right-hand and wrist complaints. It must
be repeated that the Tribunal has accepted that she gave
an account to both Dr
Floyd and Ms Richards of a previous condition, however that may be described.
Those previous symptoms the Tribunal
has found were experienced by her for some
considerable time prior to 30 March 2020.
fact is also a reason why ultimately, the Tribunal prefers the evidence of Dr
Journeaux over
Mr Moaveni and Dr Mandaleson. Both Mr
Moaveni and Dr Mandaleson referred to a sudden or immediate onset of the injury
(or as Dr Mandaleson
described it - the nature of the work and the temporal
relationship between work-related activity in the onset of symptoms), which
conclusion the Tribunal has not accepted. It was the foundation or fulcrum for
their finding that this condition was work-related.
Due to the facts found by
the Tribunal that the applicant experienced some symptoms beforehand this
foundation must be rejected.
next ground relied upon by the applicant, once again, is to assert that it is
inherently implausible that the applicant would
suffer from three constitutional
conditions affecting her right arm simultaneously. Therefore, it is more
probable than not that
her right arm was injured from repetitive use at work.
Following this, the probability that her three conditions were work-caused
mutually reinforced by their simultaneous onset. The Tribunal for the reasons
articulated previously does not accept that the
three conditions occurred at
ground relied upon by the applicant to contend that the second reviewable
decision should be set aside is that the applicant
has continued to suffer from
the effects of DQT since 30 March 2020, rather than an aggravation of some other
underlying condition
and whilst the symptoms of her condition had subsided to
some extent after ceasing work, the medical evidence supports a finding
condition persists and is likely to persist should she return to work duties. It
is also contended that the condition has
persisted well beyond 10 May and 6
December 2021 after which the respondent had previously determined that the
effects of her compensable
condition had ceased.
contention on the part of the applicant is problematic. It does run contrary to
the report of her treating hand surgeon
Janakiramanan of 20 May 2021, which provided that provocative testing for DQT
was negative.
She further stated
in that report, ‘no evidence of De Quervain’s today’. The
Tribunal did not understand the evidence
from any of the other doctors called by
the applicant to contradict this finding.
Additionally,
there was the evidence of Dr Sabetghadam who conducted an apprehension test for
De Quervains tenosnovitis on the applicant
when he undertook a clinical
assessment of her on 26 August 2021. He described her symptoms as being
inconsistent with such a condition.
The results of that test were consistent
with the results of the tests conducted by
Janakiramanan on 20 May 2021.
Janakiramanan prepared a relatively detailed report, more recently, on 8 August
2023, as previously noted. In addition to providing
a moderately extensive
background, there were sections entitled ‘Diagnosis of condition and
treatment’ and ‘Prognosis
of condition’. In the section of the
report concerning the diagnosis of the applicant’s condition there is no
findings of
Dr Janakiramanan and Dr Sabetghadam in
May and August 2021 (together with Dr Janakiramanan in August 2023) where no De
Quervains tenosnovitis
was diagnosed, were not adequately explained away by the
medical evidence adduced by the applicant. They are inconsistent with,
not support, a contention that the applicant has suffered the effects of the
claimed condition De Quervains tenosnovitis
since 30 March 2020 and continues
to suffer from the effects of that condition as at present and ongoing.
applicant also sought to contend that the expert evidence
from Mr Moaveni and Dr Mandalson) adduced by the
applicant strongly suggested that her right wrist and thumb DQT was caused by
employment, and that such expert evidence should be preferred over that
adduced by the respondent from Dr Journeaux. The reason for
this was that Mr
Moaveni and Dr Mandalson are specialists in upper limb and hand wrist conditions
by reason of which they are best
placed to give an opinion on the cause of the
applicant’s condition. Indeed, in cross examination Dr Journeaux was
this to some extent. He readily conceded that his higher-level
experience was with respect to hips and knees in which he has spent
more than 25
years practising. However, it was not suggested that Dr Journeaux was not
qualified to express an expert opinion with
respect to wrists, arms and elbows
with which he was clearly familiar and has obviously operated on in the past. In
the same way,
Mr Moaveni has given perfectly appropriate evidence to this
Tribunal concerning hips, for instance, in other applications. Dr Journeaux
his evidence in a fair and impartial manner which was clearly intended to assist
the Tribunal in its consideration of this application.
In this sense the
Tribunal did not understand the applicant’s submissions to challenge Dr
Journeaux’s evidence. It was
more a question of which expert evidence the
Tribunal should prefer. In any event, the evidence of Mr Moaveni and Dr
Mandalson did
not adequately explain how the diagnoses made by Dr Janakiramanan
and Dr Sabetghadam should not be accepted by the Tribunal in finding
applicant did not suffer from DQT at all relevant times as she has claimed. This
was a reason for preferring the evidence
of Dr Journeaux on this issue.
all these reasons the Tribunal concludes that the second reviewable decision
should be affirmed.
The permanent impairment claim
fourth reviewable decision denied liability of the applicant’s claim for
permanent impairment and non-economic loss relating
to her right-hand and wrist
impairment pursuant to ss s 24 and 27 of the SRC Act.
grounds relied upon by the applicant in submitting that the Tribunal should set
aside the fourth reviewable decision are:
(a) That she has suffered an injury to her right-hand and wrist, due to her
right sided CTs and/or the injury to her right median
nerve following the
intraneural injection on or around 9 March 2021, for which the respondent is
liable pursuant to s 14 of the SRC
(b) Due to this compensable injury, the applicant has suffered permanent
impairment to her right-hand and wrist; and
(c) Her level of Whole Person Impairment is greater than 10%, for which the
respondent is liable to pay compensation pursuant to
ss 24 and 27 of the SRC
reasons that have already been articulated, the Tribunal is not satisfied that
the applicant’s employment with Services
Australia contributed to a
significant degree to an injury to her right-hand and wrist due to her right
sided carpal tunnel syndrome
and/or the injury to her right median nerve
following the intraneural injection on or around 9 March 2021. Also, the
Tribunal accepts
the respondent’s contention, for the reasons articulated
above, that any continuing symptoms are not necessarily explicable
grounds that her work with Services Australia significantly contributed to her
claimed condition of carpal tunnel syndrome.
applicant relies on the expert opinions of Mr Moaveni and Dr Janakiramanan that
the impairment is permanent. The condition is
also said to be recurrent. Insofar
as it might be a condition that is recurrent, reference was made to the evidence
given in cross
examination by
Mr Khurana. His
evidence by way of response did explain the question from two dimensions as he
explained if a patient is predisposed
to weight, menopause, age or whatever it
might be physiologically, even the cessation of activities such as work, which
otherwise exacerbated the condition, may not lead to a cessation of
such symptoms. This would be because there was an underlying
progressing cause,
not just the activities of the use of the hand such as in the workplace. The
other dimension to the question referred
to by Mr Khurana was that if the person
returned to using their hands again, or the activity that was previously causing
the symptoms,
the symptoms might re-occur.
the history that the Tribunal has found concerning the applicant’s
condition prior to 30 March 2020, it prefers the evidence
of Mr Khurana with
respect to the underlying condition or predisposition to it.
respondent also answers the permanent impairment claim made by the applicant by
reference to the reports of Dr Seneviratne of
3 September 2020 and 3 November
2021. The report of 3 September 2020 reported the condition as being mild, which
was an improvement
from the evidence that was gathered in nerve conduction
studies in July 2020. The report of 3 November 2021 following a further nerve
conduction study undertaken on that day revealed several things. The right nerve
studies and right radial sensory responses and left
median sensory responses
were all normal. The right lateral antebrachial sensory response was also
normal. The opinion was expressed
that Dr Seneviratne was not convinced that the
applicant had an ongoing right sided carpal tunnel syndrome that was
contributing
to her symptoms. It was suspected that most of her symptoms were
related either to a chronic pain condition affecting the right-hand
musculoskeletal aetiology, which did not reveal any evidence of carpal tunnel
Additionally,
there is the report of
Dr Janakiramanan of 8 August
2023. In the section entitled ‘Diagnosis of condition and treatment’
she records, ‘Right
carpal tunnel syndrome-quiescent for now’. In
the face of this finding made in August 2023, which is consistent with the
findings of Drs Seneviratne and Sabetghadam made in the years 2020 and
2021, one has to accept the respondent’s contention
that given the
condition is in a state of inactivity or dormant, it cannot really be said to
fit the descriptor of being ‘permanent’.
as already noted, the respondent relies upon the evidence of Dr Sabetghadam,
that the tests he conducted were inconsistent
with the presentation of carpal
tunnel syndrome.
Tribunal considers that the findings of Dr Seneviratne in the two reports and
that of Dr Sabetghadam (not to mention the diagnosis
of Dr Janakiramanan in her
report of 8 August 2023) are, as the respondent contends, obstacles, or perhaps
, more accurately as contended
on its behalf issues which are insurmountable for
a finding being made of permanent impairment to which the applicant’s work
significantly contributed to, and that any continuing symptoms arise from the
contribution made by her work at Services Australia
to such conditions. These
obstacles or insurmountable issues identified by the respondent were not
explained away by the expert evidence
adduced by the applicant.
is another matter that is relevant to a determination of whether the claim
condition is permanent within the meaning of the
relevant provisions of the SRC
Act on the basis of Dr Janakiramanan’s report of 8 August 2023. In that
report and also in her
evidence, Dr Janakiramanan expressed the opinion, quite
understandably, that the applicant is likely to require carpal tunnel surgery
some future stage. The respondent relies upon the language used in s 24(2) of
the SRC Act which provides the purpose of determining
whether an impairment is
permanent, the decision-maker (in this case the Tribunal) shall have regard to:
(a) The duration of the impairment;
(b) The likelihood of improvement in the employee’s condition;
(c) Whether the employee has undertaken all reasonable rehabilitative treatment
for the impairment; and
(d) Any other relevant matters.
the findings of Dr Seneviratne in the two reports, and that of Dr Sabetghadam
and the diagnosis of Dr Janakiramanan in her report
of 8 August 2023 referred to
above, the Tribunal:
(a) Is unable to reach a conclusion as to the duration of the claimed
impairment, if at all; and
(b) Given the opinion that the applicant is likely to need carpal tunnel surgery
at some stage in the future, which is as the respondent
contends a likely
prospect, the Tribunal concludes there must be a likelihood of the claimed
condition, if it is otherwise as contended
for by the applicant as improving,
which is a relevant consideration under s 24(b) of the SRC Act in determining
whether an impairment
is permanent.
reason of these matters the Tribunal accepts the respondent’s contentions
that a number of the descriptors or criteria prescribed
by s 24(2) of the SRC
Act have not been satisfied by the applicant. Therefore, it is another reason
why the Tribunal is unable to
conclude that the applicant has suffered an injury
significantly contributed to by her employment which has resulted in a permanent
impairment within the meaning of s 24 of the SRC Act.
is one other matter that should be referred to by way of conclusion with respect
to the applicant’s claim for a permanent
impairment. Once again, this
arises from the contents of the report of Dr Janakiramanan of 8 August 2023.
Reference was also made
in the portion of her report entitled ‘Diagnosis
of condition and treatment’ to ‘Ongoing neuropathic pain, Complex
Regional Pain Syndrome-due to nerve injury to the right median nerve’. The
respondent contends that this diagnosis by Dr Janakiramanan
does raise the
prospect of the existence of Complex Regional Pain Syndrome affecting or
impacting the applicant’s right-hand
condition. Therefore, it is contended
that if this is the case, it is reasonable to assume that such condition might
be having an
impact on any alleged level of impairment, or otherwise have some
causative effect. Therefore, and in this setting, a problem faced
applicant is that there has been no claim under s 14 of the SRC Act for such a
condition. There is some force in this contention.
reason of the foregoing matters the Tribunal is unable to find or accept that
the applicant has established a permanent impairment
and non-economic loss claim
with respect to her right-hand and wrist.
the fourth reviewable decision will be affirmed.
CONCLUSIONS ON THE ISSUES
way of conclusion the Tribunal will address each of the issues before it that
have been identified in paragraph 10 above.
respect to the diagnoses of the applicant’s right upper limb
injury/condition sustained on:
(a) 30 March 2020; and
(b) 9 March 2022;
the Tribunal refers to the consideration of each of the claimed
conditions in these reasons above.
to whether the applicant suffered an ‘injury’ within the meaning of
s 5A of the SRC Act the Tribunal has concluded
she has not suffered an injury
within the meaning of that section. By reason of this conclusion the remaining
issues identified in
paragraph 10 above do not need to be
first reviewable decision will be set aside and in substitution the Tribunal
finds that the applicant suffered an aggravation
of an underlying condition of
carpal tunnel syndrome to 2 September 2021.
second reviewable decision is affirmed.
third reviewable decision will be set aside and in substitution the Tribunal
finds that the applicant suffered an aggravation
of an underlying condition of
right elbow epicondylitis to 2 September 2021
fourth reviewable decision is affirmed.
I certify that the preceding 297 (two hundred and ninety-seven)
paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for the decision herein
of R Cameron,
Senior Member.
......................[
]...........................
Date(s) of hearing:
11-15 December 2024
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Angela Sdrinis Legal
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr Shane Dawson
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Charles Clarke
Applicant’s written
submissions dated 12 March 2024, 1.
See also, the three witness
statements made by the applicant (dated 6 June 2022, 20 June 2023 and 13
November 2023) of the JTB, 239;
246; and 258.
See also, the two witness
statements of Ms Young dated 1 June 2020 and 5 December 2023.
Transcript of Proceedings,
Jacqueline Quirk and Comcare (Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 2021/8667,
Senior Member R. Cameron,
11 December 2023) 10, [28] – [46].
JTB, R2, 102.
See also JTB, A2, 16 with
reference to the number of claims processed.
JTB, R1, 29.
See generally Dr Floyd's report
of 29 June 2020 which is document T7 of the T documents in application No
For instance, Dr Janakiramanan
in her report of 8 August 2023, recorded the applicant as informing her that she
first noted issues
with the right-hand in March 2020 when she had a sense of
instability and pain in the hand. Such being coincident with an increase
workload. Her report is at page 170 of the JTB. Dr Moaveni recorded the injury
occurring on 31 March 2020 when she felt a
sudden sharp pain shoot through the
radial border of her right wrist, which spread into her hand and up into her
right elbow and
shoulder. This report is at page 4 of the JTB. There was no
reference in that report to any previous history as recorded by Dr Floyd.
JTB, R5, 226.
Transcript of Proceedings,
Jacqueline Quirk and Comcare (Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 2021/8667,
Senior Member R. Cameron,
11 December 2023) 26, [13] – [45]; 27 [1]
Transcript of Proceedings,
Jacqueline Quirk and Comcare (Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 2021/8667,
Senior Member R. Cameron,
11 December 2023) 36, [14] – 37 [18]; 37 [13]
In her first witness
statement the applicant stated that the second cortisone injection to her wrist
occurred on 10 March 2021. This
was not explored in her evidence and probably
nothing turns on it however the report from Dr Poynter the specialist who
administered
the procedure stated that it occurred on 9 March 2021.
Statement of Ms Jacqueline
Quirk, dated 6 June 2022, [37] – [38].
Transcript of Proceedings,
Jacqueline Quirk and Comcare (Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 2021/8667,
Senior Member R. Cameron,
11 December 2023) 24, [37] – 25 [23].
Applicant’s Reply
submission dated 7 June 2024, 5, [21].
See, e.g., the ultrasound
image of the applicant's right-hand and wrist taken on 3 April 2020, JTB, 297.
Also in evidence was a clinical
note of a tele-health consultation between Dr
Molloy and the applicant on 15 April 2020, which discusses the ultrasound
JTB 296; 298. Here, Dr Molloy has recorded that the ultrasound
confirmed a diagnosis of De Quervain’s. No other condition is
See also Dr
Seneviratne’s report of 3 September 2020, JTB, 317 and the
Electrophysiology Report of the Nerve Conduction Studies
undertaken by Dr
Seneviratne, JTB, 318.
In Dr Janakiramanan's
reports she describes herself as a hand and wrist surgeon. However, when giving
evidence before the Tribunal
on affirmation she gave her occupation as a
‘plastic and reconstructive surgeon’. Probably nothing turns on this
distinction.
Ibid 170-175.
See e.g., JTB, A1, 1;
Exhibit A24.
Bruce Connolly and John McKessar, ‘Carpal
tunnel syndrome. Can it be a work related condition?’ (2009) 38(9)
Australian Family Physician
, 684. It should also be noted that its
authors, Associate Professor Bruce Connolly is a hand surgeon at the Sydney
Hospital and
John McKessar is a hand and upper limb consultant also from Sydney.
Transcript of Proceedings,
Jacqueline Quirk and Comcare (Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 2021/8667,
Senior Member R. Cameron,
12 December 2023) 122, [41] – [43].
JTB, A2, 16-27.
Transcript of Proceedings,
Jacqueline Quirk and Comcare (Administrative Appeals Tribunal, No. 2021/8667,
Senior Member R. Cameron,
13 December 2023) 164, [4] – [9].
JTB, A6, 164.
JTB, R28, 329-330.
Indeed, Mr Khurana on page 6
of his report described the applicant as coming, ’across as a forthright
historian, and what she
told me was overall consistent with the records’.
The Tribunal agrees with this assessment of her. JTB, 33.
Bruce Connolly and John
McKessar, ‘Carpal tunnel syndrome. Can it be a work related
condition?’ (2009) 38(9)
Australian Family Physician
Rogier M van Rijn et al,
‘Associations between work-related factors and the carpal tunnel
syndrome-a systematic review’
(2009) 35(1),
Scandinavian Journal of
Work, Environment & Health,
JTB, R47, 363.
See e.g., JTB, 98. This is
Dr Journeaux’s first report dated 29 November 2022. The letter of
instruction furnished to him by
the respondent's lawyers included 56 documents
or classes of documents for him to review. They included a significant number of
that had been summoned from various healthcare providers in these
applications. They included all of Dr Molloy's clinical notes relevant
applications.
JTB, R3, 154.
See e.g., JTB, R54, 422-423.
In making this statement he
referred to a textbook cited as
L Solomon, D
Warwick, & D Nayagam, (eds), Apley's System of Orthopaedics and Fractures
(CRC Press, 9
See the Workers’
Compensation Claim lodged by the applicant on 19 May 2020, it is document T3 in
application No: 2022/0493.
For example, medical
specialists such as Dr Seneviratne and Dr Janakiramanan.
See also, the Workers’
Compensation Claim submitted by the applicant 20 July 2021 for the claimed
condition of carpal tunnel
syndrome is document T3 in application No:
JTB, A5, 317-318.
Application No. 2021/8667,
Dr Molloy a general
practitioner, as noted earlier, also conceded that carpal tunnel syndrome can be
common in women experiencing
In support of its contention
a “decision-making history” or series of events relied upon by the
respondent as giving
rise to a wall of silence concerning the alleged injury to
the applicant’s right median nerve arising from the second cortisone
injection, are referred to in paragraph 17 of its written submissions. They need
not be reproduced for the purposes of these reasons.
However, they are referred
to in their entirety for their full force and effect. They catalogue several
steps taken on the applicant’s
behalf between 20 July 2021 and 20 June
2022, concerning her existing claim, where there is no reference to a claim or
claim arising from the second cortisone injection on 9 March 2021. The
point being that if she had suffered an additional compensable
injury and such a
claim as foreshadowed was to be made, one would have expected some reference to
have been made to it in some, or
all, of those interactions on her behalf with
the respondent.
[2022] FCA 95
(2022) 175 ALD 62
Ibid [141] (citations
It is appropriate to observe
that these considerations are consistent with the beneficial nature and objects
of the SRC Act.
Application No. 2021/8667,
The medical certificate from
Dr Molloy dated 27 May 2021 is document PT 9 of the T documents in application
No 2021/8667 at pages
117-118. Another medical certificate was issued by Dr
Molloy on 17 June 2021 to the same effect. That certificate was also provided
the respondent. These medical certificates from Dr Molloy were also referred to
in the Employer Statement of 10 August 2021 and
copies attached to it.
Ibid 422-423.
For example, Dr Molloy also
issued several subsequent medical certificates after the first one following the
second cortisone injection
on 9 March 2021 stating that the applicant was unfit
for work due to her experiencing an exacerbation of symptoms following a steroid
injection administered to the carpal tunnel on 9 March 2021. All those medical
certificates were attached to the Employer Statement
of 10 August 2021 from
Services Australia to the respondent’s claims manager following a s 71
request. They are referred to
in paragraph 215 and JTB, 317-318.
Applicant's Final
Submissions dated 12 March 2024, 25.
Applicant's Final
Submissions dated 12 March 2024, 33-34.
RTF format (2.55 MB)
Signed PDF/A format