Fire Rescue Victoria v United Firefighters' Union of Australia [2025] FCA 1398 (14 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Fire Rescue Victoria v United
Firefighters' Union of Australia
[2025] FCA 1398
File number(s):
VID 1368 of 2025
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– application
for interlocutory injunction to restrain use of trust assets – principles
relevant to the grant of an interlocutory
injunction – whether
case and balance of convenience sufficient to sustain the grant of
interlocutory injunction - injunction granted
Legislation:
Fire Rescue Victoria Act
Cases cited:
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v
Westpac Banking Corporation
[1988] HCA 17
(1988) 164 CLR 662
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v O’Neill
[2006] HCA 46
Beecham Group Ltd v Bristol Laboratories Pty Ltd
(1968) 118 CLR
Bullock v Federated Furnishing Trades Society of Australasia
[1985] FCA 19
Campbell v Tran
[2024] NSWSC 204
Colonial Bank v Exchange Bank of Yarmouth, Nova Scotia
[1885] UKLawRpAC 36
(1886) 11 App
Cooper (Trustee) v Gibraltar Capital Pty Ltd (Trustee), in the matter of
Suhren (Bankrupt)
[2025] FCA 1297
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd v Reckitt Benckiser Healthcare (UK)
[2013] FCAFC 102
103 IPR 487
Samsung Electronics Company Ltd v Apple Inc
[2011] FCAFC
; 217 FCR 238
Twinside Pty Ltd v Venetian Nominees Pty Ltd
[2008] WASC
United Firefighters’ Union v Fire Rescue Victoria
[2025] FWCFB
United Firefighters’ Union v Fire Rescue Victoria
[2025] FWCFB
Warner-Lambert Co LLC v Apotex Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 59
General Division
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
Regulator and Consumer Protection
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
H N G Austin KC and JA Findlay
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Lander & Rogers
Counsel for the First Respondent:
The First Respondent did not appear
Counsel for the Second Respondent:
M N C Harvey KC and O Nanlohy
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
Piper Alderman
VID 1368 of 2025
FIRE RESCUE VICTORIA
UNITED FIREFIGHTERS’ UNION OF
First Respondent
ALTERNATIVE RISK MANAGEMENT SERVICES
Second Respondent
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Upon the Applicant (
) giving the usual undertakings as to damages in
the form set out in the Usual Undertaking as to Damages Practice Note
(GPN-UNDR):
the hearing and determination of the proceeding or further order, the Second
Respondent (
) be restrained from using or applying any funds that
ARMS holds as trustee for the United Firefighters Union of Australia –
Victoria Branch Discretionary Trust (
) other than for the following
(a) in the exercise of its discretion to pay out claims against the Trust made
by any employee of FRV covered by the
Fire Rescue Victoria Operational
Employees Interim Enterprise Agreement 2020
) for income
protection and ambulance;
(b) to maintain the existing income protection insurance purchased by the Trust
through Arch Underwriting at Lloyd’s (Australia)
Pty Ltd for the benefit
of Employees;
(c) to maintain the existing Ambulance Victoria cover purchased by the Trust for
the benefit of Employees;
(d) to permit the payment of existing professional services fees for
auditors’ fees or software licenses; and
(e) to permit the payment of legal fees associated with this application to
date, and with any application for variation to these
the hearing and determination of the proceeding or further order, ARMS will not
cancel the membership of any Employee who is
currently a member of the
the hearing and determination of the proceeding or further order, ARMS is
restrained from taking any steps to wind up or dissolve
party will bear their own costs of the present application.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
is an application for interlocutory orders preventing the second respondent,
Alternative Risk Management Services Pty Ltd (
), from using or applying any funds that ARMS holds as trustee for
the United Firefighters Union of Australia – Victoria Branch
Discretionary
) other than for certain, specified purposes.
principles applicable to the grant of interlocutory injunctions are well
established and were largely agreed as between the parties.
An applicant must
demonstrate that there is a
prima facie
case and that the balance of
convenience favours the grant of an injunction (
Australian Broadcasting
Corporation v O’Neill
[2006] HCA 46
) at [19] (Gleeson CJ and Crennan J) and [65]
(Gummow and Hayne JJ)).
order to establish a prima facie case, the applicant does not need to show that
it is more likely than not, or more probable than
not that it will succeed at
trial; it is sufficient to show a sufficient likelihood of success to justify in
the circumstances the
preservation of the status quo pending the trial
at [19] and [65]).
court is exercising a discretion and essentially trying to minimise the risk of
injustice once the final outcome of the proceeding
becomes known
Samsung Electronics Company Ltd v Apple Inc
; 217 FCR 238 at
(Dowsett, Foster and Yates JJ);
Group Ltd v Bristol Laboratories Pty Ltd
(1968) 118 CLR 618
) at 623 (Kitto, Taylor, Menzies and Owen
Twinside Pty Ltd v Venetian Nominees Pty Ltd
(Beech J)).
balance of convenience requires consideration of “whether the
inconvenience or injury which the plaintiff would be likely
to suffer if an
injunction were refused outweighs or is outweighed by the injury which the
defendant would suffer if an injunction
were granted” (
623 (Kitto, Taylor, Menzies and Owen JJ)). Whether or not the applicant will
suffer irreparable harm for which damages will not
be an adequate remedy is one
of the matters to be addressed in considering the balance of convenience
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd v Reckitt Benckiser Healthcare (UK)
[2013] FCAFC 102
103 IPR 487
) at [81(h)] (Bennett,
Jagot and Griffiths JJ)).
two inquiries are related (
Warner-Lambert Co LLC v Apotex Pty Ltd
; 106 IPR 218 at
(Allsop CJ, Jagot and Nicholas JJ)), and the
apparent strength of the parties’ substantive cases will often be an
consideration to be weighed in the balance (
at [81(j)]).
That is, “an apparently strong claim may lead a court more readily to
grant an injunction when the balance of
convenience is fairly even. A more
doubtful claim (which nevertheless raises “a serious question to be
tried”) may still
attract interlocutory relief if there is a marked
balance of convenience in favour of it” (
Bullock v Federated Furnishing
Trades Society of Australasia
[1985] FCA 19
(1985) 5 FCR 464
at 472 (Woodward J; Smithers
and Sweeney JJ agreeing at 467 and 469 respectively)).
RELEVANT FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
will briefly set out the background to this application. The applicant, Fire
Rescue Victoria (
) is a fire rescue service
established under
Fire Rescue Victoria Act
Firefighters employed by FRV are covered by an enterprise agreement known as the
Fire Rescue Victoria Operational Employees Interim Enterprise Agreement
), which includes two divisions (Division A and
Division B). Relevantly:
(a) clause 48 of Division A and clause 56 of Division B state that FRV and the
first respondent, the United Firefighters’ Union
of Australia (
First Respondent
), will consult and implement an agreed income
protection policy/scheme for all employees covered under each Division; and
(b) clause 49 of Divisions A and clause 57 of Division B state that FRV will
arrange for and meet all costs of membership of the
ambulance service for each
to 31 December 2022, employees of FRV covered by the 2020 EA, who chose to
participate were covered by an income protection
insurance policy.
new income protection arrangement came into effect on 1 January 2023 through the
establishment of the Trust, pursuant to a trust
deed executed by ARMS as trustee
and the UFU. From February 2023, FRV commenced making payments to the Trust.
The status of those
payments, and whose money was paid to the Trust, is a
central issue to which I will return.
dispute arose in connection with the Trust including as to access to information
to that dispute that are
not presently relevant. However on 16 March 2025 a Full Bench of the Fair Work
Commission issued a decision
United Firefighters’ Union v Fire
Rescue Victoria
[2025] FWCFB 54
FWCFB Dispute
). The Full Bench
concluded that the income protection arrangement did not constitute an
agreed income protection policy / scheme
” within the meaning
of the 2020 EA. That decision was appealed. The Full Bench of the Fair Work
Commission determined that
it did not have jurisdiction to hear an appeal from
the FWCFB Dispute, and in any event, that if it did, it would have dismissed
United Firefighters’ Union v Fire Rescue Victoria
FWCFB Appeal
)). That decision was made on 3 September 2025.
On 1 October 2025, FRV ceased making payments to the Trust.
the underlying proceeding, FRV alleges that the UFU made misleading or deceptive
representations which caused FRV to agree to the
new income protection
arrangement, causing loss and damage. As against the Second Respondent, FRV
alleges that it made payments
to ARMS under a mistake of fact or law and that it
is therefore entitled to restitution of those payments.
assert that restitution is not available because the payments to ARMS were the
payment of funds belonging to individual employees,
and that it was never
FRV’s funds that were paid to the Trust. It is said to follow that there
can be no restitution. FRV
assert by contrast, that even though in form the
funds were characterised as being paid at the direction of employees, as a
of substance, it was the funds of FRV that were contributed to the Trust
and that a restitution remedy is available in consequence.
Alternatively, FRV
argue that it can have a valid restitutionary remedy to bring the funds to the
“right channel” by
effectively undoing the allegedly mistaken
Applicant filed an affidavit of Mr Tony Matthews, the Deputy Secretary of the
FRV, and two affidavits of Ms Kaitlyn Gulle, a partner
of Lander & Rogers on
27 October 2025 and 30 October 2025, respectively.
to the hearing, ARMS relied on an affidavit of Gordon Grieve, a partner of Piper
Alderman filed on 30 October 2025. The UFU
took no part in the hearing and
filed no evidence or submissions.
the hearing, I gave leave for ARMS to give evidence on certain matters about the
funding of the Trust that had been asserted from
the bar table. That leave was
deliberately confined. ARMS then sought to file two affidavits. The first of
those additional affidavits
was of Mr Grieve. That affidavit sought to provide
evidence that at a meeting which commenced at 3 pm on 31 October 2025
(approximately
25 minutes after the hearing concluded), 300 unidentified members
of the UFU voted in favour of continuing the income protection
arrangements
under consideration. There is no record of who those 300 members were, or what
they were told in terms of the extent
of coverage, the prospects of the
diminution of the capital of the Trust, or any other matter. Because the
affidavit is well outside
the scope of the leave that I have granted, and it is
in any event irrelevant, it is appropriate that it
be admitted into
evidence. Accordingly, I will not grant leave for that affidavit to be
second additional affidavit was of Mr Craig Harms filed on 5 November 2025, the
head of Alternative Risk Management for Howden
Insurance Brokers (Australia) Pty
). Howden is the sole shareholder in ARMS. Mr Harms’
affidavit included material for which leave was granted. However, it
sought to advance issues about the effect of the proposed orders on the ability
of the Trust to do certain things, which matters
are relevant to the balance of
convenience. These are matters that could easily have been the subject of
evidence prior to the hearing.
It is not clear why ARMS elected not to do so.
Nonetheless, the evidence is relevant and it is generally within the scope of
leave that was granted. I have therefore admitted the evidence. I also
granted leave for FRV to file brief written submissions
regarding this further
evidence. Those submissions were filed on 10 November, and amended on 14
November. I have had regard to the
submissions as amended.
DOES THE APPLICANT HAVE A PRIMA FACIE CASE?
claim against ARMS is pleaded in the statement of claim as follows (omitting
particulars; emphasis original):
Further and alternatively, from 17 February 2023, FRV began paying amounts
) to the Trust pursuant to what it believed to be its
obligations to fund premiums under the Income Protection Clauses and meet the
costs of ambulance membership under the FRV Agreement.
In the premises, FRV made the Payments to the Trust under a mistake of fact
and/or law, namely that FRV was legally obliged to make
the Payments under the
Income Protection Clauses of the FRV Agreement.
Accordingly, FRV is entitled to restitution of the Payments from the Trustee.
Second Respondent argues based on
Campbell v Tran
[2024] NSWSC 204
(Meek J) citing
Mason & Carter’s
Restitution Law in
(LexisNexis, 4
ed, 2021) at [2908] that for an
applicant to succeed in an action for moneys had and received, it is necessary
for it to show:
(a) a payment (or other benefit) provided by the applicant to the defendant (at
the applicant’s expense);
(b) the basis for the claim, such as a request from the respondent, the
applicant’s title, or an unjust factor (in this case,
there is an alleged
mistake of fact or law); and
(c) a causal link between the first and second elements.
Second Respondent argues that in this case, FRV is merely authorised by
employees to pay part of
wages to ARMS. It is said that the
employees are under no mistake, and that if they were under a mistake any claim
could be advanced
by them, not FRV. It follows, according to the Second
Respondent, that the claim by FRV does not disclose a
prima facie
advances two arguments in response:
(1) it argues that it made the payments to the Trust in what it believed to be
furtherance of its obligations under the 2020 EA and
that it was the funds of
FRV that were paid. It is therefore FRV that is entitled to restitution; and
(2) it argues that even if there is a dispute as to who is the proper sources of
the funds, the only party with
proper claim is ARMS, the party who
received the funds on the basis that they would be applied to an income
protection scheme that
was not provided (according to the FWCFB Appeal). Thus,
the remedy pleaded is available to bring the funds into the “right
channel”, even if FRV was not the outright owner of the funds paid to
evidence as part of this application demonstrated that payments of $50.43 were
made in respect of each nominated FRV employee
each pay cycle. The evidence
suggests that over $28,000,000 has been paid to the Trust in this way. The
evidence is that this is
the main, if not sole, source of income to the Trust.
FRV employee received a payslip. That payslip identified a portion of their
total renumeration as “deductions”.
The amount of $50.43 is found
under that heading with the narration “Howden IP – Ded”. On
the same payslip, under
the heading “payments”, are two items
labelled “Howden Reim” one for the amount of $48.01 and the other
the amount of $2.42. It is therefore apparent that the payslip records that
the calculation of that individual’s renumeration
is explained on the
basis that $50.43 is simultaneously paid to the Trust and reimbursed by FRV.
employee gave FRV a direction in substantially the following form:
I authorise my employer to deduct from my post-tax earnings the weekly premium
of $50.43 which is to be remitted directly to the
insurer’s representative
on my behalf and I aim to be simultaneously reimbursed via payroll for the same
I authorise the amount of the deduction to be increased or reduced from time to
time, on the condition that the same amount is reimbursed
to me by my employer.
I understand that the amount reimbursed by my employer is not deductible in my
personal income tax return; nor will that amount be
reported as income on my
annual payment summary.
further took the Court to various pieces of evidence which it said were
consistent with the characterisation of the funds paid
to the Trust as employee
funds, and not funds belonging to FRV, for example:
(1) A draft report prepared by Deloitte (put into evidence by FRV) relating to
the tax treatment of the payments, which referred
to the arrangement as one of
reimbursement by FRV following payment by the employee.
(2) Submissions made to this Court in a separate proceeding about whether Fringe
Benefits Tax reporting to the Australian Taxation
Office for the financial year
ending 30 June 2024 was incorrect and should be withdrawn. The applicant in
that case pleaded that
FRV is authorised to pay a weekly contribution to the
Trust on his behalf. FRV sought to set aside the originating application and
its submissions said that its interlocutory application proceeded on the basis
that the applicant would prove all of the allegations
in his statement of claim.
No defence has been filed.
ARMS seek to rely on the FRV’s application to set aside the originating
application as an admission that the amounts paid to
the Trust are the
employee’s money. I reject that submission. A pleading, or an
application, is not evidence. The fact that
FRV (strategically or otherwise)
took the view that it was not appropriate to contest facts on an application for
summary determination
of a proceeding does not assist ARMS to positively
establish that fact.
regard to the material together, ARMS argue that there are three elements to the
payment arrangement, which are said to be:
(1) The employees, by an authority, direct FRV to deduct the cost of
contribution to the Trust in discharge of the employees’
obligations under
the Trust to make payments.
(2) Howden issues an invoice to FRV reflecting the total employee contributions
derived from the list of current trust members.
FRV transfers the contributions
received to ARMS in satisfaction of the employees’ obligations to
contribute to the Trust.
The invoice is issued after the payments have been
processed and is in a “batch” form.
(3) The third payment is said to be reimbursement of the employee of the amount
of the employee contribution. This is said to be
a separate obligation which
FRV has assumed under an agreement between its employees, the UFU and the State
of Victoria.
ARMS characterise the above process as three separate payments, it is not clear
that is so. There is a single transaction by
which employees are paid their
salary. If a person elects to be part of the Trust, their actual pay is
precisely the same amount
as an employee who elects not to be part of the Trust.
In either situation, the employee will receive that pay in a single transaction.
The only difference will be that the payslip of the employee who elects to be
part of the Trust will bear reference to some of that
pay being deducted and
simultaneously reimbursed. Additionally, the employee who elects to be part of
the Trust will be insured.
argue that this is no more than a book entry, and that in reality, individual
employees never had
money directed to ARMS. FRV argues that
references to the employees paying and being reimbursed are no more than matters
Both parties rely upon the High Court’s decision in
and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Westpac Banking Corporation
[1988] HCA 17
): FRV to argue that one looks to the substance of
the transaction to identify the party with the proper claim in restitution,
focus on a “mere book entry... which can be reversed without
affecting the substance of transactions” (at 674), while
Respondent relies on the case for its focus upon the identity of the party who
has suffered the “countervailing
detriment” from payment of
money (at 673).
addition, FRV refer to
Colonial Bank v Exchange Bank of Yarmouth, Nova
[1885] UKLawRpAC 36
(1886) 11 App Cas 84
Colonial Bank
), arguing that in
that case, the House of Lords had no difficulty dismissing the utilisation of
funds via a “book entry”
as being matters that did not involve the
deployment of the funds.
an interlocutory injunction application, the Court will not conduct a
preliminary trial of the action to resolve conflicts in the
Cooper (Trustee) v Gibraltar Capital Pty Ltd (Trustee), in the
matter of Suhren (Bankrupt)
[2025] FCA 1297
(Jackson J)). Overall,
it is not appropriate to finally resolve mixed questions of fact and law of this
complexity on an interlocutory
basis, particularly where, as here, that would
likely have the effect of summarily ending the proceedings.
true characterisation of the funds paid to ARMS is a critical aspect of the
case. The resolution of the issue appears to require
an understanding of the
factual substratum which remains incomplete, or subject to further testing. In
this respect, the material
filed by the parties is voluminous – over 1,500
pages. There is a conflict of evidence in the sense that the parties contend
that different inferences should be drawn from different aspects of the
example, the attitude of FRV to the payments made to the Trust appears to be in
issue insofar as ARMS took the Court to various
documents authored or
commissioned by FRV which refer to the payments as being in the nature of a
reimbursement. One such document
was a report by Deloitte. That document was
put in evidence by FRV, and it refers to contributions being made by FRV on
employees. The report is marked as a draft. There is no evidence
it proceeded.
The fact that the evidence was prepared for a different purpose, and is in
draft, is relevant to the analysis. It
does not establish the legal and factual
basis of the payments in such a way as to render FRV’s claim unsustainable
manner alleged.
argue that FRV’s claim to restitution depends upon establishing that the
funds contributed to ARMS were its own funds,
and not the funds of its
employees, paid to ARMS at their direction. I accept that evidence is relevant
to this question. I do
not accept that all of the necessary evidence is before
the Court or which can be in any event resolved on an interlocutory basis.
way in which the payments are referred to on the payslips following the
direction may, upon a full analysis, end up being dispositive
of the issue.
However, at this stage, it is not appropriate to reach that conclusion.
Alternatively,
FRV argue that even if the fund were not relevantly FRV’s, then they had
an interest in recovering the money
sufficient to support the remedy. In this
respect, they rely upon
Colonial Bank
in which the House of Lords
considered the position of an agent who had paid funds on a mistaken basis.
Although the funds did not
belong to the agent, Lord Hobhouse said (at 91):
It seems a perfectly untenable position to say that an agent in that position
has not got an interest to recall the money so that
it may be put into the right
channel. If the money had been repaid by the defendants directly they found they
were not entitled to
it, it would have got into the right channel. Whom it would
ultimately have benefited there we do not know. It is foreign to this
and we are not bound to speculate upon it.
assert that even on the case advanced by ARMS, there is no doubt that the funds
in question were conveyed to the Trust by FRV.
FRV argue that it has a greater
claim to the funds than ARMS does. I pause to note that this argument depends
upon accepting whether
the funds were paid on the basis of a mistake of fact: a
matter which is very hotly disputed between the parties. However, the argument
is drawn from principles outlined in the
Colonial Bank
decision insofar
as it supports an assertion that funds can be moved into the “right
channel” from which a dispute as
to the proper ownership of the funds can
be ventilated.
argue that the “right channel” analysis is not apposite, because in
order for the agent to have a claim in restitution
the party which must have
made a relevant mistake of fact or law is the principal – here, the
employees – not the agent.
For that reason, ARMS argue that the
“right channel” argument must fail for the same reason that the
first argument
must fail: the evidence establishes that the funds paid to the
Trust were the employees’ funds.
first argument, that the funds paid to the Trust belonged to FRV, is essentially
an appeal to the substance of the relationship
over the legal form apparently
reflected in the payslips and the directions completed by the employees. There
is force in ARMS’
argument in this respect. However, identifying the
substance of the transaction is a factual inquiry that requires a more complete
analysis of the facts in issue than is appropriate on an application for an
interlocutory injunction, including by proper analysis
of whether the direction
was effective to authorise the payments made to the Trust as it was constituted
and in light of the findings
of in FWCFB Appeal. At the level appropriate for
this application, it is sufficient to note that the simultaneous nature of the
deduction and reimbursement to the employees is a factor tending in favour of
FRV’s argument, as is the fact that employees’
renumeration is
unchanged, whether or not their payslip records that they are
“reimbursed”. The fact that there are
not multiple sequential
transactions also tends to support FRV’s argument.
alternative argument advanced by ARMS as to the “right channel” has
a basis in authority. ARMS referred to
Mason & Carter’s Restitution
Law in Australia
(J W Carter Publishing Pty Ltd, 5
in which the authors refer to issues of payment under a mistake involving
agents and intermediaries. ARMS emphasise that the examples
provided there, do
not arise in this case. The learned authors note (at [439]):
A person may deal in a particular transaction as an agent for another. This does
not necessarily mean that, where money is involved,
the person pays or receives
money which is the property of the principal. For example, a bank which pays
money ‘on behalf of’
a customer will usually be advancing money in
reliance or purported reliance on the customer’s mandate, even though the
pays its own money... Similarly, a bank which receives money on a
customer’s behalf will usually acquire property in that money.
does with it, as between itself and its customer, will depend on the state of
the customer’s account and the bank’s
arrangements with its
customer, to each of which the payer is not privy.
authors emphasise (at [439]) that there is “an infinite variety of
intermediaries” so that “no clear answer
can be given until the
precise relationships at and after the time of the mistaken payment are
carefully examined.” While
this is not a case in the category of banking
transactions, the breadth of the jurisdiction does not, in my view, permit the
classification for which ARMS contend.
Ultimately,
I consider that the Applicant has a
prima facie
case because the legal
arguments advanced by FRV in support of its case which I have outlined above
have a sufficient likelihood
of success. However, it is necessary that I now
consider the balance of convenience to justify the grant of the relief sought.
BALANCE OF CONVENIENCE
argues that the injunction is required to ensure that the funds paid to the
Trust are available for the purpose of providing its
employees with income and
ambulance protection, should it become necessary. It also seeks to recover the
funds which it says were
paid under a mistake and to (presumably) ensure that
they are available to satisfy any judgment.
Second Respondent argues that it, and members of the Trust, would suffer if the
injunction were granted. ARMS would suffer prejudice,
it is said, because it
would be prevented from carrying out the business of the Trust in the manner
that it considers best adapted
to its obligations as trustee. I consider this
has little weight; the limitation would do no more that confine the ability to
funds out of the Trust in a manner which reflects the income protection
scheme and ambulance cover that employees were entitled to
under the 2020 EA.
Preserving and protecting the availability of that cover is not prejudicial.
The financial position of the Trust
evidence of Mr Harms is that audited accounts with actuarial estimates do not
exist, and that the accounts are in the process
of being audited and will not be
ready until approximately December 2025. Mr Harms separately refers to the
obligations upon ARMS
as a trustee to ensure the Trust accounts are properly
audited. It is difficult to understand why no audited accounts have been
prepared. At an interlocutory stage, it is appropriate to simply observe that
there is some lack of clarity in the evidence as it
concerns the financial
position of the Trust, which tends to favour the granting of the injunction
financial information provided by Mr Harms is set out in spreadsheets which he
has created. Mr Harms is the appointed Responsible
Manager for ARMS. Mr Harms
has provided of the historical balance of the Trust, and projecting the Trust
balance, as follows:
(1) the Trust net assets at 29 October 2025 were $2,246,445;
(2) the estimated Trust net assets as at 30 November are $1,542,680;
(3) the estimated Trust net assets as at 31 December 2025 are $851,341; and
(4) the estimated Trust net assets as at 31 January 2026 (being $-71,436.83).
Harms then gives evidence about the process he undertook to calculate the
estimated depletion date (being late January 2026), including
an estimate for
the sum of member claims. It is said that the claim provision is modelled based
on the average claims paid in previous
years. He estimates the depletion of
funds by the end of January 2026.
argue that the provisions for liabilities are opaque, and that if the amounts
presently excluded as liabilities were
, the Trust would have net
assets of over $4 million: sufficient to continue cover for close to 12 months.
ARMS say that the provisions
for liabilities are not excluded from the available
funds, but are liabilities to be paid from the Trust assets.
either analysis, there appears to be a risk of depletion of the Trust, albeit
that on ARMS’ analysis that risk is more imminent.
It is against that
risk that the injunction seeks to guard. The balance of convenience favours the
grant of a remedy that will prolong
the core cover that was contemplated in the
2020 EA. That risk is sufficiently proximate to justify the grant of relief on
an interlocutory
Relevantly,
Mr Harms’ affidavit also annexed a forecast of the depletion of Trust
funds, if the Trust is limited to paying claims
related to income protection and
ambulance cover. That forecast estimates that the Trust funds will be depleted
by late February
2026. I note that these projections do not include any
requirement to pay legal costs arising from the current proceeding.
Risk of dissipation
spreadsheets annexed to Mr Harm’s affidavit identifies that the amount of
$1,620,000 was paid to the First Respondent pursuant
to an arrangement which the
Full Bench described as a “secret commission” (FWCFB Appeal at
[170]). There is no material
before me which permits me to comment one way or
the other on the appropriateness of that appellation. However, the expenditure
of such a substantial amount in the circumstances described in FWCFB Appeal
tends to support the opacity surrounding the financial
accounts, and lends some
weight to the concerns expressed by the FRV as to the potential dissipation of
Other issues
identify some issues concerning the balance of convenience related to its
ability to fund its defence of this proceeding, or
to pay other liabilities.
The injunction is granted on an interlocutory basis. It is open to apply for a
variation on proper material,
and so any concerns regarding future claims or
future liabilities to pay legal costs can be addressed in that way. However, it
circular to suggest that ARMS should be prevented from accessing funds for
legal costs, while simultaneously suggesting that it can
make an application for
variation. It is therefore appropriate to draw the injunction to permit payment
of legal fees associated
with this application, and with any future application
for variation of these orders.
addition, it is said that ARMS would be prevented from taking steps, in its
discretion, to vary or alter the type of insurance
cover provided in the way of
additional income protection insurance or ambulance cover, regardless of whether
such cover is in the
interests of its members. Such an argument is
misconceived. As already observed, any variation can be sought; however, given
fact that the Trust capital is likely to dissipate, on Mr Harms’
evidence, by January 2026, the expansion of cover at this
stage would seem to be
an unlikely step.
it is appropriate that the Trust be in a position to pay for those matters which
are necessary for the proper operation and
good governance of the Trust,
including the payment of auditors or software licences.
is true that the interlocutory injunction will not prevent dissipation of the
Trust assets entirely. That is appropriate, because
the funds of the Trust
should continue to be available to members for income protection insurance and
ambulance cover. On Mr Harms’
evidence, the orders will extend the
depletion date by one month. Even if that is correct, I consider that the
balance of convenience
still favours making the orders: they are appropriately
designed to reduce the rate of depletion so far as is appropriate.
the reasons that I have explained above, I consider it is appropriate to make
the orders sought, with variation to permit the
payment of existing professional
service fees or obligations in the nature of auditors’ fees or software
licences and a limited
exception for legal fees associated with seeking a
variation to these orders. The parties will have liberty to apply in relation
to the orders.
the issues ventilated in this hearing, and the way in which they evolved in the
course of the hearing, it is appropriate that
the parties each bear their own
costs of this application. In particular, FRV’s concerns for the
dissipation of the Trust,
and the terms of the restraint which it sought are not
consistent with a costs obligation being imposed upon ARMS in respect of this
application.
I certify that the preceding fifty-four (54)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 14 November 2025
RTF format (460 KB)
Signed PDF/A format