Nakad & Ors v Minister for Immigration & Anor [2013] FMCA 234 (4 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
NAKAD & ORS v MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & ANOR
[2013] FMCA 234
MIGRATION – Review of decision by Refugee Review Tribunal –
whether Refugee Review Tribunal’s decision affected
by jurisdictional
error – whether applicants satisfy the definition of
” for the purposes of satisfying the requirements of
subclause 802.212 – no error – application dismissed.
Judiciary Act 1903
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
schedule 2, regs.1.03, 1.05A
Family Law Act
First Applicant:
JULIAN ANTOINE NAKAD
Second Applicant:
MARIA NAKAD
Third Applicant:
JOSEPH ANTOINE NAKAD
First Respondent:
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP
Second Respondent:
MIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
File Number:
SYG 1571 of 2012
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
The applicants appeared in person with the
assistance of an interpreter
Solicitors for the Respondents:
L. Buchanan (Australian Government Solicitors)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYG 1571 of 2012
JULIAN ANTOINE NAKAD
First Applicant
MARIA NAKAD
Second Applicant
JOSEPH ANTOINE NAKAD
Third Applicant
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
MIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
is an application pursuant to
Judiciary Act 1903
Pt.8, Div.2 of the
Migration Act 1958
”) for judicial review of a decision of the Migration Review
Tribunal dated 13 June 2012 and handed down on the same day (“
applicants are all minors and are citizens of the United States of America.
Neither the applicants nor their parents are Australian
23 August 2012, an Order was made by this Court appointing the applicants’
mother, as the litigation guardian to the first
named applicant, born 5 February
2002, the second named applicant, born 31 January 1998, and the third named
applicant, born 12 July
issue in this case is whether the applicants satisfied the definition of
” for the purposes of satisfying the requirements of
subclause 802.212 of Schedule 2 of the
Migration Regulations 1994
the Regulations
”). This issue is considered below in the
context of considering whether the Tribunal’s decision is affected by
to considering the proceeding before this Court, these Reasons provide the
relevant procedural background, a summary of the
legislative framework and a
summary of the Tribunal’s review and decision.
applicants applied to the Department of Immigration and Citizenship for Child
(Residence) (Class BT) visas on 7 March 2012. They
were sponsored by their
uncle, an Australian citizen, with whom they and their parents live.
16 March 2012, the Delegate refused the applicants’ applications for a
Child (Residence) (Class BT) visas.
11 April 2012, the applicants lodged an application for review of the
Delegate’s decision by the Migration Review Tribunal.
13 June 2012, the Tribunal affirmed the decision of the Delegate.
17 July 212, the applicants filed an application in this Court seeking judicial
review of the Tribunal’s decision.
Legislative framework
only subclass in respect of which any claims have been advanced is Child
(subclass 802) visa. Relevantly, clauses 802.212 and
802.215 of Schedule 2 of
the Regulations states:
dependent child of a person who is an Australian citizen
, holder of a
permanent visa or eligible New Zealand Citizen; and
(b) subject
to subclause (2), has not turned 25.
paragraph (1)(b) does not apply to an applicant who, at the time of making the
application, was a dependent child within the
meaning of subparagraph (b)(ii) of
the definition of dependent child.
applicant is:
person whose application is supported by a letter of support from a State or
Territory government welfare authority;
sponsored by a person who:
turned 18; and
Australian citizen, or a holder of a permanent visa or an eligible New Zealand
citizen; and
Australian citizen, holder of a permanent visa or eligible New Zealand citizen
mentioned in paragraph 802.212(1)(a);
cohabiting spouse or de facto partner of the Australian citizen holder of a
permanent visa or eligible New Zealand citizen mentioned
in paragraph
802.212(1)(a).
of the Regulations defines a “
dependant child
1.03 Dependent Child,
person, means the child or step child of the person (other than a child who is
engaged to be married or has a spouse or de facto
partner), being a child who:
(a) has not
turned 18; or
turned 18 and:
dependent on that person; or
incapacitated for work due to the total or partial loss of the child’s
bodily or mental functions.
of the Regulations defines the circumstance in which a person may be
” on another.
” of a person is defined in s.5CA of the Act as
Without limiting who is a child of a person for the
purposes of this Act, each of the following is the
someone who is a child of the person within the meaning
Family Law Act 1975
(other than someone who is an adopted child of
the person within the meaning of that Act);
someone who is an adopted child of the person within the meaning of this Act.
The regulations may provide that, for the purposes of this Act, a person
specified by the regulations is not a child
person specified by the regulations in circumstances in which the
person would, apart from this subsection, be the child
than 2 persons for the purposes of this Act.
Subsection (2), and regulations made for the purposes of that subsection,
have effect whether the person specified as not being
a child of another person
would, apart from that subsection and those regulations, be the child of the
other person because of subsection
(1) or otherwise.
Relevantly,
Family Law Act 1975
”) defines a “
Subdivision D of Division 1 of
Family Law Act
as defining the
situations in which a “
of a person or is a “
of a marriage or other
relationship.
The Tribunal’s review and decision
27 April 2013, the Tribunal wrote to the applicants informing them that the
Tribunal had considered the material before it but
was unable to make a
favourable decision on that material alone. The letter invited the applicants to
attend a hearing on 12 June
2012 to give oral evidence and present arguments.
decision of the Tribunal is accurately summarised by the solicitor for the First
Respondent in her written submissions as follows:
The applicants applied to the Tribunal for review of the decision of the
delegate on 11 April 2012 (RD 56 - 73). In support
of their application they
provided a letter from their uncle and sponsor in which their uncle stated that
the applicants and their
parents are living with him and had been supporting
them with accommodation, financial and health expenses since 2007, and had been
giving the applicants' mother, Ms Mona Nakad, $200 a fortnight for the expenses
of the children (RD 73).
Nakad, Mr Bakhos Nakad, a further support person and the applicants attended a
hearing of the Tribunal on 12 June 2012
(RD 102). At the hearing, Ms Mona Nakad,
spoke on the applicants' behalf and indicated that she did not agree with the
decision of
the delegate as her children were happy in Australia, did not want
to return to the USA, and that their father's family was in Australia.
previously applied for business and protection visas in the past but these had
been refused. Mr Bakhos Nakad also confirmed
his relationship with the
applicants as their uncle (RD 113 [23]-[24]).
decision, dated 13 June 2012, the Tribunal found that as the application was not
supported by a letter of support from
a State or Territory government (RD 113
[26]). The relevant issue for consideration therefore was whether the primary
was the dependant child of the sponsor, that is, of his uncle Mr
Bakhos Nakad.
Tribunal considered the definitions relevant to determining whether someone is a
dependent child for the purposes of the
Act as well as Departmental policy
explaining the term 'child of a person' in the context of the Act's definitions
(RD 110-111, 113).
The Tribunal found that no letter of support from a State or
Territory welfare authority had been provided with the visa application.
Tribunal then considered whether the applicant met the criteria in cl 802.212 of
Schedule 2 to the Regulations. It found that
the primary applicant's biological
parents are not Australian citizens, permanent residents or eligible New Zealand
citizens. It
also found that the primary applicant lived with his parents who
had legal custody of him and that the sponsor, who declared himself
applicant's uncle, did not have parental responsibility for him. The Tribunal
therefore found that there was no evidence
or claim that the applicant was a
child of the sponsor within the meaning of the
Family Law Act 1975
[29]). The Tribunal was not satisfied that the primary applicant was a child of
the sponsor or a dependent child of the sponsor
and therefore did not satisfy cl
802.212 of Schedule 2 to the Regulations. Similarly, the second and third
applicants also did not
satisfy the same criterion (RD 114 [30]).
Tribunal also found that the applicants are not members of the family unit of a
holder of a subclass 802 visa and that there
was also no evidence that they
satisfied the criteria for any other visa subclass (RD 114 [31 - 32]).
Accordingly, the Tribunal affirmed the decision under
The proceeding before this Court
applicants were represented before this Court by their mother as their
litigation guardian with the assistance of an Arabic interpreter.
23 August 2012, the mother attended a directions hearing before me. I explained
to the mother that this Court had no power to interfere
with the decision of the
Tribunal, unless the Court is satisfied that the Tribunal’s decision is
affected by a mistake going
to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. I also
explained that the grounds of the application made bare assertions that were
unsupported
by particulars and did not by themselves disclose an error capable
of review by this Court. The mother confirmed that the applicants
continue with the application. The applicants were given leave to file and serve
an amended application giving complete
particulars of each ground of review
relied upon, together with any further evidence by way of affidavit, including
any transcript
of the Tribunal hearing, as well as submissions in support.
mother was also provided with the contact details of legal services providers
and interpreting and translation services in documents
headed in the Arabic
the commencement of the hearing, the mother confirmed that the applicants relied
on the grounds contained in an application filed
on 17 July 2012 as
The Tribunal misapplied the law.
department misapplied the applicants as on form 40CH the sponsor is not required
to be natural father.
of the grounds was interpreted for the assistance of the mother, and the mother
was invited to make submissions in support of
each of the grounds and in support
of the application generally.
mother wished to read an affidavit, sworn by her on, 17 October 2012, annexing a
copy of the transcript to the Tribunal hearing.
It was not an affidavit that
complied with the directions of the Court and was objected to by the solicitor
for the first respondent,
Ms Buchanan. Ms Buchanan objected to the affidavit on
the grounds of relevance. I asked the applicant what was the issue to which
transcript may be relevant. The mother answered that she had prepared the
affidavit because she thought she was required to do
so and that she did not
rely on it for any specific issue. On that basis, the affidavit was rejected.
mother’s submissions in support of the application centred around the
complaint that no one had told her that the applicants
needed a letter from the
authorities to support their application, and that the applicants were dependant
on their sponsor uncle
for their accommodation and sustenance and therefore were
dependant children. Both these complaints are misconceived and neither
demonstrates any error on the part of the Tribunal.
an application is made for a class of visa, the application must be considered
against the criteria for all subclasses within
the visa. The relevant subclass
to the applicants is subclass 802. The applicants must satisfy the criteria of
subclass 802 in order
to be granted a visa. The requirements must be satisfied
at the time of application.
Relevantly,
the applicants were required to satisfy either criteria 802.212 or 802.215 of
schedule 2 of the Regulations.
802.212 of the Regulations referred to an applicant who, relevantly, is a
dependant child of a person who is an Australian
citizen and who has not turned
25. All the applicants were under the age of 25. Presumably, the Australian
citizen upon whom the
applicants are said to be dependant is their uncle with
whom they live and the litigation guardian.
802.215 of the Regulations provided that an applicant is a person whose
application is supported by a letter of support from
a State or Territory
government welfare authority. It was not necessary for the applicants to have a
letter of support from a State
or Territory government welfare authority if they
were capable of satisfying clause 802.212. However, if they did not satisfy
802.212, without such a letter, they were not capable of satisfying
clause 802.215.
Relevantly,
reg.1.03 of the Regulations defines a “
dependant child”
person as, the child of the person being a child who has not turned 18 or has
turned 18 and is dependant on that person or is
incapacitated.
to reg.1.03 of the Regulations, “
has the meaning
given by reg.1.05A of the Regulations. Relevantly, reg.1.05A(1) of the
Regulations defines a “
” to be a person dependant on
another person where the person has been wholly or substantially reliant on the
other person for
food, clothing and shelter or is wholly or substantially
reliant on the other person for financial support due to the first
incapacity for work. Unless any of the applicants satisfy the
definition of “
”, it matters not whether they were
dependant on the sponsor uncle for food, clothing and shelter.
of the Act defines a “
” of a person as having the
meaning effected by s.5CA of the Act. Section 5CA of the Act provides that a
” of a person is a child of a person within the meaning
Family Law Act
Family Law Act
defines a “
” as a person to whom
Subdivision D of Division 1 of
relates. Subdivision D of Division 1 of
provides for various definitions of “
depending on particular situations relating generally (inter alia) to the
parents in their life. They refer to a child born
of a defacto relationship, an
adopted child, a child born as a result of artificial conception and children
born under surrogacy
arrangements.
of the situations referred to in the
Family Law Act
has any application or is of
any assistance to the applicants in satisfying the relevant criteria. The
sponsor of the applicants
is their uncle and not their natural, adoptive or step
parent. As stated above, the applicants’ biological parents are not
Australian citizens.
Tribunal found that the applicants live with their biological parents who have
legal custody of them. The Tribunal found that
the sponsor uncle does not have
parental responsibility for the applicants and that there is no evidence, or
claim, that the applicants
are children of the uncle within the meaning of the
Family Law Act
. For those reasons, the Tribunal was not satisfied that the
applicants are the dependant children of the sponsor.
those reasons, the Tribunal concluded that the applicants do not meet the
requirements of clause 802.212 of the Regulations.
Tribunal’s findings were open to it on the material and evidence before it
and for the reasons it gave.
grounds of the initiating application for judicial review of the
Tribunal’s decision also assert that the Department misled
the applicants
because on the “
Sponsorship for a child to migrate to
” visa application form, it did not state that the sponsor
was required to be the natural father. However, such a complaint
misconceived and does not demonstrate any jurisdictional error on the part of
the Tribunal.
form to which the mother referred was contained in the bundle of relevant
documents filed by the first respondent on 30 August
2012, and marked
“Exhibit 1R”. The form is headed “
seeks various details of the child’s relationship to the sponsor,
including whether the child was a nephew or niece.
that s.5CA of the Act states that “
Without limiting who is a child of a
person for the purposes of this Act
”, it is possible that in certain
circumstances a niece or nephew may be capable of satisfying the definition of a
”. For example, an uncle may have custody of a niece or
nephew. However, such was not the case here. As stated above, the Tribunal
that the applicants’ parents had custody of the applicants and were
responsible for them. As stated above, that finding
was open to the Tribunal.
any event, the existence of that possibility or choice on the “
can not by itself demonstrate an error on the part of the
Tribunal that goes to its jurisdiction.
Accordingly,
the grounds of the application are not made out.
is no error in the manner in which the Tribunal applied the law in determining
whether the applicants met the criteria for the
subclass 802 visa for which the
applicants were applying.
the circumstances, the Tribunal complied with its obligations under the
statutory regime in the making of its decision, including
the conduct of its
Tribunal’s decision is not affected by jurisdictional error and is
therefore a privative clause decision. Accordingly, pursuant
to s.474 of the
Act, this Court has no jurisdiction to interfere.
proceeding before this Court should be dismissed with costs.
certify that the preceding forty five (45) paragraphs are a true copy of the
reasons for judgment of Emmett FM
Date: 4 April 2013
RTF format (135 KB)
Signed PDF/A format