Bryah Resources Limited [2025] ATP 32 (12 September 2025)
Reasons for Decision
Bryah Resources Limited
Catchwords:
Decline to make a declaration – association – conference
– substantial holding – board spill – interim
legal privilege
Corporations Act 2001
Corporations Regulation 2001 (Cth), regulation 1.0.18
Australia Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 (Cth), section
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Regulations
regulation 18(1)
Takeovers Panel Procedural Rules 2020, rule 11(2)
Guidance Note 4 – Remedies General
Aurora Funds Management Limited v Australian Government Takeovers Panel
[2020] FCA 496
Asahi Holdings (Australia) Pty Ltd v Pacific Equity
Partners Pty Limited (No 4)
[2014] FCA 796
, Adsteam Building Industries Pty Ltd
& Anor v The Queensland Cement and Lime Co Ltd & Ors
(1984) 14 ACLR
Ainsworth Game Technology Limited 01 & 02 [2016] ATP 9, Viento Group
Limited [2011] ATP 1, CMI Limited [2011] ATP 4, World Oil
Resources Limited
[2013] ATP 1, CMI Limited 01R [2011] ATP 5, Mount Gibson Iron Limited [2008] ATP
4, Winepros Limited [2002] ATP
Interim order
IO undertaking
Declaration
Final order
Undertaking
INTRODUCTION
Panel, Tonianne Dwyer, Diana Nicholson (sitting President) and Karen Phin,
declined to make a declaration of unacceptable circumstances
in relation to the
affairs of Bryah Resources Limited. The application concerned an alleged
association between certain shareholders
following a placement and a subsequent
section 249D notice to change the board of Bryah. The Panel was not satisfied
was sufficient material to enable the drawing of inferences of
association such that the circumstances were unacceptable.
these reasons, the following definitions
888 (Aust) Pty Ltd, a company controlled by Mr Flynn Huang, an executive
director of GBA
Australian Financial Services Licence
Alleged Associates
Mr Yonglu Yu, 888, Mr Joshua Duff, Mr Cedric Koh, Swanside, Ms Lin Zhu, Ms
Chunyan Niu, Vera Fides, Safinia, Mr Timothy Morrison,
Scintilla, Mr Tangnian
Yuan, Mr Patrick Kok and Mr Antanas
Application
Bryah’s application to the Panel dated 9 July 2025
Bryah Resources Limited
The section 249D meeting of Bryah’s shareholders held on 29 July
GBA Capital Pty Ltd
The placement of shares by Bryah in two tranches, on 11 February 2025
and 7 April 2025
means the individuals or entities who were allocated Bryah shares under the
Safinia Pty Ltd, a company controlled by Mr Nick Katounas
Scintilla Strategic Investments Limited, whose directors include Mr Kim
Muller, Mr Craig Chapman and Mr Andre Marschke
Swanside Investments Pty Ltd, a company controlled by Mr Martin Nguyen
Tranche One
has the meaning in paragraph
Tranche Two
has the meaning in paragraph
Trigg Minerals
Trigg Minerals Limited
Vera Fides Holdings Pty Ltd, a company controlled by Mr Ming Shing
is a WA based mining and exploration company listed on ASX (ASX: BYH).
directors of Bryah are Mr Ian Stuart, Mr Ashley Jones, formerly the
and Mr Leslie Ingraham.
is an Australian investment and advisory firm. It is a Corporate Authorised
Representative under an AFSL held by GBA Capital
Holdings Pty Limited.
29 January 2025, Bryah entered a “lead manager engagement” with GBA
for the purpose of raising up to $1 million of
capital in two tranches. The
fully paid ordinary placement shares were to be issued to sophisticated and
professional investors
at $0.003 per share, with a free attaching option.
4.1 of the lead manager engagement stated that GBA would allocate the securities
in consultation with Bryah. Clause 4.2 stated
that GBA may take into account
(in effect) bidders and demand levels “
to facilitate a successful
transaction that promotes a supportive and liquid after-market
Clause 4.3 stated that GBA, its directors, officers and employees may
participate in the placement “
subject to this clause 4
completed the placement as follows:
(a) On 11 February 2025 (
Tranche One
123,513,872 shares were issued raising approximately
(b) On 7 April 2025 (
Tranche Two
243,152,794 shares were issued raising approximately
20 May 2025, Bryah shares were suspended pending the announcement of a major
acquisition. There followed an announcement of the
acquisition of a Canadian
mineral claim.
21 May 2025, the shares were reinstated to trading.
25 May 2025, one of GBA’s Placees, Mr Yonglu Yu, emailed the directors of
Bryah to ask whether the company needed to raise
cash for short term
obligations.
26 May 2025, Mr Stuart replied “
The company does not need to raise cash
for short term obligations. We are still in the Due Diligence phase with the
Canadian proposed
acquisition.
not in the short
wording in response to Mr Yu’s email was suggested by Mr
Flynn Huang (an executive director at GBA) in a phone call between
Mr Huang, Mr
Stuart and Mr Jones.
27 May 2025, Mr Huang sent a WhatsApp message to Mr Jones asking for a call with
the Bryah directors.
on 27 May 2025, Mr Yu lodged a section
notice with Bryah of his
intention to move resolutions at the next general meeting of Bryah to remove all
three directors of Bryah.
28 May 2025, Mr Cedric Koh, a trader at GBA, sent Bryah a Form 603 on behalf of
Mr Yu showing that Mr Yu had voting power in 102,965,235
shares representing
11.84%. No associates were included in the form. The PDF of the Form 603
included comments which indicated
that Mr Sebastian Jurd, founder and managing
director of GBA, had some involvement in the creation of the document.
29 May 2025, Mr Yu lodged a section 249D notice with Bryah seeking the
removal of two directors, Messrs Ingraham and Stuart, and
the appointment of two
new directors, Mr Nicholas Katris and Mr Bishoy Habib. Bryah released the
notice on ASX on 2 June 2025.
30 May 2025, Mr Yu gave Bryah a statement for distribution to members under
section 249P. Included were the following reasons
(in effect) for issuing the
section 249D notice:
(a) Since listing in 2017, Bryah’s share price had fallen 98%
(b) Lack of updates to shareholders on the company’s drilling results
(c) The proposed directors had mining experience and had demonstrated success at
Trigg Minerals.
19 June 2025, Bryah released on ASX the notice of meeting for the section 249D
meeting which was scheduled to be held on 29 July
2025. The notice did not
include resolutions for the appointment of Messrs Katris and Habib. It included
only resolutions to remove
Messrs Stuart and Ingraham, which the directors of
Bryah recommended shareholders vote against.
20 June 2025, Mr Yu emailed the directors of Bryah enclosing a letter regarding
non-compliance with section 249D and consents to
act as directors from Messrs
Katris and Habib.
24 June 2025, Mr Yu sent another letter to the directors of Bryah stating that
section 249D had not been complied with.
3 July 2025, Bryah announced on the ASX that a subsidiary of Bryah had agreed to
acquire a mineral royalty over various mining
tenements held by Bryah (unrelated
to the Canadian mineral claim acquisition referred to in paragraph
), in consideration for the issue of
100,000,000 Bryah shares.
9 July 2025, Bryah lodged the Panel application.
29 July 2025, following the section 249D meeting, Bryah announced on ASX that
the resolutions to remove Messrs Stuart and Ingraham
lodgement of the section 249D notice with Bryah, some dealers at GBA, as well as
some of GBA’s clients, bought and
sold shares in
parties can be shown diagrammatically as follows, with their shareholdings in
Bryah as at 11 July 2025:
APPLICATION
Declaration sought
application dated 9 July 2025, Bryah sought a declaration of unacceptable
circumstances. It submitted:
“The conduct of GBA Capital
and the Shareholders infringes the fundamental principles expressed in
Corporations Act
formed an unlawful association to acquire voting power in more than 20% of
taken steps to take control of the Board of Bryah.
shareholder of Bryah has had a reasonable and equal opportunity to participate
in the attempted change of control.
further submitted that:
(a) Mr Yu had breached the substantial holder provisions in relation to the
timing and content of his initial substantial holder
(b) the Alleged Associates had breached the substantial holder provisions by
failing to disclose the effect of the association.
submitted that
sections 606
had been contravened.
Interim order sought
sought an interim order restraining each of the Alleged Associates from
acquiring any further securities in Bryah until further order.
Final orders sought
sought final orders to the effect that:
(a) Bryah shares acquired in breach of
section 606
be vested in ASIC for
disposal, or alternatively shares acquired by the Alleged Associates since the
date of the
section 249D
notice be vested in ASIC for disposal
(b) the Alleged Associates be restrained from exercising any voting rights in
Bryah shares until their voting power collectively
is no greater than 20%
(c) Mr Yu lodge a corrected notice of initial substantial holding and
(d) each of the Alleged Associates “
give notice of their substantial
holding in Bryah and their association giving rise to that substantial
shareholding
Preliminary submission
Scintilla made preliminary submissions. It submitted that it was not part of
any association and had been a long-term shareholder.
It submitted that when
the shares were suspended, one of its directors contacted Mr Jones to express
interest in participating in
the placement. It submitted that it received only
a portion of its application and had since been a seller of Bryah shares.
submitted in response to our brief (below) that the evidence provided by
Scintilla supported “
an inference that Scintilla is not an associate of
the other Alleged Associates.
Accordingly,
we did not consider whether Scintilla was associated with any of the other
shareholders referred to in the application.
Interim Orders
28 July 2025, we met and considered the request for interim orders on an urgent
decided to make an interim order after considering (among other things) the
relevant factors
, the fact that the
Bryah GM was to be held the next day and the unresolved allegations of
association.
Accordingly,
we made interim orders requiring Bryah to keep a record of any votes cast on the
resolutions to be considered at the
Bryah GM in respect of the ordinary shares
in Bryah held by each of the Alleged Associates and
(a) ensure copies of such voting records (being any voting card, proxy form or
other document evidencing votes cast on the poll)
are kept for 14 days following
the date of the meeting and
(b) provide to us by 12.00pm (Melbourne time) on the day after the meeting the
poll report for each resolution (see Annexure
Decision to conduct proceedings
sets out the tests for association as applied to Chapter 6. There are two
relevant tests here:
section 12(2)(b)
– which provides, in essence, that B is an associate
of A if (and only if) B is a person with whom A has, or proposes to enter
a relevant agreement for the purpose of controlling or influencing the
composition of a company’s board or conduct of
its affairs and
section 12(2)(c)
– which provides, in essence, that B is an associate
of A if (and only if) B is a person with whom A is acting or proposing
concert in relation to the company’s affairs.
“affairs” of a body corporate for the purposes of these tests
include the matters listed in
relevant agreement is an agreement, arrangement or understanding:
(a) whether formal or informal or partly formal and partly informal and
(b) whether written or oral or partly written and partly oral and
(c) whether or not having legal or equitable force and whether or not based on
legal or equitable rights.
provides that a person is not an associate of another by virtue of
“merely because of one or more” specified matters,
one gives advice to the other, or acts on the other’s behalf, in
the proper performance of the functions attaching to a professional
capacity or
a business relationship
stated by the Panel in
CMI Limited
the cases make it clear
that there is significant overlap between the concepts of “
relevant agreement
understanding means an understanding – “
plainly a word of wide
some common purpose or object in relation to the company in question.
establishing an association requires the Panel “
to draw inferences from
patterns of behaviour, commercial logic and other evidence suggestive of
association.”
Panel is a specialist, peer review tribunal. When making an assessment of all
the material in this matter, we have relied on
our skills and experience as
practitioners and as members of the sitting Panel.
Mount Gibson Iron
, the Panel said
circumstances which are relevant to establishing an association
(a) a shared goal or purpose
(b) prior collaborative conduct
(c) structural links
(d) common investments and dealings
(e) common knowledge of relevant facts and
(f) actions which are uncommercial.
considered that the application raised elements of the above factors
sufficiently to warrant further enquiries to establish whether
an association
exists here.
this reason, we decided to conduct proceedings and issue a brief.
Association
submitted that, as at 3 July 2025, it had identified 15 shareholders - either
employees of GBA, clients of GBA or shareholders
who had common investments in
other ASX-listed entities - who together held 31.19% of
further submitted that, on 27 May 2025, Mr Huang told the Bryah board that he
controlled 35% of Bryah and wanted to change control
of the board. Mr Huang
denied that he said he controlled 35% of Bryah.
submitted that the following shareholders are employees of GBA or companies
controlled by employees:
(a) 888, controlled by Mr Huang who is an Executive Director of GBA
(b) Joshua Duff, a GBA broker
(c) Cedric Koh, a GBA sales trader and
(d) Swanside, controlled by Mr Nguyen who is a GBA sales associate.
than Mr Tangnian Yuan, Mr Patrick Kok and Mr Antanas Guoga, the other Alleged
Associates were Placees.
submitted that:
(a) the Alleged Associates had a shared goal or purpose in taking control of the
Bryah board
(b) there was evidence of prior collaborative conduct in Trigg Minerals,
Perpetual Resources Limited and Summit Minerals Limited
(c) there were structural links between GBA, Mr Yu and the other Alleged
(d) there were common investments in other ASX-listed entities held by many of
the Alleged Associates
(e) the Alleged Associates had common knowledge of the
section 249D
(f) there was uncommercial trading, both in terms of trading volume and trading
price, in the period between 2 June 2025 and 2 July
brief was issued on 22 July 2025 to the parties, namely Bryah and Mr Yu (and
also to ASIC)
. Questions for
non-parties, namely GBA and the other Alleged Associates, were sent to them
separately.
were received from Bryah, Mr Yu and Mr Timothy Morrison to the brief and from Mr
Flynn Huang to the questions for non-parties.
noted, in addition to its response, that 9 of the Alleged Associates had lodged
proxies for the Bryah GM directing the proxyholder
to vote in favour of each
resolution (that is, to remove the two
directors).
Yu submitted that he was not an associate of any of the other Alleged Associates
in relation to Bryah. He submitted that he had
no relationship or dealings with
any of the other Alleged Associates, except Mr Huang, who was his broker. He
submitted that he
had no agreement, arrangement or understanding with Mr Huang
regarding voting or controlling or influencing the board of Bryah and
acting in concert with Mr Huang.
Yu submitted that he:
acquired Bryah shares following his participation in the February
placement because, prior to delivery of the 249D notice, he wanted
to increase
his shareholding in Bryah from what was initially acquired under the
acquired Bryah shares via on market purchases to minimise the
extent of the dilution of his voting rights
...” since delivery of the
249D notice.
Yu also submitted that his only contact with any of the Alleged Associates was
with Mr Huang, as his broker, in respect of:
(a) lodging his proxy
(b) the “Royalty
Transaction”
highly dilutive share issues
” since the
section 249D
Yu also submitted that the preparation of the
section 249D
notice was undertaken
by his lawyers, but he had consulted Mr Huang as his broker about it. He
submitted that communications with
his lawyers were “
confidential and
subject to legal professional privilege
say more about privilege below.
asked how he came to nominate Mr Katris and Mr Habib for election as directors
of Bryah. Mr Yu submitted that he knew of them as
a shareholder in Trigg
Minerals and he had asked Mr Huang to contact them.
also asked about an Australian address he had provided in his substantial
holding notice. He submitted that it was the home address
of a friend, and as
an overseas resident, he submitted, he used it as “
a simple matter of
convenience
” for his Australian investments. The documents show that
he has used various addresses.
It is unclear why.
also asked why communications with Bryah went through GBA, rather than directly.
Mr Yu submitted “
In terms of Mr Huang’s communications with Bryah
and its directors referred to in the Application, Mr Yu is an overseas resident
and English [is] his second language, so he requested and authorised Mr Huang to
discuss the
notices with the Bryah directors on his behalf in
his capacity as Mr Yu’s broker with a view to negotiating changes to the
Bryah board without the need to proceed to a requisitioned shareholder meeting.
Mr Yu did not give any specific instructions or
directions to Mr Huang in terms
of the content of the discussions or negotiations with Bryah and its
added (among other things) “
In terms of the statement which paragraph 6
of the Application alleges Mr Huang made regarding him controlling 35% of Bryah
Mr Yu was not privy to that conversation so cannot confirm or deny
whether that statement was made, other than to confirm that Mr
Huang does not
control any Bryah shares held by Mr Yu
many opportunities to produce records, no documents evidencing the instructions
given by Mr Yu to Mr Huang have been provided
to us, either from Mr Yu or
subsequently we learned that Mr Yu held Bryah shares in two accounts, one with
CommSec and one with Morrisons, and his responses
to us had addressed only one.
Bryah submitted in rebuttals that “
Mr Yu has again in this question
failed to refer at all to any acquisitions of shares in relation to [his other
an out of process submission by email on 28 July 2025, which we agreed to
receive, Steinepreis Paganin, legal advisers to Mr Yu,
acknowledged that Mr Yu
inadvertently omitted any references
” in his submission to
certain trades that Bryah had identified in its rebuttals.
also, in rebuttal submissions, queried how Mr Yu could acknowledge only a
relationship with Mr Huang when he had dealings with
, who emailed Mr Yu’s
Form 603 to Bryah, and with Mr Morrison as a shareholder in Trigg Minerals.
Huang submitted that:
(a) he did not remember the exact dates when he had a telephone conversation
with the Bryah directors regarding Bryah, but had had
phone conversations with
(b) he did not say he controlled 35% of Bryah
shares, submitting “
No, I did not say that. I definitely do not control
35% of the Bryah shares and can only speak for my shares
Timothy Morrison submitted that he had a direct relevant interest in
approximately 0.034% of the total fully paid ordinary shares
in Bryah. He
submitted that he had not acquired any shares since 7 April 2025, and the
placement to him came about after being contacted
by Mr Brandon Loo of GBA.
Other than that, he submitted, he “
has not had discussions with anyone
in relation to investing in Bryah and in particular has not had any discussions
with Mr Yonglu
Morrison set out his relationship to each of the Alleged Associates and
submitted that “
Bryah has failed to provide evidence of association
between Mr Morrison and each of the Alleged Associates
...”. He went
further in rebuttal submissions, stating: “
Bryah has sought to select
such number of Bryah shareholders that, in the aggregate, approximately equates
to 35% of the total Shares
on issue. This approach appears to be selective
rather than seeking to establish an association between the Alleged Associates
regard to the matters generally considered by the Panel as being relevant
factors which establish association and the meaning of
“associate”
under the Act
note that Mr Morrison is the Executive Chairman of Trigg Minerals and a
shareholder in it, and that the two directors nominated
for election to the
board of Bryah by Mr Yu sit on the board of Trigg Minerals. We agree with Mr
Morrison, however, that these things
are not sufficient to draw an inference of
association with the Alleged Associates.
Further questions of non-parties
the Bryah GM, we asked further questions of Bryah, GBA and the Alleged
Associates. In particular, we asked the non-parties
who had not responded to
the separate questions, why they had not responded.
then responded to say it “
has decided not to join as party to this
proceeding, and respectfully does not intend to respond to the questions in your
found this surprising from the authorised representative of an AFSL holder
(which appears to be its holding company). We were
not satisfied that our
inquiries had been adequately responded to and as a result we decided to convene
a conference, discussed below.
Lin Zhu responded “
I did not have any discussions with any party,
including GBA or Mr Yonglu Yu, prior to my initial investment in Bryah. All
were made independently. I am just a passive investor and prefer to be
left out of this, I have no involvement in this.”
Tangnian Yuan responded similarly, submitting “
I have acted entirely
independently and voted in my personal capacity as a
shareholder.
Morrison responded that between 3 July 2025 and 4 July 2025, he sold a total of
3,000,000 Bryah shares and that he voted against
the resolutions at the Bryah
GM. He submitted that these facts were inconsistent with him being an Alleged
Associate. We were inclined
to agree and therefore did not pursue the
allegation of association against him further.
responded with a document titled “
Notes on calls with Flynn Huang, GBA
” which included:
Flynn [Mr Huang] stated that the issue
couldn’t wait till the next week (when Les [Mr Ingraham] returned from
holiday) and that
as they held 35% of the register, they wanted two directors
gone ASAP and two new directors appointed
we told Flynn that we had a new project and new CEO. Flynn said
that they won’t let that happen
Flynn offered $50K to each director to walk
“FH [Mr Huang] demanded Ian and me [Mr Ingraham]
“Flynn wanted to know the price/offer that we were making to buy
out Yu Yonglu’s BYH shares.”
“Flynn was adamant that we must include a buy out for his BYH stake
as well if we do anything for Yu Yonglu,”
submitted that the document “
sets out details of the various
discussions between Bryah directors and Mr Huang (other than the conversation of
30 May 2025 of which
a summary has already been provided), as well as a summary
of a conversation between Bryah’s CEO, Mr Greg Hill and Mr Huang
Monday, 28 July 2025
notes appeared to be reconstructed conversations. We were not given any
original (for example, handwritten) contemporaneous notes
of the various
conversations, or any detailed explanation of how the notes came to be
constructed in that form and on what bases
the information was derived.
Accordingly, it is difficult to give much weight to the document.
note that in its rebuttal submissions, Bryah said, referring to Mr Huang’s
denial in paragraph
above (again
referenced in paragraph
Mr Jones and Mr Stuart who were parties to that conversation are
prepared to sign statutory declarations consistent with the file
note Bryah has
produced in relation to that phone call if required by the Panel
also provided the proxies for the Bryah GM submitting that “
proxies for
888 (Aust) Pty Ltd, Mr Koh and Ms Niu were all scanned on the same
.” Had we continued the matter, we may have drilled down to
understand the accuracy and significance of this.
than Ms Zhu, Mr Yuan and Mr Morrison, the other Alleged Associates did not
respond to our further questions.
our efforts, in our view the responses from Mr Huang and GBA were either
non-responsive, incomplete or unhelpful. It appeared
that GBA (either through
Mr Huang or others) was central to issues being raised. As an authorised
representative, we felt that GBA’s
obligation to the market warranted
better conduct. Mr Huang, as an executive director of GBA, likewise.
Accordingly,
we decided to convene a
with the primary
purpose of obtaining documents from Mr Sebastian Jurd on behalf of GBA as he is
its Founder and Managing Director,
and from Mr Huang as he is GBA’s
executive director and the controller of 888, which is a shareholder in Bryah
and one of the
18 August 2025, we issued a notice of conference to the parties, GBA and 888.
On the same day we issued
dated 15 August 2025
for Mr Huang as Executive Director of GBA and Director of 888, and for Mr Jurd
as Managing Director of GBA.
summonses were returnable on 20 August 2025 and required (among other things)
the production of documents in connection with the
sections 203D and s249D
notices, communications with the Bryah board, instructions from Mr Yu and
communications with the Alleged
Associates. We convened the conference, held by
videoconference facility, and extended the date, on request, to 25 August
25 August 2025, parties, Messrs Jurd and Huang attended. We formally received
documents that had been uploaded into the data room
and adjourned to consider
Huang appeared to us to approach the conference somewhat informally and gave us
pause as to whether he was taking the proceedings
Jurd and Huang were asked “
to confirm that you’ve produced all
the documents requested in the summons dated 15 August 2025
responded, each on affirmation:
That’s correct
Mr Huang: “
That’s correct. That’s
records produced left us underwhelmed.
of the documents produced we already had. In the case of communications with
any of the Alleged Associates, Mr Jurd did not
provide any documents
including documents held by GBA Capital
”), other than
letters confirming the placement to the Alleged Associates. Similarly, Mr Huang
produced mostly documents relating
to the placement and none regarding
communications with any of the Alleged Associates.
is Mr Huang’s habit to use WhatsApp to communicate with clients or
companies (in this case, Bryah) and he prefers verbal
to written communications.
So much so, that his WhatsApp messages automatically delete after 7 days and
this feature was “
likely enabled when I first installed the
application
.” He told us that this feature applied itself to all chat
threads. Even if it did so, it is a feature that could be turned
settings. We find it extraordinary that a broker/advisor with a market
participant should do business entirely orally
and not want (or be obligated) to
create or retain any records. We can only wonder why.
of the documents listed in their schedules of documents were identified as
possibly subject to legal privilege. This is addressed
any event, given the paucity of the responses, and acknowledging that perhaps
there were no other documents (odd as that may be),
we decided to issue a
further round of questions for Mr Jurd and Mr Huang before deciding whether to
reconvene the conference.
Further questions post-conference
1 September 2025, we asked further questions of Bryah, Mr Jurd and Mr Huang.
Huang submitted that to the best of his recollection, he had not had any
communications with the five Alleged Associates we identified
in our questions
regarding Bryah’s board positions or their voting intentions at the Bryah
GM between 24 May 2025 and 29 July
2025, except for Mr Yu. He submitted that
the communication with Mr Yu was “
limited to Mr Yu requesting I obtain
consent from Nick Katris and Bishoy Habib to be proposed directors of Bryah and
to have their
names set out in the s249D.”
Jurd submitted that “
GBA does not record verbal conversations with
clients. Where conversations involve client instructions (ie trade orders), then
instructions are 'recorded' by the fact of the trade being placed, and a
contract note being produced and provided for the client's
asked if GBA had disclosed to Bryah, prior to the allocation of the placement
shares, that some of the proposed Placees were GBA
employees or entities related
to GBA employees. He submitted “
Mr Jurd did not have any specific
communications with Bryah regarding the Placement or allocations and therefore
does not know what
was disclosed regarding the participation of GBA employees.
Any relevant communications between GBA and the Bryah board regarding
allocations have been disclosed
.” In our view this is a very limited
answer, perhaps non-responsive, as it does not address whether any other officer
or employee
of GBA had, or state that Mr Jurd had, made any inquiries to find
out. It’s all the more surprising given what appears to
be a requirement
in clause 4 of the lead manager engagement, which required GBA to (among other
things) allocate the placement shares
in consultation with Bryah.
of the Alleged Associates, Ms Chunyan Niu, took shares in the placement and then
acquired further shares taking her holding in
Bryah to 4.99%. We asked GBA who
initiated the trade and for any documents in relation to it. Mr Jurd submitted
that Ms Niu “
has an account login that allows her to place trades
directly through the Iress system without requiring assistance from a GBA
” and that no records had been located on GBA's system
regarding instructions for that trade.
Placement and scale back
Yu submitted that GBA asked him if he would be interested in participating in
the placement and “
he received a firm allocation of $300,000 worth of
Bryah shares across the two tranches of the placement, which represented a scale
the summons to Mr Jurd, we asked him to provide documents identifying who was
scaled back under the Placement and explain how the
decisions regarding the
scaling back were made. In response to this request, Mr Jurd provided a word
document titled “
Bid allocation sheet explanation”
stated that “
only GBA staff got scaled back, balance got
Furthermore,
Mr Jurd also provided a spreadsheet identifying the Alleged Associates who were
scaled back:
(b) Vera Fides
(c) Swanside and
(d) ‘Saba Nominees Pty Ltd’.
information provided by Mr Jurd is inconsistent and raises concerns. The
spreadsheet lists Vera Fides and Saba Nominees as having
been scaled back,
despite neither being GBA employees. Scintilla also submitted that its
allocation was scaled back which is not
reflected in the spreadsheet. This
contradicts the stated rationale and adds to a pattern of inconsistencies and
lack of transparency
in the materials provided.
on the placement records, the only GBA employees who were Placees are 888,
Swanside, Mr Cedric Koh and Mr Joshua Duff (see paragraph
). It is therefore unclear why Vera
Fides and Saba Nominees were scaled back, and the basis for these allocation
decisions remains
Substantial holding
the brief we asked Mr Yu to explain why he did not lodge an initial substantial
holder notice after the issue of Tranche One shares,
and then an updated notice
after the issue of the Tranche Two shares.
submitted that he “
was not aware that he was required to lodge an
initial substantial holder notice in respect his Bryah shareholding until he was
by Steinepreis Paganin of the requirement in the course of its
engagement to assist in preparing the 203D and 249D notices
later submitted in response to a different question: “
GBA Capital
assisted Mr Yu in the preparation of his substantial holder notice in their
capacity as Mr Yu’s broker
do not accept that Mr Yu was unaware of the requirement. Mr Yu is an
experienced shareholder. Indeed, to participate in the placement
he had to be a
sophisticated or professional investor. As Bryah submitted in rebuttals,
Mr Yu’s resume also states he has invested in Australian mining
companies over many years
.” Moreover, Mr Yu holds shares in, for
example, Trigg Minerals. He has lodged substantial holder notices in relation
company in the
placement to Mr Yu in Tranche One, on 11 February 2025, gave him a relevant
interest in more than 5% of Bryah. There followed
several share issues by Bryah
and the Tranche Two placement, because of which, at various times, Mr Yu’s
relevant interest
in Bryah changed by 1% or more. There was only a notice of
initial substantial holding dated 28 May 2025 disclosing voting power
consider that Mr Yu’s failure to lodge an initial substantial holder
notice following the issue of the Tranche One shares,
and to update that notice
after the issue of the Tranche Two shares, constituted a breach of his
obligations under section 671B.
This failure deprived Bryah shareholders of
timely and accurate information regarding the identity and intentions of a
person with
a substantial holding in the company, information which is critical
to informed decision-making in the context of control transactions.
In light of
the seriousness of this omission and its potential impact on the market for
control of Bryah, we intend to refer this
matter to ASIC.
Other issue – market trading
submitted that on 2 June 2025, before the announcement of the Section 249D
notice, the volume of Bryah shares traded increased
dramatically.
submitted that 5,035,000 shares were traded, which it submitted was
well above the daily average of 1.45 million shares for the period 1
January to 15th May 2025
”. It submitted also that the trading price
increased by 40% from $0.005 to $0.007, then to $0.01 following the announcement
and the volume also continued to increase.
also identified other trading over succeeding days which was apparently out of
the ordinary.
issue was not considered by us as it relates to market issues such as potential
insider trading or market manipulation, which
are the province of ASIC. In its
application Bryah noted that “
anomalous share trading is the subject of
a complaint made by Bryah to ASX and ASIC
Other issue – Legal professional privilege
the conference, we asked about possible claims of privilege that GBA had
identified. Its legal representative said that GBA itself
was not claiming
privilege but “
wanted to flag that we had those documents in case
someone else wanted to claim privilege
asked the legal representative of Mr Yu, who said “
I think the
correspondence that [GBA’s representative] is thinking of there, and I
haven’t seen it, is correspondence
that was between us, Steinepreis
Paganin, and our client, Mr Yu, that had representatives from GBA copied on it.
So yes, the correspondence
between us and Mr Yu is the subject of a claim of
privilege from Mr Yu
documents concerned were identified simply as various email chains concluding
with an email from Mr Yu, Mr Huang or Steinepreis
Paganin. Each individual
document within the chain was not identified. The claim of privilege was sought
to be maintained ‘en
bloc’ as it were.
that to one side, we sought a written submission detailing, among other things,
why privilege can be maintained when it appears that the documents
have been shared between parties other than Steinepreis Paganin
Yu’s legal representatives submitted that:
“the dominant purpose of the communications was to give or receive
legal advice at the time those communications were made;
there were only 4 recipients of the communications which are privileged,
two of whom are solicitors who were acting for Mr Yu at the
time of the
communications, one is Mr Yu himself and the other is a broker to Mr
confidentiality was maintained by all recipients of the communications;
the communications were not disseminated or disclosed to any other person
other than the recipients
legal representatives referred to
in support of the
claim for privilege. That case concerned a claim of misrepresentation over the
sale of a beverage business. In
response to a subpoena, privilege was claimed
over various documents. The privilege claim was disputed on two bases –
some did not appear to be sent or received by the applicants’ legal
advisers, and (b) the titles or number of recipients of
some suggested that they
may not have been made for the dominant purpose of obtaining or giving legal
was argued that the third-party advisers were engaged under express and implied
obligations to keep the communications confidential
and were not permitted to
disclose or use that information for any purpose contrary to Asahi’s
requirements. Evidence was provided
that their engagement letters contained
confidentiality obligations. In addition, a solicitor deposed that he had
considered each
of the documents, formed the view that the redacted portions
were properly subject to a claim of legal professional privilege, and
the basis for his belief with respect to each of the documents.
examining the documents in detail, Beach J held that the whole of some were
privileged and need not be produced while a redacted
form of some others should
be produced.
Honour set out the principles applicable to the legal advice limb of legal
professional privilege, in summary:
(a) Common law principles, rather than the Evidence Act, apply because the
relevant issue is whether the communications were created
or made for the
dominant purpose of obtaining or being provided with legal advice
(b) An applicant bears the onus of establishing the claims. “
respect, focused and specific evidence is required in respect of each
communication, rather than mere generalised assertion
let alone opaque and
repetitious verbal formulae
.” The communication must also be
confidential.
(c) The relevant time for ascertaining purpose is when the communication was
made. If written, the relevant time is when it came
into existence.
If the communication was constituted by the forwarding of a copy
document, the purpose for the creation of the copy document at the
time that the
copy was created is what is relevant
(d) The relevant purpose may be that of the author, or the initiator of the
communication, or the person at whose request or under
whose authority the
communication was created or made.
(e) The purpose is to be objectively ascertained. Evidence of the subjective
intention of the author or person requesting the creation
of the communication
(document) is significant but not conclusive.
(f) The purpose must predominate. It must be the paramount or most
influential purpose.
(g) A document may be privileged to the extent to which it records a privileged
communication, even if the document itself would
not satisfy the dominant
purpose test.
(h) His Honour had the power to examine the
documents and should not be reticent in exercising it.
point made at paragraph
applicable to us. Our powers are different and the process available to a Court
to consider claims separately to the trial
is not available to a sitting
J then addressed the case law. Relevantly he noted that non-legal advice, even
when mixed with legal advice so that the client
gains a holistic view of the
particular transaction, generally has a distinct function not attracting
privilege and that non-legal
advice does not attract privilege by routing
through the lawyer.
this case, we were not provided with detailed identification of the documents,
despite having asked
, or of the
basis of the claim in each case, or evidence to establish the confidentiality of
each communication, or evidence that
in fact they remained confidential. We are
not satisfied that a claim of legal privilege has been properly made out. Were
to proceed, we would have followed this issue up.
No Declaration
participants in organising, or taking shares in, the placement were
sophisticated and professional investors, and a broking firm.
The behaviours
exhibited, and the conduct complained of, does not appear to be naïve.
Some of the behaviour before the Panel
may be characterised as obstructionist,
resulting in the need for us to take additional measures which put the applicant
to additional,
unnecessary expense and the Panel to inordinate delay.
were left with concerns about the apparent lack of proper engagement and respect
for the role of the Panel by GBA and Mr Huang.
We were also left with concerns
that, even after the production of documents in response to the summonses, we
did not receive full
and frank responses, which did not assist us in the
proceedings.
there are several indications of association, on the materials available, we are
not satisfied that there is sufficient material
available to draw inferences of
an association to support a declaration of unacceptable circumstances. The
materials needed to support
an inference of association, such that the
associates’ combined voting power would exceed 20%, were even more
limited. In part,
we acknowledge that this is a consequence of our limited
powers of investigation.
we do not doubt that aspects of the matter warrant further investigation, and we
are referring various issues (including concerning
substantial holder notice
compliance)
to ASIC under
regulation 18 of the ASIC
regulations
and otherwise.
all the reasons above, we decline to make a declaration of unacceptable
circumstances. We consider that it is not against the
public interest to
decline to make a declaration and we had regard to the matters in s657A(3).
communicated our decision to the parties, including that we had closed our
conference.
completeness, we note that if we had decided to make a declaration, it would
have required us to obtain an extension of time under
We were prepared to do
that we made no declaration of unacceptable circumstances, we make no final
orders, including as to costs.
President of the sitting Panel
Decision dated 12
September 2025
Reasons given to parties 16 October
Reasons published 23 October 2025
Bryah Resources Limited
Bennett Litigation and Commercial Law
Steinepreis Paganin
Timothy Morrison
MPH Lawyers
CORPORATIONS ACT
SECTION 657E
INTERIM ORDERS
BRYAH RESOURCES LIMITED
made an application to the Panel dated 9 July 2025 in relation to its own
The Panel ORDERS:
relation to the
section 249D
general meeting of Bryah to be held on Tuesday, 29
July 2025 at 2:00pm (WST), that Bryah keeps a record of any votes cast on the
resolutions to be considered at that meeting in respect of the ordinary shares
in Bryah held by each of the Relevant Shareholders,
(a) ensures copies of such voting records (being any voting card, proxy form or
other document evidencing votes cast on the poll)
are kept for 14 days following
the date of the meeting, which must be provided to the Panel upon its request
(b) provides to the Panel by 12:00pm (Melbourne time) on the day after the
meeting the poll report for each resolution.
these interim orders the following terms have their corresponding meaning:
Relevant Shareholders
888 (Aust) Pty Ltd, Mr Joshua Duff, Mr Cedric Koh, Swanside Investments Pty
Ltd, Mr Yonglu Yu, Ms Lin Zhu, Ms Chunyan Niu, Vera Fides
Holdings Pty Ltd,
Safinia Pty Ltd, Scintilla Strategic Investments Limited, Mr Timothy Morrison,
Mr Tangnian Yuan, Mr Patrick Kok,
Mr Antanas Guoga
Bryah Resources Limited
interim orders have effect until the earliest of:
(i) further order
of the Panel
(ii) the determination of the proceedings and
(iii) 2 months from the date of these interim orders.
Tania Mattei
General Counsel
with authority of Diana
President of the sitting Panel
Dated 28 July
In its application, Bryah
originally included STO Capital Pty Ltd as an Alleged Associate. On 11 July
2025, Bryah acknowledged STO
was no longer a shareholder and confirmed that its
application was not applicable to
On 31 March 2025, Bryah
announced on ASX, among other things, that with effect from 1 April 2025 Mr
Jones would step down as CEO
and take up the role of non-executive
On the same day, Bryah
section 708A
notice on ASX in respect of tranche
On 8 April 2025, Bryah issued
section 708A
notice on ASX in respect of tranche
Unless otherwise indicated,
all statutory references are to the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) and all terms
used in Chapter 6, 6A or 6C have the meaning given in the relevant Chapter (as
modified by ASIC)
The following
Alleged Associates lodged proxies appointing and directing the proxyholder to
vote in favour of each resolution: 888,
Mr Yu, Mr Koh, Swanside, Mr Yuan, Ms
Zhu, Mr Kok, Ms Niu, Vera Fides,
Bryah complained to ASX
and ASIC separately in relation to the share trading
See Guidance Note 4:
Remedies at [12]
Bryah complied
with the interim orders by sending us a poll declaration received from Automic
on 30 July 2025 which showed that the
resolutions weren’t passed at the
Bryah GM and the board spill
Regulation 1.0.18
Corporations Regulations 2001
The Alleged Associates did
not rely on the s16(1) exemption to deny association
[2011] ATP 5 at
Building Industries Pty Ltd & Anor v The Queensland Cement and Lime Co Ltd
(1984) 14 ACLR 456
at 459. See also:
Aurora Funds Management
Limited v Australian Government Takeovers Panel
[2020] FCA 496
Winepros Limited
[2002] ATP 18 at [27]
[2008] ATP 4. These factors have been applied in several Panel decisions
Ainsworth Game Technology Limited 01 & 02
[2016] ATP 9,
Viento Group Limited
[2011] ATP 1,
CMI Limited
[2011] ATP 4 and
World Oil Resources Limited
[2013] ATP 1
Prior to Bryah issuing 100
million shares on 2 July 2025 as part of a commercial transaction (see paragraph
), the percentage was submitted to be
Timothy Morrison
became a party subsequently
As the notice of meeting did not include resolutions for the appointment of
replacement directors it was unclear what would happen
next if the resolutions
were carried
Bryah’s ASX announcement dated 3 July 2025 titled “
Royalty Purchased by Subsidiary of Bryah
example, in the Trigg Minerals substantial holder notice dated 25 June 2024, he
gave a Mount Waverley Victoria
This may be a
typographical error. It was Mr Cedric Koh who emailed the Form
See Part 3, Division 5
of the of the
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Regulations
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
One of the documents
produced in response to the summons to GBA was a letter to Vera Fides confirming
the placement to it, which
was addressed to be sent by email to an employee of
GBA. This also was not explained. Subsequent to our decision, Mr Jurd
both Vera Fides and Saba Nominees Pty Ltd are companies
that are associated with GBA
example, Mr Yu lodged a change of substantial holder notice in Trigg Minerals
dated 21 August 2024
Asahi Holdings (Australia) Pty Ltd v Pacific Equity Partners Pty Limited (No
[2014] FCA 796
Takeovers Panel Procedural Rules 2020
See paragraph
Regulation 18(1)
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Regulations
The Takeovers Panel may refer a matter
to the Commission for the Commission to consider with a view to making an
application
Section 657B
Corporations Act
provides” “
Takeovers Panel can only make a declaration under
section 657A
(a) 3 months after the circumstances occur; or
(b) 1 month after the application under
section 657C
for the declaration was
whichever ends last. The Court may extend the period on
application by the Takeovers Panel
RTF format (11 MB)
Signed PDF/A format