Keybridge Capital Limited 17 [2025] ATP 15 (13 June 2025)
Reasons for Decision
Keybridge Capital Limited 17
Catchwords:
Decline to make a declaration – board spill – announced bid
– triggered conditions – frustrating action
Corporations Act 2001
sections 203D
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Regulations 2001
regulation 20
ASX Listing Rules, Listing Rules 10.1, 11.1, 11.2
Guidance Note 12: Frustrating Action, Guidance Note 19: Insider
Participation in Control Transactions
In the matter of Yowie Group Ltd
[2025] NSWSC 648
, Bolton v WAM Active
[2025] NSWCA 99
, Keybridge Capital Limited
[2025] NSWSC 240
Bank Australia Ltd v FAI Insurances Ltd
(1987) 9 NSWLR 464
Strategic Minerals Corporation NL [2018] ATP 2, Molopo Energy Limited 09
[2017] ATP 22, Austock Group Limited [2012] ATP 12, Resource
Pacific Holdings
Limited [2007] ATP 26, Pinnacle VRB Ltd 05 [2001] ATP 14
Interim order
IO undertaking
Declaration
Final order
Undertaking
INTRODUCTION
Panel, Teresa Dyson (sitting President), Christopher Stavrianou and James
Stewart, declined to make a declaration of unacceptable
circumstances in
relation to the affairs of Keybridge Capital Limited. Yowie announced a bid for
Keybridge that included a condition
(among other things) that Keybridge, its
officers or associates not issue a notice pursuant to sections 249D, 249F or
for the purpose of convening a
meeting of Yowie shareholders that would influence the control or composition of
the board of Yowie.
Yowie submitted that calling the meeting would trigger a
defeating condition of its announced bid and be a frustrating action.
considered that Yowie was aware of the likelihood that Keybridge may seek to
change the composition of the Yowie board
when Yowie announced its proposed bid,
and accordingly that the condition was likely to be triggered by Keybridge.
these reasons, the following definitions
Condition 9
has the meaning given in paragraph
Incumbent Directors
has the meaning given in paragraph
Keybridge Capital Limited
Proposed Bid
has the meaning given in paragraph
Proposed Directors
has the meaning given in paragraph
Section 249F Meeting
has the meaning given in paragraph
WAM Active Limited
Yowie Group Ltd
is an ASX listed company (ASX code: KBC).
is an ASX listed company (ASX code: YOW).
is an ASX listed company (ASX code: WAA).
holds a relevant interest in 43.5% of Keybridge.
holds a relevant interest in 58.07% of Yowie.
incumbent directors of Yowie (the
Incumbent Directors
) are Messrs
Nicholas Bolton, John Patton, Andrew Ranger, Diesel Schwarze (who is Mr
Bolton’s brother-in-law) and Daniel Agocs.
Mr Bolton was also CEO of
current directors of Keybridge are Messrs Geoffrey Wilson AO, Jesse Hamilton,
Martyn McCathie, Sulieman Ravell and Antony Catalano.
relationship between the parties prior to the section 249F Meeting can be shown
diagrammatically as follows.
April 2024 and February 2025, Yowie extended loans to Keybridge.
notice under section 249F dated 19 December 2024, WAM had sought a meeting of
Keybridge shareholders to replace the directors of
Keybridge with 4 of its
On 10 February 2025, the
section 249F meeting that had been called by WAM was held. The meeting was
purportedly adjourned by Mr
Patton as the chair but was continued by Mr Hamilton
assuming the chair. The meeting proceeded to approve all resolutions, except
for the resolution to remove Mr Catalano. Court proceedings ensued.
10 February 2025, Keybridge announced on ASX that Yowie had formally demanded
repayment of $4.6 million by 7 February 2025.
on 10 February 2025, Keybridge announced on ASX that it had appointed a
voluntary administrator. At the time the directors of
Keybridge were Messrs
Bolton, Patton, Catalano and Richard Dukes.
6 March 2025, WAM issued a “Bridge Funding Facility” term sheet to
Keybridge to provide Keybridge with bridging financing
pending finalisation of a
capital raising. Included as “Conditions Precedent” were:
Patton and Bolton ceasing to be directors of the Borrower and/or any entity that
is a subsidiary (as defined under the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth)) of the
Borrower including, for the avoidance of doubt, including (sic) Yowie Group
Wilson, Hamilton, McCathie and Ravell comprising a majority of the directors of
the Borrower (New Directors).”
21 March 2025, the Supreme Court of New South Wales declared that the meeting on
10 February 2025 had been invalidly adjourned
by Mr Patton and that the
directors of Keybridge had been replaced in accordance with the resolutions
which were validly passed.
Court also decided that outstanding issues regarding the voluntary
administration of Keybridge be stood over.
25 March 2025, Mr Bolton filed notice of intention to appeal to the New South
Wales Court of Appeal.
Accordingly,
following the meeting on 10 February 2025, the directors of Keybridge, as had
been declared by Nixon J at first instance,
were Messrs Wilson, Hamilton,
McCathie, Ravell and Catalano.
1 April 2025, a
section 203D
notice was given to Yowie expressed to be on behalf
of Keybridge and signed by Messrs Wilson and
The notice proposed an
intention to move resolutions for the removal of Messrs Patton, Bolton and
Ranger from the Yowie board at
the next general meeting of Yowie.
on 1 April 2025, Messrs Schwarze and Agocs were appointed to the Yowie board.
Yowie announced their appointment on ASX in a
market update on 7 April 2025.
The market update also stated that Mr Bolton had proposed a deed of company
arrangement with Keybridge
while WAM had proposed a loan facility for Keybridge,
each of which were being assessed by Yowie as a major creditor of Keybridge
(which was in administration).
9 April 2025, a second
section 203D
notice was given to Yowie expressed to be on
behalf of Keybridge, also signed by Messrs Wilson and Hamilton, specifying an
to move resolutions for the removal of Messrs Schwarze and Agocs from
the Yowie board at the next general meeting of Yowie.
14 April 2025, Nixon J ordered that the administration of Keybridge was ended,
but His Honour stayed the order until 16 April 2025.
It was further stayed by
the New South Wales Court of Appeal to 8 May 2025 because of the appeal.
On 8 May 2025, the New South Wales Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal of
Justice Nixon’
March 2025 decision and ended the stay of the order
terminating the administration.
9 May 2025, Yowie announced an intention to make an off-market scrip takeover
bid for all the issued fully paid ordinary shares
in Keybridge, offering 1 Yowie
share for each Keybridge share on issue (
Proposed Bid
). The Proposed Bid
included the following condition 9:
No change to Yowie board
composition
[Keybridge], its directors, officers or associates do not:
(a) Issue a notice pursuant to
section 249D
for the purpose of
convening a meeting of Yowie shareholders; or
(b) Propose a resolution at a meeting of Yowie shareholders; or
(c) take any actions,
that would influence the control or composition of the Yowie board of
16 May 2025, Keybridge made an ASX announcement advising its shareholders to
‘take no action’ in relation to the Proposed
Bid, and that it
intended to call a
section 249F
or about 26 May 2025, Keybridge issued to Yowie a Notice of General Meeting and
Explanatory Memorandum dated 26 May 2025 as the
convening shareholder under
section 249F.
The meeting of Yowie shareholders (
Section 249F
was scheduled for 27 June 2025. Keybridge dispatched the notice to Yowie
shareholders on 28 May 2025, but the announcement that
it had done so was not
released on ASX until 5 June 2025.
to the Notice of Meeting, Keybridge proposed resolutions, including:
(a) a special resolution to amend clause 13.3 of the constitution of Yowie
(which required a 75% majority)
(b) resolutions to remove the Incumbent Directors of Yowie and
(c) resolutions to appoint Messrs Wilson, McCathie,
Hamilton, Ravell and Catalano (the
Proposed Directors
) to the Yowie
Notice of Meeting stated that Keybridge
“has significant concerns in
relation to the actions of the [Incumbent Directors] as regards total failures
of corporate governance
for the Company and their directors’
2 June 2025, Yowie made an ASX announcement advising that Keybridge had
purported to send a
section 249F
notice to Yowie shareholders and that, to the
extent it was valid, the meeting was postponed by Yowie’s board to 14 July
for several reasons, including that the constitutional amendment raised
issues affecting a number of the proposed resolutions. Court
proceedings ensued
APPLICATION
Declaration sought
application dated 23 May 2025, Yowie sought a declaration of unacceptable
circumstances. The application predated the issue of
the section 249F
submitted that the calling of a section 249F meeting in relation to Yowie by
Keybridge would trigger a defeating condition of
its bid, if it sought to
disturb the composition of the Yowie Board. However, it also noted that
Yowie would not consider the mere issuing of a s203D notice or a
proper notice under its constitution to nominate directors at a general
would of themselves constitute frustrating action of Condition 9 of the
Offer. It is the act of calling a meeting under
s249D, s249F or s249G or
putting resolutions at a meeting under s249N that would be the frustrating
submitted that at no time prior to the announcement of the Proposed Bid had
Keybridge (in administration at the time) indicated
that it intended to convene
a section 249F meeting.
further submitted in its application that “
There is no urgency or
probative reason why Keybridge would need to convene a s.249F meeting of its
Bidder until after the conclusion
of the [Proposed Bid], other than to frustrate
[the Proposed Bid]
further submitted that WAM was seeking to entrench control of Keybridge by
providing finance, conditional upon it holding majority
board control.
submitted that the acquisition of control over Keybridge shares was not taking
place in an efficient, competitive and informed
market, contrary to section 602
of the Act. It submitted that it was for target shareholders to determine
actions which may interfere
with this, and so “
Keybridge ought to
obtain its own shareholder approval if it wishes to wilfully take steps
to...trigger a defeating condition of the
[Proposed Bid]. Failure to do so
constitutes unacceptable circumstances.”
Interim order sought
application sought an interim order that Keybridge be restrained from issuing a
section 249F, 249D or 249G notice to
Yowie until the final determination of the
Panel proceedings.
interim order request dated 23 May 2025 was overtaken by events, being the issue
of the disputed section 249F notice dated 28
Final orders sought
application sought a final order that “
Keybridge be restrained from
issuing a s249F, s249D or s249G notice to Yowie that moves resolutions to change
the Yowie board until
the earlier of:
the waiver of
Condition 9 of the [Proposed Bid]; or
the [Proposed Bid]; or
shareholders passing a resolution approving the action, on a fully informed
basis, at a properly held shareholder meeting
the issue of the disputed section 249F Notice by Keybridge also made the final
orders sought redundant. Yowie amended them
“That the EGM be postponed until the date that is
the earliest of:
(a) the date determined by the Company that is no later than 45 days after
Yowie waives Modified Condition 9;
(b) the date determined by the Company that is no later than 45 days after
the close of the Offer; and
(c) the date determined by the Company that is no later than 45 days after
Keybridge shareholders in general meeting have passed an
ordinary resolution
approving the issue of the s249F Notice on a fully informed basis, including as
to the effect of issuing the
s249F Notice on the Offer and Yowie holding the
submitted that the 45-day period was required to allow sufficient time for Yowie
to call and hold a meeting of Keybridge shareholders
under section 249F to
remove and replace the directors of Keybridge prior to the record date for the
Out of process submission
decided to accept an out of process submission from Keybridge enclosing a copy
of the section 249F notice dated 28 May 2025. In
preliminary questions we asked
of Yowie (see below), a copy was also provided to us by Yowie.
have considered all the material presented to us in coming to our decision, but
only specifically address those things that we
consider necessary to explain our
reasoning. At the outset we comment that the broader ongoing corporate dispute
being waged in
the Courts and the Panel involving Keybridge, Yowie, WAM and
others is complex and multi-faceted, and this application represents
aspect of the dispute.
Conduct proceedings?
Panel’s first consideration (apart from interim orders) is whether it
should conduct proceedings.
view of the notification that Yowie received under section 249F, we asked Yowie
two preliminary questions:
(a) Does Yowie intend to waive announced condition 9(a) (dealing with the
issuance of notices under sections 249D, 249F, or 249G by
Keybridge)? If
(i) should the Panel consider that the proposed bid will not go ahead?
(ii) in the absence of, for example, an undertaking not to rely on the
condition (either permanently or for a limited period), why
does Yowie seek to
proceed with the application?
(b) What final orders are now being sought, noting that Keybridge gave a
notice under section 249F on 26 May 2025?
submitted that it intended to replace that condition with a modified condition
to the effect that no meeting of Yowie shareholders
was held at which a
resolution was put to Yowie shareholders for the removal or replacement of any
of the existing Yowie directors
or for the appointment of any new Yowie
directors. Accordingly, it submitted, there was no need for it to waive or
otherwise provide
any undertaking in relation to Condition 9. It submitted that
the modification was consistent with section 631(1) of the Act.
also submitted that the heart of its application was that Keybridge should not
be permitted to take steps to remove or replace
the Incumbent Directors thus
triggering a defeating condition of its announced bid and denying Keybridge
shareholders a reasonable
and equal opportunity to participate in the benefits
of the announced bid.
application raises a significant policy consideration, namely the interaction of
the Panel’s frustrating action policy with
board entrenchment and,
potentially, using a takeover bid as a defence to a board spill. On the other
hand, we also considered what
impact conducting proceedings would have in the
dispute between the parties.
balance, we decided that the issues that the application raised warranted
further consideration, and we decided to conduct proceedings.
Frustrating action
Note 12 defines frustrating action in the following way:
frustrating action is an action by a target, whether taken or proposed, by
reason of which:
(a) a bid may be withdrawn or lapse
(b) a potential bid is not proceeded
policy basis is stated in paragraph 4 of the Guidance Note, namely that:
it is shareholders who should decide on actions that
with the reasonable and equal opportunity of the shareholders to participate in
a proposal or
inhibit the
acquisition of control over their voting shares taking place in an efficient,
competitive and informed market.”
submitted that “
Voluntarily triggering Condition 9 of the Yowie Offer
is a ‘frustrating action’
Panel has never sought to restrict a bidder’s freedom to impose any
defeating conditions that it is otherwise free to make,
although this would not
include the freedom to state a condition that is otherwise void or unlawful (as,
for example, a condition
contrary to section 629 would be). The definition of
frustrating action in Guidance Note 12 might theoretically apply to the
of any such condition, although in substance a triggering action
might only be ‘frustrating’ if it was commercially critical
does not follow that the triggering of any condition results in an unacceptable
frustrating action. As early as 2001, in
Pinnacle VRB Ltd
, the Panel articulated
(at [31]) that “
The policy needs to be refined to make its application
clear in instances where, for instance, the facts involve breaches of conditions
which may be unreasonable for a bidder to rely on, transactions which have been
entered into or announced before a bid is made, or
compelling reasons why
shareholder approval should be dispensed with in a particular case. Companies
should not be paralysed simply
due to the existence of a takeover
Unacceptable circumstances
submitted in its application that it had received no prior notice of the
intention to call a meeting pursuant to the issue of
a section 249F notice. It
submitted that it could not be on notice of any intention from Keybridge prior
to determining to make
the Proposed Bid because:
(a) As Keybridge was in voluntary administration, it needed either the
administrator’s approval or court approval for the directors
that capacity (i.e. to issue the section 203D notices or call a meeting of Yowie
shareholders). Keybridge did not, Yowie
submitted, for various reasons, have
the requisite approval.
short, Yowie took a technical interpretation of ‘notice’ as
demonstrated when it submitted in response to the brief:
Importantly,
as Keybridge was in administration at the time the notices were purportedly
given (at all relevant times before the [announced
bid]) and having regard to
the prohibitions in s. 198G of the Act and that it is a criminal offence for an
officer of a company in
external administration to purport to contravene those
prohibitions, there can be no ‘reading between the lines’ on what
notice means.
(b) Previous notices had not resulted in shareholder meetings. It said
Yowie notes a previous pattern of conduct of the relevant directors in
giving a notice under s. 203D and not later calling a shareholder
meeting to put
the resolutions (as was their right)
.“ Accordingly, it submitted that
did not believe that Keybridge as an entity held an intention to
issue a s. 249F meeting request and was entitled to have that belief
circumstances.
(c) In any event, the notices given (which concerned section 203D) did not go to
the calling of a section 249F meeting.
further submitted that Condition 9 was necessary “
to protect the
operation of a viable bid
” and it was not commercially imperative for
Keybridge to call a shareholders’ meeting in Yowie without first seeking
its own shareholder approval.
also submitted that “
the act of a target adverse to the bid proceeding,
attempting to change control of a bidder during an offer period otherwise
constitutes
unacceptable circumstances
response to the brief, Yowie submitted that Keybridge, by issuing the section
249F notice, took a deliberate step to frustrate
Yowie’s announced bid and
this was, further, a decision made “
by parties who ought to have been
prohibited insiders pursuant to
We address the
latter point later.
were, during our consideration, further court proceedings regarding the validity
of the section 249F notice given by Keybridge
to Yowie. Yowie submitted that we
should not infer validity of the notice until these proceedings were determined.
We did not.
submitted that
“Yowie has been on notice since at least 1 April 2025
that Keybridge intended to call a meeting to appoint and remove directors
subsidiary, Yowie
.” We agree, without using the term
‘notice’ in a technical sense.
our view Yowie’s submissions conflated the concepts of awareness and
validity. From all that has passed between the parties
it is not credible that
the incumbent directors of Yowie were not aware that Keybridge was attempting to
replace them on Yowie’s
board. We do not accept, for our purposes, that
Yowie is entitled to take a strictly legalistic view of the various
communications
it received (even if its view is correct). Regardless of the
validity or otherwise of various notices, in our view Yowie was aware
likelihood that the newly appointed directors of Keybridge, and therefore
Keybridge itself, were seeking to change the composition
of the Yowie board when
Yowie (a subsidiary of Keybridge whose board included some of the directors who
had just been removed from
the board of Keybridge) announced the Proposed Bid,
and accordingly that Condition 9 was likely to be triggered by Keybridge.
only had section 203D notices been provided (regardless of their legal status)
but numerous court proceedings had been engaged
in, including proceedings to
identify the directors of Keybridge following the section 249F meeting. In the
Court of Appeal, the
affidavit of Mr Simmons dated 17 April 2025, a solicitor
for WAM, was read. The affidavit had been served on Mr Bolton, and Mr Bolton
had attended the hearing in person. The affidavit made clear Keybridge’s
intentions to take steps to replace the directors
well, the solicitors for Keybridge had written to Yowie on 24 April 2025
requesting a copy of Yowie’s register of members
and enclosing a letter of
the same date stating Keybridge’s intention to nominate directors for
election to the Yowie board
together with consents to act as directors. There
were also court proceedings regarding the register.
considerations for whether a frustrating action gives rise to unacceptable
circumstances include “
how advanced the frustrating action was when the
bid was made or
communicated
the actions of Keybridge were well advanced, and its intentions clear, when the
Proposed Bid was announced on 9 May 2025.
Molopo Energy Limited 09
the Panel declined to make a declaration that a proposed payment by Molopo would
constitute a frustrating action giving rise to
unacceptable circumstances. The
application concerned a capital expenditure that exceeded the limit set out in a
condition of the
bid by Aurora. The Panel said (at
“We consider that Aurora was sufficiently put on
notice regarding the likelihood of one or more payments like the proposed
being made by Molopo in connection with the Orient project, before it
announced its bid
submitted that Condition 9 was critical to the Proposed Bid. It submitted
Given that Keybridge owns a material stake in Yowie, Condition 9 is
important to prevent the current Keybridge board taking steps
to remove/replace
the existing Yowie board with its own nominees which would allow it to
effectively kill the Yowie bid
also submitted that “
Condition 9 also critically ensures that s. 259C
is not enlivened by the operation of s. 259E
.” However, it stated that
it intended “
to replace the ASIC approval condition [that is, section
259C] with a condition to the effect that Keybridge does not control (within
section 259E
Corporations Act
) Yowie by the end of the
[Proposed Bid]
the other hand, Keybridge submitted that “
The announcement of the
‘intention to bid’ on 9 May 2025 was made when other options for
resistance were running out
.” It also submitted “
offered no explanation (sensible or otherwise) at all as to why a financial
services investment company and a chocolate
manufacturer would ever want to
combine, or why such a transaction would make sense to the shareholders of
either entity, let alone
why a board change is commercially critical
also submitted that Condition 9 “
represents a clear breach of the
prohibition against electioneering as set out in
Advance Bank Australia Ltd v
FAI Insurances Ltd
(1987) 9 NSWLR 464
...” We do not consider that
we need to decide this question.
is a factor in determining whether a frustrating action gives rise to
unacceptable circumstances whether the triggered condition
is commercially
critical to the bid.
say with certainty that Keybridge would withdraw or otherwise not proceed with
the Proposed Bid (assuming it could do
so) if the Proposed Directors were to
take charge of Yowie. That would require an assessment by the new directors of
Yowie of the
merits of the Proposed Bid from Yowie’s perspective, and that
seems at this stage uncertain. We also cannot say whether the
change to the
section 259C
condition, assuming it is effective, means that Condition 9 is no
longer critical to the bid.
short, while we have some doubt as to the criticality of Condition 9, we do not
need to form a concluded view.
Other conditions?
also considered the additional concerns Yowie raised in prospect of potential
applications in respect of its constitution, actions
that may defeat a Listing
resolution, financing provided by WAM, and the changes Yowie proposed
to the conditions of the Proposed Bid. We have considered
them and address them
was aware that other conditions of the Proposed Bid were, or were likely to be,
triggered. Yowie submitted that the following
conditions had been triggered (in
(a) Keybridge’s proposal to amend the constitution of Yowie, which Yowie
said triggered condition 8 of the Proposed
The announced Condition 8
referred to changing Yowie’s
constitution
or granting
encumbrances over Yowie’s assets.
(b) Keybridge proposing to vote against a Listing
to allow WAM to accept into
Yowie’s offer, which Yowie said was a frustrating action. Keybridge holds
58.07% of Yowie and has
stated that it would oppose Listing
Yowie however
submitted that “
this condition will only be relied upon to the extent
WAM intends to accept into the bid, which appears unlikely.
(c) Keybridge pursuing the finance arrangement with WAM “
Conditions 5(h) and 8(b) of the [Proposed Bid] and otherwise plainly constitutes
unacceptable
circumstances....
addition, Yowie submitted that WAM and Keybridge agreeing that the finance was
subject to a condition precedent that Messrs Ravell,
Hamilton, McCathie and
Wilson were a majority of Keybridge’s directors was a frustrating action
and unacceptable circumstances.
was, or ought to have been, already sufficiently cognisant of each of these
potential actions by Keybridge when announcing the
Proposed Bid. For
(a) Condition 2, concerning Listing
approval, was obviously going to
create an issue in respect of the Keybridge shareholders granting that approval.
In any event, Yowie
has acknowledged that it may not need to rely on the
condition if WAM did not accept. And ASX may, pursuant to condition 2(c) of
Proposed Bid, determine that no approval is required.
(b) Condition 8(b), concerning Keybridge granting encumbrances, was also
obviously going to create an issue given Keybridge’s
administration and
the Comfort Letter offered by WAM.
also consider in relation to Condition 8, that the amendment to Yowie’s
constitution was not commercially critical to the
Proposed Bid.
such circumstances we do not find that actions triggering these other conditions
give rise to unacceptable circumstances.
note further the rebuttal submission of Keybridge identifying other listing
rules that may also need to be addressed in order for
the Proposed Bid to
We do not need to
concern ourselves with these.
also had concerns (but again do not need to decide) about other conditions
potentially making the bid not genuinely available to
shareholders:
(a) WAM holds about 43.5% of Keybridge and Catalano Super holds about 10.6% of
Keybridge, potentially affecting the likelihood of
meeting the 50.1% minimum
acceptance condition. Yowie submitted that this could be waived, and it
intended reducing the minimum
although it did not explain
the significance of that number.
(b) The possibility of Yowie itself triggering a condition as a subsidiary of
Keybridge, to which Yowie submitted that it will not
rely upon the condition to
any extent triggered by Yowie itself and had said as much in its announcement of
the Proposed Bid. For
this reason, Yowie submitted that the condition was not
section 629.
Again, we leave aside whether this is effective.
submitted that “
The challenge faced with the [Proposed Bid] is that it
was never intended to continue
.” Keybridge based this on, it
submitted, the lack of rationale for the bid, the sheer number of conditions
imposed, and those
specific to preventing shareholder meetings.
do not think we have the evidence to accept Keybridge’s submission in this
respect, although we are of the view that many
of the conditions of the Proposed
Bid have been, or are likely to be, breached, and it follows that the Proposed
Bid is unlikely
to continue successfully. It has, we think, only a remote
chance of completion.
those circumstances, we do not consider that the conduct of Keybridge’s
that has been the subject of complaint should be
restricted by the Panel’s
policy on frustrating action.
Shareholder approval of a frustrating action?
in its application, stated that it
“[did] not oppose Keybridge
obtaining its own shareholder approval, on a fully informed basis, to permit it
committing an act
that would frustrate the [announced bid].”
Yowie to explain what would be required for Keybridge’s shareholder
approval to be “fully informed”.
Yowie submitted, we think, that
this required:
(a) a copy of Yowie's Bidder’s Statement
(b) a copy of Keybridge's Target's Statement
(c) an independent expert report opining on the bid
(d) a clear statement that approving the issuing of a notice or convening of a
meeting would trigger a defeating condition
(e) the intentions of Keybridge (and its nominee directors) concerning the
continuation of Yowie’s announced bid and
(f) any information barriers that are in place with regard to the WAM nominee
Panel has previously stated that “
In general an action which frustrates
a bid will not give rise to unacceptable circumstances if shareholders are given
a fair choice
between the bid and the alternative
submitted in rebuttals that, given that the position on the outcome of the
meeting was already known (since the existing
position of two shareholders who
together hold over 50% of Keybridge’s issued shares was clear) these
requirements laid bare
Yowie’s collateral purpose. There is some force in
this argument, but we do not need to form a conclusion other than to say
even where the outcome of a meeting may appear to be a forgone conclusion, there
can be a useful purpose served in holding
it. Nor do we understand Keybridge to
be saying no meeting should be held (if it were required) because the outcome
was a forgone
conclusion.
our conclusion on the application was different and we were considering
requiring a meeting of Keybridge’s shareholders,
we would not consider it
sufficient to say that the outcome was pre-determined and therefore no meeting
was needed. Positions can
change, whether on reflection or by the persuasion of
other shareholders in attendance.
short, given our conclusion below, we do not need to explore further whether
shareholders in Keybridge need to be offered the opportunity
to decide on the
frustrating actions.
Conclusion on frustrating action
we do not go as far as Keybridge, which submitted that “
The bid has
been designed to engage the Panel’s policy on frustrating action, with the
current application from Yowie representing
an abuse of process
have concluded that, even if some or all of Keybridge’s actions were
frustrating actions, they did not give rise
to unacceptable circumstances.
made clear above, we have also considered the additional concerns Yowie
Insider participation
section 249F
meeting in Yowie triggering a condition of Yowie’s
Proposed Bid. This potentially has the effect that the right of other
shareholders
to consider the Proposed Bid is removed from them. As noted
earlier, Yowie submitted that the
section 249F
decision was made “
parties who ought to have been prohibited insiders pursuant to
note in passing that the definition of a ‘participating insider’ is
directed at an insider (here, presumably a target
director) gaining something
from the bidder or being in a relationship with the
The policy concerns
(among other things) ensuring that the target board is free from influence or
the appearance of influence from
persons with a relationship with the bidder.
Strategic Minerals
, the Panel said:
We consider
that transactions involving insiders require an increased sensitivity and
vigilance (including by advisers) to ensure
that conflicts are avoided, full
disclosure of all material information is made and consideration by the target
board and management
of their response, is undertaken free from any actual
influence (or appearance of influence), from participating
submitted that the nominee directors of WAM on the board of Keybridge were
participating insiders in relation to Yowie's Proposed
Bid, by virtue of WAM's
investment in Yowie of a relevant interest of 81.17%. It submitted that
If Yowie is successful in its bid, the WAM directors will be displaced
and inevitably their loan (which was entered into after the
bid intention was
announced) will likely go into default. This presents WAM with an inevitable
appears to have been put forward to establish that there would be no available
directors of Keybridge (perhaps other than Mr
Catalano) to respond to the
Proposed Bid, and for that reason as well the frustrating action should be put
to Keybridge’s shareholders
for vote. But we have decided that there is
no frustrating action giving rise to unacceptable circumstances, and hence no
also submitted that WAM was “
the competing bidder to Yowie for
”, given WAM’s finance. Accordingly, it submitted that
WAM nominee directors are hopelessly conflicted and it cannot be
appropriate for WAM nominee directors to be opining on a competing
in rebuttals submitted that the loan documents were negotiated by Mr Catalano
and Mr Ravell for Keybridge, who are independent
of the Wilson Asset Management
Group, although the submission acknowledged a previous possible “technical
association”
of Mr Ravell that has since been ended.
Nonetheless,
in its submission, Keybridge said “...
the [Proposed Bid] is not a
genuine bid. In the event the [Proposed Bid] (or any other bid) were genuinely
to be made, for such time
as WAM was providing funding to Keybridge including
conditions on board composition it would be appropriate for Keybridge to
an independent board committee to respond to any genuine takeover
short, even if some or all Keybridge’s actions were frustrating actions,
we consider that they do not give rise to unacceptable
circumstances.
the reasons above, we declined to make a declaration of unacceptable
circumstances. We consider that it is not against the public
interest to
decline to make a declaration and we had regard to the matters in
that we make no declaration, we make no final orders, including as to
Post-script
30 June 2025, Yowie announced that following the
Section 249F
Meeting on 27 June
2025, the Yowie board comprises Messrs Wilson, Hamilton, McCathie, Catalano and
10 July 2025, Yowie announced that it will not proceed with despatch of offers
and the Bidder’s Statement in relation to
the Proposed Bid, stating that
following the outcome of the
Section 249F
Meeting, the “no change to Yowie
Board composition” condition to the bid had been triggered and that it is
not in Yowie’s
interest to proceed with the bid.
President of the sitting Panel
Decision dated 13 June
Reasons given to parties 31 July 2025
Reasons published
Mills Oakley
Minter Ellison and KCL Law
Unless otherwise indicated, all
statutory references are to the
Corporations Act 2001
all terms used in Chapter 6, 6A or 6C have the meaning given in the relevant
Chapter (as modified by ASIC)
As at 23 May 2025, being the date of the application
The resolutions called for
the removal of Messrs Bolton, Patton, Catalano and Dukes and the appointment of
Messrs Wilson, McCathie,
Hamilton and
In the matter of
Keybridge Capital Limited
[2025] NSWSC
Mr Catalano had been
appointed by a separate process
section 203D
, a person gives 2 months’ notice to a company of the
intention to remove a director at the next general meeting
Bolton v WAM Active Ltd (No
[2025] NSWCA 99
numbering of the conditions is as per Yowie’s announcement on ASX on 9 May
Keybridge disputed
Yowie’s purported postponement of the
section 249F
meeting until 14 July
2025 and applied to the NSW Supreme Court seeking orders in relation to the
purported postponement. Since making
our decision, but before publishing these
reasons, the Court declared the postponement to be invalid:
In the matter of
Yowie Group Ltd
[2025] NSWSC
ASIC Regulations,
Regulation 20
Guidance Note
12 - Frustrating Action at [3] (footnotes omitted)
It also submitted that
the notices were issued by “
certain directors
” rather than
Keybridge itself. We do not need to explore this further
Guidance Note 19 –
Insider Participation in Control Transactions deals with insider participation
in a bid. Yowie submitted
that the terms of WAM’s financing arrangement
with Keybridge made the directors insiders
After we had informed the
parties of our decision on 17 June 2025, the NSW Supreme Court on 20 June 2025
declared that Keybridge’s
section 249F notice was valid, that the
purported postponement of the meeting to 14 July 2025 by the Incumbent Directors
was invalid,
and ordered that an independent person chair the meeting to be held
on 27 June 2025:
In the matter of Yowie Group Ltd
[2025] NSWSC
Frustrating Action at [12]
[2017] ATP 22
Energy Limited 09
[2017] ATP 22 at
If we had been minded
to make a declaration of unacceptable circumstances, this submission may have
become relevant in considering
whether it was not against the public interest to
make such a declaration.
Guidance Note 12 – Frustrating Action at
Yowie submitted that
reserves its right to make a separate application in relation to
this frustrating action unless the Panel wishes to hear it as part
proceedings
.” We are doing
This issue has since
been overtaken by the decision of Black J in the NSW Supreme Court on 20 June
In the matter of Yowie Group Ltd
[2025] NSWSC
Listing Rule 10.1
concerns the acquisition, or disposal, of a substantial asset to, or from, a
related entity etc
Keybridge Capital Limited, ‘Take no action – takeover bid from Yowie
Group’ (ASX Announcement, 16 May
Yowie submitted that,
for this too, it “
reserves its right to make a separate application in
relation to this frustrating action unless the Panel wishes to hear it as part
of these proceedings
.” We are doing
Yowie submitted that, for
this too, it “
reserves its right to make a separate application in
relation to this frustrating action and unacceptable circumstances unless the
Panel wishes to hear it as part of these proceedings
.” We are doing
Listing Rule 11.1
(proposed change to nature or scale of activities and Listing Rule 11.2 (change
involving main undertaking)
In fact, condition 2.9(a) of the bidder’s statement is a 35% minimum
acceptance condition: see announcement by Yowie dated
13 June 2025 released on
Austock Group
[2012] ATP 12 at [30]. See also
Resource Pacific Holdings
[2007] ATP 26 at
Guidance Note 19
– Insider Participation in Control Transactions at
Strategic Minerals
Corporation NL
[2018] ATP 2 at [68]
RTF format (12.7 MB)
Signed PDF/A format