River Stone Biotech ApS v Antheia, Inc [2025] APO 38 (4 November 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
PATENT OFFICE
River Stone Biotech ApS v Antheia, Inc
[2025] APO 38
Patent Application: 2022203267
Title: Methods of producing nor-opioid and nal-opioid benzylisoquinoline
Applicant: Antheia, Inc
Opponent: River Stone Biotech
Hearing Officer: Dr N. R. Madsen – Deputy Commissioner of
Decision Date: 4 November 2025
Hearing Date: 16 September 2025, by video conference
Catchwords:
– section 210 – request for production
of documents – ground of best method – whether documents on balance
of probabilities are likely to be of substantial relevance to the matter –
do the documents exist? – discovery verses
production – notice to
produce refused
Representation: Patent attorneys for the opponent: Mr Gary Cox and Dr Linda
Kennaugh of Wrays
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Application: 2022203267
Title: Methods of producing nor-opioid and nal-opioid benzylisoquinoline
Applicant: Antheia, Inc
Date of Decision: 4 November
I refuse to issue a notice to produce.
REASONS FOR DECISION
matter concerns a request by River Stone Biotech ApS (
River Stone
orders under
section 210
Patents Act 1990
for the production of documents for the purpose of an opposition under
application 2022203267 was filed in the name of Antheia, Inc (
16 May 2022 as a divisional application of 2017345328 itself filed on 18 October
2017. The application was examined and subsequently
accepted. Following
acceptance, River Stone filed a Notice of Opposition. The case asserted in the
statement of grounds and particulars
consists of a rather full suite of grounds,
but it is the ground of best method
(s40(2)(aa))
that is relevant to the matter
the period for filing evidence in support, River Stone filed a request for a
Notice to Produce (19 May 2025). The request
was subject to some exchanges with
a delegate of the Commissioner of Patents who was ultimately not convinced that
a Notice to Produce
should issue. On 28 July 2025, River Stone requested a
hearing in regard to the delegate’s findings. I also note that evidence
in support has been filed and completed. The applicant has chosen not to file
any evidence in answer. As such, pending River Stone’s
request for a
notice to produce, the matter is ready to proceed to a hearing of the
substantive opposition.
The Patent Application
specification
describes the
background to the present invention as follows:
Medicinal opioids are used for treating moderate to severe pain, but may
exhibit addictive properties. Due to the mechanism by which
medicinal opioids
relieve pain, these medications are among the most effective painkillers in
modern medicine. Additionally, however,
medicinal opioids are also widely
abused. In addressing the use of medicinal opioids, policy makers are tasked
with balancing the
under-treatment of pain, while mitigating the risk for opioid
abuse. Pharmacotherapies have proven effective in treating and preventing
addiction but the high cost of these therapeutics is a limiting factor in the
scope and reach of treatment programs.
preliminary consistory clauses describing the invention are as
The present disclosure provides methods for demethylating a first opioid to a
second opioid. The present disclosure further provides
methods for demethylating
an opioid to a nor-opioid. Additionally, the present disclosure provides methods
for altering an opioid
to a nal-opioid. Further, the present disclosure provides
engineered cells for producing a nor-opioid from an opioid present within
engineered cell. The present disclosure also provides engineered cells for
producing a nal-opioid from a nor-opioid present within
the engineered cell.
An aspect of the disclosure provides a method for demethylating a first
opioid to a second opioid. The method comprises contacting
the first opioid with
at least one enzyme, wherein contacting the first opioid with the at least one
enzyme converts the first opioid
to a second opioid through loss of an O-linked
methyl group, wherein the first opioid is not selected from the group consisting
codeine and thebaine.
Another aspect of the disclosure provides a method of demethylating an opioid
to a nor-opioid. The method comprises contacting the
first opioid with at least
one enzyme, wherein contacting the first opioid with the at least one enzyme
converts the first opioid
to a second opioid through loss of an O-linked methyl
group. The method also comprises contacting the second opioid with at least
enzyme, wherein contacting the opioid with the at least one enzyme converts the
second opioid to a nor-opioid through loss of
an N-linked methyl
note the specification is rather lengthy, constituting 162 pages, and for the
purposes of this decision it is not necessary for
me to provide a general
summary of its contents. River Stone’s request for a Notice to Produce is
focused on examples 14-16
in the specification. Paragraphs [00345], [00348] and
[00351] are relevant to examples 14 (O-demethylation of opioid molecules),
(N-demethylation of opioid molecules) and 16 (Modification of nor-opioid
compounds to generate nal-opioids) respectively. I have
added emphasis to the
key aspect of these examples that form the basis for River Stone’s
assertion that the best method has
been withheld.
[00345] To identify engineered enzymes with improved O-demethylation
activity, sequences encoding enzymes listed in Table 3 were subjected
mutagenesis and then screened via a high-throughput colorimetric assay. Initial
libraries were generated by error-prone
PCR using Mutazyme II (Agilent
Technologies), and variants were cloned into the pA24 (or similar) vector by gap
repair in the Cen.PK2
screening host. Strains expressing mutated enzymes, with
either individual mutations or combinations of mutations introduced by gene
shuffling or other methods, were grown in selective medium in 96-well plate
format under varying fermentation conditions (different
media components, pH,
and temperature, for example), pelleted, and lysed by glass bead disruption.
Lysates were incubated with substrates
(listed in FIG. 23) and assayed for
formaldehyde production in the purpald assay.
Enzymes with improved
O-demethylation activity were verified by directly measuring O-demethylated
product (oxymorphone, for example)
formation in the culture medium by LC-MS.
[00348] To identify engineered enzymes with improved N-demethylation
activity, sequences encoding enzymes listed in Table 4 were subjected
mutagenesis and then screened via a high-throughput colorimetric assay. Initial
libraries were generated by error-prone
PCR using Mutazyme II (Agilent
Technologies), and variants were cloned into the pA24 (or similar) vector by gap
repair in the Cen.PK2
screening host. Strains expressing mutated enzymes, with
either individual mutations or combinations of mutations introduced by gene
shuffling or other methods, were grown in selective medium in 96-well plate
format under varying fermentation conditions (different
media components, pH,
and temperature, for example), pelleted, and lysed by glass bead disruption.
Lysates were incubated with substrates
(listed in FIG. 24) and assayed for
formaldehyde production in the purpald assay.
Enzymes with improved
N-demethylation activity were verified by direct measurement of N-demethylated
product (noroxymorphone, for
example) formation in the culture medium by
[00351] To identify engineered enzymes with improved BIA modifying activity,
sequences encoding enzymes listed in Table 5 were subjected
mutagenesis and then screened via a high-throughput colorimetric assay. Initial
libraries were generated by error-prone
PCR using Mutazyme II (Agilent
Technologies), and variants were cloned into the pA24 (or similar) vector by gap
repair in the Cen.PK2
screening host. Strains expressing mutated enzymes, with
either individual mutations or combinations of mutations introduced by gene
shuffling or other methods, were grown in selective medium in 96-well plate
format under varying fermentation conditions (different
media components, pH,
and temperature, for example), pelleted, and lysed by glass bead disruption. To
detect N-methylation activity
in a high-throughput screen, lysates were
incubated with substrates (such as noroxymorphone) in the presence of a BM3
variant with
demethylating activity, and assayed for formaldehyde production in
the purpald assay (for indirect measurement of methylation). In
formaldehyde formation can only result from the activity of BM3 on a substrate
that has been N-methylated by an enzyme
of interest.
Enzymes with improved
modifying activity were additionally tested for activity in cell lysates using
various SAM analogues as cosubstrates
(see FIG. 25), and verified by direct
measurement of product formation by LC-MS. The best variant enzymes were
selected for the efficient
bioconversion of substrate molecules to nal-opioid
to the claims, claims 1-3, which reflect examples 14-16, are most relevant, I
provide these claims below.
method of demethylating an opioid to a nor-opioid, comprising:
through removal of a N-linked methyl group from the opioid,
wherein the nor-opioid is produced by culturing an engineered yeast cell
comprising a coding sequence for encoding the N-demethylase
wherein the opioid is selected from the group consisting of codeine,
oxycodone, thebaine, hydrocodone, dihydrocodeine, 14-hydroxycodeine,
and 14- hydroxycodeinone, morphine, oxymorphone, oripavine, hydromorphone,
dihydromorphine, 14-hydroxy-morphine, morphinone,
or 14-hydroxy-morphinone.
method of claim 1, further comprising:
opioid with an O-demethylase enzyme, wherein contacting the first opioid with
the O-demethylase enzyme converts
the first opioid to a second opioid through
loss of an O-linked methyl group; and
the second opioid
to the nor-opioid through loss of an N-linked methyl group,
wherein the nor-opioid is produced by culturing the engineered cell,
wherein the cell further comprises a coding sequence for encoding
O-demethylase enzyme.
method of claim 1 or claim 2, further comprising altering an opioid to a
nal-opioid, comprising:
N-methyltransferase enzyme, wherein contacting the nor-opioid with the
N-methyltransferase enzyme
in the presence of a cofactor converts the nor-opioid
to the nal-opioid through transfer of a sidechain from the cofactor,
wherein the nal-opioid is produced by culturing the engineered cell,
wherein the cell further comprises a coding sequence for encoding
N-methyltransferase enzyme.
The Notice to Produce Request
19 May 2025 River Stone made an initial request for a Notice to Produce. That
request sought the following:
pertaining to Example 14 of the Specification
constituting, reporting, recording or evidencing each sequence of the
O-demethylation enzymes that was verified by the
Applicant and identified in
paragraph [00345] of the Specification as displaying improved activity.
pertaining to Example 15 of the Specification
constituting, reporting, recording or evidencing each sequence of the
N-demethylation enzymes that was verified by the
Applicant and identified in
paragraph [00348] of the Specification as displaying improved activity.
pertaining to Example 16 of the Specification
constituting, reporting, recording or evidencing each sequence of the best
variant enzymes that were verified and selected
by the Applicant for the
efficient bioconversion of substrate molecules to nal-opioid compounds
identified in paragraph [00351] of
the Specification
Stone supported this request by noting that:
They assert in
the statement of grounds and particulars that the specification does not
describe the best method known to the applicant
at the time of filing.
The claimed
invention is directed to methods using N-demethylase enzymes, O-demethylase
enzymes, and N-methyltransferase enzymes.
specification at examples 14-16 suggests that enzymes with improved activity
were verified and the best enzymes for efficient
bioconversion were selected.
disclosure of sequence listings for these enzymes, the best method for
reproducing the invention is not present.
The requested
documents will identify the improved sequences and are thereby determinative of
the best method matter.
request was considered by a delegate who considered that the relevant question
was whether the applicant had knowledge of the
improved enzymes at the relevant
date, and not the identity of the enzymes themselves. He was not satisfied that
a notice should
issue on the basis that it appeared an exercise of discovery
noting there was no certainty that the documents actually existed.
Stone responded by expanding their arguments along the lines I have summarised
above. Notably they suggested that:
The documents
sought by the request were expected to reveal with very high probability that
the applicant has withheld the best method.
The selected
documents only relate to sequence listings and are easily produced
Identifying the
improved sequences requires incredible time and research effort thus it is
necessary they be disclosed to satisfy
the requirements of the ground of best
delegate remained unsatisfied of the merits of the request for fundamentally the
same reasons as already provided.
Stone requested to be heard. Antheia did not wish to be heard.
210 Commissioner's powers
Commissioner's powers
(1) The Commissioner may, for the purposes of this Act:
(a) summon witnesses; and
(b) receive written or oral evidence on oath or affirmation; and
(c) require the production of documents or articles; and
(d) award costs against a party to proceedings before the Commissioner.
Exercise of power to summon witnesses
(2) The Commissioner must not summon a witness under paragraph (1)(a)
(a) the Commissioner is satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, of the
following matters:
(i) the witness has a substantial interest in the proceedings before the
Commissioner;
(ii) the witness is likely to provide oral evidence of substantial relevance
to a matter before the Commissioner;
(iii) receiving oral evidence from the witness is necessary or desirable in
all the circumstances; and
(b) the Commissioner notifies the witness of the actions the Commissioner may
section 210A
if the witness fails or refuses to comply with the
(3) The Commissioner may summon a witness under paragraph (1)(a) whether the
witness is in or out of the patent area.
Exercise of power to require production of document or article
(4) The Commissioner must not require a person to produce a document or
article under paragraph (1)(c) unless:
(a) the Commissioner is satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, of the
following matters:
(i) the person has a substantial interest in the proceedings before the
Commissioner;
(ii) the document or article is likely to be of substantial relevance to a
matter before the Commissioner; and
(b) the Commissioner notifies the person of the actions the Commissioner may
section 210A
if the person fails or refuses to comply with the
requirement.
(5) The Commissioner may require a person to produce a document or article
under paragraph (1)(c) whether the person is in or out
of the patent area.
Exercise of powers in relation to bodies corporate
(6) The Commissioner's powers in subsection (1) to make a requirement of a
person extend, if the person is a body corporate, to making
that requirement of
any person who is an officer, agent or employee of the body corporate.
central consideration is the fact that the Commissioner must not issue a notice
to produce unless the document or article is likely
to be of "substantial
relevance" to the matter. Notably, the Commissioner must be satisfied of this
requirement on the balance of
probabilities.
provisions apply to the exercise of the Commissioner's powers on or after the
commencement of Schedule 3 of the
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment
(Raising the Bar) Act 2012
Raising the Bar Act
is, after 15 April 2013. Substantially the changes brought about at that time
were the insertion of subsections (2) to (6).
The effect of these changes to
section 210 was discussed by the Deputy Commissioner in
Domino's Pizza
Enterprises Limited v Precision Tracking Pty
"...in my view 'substantial relevance' means more than just 'substantive
relevance' or 'not of limited relevance' as suggested by
Mr Cordiner. It must
be something that is likely to be, if not determinative, highly significant in
the determination of a relevant
issue in dispute in the proceedings."
Deputy Commissioner drew a clear distinction between production under the
and discovery (at [32]):
"It follows that section 210 as amended is unlike the scheme for discovery
and production in other jurisdictions. It is not to be
invoked by one party as
a general means of exploring the other party’s case and particularly is
not to be used in a fishing
expedition or a hunt for a ‘smoking
gun’. Usually it will be necessary to identify a real and specific
factual issue
in dispute, not merely speculation that production or summons
might reveal such a matter and a plausible basis for concluding that
will in some way be likely to provide substantial assistance in resolving the
matter. Otherwise the Commissioner cannot
be satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that what is sought is 'likely to be of substantial
relevance'."
and pointed out that the power is discretionary (at
"The power exercised by the Commissioner is discretionary and must only be
exercised after considering the respective interests involved
and the purpose of
the legislation. Some relevant factors will include fairness to the respective
parties, whether any order made
would be onerous, delay in the resolution of the
proceedings and in the granting of the patent, the correctness of the
determination
of the proceedings and the efficiency of IP Australia in
administering the process."
Deputy Commissioner also focused on the idea that the distinction between
production and discovery is supported by section 210
“Rather [section 210] is intended to allow
documents to be produced in limited circumstances where they would
provide significant assistance in a determination by the Commissioner.”
(emphasis added)
an understanding appears consistent with the approach of the Federal Court of
Australia as articulated in a relevant practice
issued by then Chief Justice
Allsop concerning subpoenas and notices to produce before the court, where
recognition was given to
the importance of avoiding “fishing”
exercises as follows:
“The subpoena must specify, with reasonable particularity, the
documents to be produced and must avoid becoming a mechanism
“fishing” for evidence or documents. Broad subpoenas that contain
imprecise or ambiguous terms may fail to obtain
it appears clear that if the Commissioner cannot be satisfied that documents
sought by a requested notice exist then they cannot
be satisfied, on balance of
probabilities, that the relevant threshold of section 210(4) is passed. It
follows that in circumstances
where it is merely speculation that the documents
exist then this will likely be considered an exercise of
reasoning and conclusions of Deputy Commissioner Spann in
adopted by Deputy Commissioner Barker in
Sanofi v Amgen
Laboratories Limited v Bayer New Zealand
Deputy Commissioner stated that "substantial relevance" is not to be understood
as merely relevant to a substantial issue that
is in dispute. Rather, he noted
that it is the degree of relevance that must be considered, and it is the high
threshold set out
that applies. The Patent Manual of
Practice and Procedure at 7.6.3
summarises the principles neatly:
“Likely to be of substantial relevance" means that the documents or
articles required are likely to be of substantial probative
value in the
determination of a matter before the Commissioner. This goes beyond
evidence that may be merely relevant to the Commissioner’s
determination.
It requires a realistic expectation that the documents or articles are of
such significance that they may be determinative
of a matter before the
Commissioner.
Unless a document or article is identified with sufficient particularity for
its relevance to be determined it cannot be the subject
of a requirement to
Section 210
is not an opportunity to discover what
relevant documents are in possession of another party or to obtain documents of
relevance. Requests of this nature will be refused.”
opponent made a submission that the Deputy Commissioner in
devised a test that went beyond the intent of the explanatory memorandum
when suggesting that documents should be “likely to
be ... highly
significant in the determination” in order for a notice to issue. While
not an important aspect of the present
decision, my reading of the Deputy
Commissioner’s approach is that his language merely represents an
alternative formulation
of the fundamental consideration that is present in
section 210 that a document must, on balance, be likely to be of substantial
relevance. As the Patent Manual of Practice and Procedure puts it, a document
will be considered likely determinative where it would
provide substantial
assistance in resolving the issue and/or dispute.
Consideration
Initial Considerations
an initial point discussed at the hearing, I identified that the present request
from River Stone seeks documents with no limitation
to a range of dates. While
River Stone suggests in their submissions that they seek a very specific set of
documents with “surgical
precision”, I note that the relevant time
for establishing the ground of best method has recently been clarified by the
The NOCO Company v Brown and Watson International Pty
. In this regard, the best
method requirement is assessed on the basis of the applicant’s knowledge
at the filing of a complete
specification qualified by the fact that for a
divisional application, the relevant date is the filing date of the earliest
application,
being the date from which the patent term is calculated. Thus,
such a limitation should be present in the requested notice. River
Stone agreed
this was the case at the hearing and noted that they would seek to amend their
request if required.
applicant clearly has a substantial interest in the proceedings in the context
of the requested notice to produce, notwithstanding
an indication of intent to
not pay continuation fees. In turn, section 210(4)(a)(i) is satisfied. The
question that remains to be
answered is whether, on balance, a notice should
issue including, if necessary, considering whether the documents requested are
to be of substantial relevance.
submissions
Stone generally submitted along the following lines:
The selected
documents concern three different enzyme sequences referenced in the
specification as having improved activity with respect
to the claimed invention.
They note that the “importance of the enzyme sequences is recited in the
claims in that the invention
defines the use of ‘a coding sequence’
in an engineered yeast cell encoding a particular enzyme function”.
specification does not list these improved enzyme sequences
This information
has been withheld by the patentee, and the evidence on file in support of the
section 59 opposition demonstrates
that it would take decades to repeat the
relevant methods. They add that the steps described in the specification for
and/or identifying the verified enzymes are highly complex and
time-consuming, and that without those sequence listings the skilled
cannot possibly repeat the invention.
The documents
are highly likely to reveal that the patent applicant withheld improved sequence
listings and as such, they would be
sufficiently relevant to the allegation that
the best method of performing the invention has been withheld.
Stone noted that the applicant did not deposit the relevant engineered yeast
cells under the Budapest Treaty (being a mechanism
that may be used to provide a
clear enough and complete enough disclosure in relation to microorganisms), and
that accordingly they
must disclose the enzyme sequences. The converse would
suggest that if the applicant had deposited the cells, they would not need
disclose the sequences. To the extent that the cells (rather than the
corresponding identified sequences) may be used to perform
the invention, it is
prima facie not clear whether the applicant possessed the relevant information -
that is, whether they had sequenced
the enzymes.
address this, River Stone focusses upon the idea that the specification itself
provides clear circumstantial evidence that the
applicant has withheld the best
method at the relevant date. They submit:
“In Example 19, the Patent Applicant describes the biological
production of
N-demethylated
opioid molecules... For the purposes of the
Notice, River Stone refers the delegate to the first 4 lines of [00358] which
Enzymes described in Example 15 and listed in
Table 4, that displayed N
demethylase activity on BIA molecules
(such as those listed in
were incorporated into a
microbial strain (either Saccharomyces cerevisiae
or Escherichia coli) which biosynthesizes morphinan alkaloids de nova. (Emphasis
This passage presents clear circumstantial evidence that the Patent Applicant
was in possession of the sequences at the time of filing
the Patent Application,
for the following reasons:
(a) First, the above passage refers to the use of enzymes that displayed
“N-demethylase activity on BIA molecules”. The
only enzymes that
were tested for N demethylase activity on BIA molecules were the improved
enzymes identified in paragraph [00348].
The enzymes produced in paragraph
[00346] were not tested for the identified enzyme activity; they were merely
isolated, verified
by PCR and sequenced.
(b) Second the Enzymes were then “incorporated” into the select
microbial strain. Without knowing the sequence of the
enzyme, it would not have
been possible to incorporate the sequence into the strain.
the circumstantial evidence would strongly suggest that the Patent Applicant
must have been in possession of the sequences
with N demethylase activity on BIA
molecules revealed in Example 15.”
with specific focus on the specificity of the request and the relevance of the
requested documents, River Stone assert that
the documents sought are specific
and not an act of discovery.
Should a notice be
as I reflect upon the submissions summarised at paragraph 25 above, it is clear
to me that the issues compress into some
rather straightforward points. The
focus of the request is that it is clearly the case that “improved”
enzymes are in
some way identified. It is also clearly the case that the
specification does not list what those enzymes are in terms of their sequencing.
The documents that are sought are essentially those which are considered to
contain the identity of those sequences. While it is
the case that the steps of
producing and identifying the improved enzymes may be highly complex and time
consuming and that the requested
documents may be highly relevant to the ground
of best method, it is relevant to first consider whether the request is one for
or for discovery.
I have noted above in discussing the relevant legal principles, s210(4) operates
to enable the production of existing documents.
This is distinct from
discovery, or the conduct of a “fishing expedition” for documents
that might exist. Subsection
210(4) also operates generally on the on the
balance of probabilities. Thus, it appears plain to me that if the Commissioner
be satisfied that the documents exist then he cannot be satisfied, on the
balance of probabilities, that the requirements of 210(4)(a)(ii)
are made out.
opponent submits that the specification itself provides sufficient evidence of
the existence of the requested documents, at least
circumstantially. Firstly,
the opponent submits that the only way the enzymes could be
“identified” is by their sequences.
Secondly, the opponent submits
that the only way the improved enzymes could be “incorporated” into
the microbial strain
as per example 19 is by knowing their
am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the documents do in fact
exist. Firstly, while the disclosed methods at paragraph
[00345], [00348] and
[00351] discuss “identifying engineered enzymes” I see no
information before me that inherently
suggests that the relevant enzymes were
sequenced. As a general proposition it would appear arguable that
identification of improved
enzymes may be nothing more than some kind of wet
chemical isolation in a test tube, to put it colloquially. More specifically,
turning to those paragraphs in full the identification occurs through a method
of verification using Liquid Chromatography –
Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS).
I note that Examples 14, 15 and 16 are supported by methods that identify
capable enzymes, wherein these
individual colonies are sequenced for
identification purposes ([00342], [00346] and [00349], respectively). However,
there is nothing
in the methods of the improved enzymes (para [00345], [00348]
and [00351]) that requires identification methods to be the same, especially
when each method clearly identifies the relevant method to be used. Therefore,
I am not satisfied on balance that there is a circumstantial
argument that the
documents requested containing the sequences must exist on the face of the
specification.
the opponent concedes in their submissions that when reading example 15 it is
unclear if the improved enzymes have been
sequenced. Albeit it, the opponent
claims that when this is read together with example 19 (at [00358]) the fact
that the improved
enzymes are “incorporated” into a microbial strain
is evidence that the applicant must have the sequences, otherwise
incorporation
would be impossible. I further note that at the hearing the Opponent also
relied on the term “engineered cell”
to emphasise this point that
the sequences had to be known to engineer the microbial strain by incorporation.
However, these contentions
are not supported by any evidence and as such this
claim does not rise higher than mere speculation as to the existence of the
Furthermore,
the opponent acknowledges that they are seeking to identify whether the
applicant was in possession of the relevant sequences
and submitted at the
hearing that if the applicant does not have these sequences, then there would be
no burden having allowed the
notice to produce. These claims further support my
preferred construction of the specification that there is nothing circumstantial
or directly leading to the inference that these documents must be more likely
than not to exist.
general, the opponent argues that the real and specific factual issue in dispute
is best method (s40(2)(aa)) because they claim
that the applicant has withheld
sequence information relating to the improved enzymes of examples 14-16. I
accept that this is a
real and specific factual issue. However, I am not
convinced that it is being properly relied on. What appears at this stage a
more relevant issue, given the evidence already filed in support of the s59
opposition to the application and River Stone’s
submissions, is that of
whether there is a clear and complete disclosure of the invention as required by
s40(2)(a). Much of the
opponent’s submissions refer to the requested
notice being necessary because the claimed invention is not repeatable, not
(e.g. the opponent asserts that at least claim 1 cannot be performed
without knowledge of the “coding sequence for encoding
the N-demethylase
enzyme) and/or because the N-demethylase engineered yeast cells have not been
deposited under the Budapest Treaty.
Such arguments are not applicable in the
present matter to the ground of best method.
absent any evidence in areas that amount at this stage to speculation, I am of
the opinion that allowing this notice to
produce would constitute a “hunt
for a smoking gun” in relation to the ground of best method.
need go no further to consider the question of substantial relevance. I
consider the request is for discovery as opposed to production.
With this in
mind I note that the amendments introduced by the
Raising the Bar Act
merely raised the threshold for relevance required of documents sought to be
produced. An important aspect of section 210 was, and
continues to be, the need
to distinguish between production and discovery as a preliminary matter.
the event that I am wrong in my approach to the nature of the request as a
fishing expedition, I will comment on the potential
relevance of the documents.
As put forward by the delegate in his approach to the matter prior to the
hearing, if the case currently
put forward by the opponent on the basis of the
specification alone satisfied me that the relevant improved enzymes were
then I cannot see how the production of those documents would provide
substantial assistance in resolving the matter. Knowledge
of the identity of
the sequences as such is not the question to be answered in the context of the
ground of best method. Instead,
the ground of best method asks whether, at the
relevant time, the applicant knew of a better method than that which is
If one assumes that the performance of the relevant enzymes is
critical to the best method and is satisfied on balance that the
enzymes have
been sequenced, then a best method attack would succeed on that basis, and the
identity of the sequences themselves
would appear to bring no further
determinative force to the matter.
this further reason I do not think a notice should issue.
am not satisfied that I should issue a notice. On the information before me, I
consider that the present request is for discovery
and not production.
Dr N. R. Madsen
Deputy Commissioner of Patents
Specification at
Specification at
[0003]-[0005]
[2016] APO 13
Allsop CJ (25 October
2016) Subpoenas and Notices to Produce Practice Note (GPN -SUBP) Federal Court
of Australia,
https://www.fedcourt.gov.au/law-and-practice/practice-documents/practice-notes/gpn-subp
https://manuals.ipaustralia.gov.au/patent/7.6.3-basis-for-requiring-production
The NOCO Company v Brown and Watson International Pty Ltd
[2025] FCA 887
RTF format (350 KB)
Signed PDF/A format