Kaki v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs [2025] FCA 1387 (14 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Kaki v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
[2025] FCA 1387
Kaki and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, and Multicultural
Affairs (Citizenship
[2024] AATA 2557
File number(s):
1541 of 2024
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– application for an
extension of time – judicial review of a decision of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal –
application for citizenship – whether one or both
of the applicant’s parents held Australian citizenship – whether
applicant’s father became a citizen of Papua New Guinea (PNG) on
Independence Day by virtue of
Constitution
Independent State of Papua New Guinea
(PNG) – the applicant’s
father did become a citizen of PNG – application dismissed
Legislation:
Australian Citizenship Act 1948
Australian Citizenship Act 2007
Constitution
of the Independent State of Papua New Guinea
Cases cited:
Hunter Valley Developments Pty Ltd v Cohen
[1984] FCA 186
(1984) 3 FCR 344
Parker v The Queen
[2002] FCAFC 133
Re Minister for Immigration and Multiple and Indigenous Affairs; Ex
[2005] HCA 36
(2005) 222 CLR 439
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
The Applicant was self-represented
Counsel for the First Respondent
Mr B Kaplan SC
Solicitor for the First Respondent
Minter Ellison
Counsel for the Second Respondent:
The Second Respondent submitted to any order, save as to costs
1541 of 2024
ROBERT BASUA WAKENDA KAKI
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
Second Respondent
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
application for an extension of time is dismissed.
applicant is to pay the costs of the first respondent to be agreed or assessed.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
is an application for an extension of time in which to apply for judicial review
of a decision of the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (Tribunal) made on 19 July
2024. That review concerned a decision made by a delegate of the Minister, on 19
July 2023, which
refused the applicant’s application for citizenship by
descent on the grounds the applicant did not satisfy the requirements
Australian Citizenship Act 2007
ground of review is that the Minister ignored relevant materials that indicates
one or both of the applicant’s parents held
Australian citizenship at the
time of his birth. The applicant appeared in person. He filed an affidavit which
I took to be the basis
of his application. He made brief oral submissions. The
evidence that the applicant alleged the Tribunal ignored was not particularised.
the reasons below, the extension of time is refused, and the application is
Extension of time
relevant principles as to the application for an extension of time are well
established.
power to extend time in which to appeal is unfettered. However, the authorities
identify several matters bearing upon the exercise
of the discretion to extend
Hunter Valley Developments Pty Ltd v Cohen
[1984] FCA 186
(1984) 3 FCR 344
at 348-349, Wilcox J identified a number of factors which are
often cited in this regard. The matters identified by his Honour to
Court will usually have regard are: (1) the length of the extension sought; (2)
the explanation for the delay, including
consideration of any action taken by
the applicant, other than by way of making an application for review; (3) the
prejudice to the
applicant if the extension of time is refused; (4) any relevant
prejudice to a respondent if the extension of time is granted; (5)
the conduct
of the parties in the litigation; (6) the merits of the substantial application;
and (7) the interests of justice more
generally: see e.g.
Parker v The
[2002] FCAFC 133
and [17]-[19] per Spender, O’Loughlin
and Dowsett JJ.
Minister opposed the application on two bases:
, there is no
adequate explanation for the delay; and
, there is no merit in the
grounds sought to be advanced. The Minister accepted he has suffered no
prejudice, although noting the
absence of prejudice alone would be insufficient
to warrant the grant of an extension.
Factual background
applicant was born in Papua New Guinea (PNG) on 7 June 1981. He arrived in
Australia as a holder of a visitor visa on 21 April
25 August 2011, the applicant applied for Australian citizenship by descent. The
application was refused on 30 January 2014 on
the basis that the applicant did
not have a parent who was an Australian citizen at the time of his birth. The
applicant sought merits
review of that decision but withdrew his application. On
19 January 2015, the applicant made a second application for Australian
citizenship by descent. The applicant was refused on 31 December 2018 on the
grounds that the applicant did not have a parent who
was an Australian citizen
at the time of his birth, and he was not a person of good character.
5 May 2022, the applicant made a third application for Australian citizenship by
descent. That application was refused on the basis
that the applicant did not
have a parent who was an Australian citizen at the time of his birth. The
applicant applied for review
on 21 July 2023. On 19 July 2024, the Tribunal
affirmed the delegate’s decision. It is this decision that is the subject
this application.
Consideration
applicant primarily relied on affidavits he affirmed in this application which
stated both his parents held Australian citizenship
at the time of his birth. He
also submitted that since his brother, Mr Benjamin Kaki, acquired Australian
citizenship, this means
it must follow that he too is eligible for Australian
citizenship.
respondent submitted that the applicant’s brother’s application for
citizenship is not relevant to any issue in the
applicant’s application
for citizenship. I accept that submission. The issue before the Tribunal was
whether either or both
of the applicant’s parents held Australian
citizenship at the time of the applicant’s birth. That was to be
by the delegate on the material before them. The respondent submitted
that the Tribunal did not err in law in concluding neither
applicant’s parents held Australian citizenship at the time of his birth.
As explained below, I accept that submission.
respondent’s written submissions between [16]-[29] provide an accurate
summary of the delegate’s reasons (references
to the appeal book are
[16] The Tribunal found that the applicant’s mother, who was born in the
Territory of Papua on 13 March 1964, became a citizen
by operation of the
Australian Citizenship Act 1948
(Cth) (1948 Act). At the time of the
birth of the applicant’s mother, s 10(1) of the 1948 Act provided that,
subject to certain
exceptions, a person born in Australia after the commencement
of the 1948 Act shall be an Australian citizen. Section 5(1) of the
defined Australia to include “the Territory of Papua”, and the word
“Territory” was defined as a
“Territory under the authority of
the Commonwealth”. At the time of the birth of the applicant’s
mother, Papua
was a territory under the authority of the Commonwealth.
Accordingly, she became an Australian citizen at birth.
[17] The position of the applicant’s father was more complex. The
applicant’s father was born on 1 July 1947 in New Guinea.
At that time,
Nationality Act 1920
(Cth) (1920 Act) was in effect. Section 6(1) of
that Act deemed certain persons to be natural-born British subjects, including
person born out of His Majesty’s dominions, whose father was,
at the time of that person’s birth, a British subject,
and who fulfils any
of the following conditions ... if his [sic] father was born within His
Majesty’s allegiance” (s
6(1)(b)(i)).
[18] Determining the nationality of the applicant’s father, therefore,
depended on the nationality of the applicant’s
paternal grandfather at the
time the applicant’s father was born. The applicant’s paternal
grandfather was born in Papua
on 1 January 1913. At that time, Papua was a
Commonwealth territory, and “The Commonwealth of Australia (including for
purposes of this Act the territory of Papua and Norfolk Island)”
formed part of “His Majesty’s dominions”
(see Sch 2 to the
1920 Act). Because the applicant’s paternal grandfather was born in Papua,
he was a British subject born
within His Majesty’s allegiance. This had
the consequence that the applicant’s father was a natural-born British
by operation of s 6(1)(b)(i) of the 1920 Act.
[19] When the 1948 Act commenced on 26 January 1949, the applicant’s
father became an Australian citizen because s 25(1)(b)
of that Act provided that
a person who was a British subject immediately prior to the date on which that
Act commenced shall, on
that date, become an Australian citizen if they were
born in New Guinea.
[20] To further complicate matters, the citizenship status of the
applicants’ parents as at the date of his birth was affected
Constitution
of Papua New Guinea (PNG
Constitution
), which relevantly
64. DUAL CITIZENSHIP
(1) Notwithstanding the succeeding provisions of this Part but subject to
Subsection (2), no person who has a real foreign citizenship
may be or become a
citizen, and the provisions of this Part shall be read subject to that
prohibition.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to a person who has not yet reached the age of
19 years, provided that, before he reaches that
age and in such manner as is
prescribed by or under an Act of the Parliament, he renounces his other
citizenship and makes the Declaration
of Loyalty.
(3) A person who has a real foreign citizenship and fails to comply with
Subsection (2) ceases to be a citizen of Papua New Guinea
when he reaches the
age of 19 years.
(4) For the purposes of this section, a person who–
) was, immediately before Independence Day, an Australian citizen or an
Australian Protected Person by virtue of–
(i) birth in the former Territory of Papua; or
(ii) birth in the former Territory of New Guinea and registration under Section
Australian Citizenship Act
1948-1975 of Australia; and
) was never granted a right (whether revocable or not) to permanent
residence in Australia,
has no real foreign citizenship.
Division 2. – Acquisition of Citizenship.
65. AUTOMATIC CITZENSHIP ON INDEPENDENCE DAY
(1) A person born in the country before Independence Day who has two
grand-parents who were born in the country or an adjacent area
is a citizen.
(4) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to a person who–
) has a right (whether revocable or not) to permanent residence in
[21] The area of Papua New Guinea (PNG) consisted of, relevantly, “the
area that, immediately before Independence Day, constituted
what was then known
as Papua New Guinea” (s 2(1)).
[22] PNG gained independence from Australia on 16 September 1975.
[23] The Tribunal found that the applicant’s father became a PNG citizen
on 16 September 1975. It found that the applicant’s
father was a person
born in PNG before Independence Day who had two grandparents who were born in
the country, and therefore satisfied
the requirements of s 65(1) of the PNG
Constitution
. The reference to “grandparents” in this context is to
the applicant’s father’s grandparents (that is, the
applicant’s paternal great grandparents).
[24] The Tribunal also reasoned, consistently with the Minister’s
submissions, that
had to be read subject to
such that a person
who had “a real foreign citizenship” could not become a PNG citizen.
The Tribunal accepted the Minister’s
submission that the purpose of
was to ensure that persons who were, relevantly, Australian citizens but who did
not have the right to enter and reside in Australia
did not have a “real
foreign citizenship” and therefore could become PNG citizens. The Tribunal
found that because there
was no evidence to suggest that the applicant’s
father had a right to permanent residence in Australia or that such right was
ever granted to him,
did not operate to disapply
in respect of
[25] The Tribunal found that the applicant’s mother became a PNG citizen
on 16 September 1975. In support of an application
for Australian citizenship by
descent, the applicant’s mother gave to the Department a Certificate of
Birth Entry issued in
relation to her father by the PNG authorities on 17 May
2012, which showed that her paternal grandparents were of PNG nationality
Certificate).
[26] However, in an application for evidence of Australian citizenship made by
her on 14 April 2014, the applicant’s mother
claimed that her paternal
grandmother was born in Fiji and her maternal grandparents were born in Tonga.
In support of that application,
the applicant’s mother provided what
purported to be a Certificate of Birth Entry issued by the PNG authorities on 10
2014, in which it was stated that her paternal grandmother was born in
Fiji (2014 Certificate). Having noted that this was inconsistent
with the 2012
Certificate, the Tribunal identified numerous concerns with the 2014 Certificate
and was not satisfied that it contained
accurate information. Accordingly, the
Tribunal found, on the basis of the 2012 Certificate, that the applicant’s
grandparents were born in PNG. It followed that the
applicant’s mother became a PNG citizen on 16 September 1975 by operation
of s 65(1) of the PNG
Constitution
. Because there was no evidence before the
Tribunal to suggest that the applicant’s mother had a right to permanent
in Australia or that such right was ever granted to her, she did not
have a “real foreign citizenship” within the meaning
of ss 64(1) and
(4)(a)(i) and (b) of the PNG
Constitution
[27] The next question posed by the Tribunal was whether the applicants’
parents lost their Australian citizenship prior to
the applicant’s birth.
The Tribunal referred to reg 4 of the
Papua New Guinea Independence
(Australian Citizenship) Regulations 1975
(Cth) (1975 Regulations) made
Papua New Guinea Independence Act 1975
(Cth), which provided:
A person who:
(a) immediately before Independence Day, was an Australian citizen within the
meaning of the Act; and
(b) on Independence Day becomes a citizen of the Independent State of Papua New
Guinea by virtue of the provisions of the
Constitution
of the Independent State
of Papua New Guinea,
ceases on that day to be an Australian
[28] Having found that the applicants’ parents were Australian citizens
immediately before Independence Day and became citizens
of PNG on Independence
Day by virtue of s 65 of the PNG
Constitution
, the Tribunal further found that,
by reason of reg 4 of the 1975 Regulations, they ceased to be Australian
citizens on Independence
[29] Therefore, at the time of the applicant’s birth – 7 June 1981
– his parents were not Australian citizens.
Consequently, the Tribunal
found that the applicant did not satisfy the requirements in s 16(2)(a) of the
2007 Act for eligibility
for Australian citizenship by descent.
consideration of the reasons reflect no error in the Tribunal’s conclusion
that the applicant’s mother did not hold
Australian citizenship at the
time of his birth.
part of the respondent’s model litigant obligations, the respondent
identified that the applicant’s father falls outside
of the strict words
Constitution
of the Independent State of Papua New
Constitution
) and raised whether the Tribunal had erred in
finding the applicant’s father became a PNG citizen on Independence Day.
Sections 64
are recited above at [20] of the respondent’s written
submissions. The Tribunal’s reasoning is summarised in the quote
[23]-[24]. The respondent submitted that the Tribunal did not err in law in
concluding that
did not operate to disapply
in relation to the
applicant’s father.
arises because the applicant’s father became an Australian citizen by
reason of s 25(1)(b) of the
Australian Citizenship Act 1948
(Cth) (1948
Act), as he was a British subject who was born in New Guinea. Consequently, the
applicant’s father did not become
an Australian citizen by virtue of
registration under s 11 of the 1948 Act. Nor was the applicant’s father
born in the Territory
respondent submitted there are two reasons why the Tribunal did not err:
, s 64(4) should not be read as exhaustively defining individuals
who have “no real foreign citizenship”; and
applicant’s father did not have “real foreign citizenship”
because the Tribunal found there was no evidence
before it to suggest that the
applicant’s father had a right to permanent residence in Australia. This
meant the applicant’s
father fell within the definition of s 64(1) of the
Constitution
and there was no requirement that he also fall within
has been some judicial consideration of the term “no real foreign
citizenship” in s 64 of the PNG
Constitution
, although none which directly
addresses the issue at hand.
Re Minister for Immigration and Multiple and Indigenous Affairs; Ex Parte
[2005] HCA 36
(2005) 222 CLR 439
), to determine the meaning
of “real foreign citizenship”, the High Court considered the
Constitutional Planning Committee’s
Final Report (CPC Report) which
[22] For the purposes of this provision, persons who are Australian citizens by
virtue only of their birth in Papua, and persons
who are Australian Protected
Persons, are regarded as holding no real foreign citizenship, provided that they
have not been granted
the right to reside in Australia.
Court considered the historical context and circumstances in which
were enacted. The plurality of the Court (Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow, Hayne,
Callinan and Heydon JJ) described (emphasis in original):
[12] The reason why persons who were Australian citizens by virtue only of their
birth in Papua (persons such as the applicant and
almost all other indigenous
Papuans as at Independence Day) were regarded as holding no “real”
foreign citizenship appears
from what has been noted above. Although technically
Australian citizens, under the Migration Act that citizenship did not of its
force give them the right to enter, or remain in, mainland Australia. To have a
right of residence in Australia, they needed
to apply for, and be granted, such
a right. Hence the reference to a
of a right of residence.
[14] Sub-section (1) of s 64 declares the general prohibition against Papua New
Guinea citizenship on the part of any person who
has a real foreign citizenship,
subject to certain presently irrelevant qualifications. Plainly, the section
treats Australia as
a foreign country, as it was from Independence Day. The
concept of “real foreign citizenship” is defined in sub-s (4).
reference, in s 64(4)(b), to a grant of a right to permanent residence in
Australia is clearly related to the reference in s
65(4)(a) to a person who has
a right to permanent residence in Australia. According to the then current
Australian immigration laws,
in the absence of such a grant, persons of the kind
referred to had no such right.
the plurality noted:
[22] At the time, s 6(1) of the
Migration Act
provided that an immigrant
who entered Australia without an entry permit was a prohibited immigrant. Such a
person was liable to
deportation under s 18. Sections 6 and 7 provided for the
discretionary grant of entry permits, which might be temporary or permanent.
right of permanent residence (in practice, a right to re-enter Australia free of
the constraints of s 6) could be acquired by a
person who was granted a
permanent entry permit (s 15). Before Independence Day, Papua was an external
Territory of Australia. External
Territories were excluded from the definition
of Australia in s 17 of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Migration Act
did not define Australia in any manner inconsistent with
the definition in the
Acts Interpretation Act
. Section 5(4) of the
Migration Act
referred to persons who had left Australia but not
“entered any country other than a Territory outside Australia”. That
was consistent with an external Territory being outside Australia. The
Migration Act
defined “immigrant” to include persons entering
Australia for temporary or permanent purposes. The Act applied, and was
administered on the basis that it applied, to persons entering mainland
Australia from external Territories. As is evident from the
Report of the
Constitutional Planning Committee, that historical fact was known to the framers
Papua New Guinea
Constitution
; it was, indeed, a fact of which
they were acutely aware. It led them to describe their Australian citizenship as
other than “real”.
It was asserted that s 65 of the
Constitution
should be interpreted in the light of an understanding
that “the applicant’s Australian citizenship at birth (and non-alien
status) carried with it a right to permanent residence in Australia as a matter
of both statutory construction and as a matter of
constitutional
principle”. In this connection reliance was placed upon a passage in the
judgment of this Court in
Air Caledonie International v The Commonwealth
(17) where reference was made, in a different context, to the right of an
Australian citizen to enter the country being unqualified
by any law. Clearly,
that passage was not referring to the right of inhabitants of Papua to enter
mainland Australia, which was qualified
Migration Act
. As has been
observed, in construing s 65 what is important is the law as it was applied to
the inhabitants of Papua, an application
that is reflected in the language of ss
64 and 65. The understanding of Australian law reflected in ss 64 and 65 of the
Papua New Guinea
Constitution
was not erroneous. When Australia acquired
Papua as an external Territory, it was not obliged constitutionally to give
inhabitants
of that external Territory an unfettered right of entry into
mainland Australia. To the contrary, the broad power conferred by s
Constitution
supported laws restricting such entry by those
inhabitants. In any event, where the question is one of construing s 65 of the
Papua New Guinea
Constitution
, the understanding of Australian law and
practice clearly revealed in the text is what matters.
[23] It is improbable in the extreme that it was the purpose of s 65 of
Papua New Guinea
Constitution
to exclude from citizenship of the new nation
all indigenous Papuans living at Independence Day unless they took positive
renounce their Australian citizenship. The purpose was the opposite.
Although indigenous Papuans were Australian citizens before
Independence Day,
they were treated by Australian law, and regarded by the framers of the
Constitution
as not having, on that account alone, a right to
permanent residence in Australia. The right to permanent residence referred to
is the same as the right referred to in
, that is to
say, the right which a small number of Papuans had received by grant, not a
right which all Papuans had by virtue of
birth in the Territory of Papua at a
time when it was an external Territory of Australia. The construction which the
applicant seeks
to place on
must be rejected. On Independence Day, the
applicant became a citizen of Papua New Guinea by virtue of the
Constitution
Constitution
was antagonistic to dual
citizenship. In recognition of that policy of the new Independent State,
Australia, by reg 4, withdrew the
applicant’s Australian citizenship. That
withdrawal was not arbitrary. It was consistent with the maintenance of proper
with the new Independent State, and with the change that occurred in
Australia’s relationship with the inhabitants of that
State. It is
necessary now to consider whether that regulation was valid.
is in broad terms. Given the historical context as described above, its
purpose is evident. An interpretation of
which is not constrained by
would accord with the intent behind the provision, as expressed in the CPC
Report. The term “no real foreign citizenship”
applies generally to
a class of persons who became Australian citizens but had otherwise no
meaningful connection to Australia.
Section 64(1)
also contains the caveat
“Notwithstanding the succeeding provisions of this Part but subject to
Subsection (2)” which
suggests that sub-s (1) is only constrained by sub-s
(2) and not the succeeding sub-s (4). This suggests sub-s (4) should not limit
sub-s (1). The breadth of the language in
suggests that sub-s (4) is not
exhaustively defining the individuals who have “no real foreign
citizenship”. I accept
the respondent’s first submission that
does not exhaustively define all classes of people who would possess
“no real foreign citizenship”. The language in
captures any
person who has “no real foreign citizenship”. Accordingly, the
Tribunal did not err in concluding that
did not operate to disapply
in relation to the applicant’s father.
Tribunal also found there was no evidence to demonstrate that the
applicant’s father had a right to permanent residence
in Australia, or
that such a right was ever granted to him. As the applicant’s father had
no right to permanent residence in
Australia, his Australian citizenship could
not be described as “real”, consistent with the reasoning in
. I accept the respondent’s submission that the
applicant’s father ceased to be an Australian citizen on Independence
follows that given neither of the applicant’s parents were Australian
citizens at the time of his birth, the Tribunal has
not erred in finding he is
not eligible for citizenship by descent.
noted above, the ground of review alleged the Tribunal ignored relevant
material. That has not been established. No error has been
established in the
reasoning of the Tribunal. The application for an extension of time is refused.
Accordingly, the application is
dismissed with costs.
I certify that the preceding twenty-four (24)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 14 November 2025
RTF format (338 KB)
Signed PDF/A format