D20-21\074 [2020] SCTA 188 (3 November 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\074
FILE NUMBER : 17-2104
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Employer
The Previous Employer
The Defined Benefit Scheme (DBS)
The Accumulation Scheme
The Allocated Pension Account (APA)
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act 1993
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 19 August 2020 before:
Justin Malbon,
Presiding Member
O’Sullivan, Member.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
decision under review is the Trustee’s decision to seek to correct an
error, which would have the effect of reducing the
Complainant’s account
balance with the Fund by $161,646.
Trustee undertook on 20 December 2017 not to correct the error until this matter
is resolved by the Tribunal, or until a request
for withdrawal of her funds is
made by the Complainant, whichever takes place first. The Tribunal understands
the Complainant has
not, as yet, requested a withdrawal of funds from the
Trustee notified the Complainant of its decision by letter dated 12 December
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal determines to set aside the decision under review and substitute its
own decision that the Complainant’s account
balance in the Fund not be
corrected and that the erroneous amount of $161,646 be treated as if it were
part of her Fund account
benefit entitlement.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
Tribunal requested, under s32 of the Complaints Act, submissions from the
submission was received from the Complainant.
Trustee declined to provide a submission, choosing instead to rely on
information previously submitted to the Tribunal.
Complainant’s submission was provided to the Trustee and it was invited to
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited.
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
papers provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant complains that the decision of the Trustee is
unreasonable for the reasons summarised in this determination.
area of disagreement relates to the Trustee’s decision to seek to correct
an error, which would have the effect of reducing
the Complainant’s
account balance in the Fund by $161,646.
Complainant joined the Defined Benefit Scheme in the Fund (DBS) as a consequence
of her employment with the Previous Employer,
with a membership commencement
date of 31 October 1995.
ceased employment with the Previous Employer on 12 October 2011 and subsequently
became employed with the Employer. At the time
of her cessation of employment
with the Previous Employer, the Complainant’s defined benefit in the DBS
was crystalised and
the calculated benefit formed her closing account balance in
the DBS as at 20 October 2011. She was sent a Benefit Advice statement
Trustee showing her account balance in the DBS as at 20 October 2011 as
$211,615.40. This account balance, increasing with
indexation, was initially
required to be preserved in the DBS.
error occurred in the calculation of the Complainant’s account balance in
the DBS after she ceased employment with the Previous
Employer. Her benefit
statement for the period 1 July 2011 to 31 December 2011 (prepared on 10
February 2012) showed an account balance
as at 12 October 2011 of $384,713.42
rather than the correct amount of $211, 615.40. This error was compounded by
future indexation
of the incorrect account balance.
or about 23 June 2013, the Complainant rolled her account balance in the DBS
into an Allocated Pension Account in the Fund (APA).
The amount transferred
should have been $226,364.14 but was recorded as $417,478.61. On 11 August 2014
the Complainant rolled the
(then incorrect) balance of her APA into an account
in the Accumulation Scheme in the Fund. On 26 November 2015, the Complainant
rolled all but $2,000 of the (then incorrect) account balance in the
Accumulation Scheme back to an APA in the Fund.
the purposes of this determination, the Tribunal will refer generally to the
Complainant’s ‘account balance in the
Fund’ or ‘the Fund
account balance’ unless the particular account in which her funds were
invested is relevant.
benefit statements sent to the Complainant from 2012 (including the benefit
statement for the period 1 July 2011 to 31 December
2011) misreported the
Complainant’s account balances in the Fund.
Complainant resigned from her employment with the Employer on 29 June 2017,
having provided notice of her resignation on 18 April
2017. Her benefit
statement from the Fund for the period 1 July to 31 December 2016, which was
forwarded under cover of a letter
dated March 2017, showed a current account
balance in the Fund of $911,557.34.
Complainant received a letter from the Trustee dated 13 July 2017 (which was
her it had made an error
in calculating her Fund account balance. The letter informed her this had
resulted in the overstatement
of her current account balance in the Fund by
$191,114.48. In a subsequent letter to her dated 22 August 2017, the Trustee
that in fact the overstated amount of the Fund account balance was
$161,646.97.
Complainant offered to resolve the matter by offering to ‘repay’
$66,000 of the total $161,646.47 and for the remaining
amount to be waived by
the Trustee. The Trustee has not accepted the Complainant’s offer.
Events not in dispute:
first column below specifies the day on which the event or events specified in
the second column occurred.
− The Complainant was born.
− The Complainant joined the Fund.
− The Complainant ceased employment with the
Previous Employer.
− The Trustee issued a Benefit Advice stating
that the Complainant’s account balance in her Fund account, as at 20
2011, was $211,615.40, which, the Trustee confirms, was the correct
− The date of preparation of the
Complainant’s benefit statement for the period 1 July 2011 to 31 December
incorrectly showed an account balance in Fund account as at 12
October 201 of $384,713.42.
− The Complainant ceased her employment with the
− The date of the Trustee’s letter to the
Complainant informing her it had made an error and that her account balance
the Fund was overstated by $191,114.48.
− The date of the Trustee’s letter to the
Complainant informing her the actual amount of the overstated account balance
the Fund was $161,646.97.
− The Complainant lodged her complaint with the
GOVERNING RULES
Tribunal considers the governing rules of the Fund relevant to this complaint
are those in effect on the day the Trustee sought
to correct the error to the
Complainant’s account balance in the Fund
(i.e. 22 August
, being the governing rules as amended up to and including the
amendment dated 7 January 2015 (Governing Rules).
provisions of the Governing Rules relevant to the complaint are:
(1) The Board has power to do all things necessary or
convenient to be done for, or in connection with, the performance of its
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the Board may —
(g) do anything else that a body corporate may do.
money owed to Fund
(1) The Board may recover any money owing to the Fund –
(b) by deducting the amount owing from any amount that is, or becomes,
payable from the Fund to the debtor; or
(c) if the money is owed by an Employer, by entering into an arrangement for
the satisfaction of the debt in such manner as the Board
considers appropriate;
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
salient points made by the Complainant are as follows:
After receiving
the letters from the Trustee informing her of the errors in her Fund account
balance, the Complainant applied for
relevant documents under Freedom of
Information (FOI) legislation. The documents provided to her show the Trustee
to hide errors’ from her. The FOI documents also show that
senior staff of the Trustee knew of the errors for a considerable
period before
15 July 2017: ‘A draft letter to me even sat on the file for
The Trustee
became aware of an error in its internal software in or around 2008. It was
aware the software error was prone to incorrectly
calculate some member
balances. However, the Trustee decided it would be ‘expensive’ to
fix the error and decided to
‘rely upon manual checking’. The
Complainant submits:
[The Trustee’s] management apparently did not
consider the detrimental consequences for members of the inaccuracies or errors
which would almost certainly result from a manual system. This meant that, a
decision was made by [the Trustee] in a situation of
known software error to add
another potential level of error.
The software
error apparently caused an incorrect escalation in her calculated Fund account
balances. The Trustee’s manual checking
system was also ineffective, and
the incorrect balances were not identified by the Trustee before mid-2016. The
Complainant does
not know if the manual checking system was even implemented or
regularly carried out. She submits: ‘In any event, it proved
ineffective’.
By mid-2016 the
Trustee learned of the systemic Fund account balance errors (the Trustee already
knew of the software calculation
errors) and knew the benefit statements it had
issued were incorrect. From this time the Trustee staff and management knew the
account balances repeatedly represented to her were incorrect.
The Trustee
issued regular statements from 2011, advising of her account balance in the
Fund. The Fund account balances in the statements
were representations made by
the Trustee to her. The account balances in the statements were substantially
and repeatedly incorrect.
She was unaware of the errors until notified of them
by the Trustee in mid-2017.
On or around
September 2012, she sought general advice regarding her superannuation from the
Trustee’s in-house advisory group.
The Fund account balance error was not
identified or communicated to the Complainant at that time.
In April 2017,
she was unaware of the errors. Based on the incorrect Fund account balance
represented to her by the Trustee, she concluded
that she had sufficient
superannuation funds to enable her to retire from the workforce. She relied on
the misrepresentations made
by the Trustee and gave notice to the Employer by
letter dated 18 April 2017 of her intention to resign from her position with the
Employer by the end of June 2017.
She ceased employment with the Employer on 29 June 2017.
Had she known
from her position at the time she did
so. She would have continued to work, and
to have increased her superannuation contributions and other savings. Her job
paid and pleasurable. She is in excellent health, and there was no
reason she could not have worked until at least age 65, and possibly
However, she carefully considered her financial resources, and based upon the
misrepresentations made by the Trustee over
many years, she determined that she
could afford to retire.
▪ Upon her retirement, she went on a holiday. She also purchased a second property with her
In July 2017,
several months after the Trustee learned of its errors and misrepresentations,
the Trustee finally wrote to her stating
that her balance was overstated by
$191,114.48. She noted:
Incredibly, it turned out the amount of $191,114.48 was incorrect.
[The Trustee] then wrote again, and told me that the overstated
approximately $162,000.
She states she
has attempted to find paid work and has generally been unsuccessful. She cannot
find work paying ‘anything like
the amount’ she was being paid by
the Employer.
difference between what she has earnt, and what she would have earnt, had she
not resigned is in the order of $290,695.
This discrepancy continues to increase
each day she cannot obtain similar full-time paid work. As a 63-year-old she
finds that finding
employment is ‘very difficult’.
Registration of Complaint form she stated:
The demand for the full repayment of the calculation error,
notified some 4 years after the error was made, does not take into account
fact that I had resigned from my positon (sic) with [the Employer] believing
that I had sufficient funds to retire on prior to
[the Trustee] providing the
advise (sic) about the error. In discussions with them subsequently, they see
that as irrelevant to their
demand for full repayment. They provided incorrect
advise (sic). I acted on this advise (sic) (retired). As a consequence I will
worse off if/when I return to the workforce. That is commercially unreasonable.
I have to also get my mental state back to working
again after believing I had
retired and that has, and continues to, cause me a high level of stress. That is
unfair on me.
The balance in my superannuation/pension account was used to decide when to
finish work and retire. That occurred in June 2017 when
I felt I had sufficient
funds for my retirement. To then discover just 2 weeks after retiring that [the
Trustee] had made an error
four years prior and that they expected me to return
the overpayment of $161,646 meant that my decision to retire had been taken
prematurely and that I would have to return to the workforce.
I relied upon the balance in my [Trustee] superannuation/pension account to
decide to retire in June 2017. The fact that this was
incorrect means that I
will have to return to work in an environment that is economically weak and
problematic for someone over 60
years of age. I have been looking for suitable
work over the past few months but as of this date have not secured any work. The
expectation
is that when, hopefully, I do secure work it will be at a salary
level significantly lower than my original position prior to retirement.
The Trustee
salient points made by the Trustee are as follows:
Its decision to
correct the Complainant’s account balance in the Fund (by decreasing the
Complainant's overstated Fund account
balance by $161,646) is fair and
reasonable.
The Complainant
has not provided it with any evidence to demonstrate reasonable reliance on the
error, nor that as a result of the
reliance, the Complainant acted to her
detriment. The Complainant has also not demonstrated it would be unfair or
unconscionable
for the Trustee to make the correction to the Complainant’s
Fund account balance.
The Complainant
has not provided any income tax assessments, or evidence of the costs that she
claims she incurred as a result of
her reliance on the incorrect benefit
statements, including the purchase of property with her husband, or the vacation
she took in
or about July 2017.
The Complainant
makes a number of assertions that are unfounded and not supported by the
A disclaimer
appeared in each of the benefit statements provided to the Complainant that
would have put her on notice that complete
reliance could not be placed on the
statement amounts.
The error in the
account balance in the Fund account would have been evident to the Complainant
when comparing the Benefit Advice
statement forwarded to her on 20 October 2011
(upon her cessation of employment with the Previous Employer) with the
(incorrect)
benefit statement for the period 1 July 2011 to 31 December 2011
prepared 10 February 2012.
Its decision to
proceed with the correction of the error is fair and reasonable, as the
Complainant’s asserted reliance on the
error is unreasonable. If the
Complainant’s reliance is considered reasonable (which it denies), the
Complainant has not demonstrated
any loss arising from her alleged reliance on
the error. In addition, the Complainant has not demonstrated an inability to
correction of the error, nor that she would undergo financial hardship
if the correction was carried out.
DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
Tribunal must initially determine, under s37(6) of the Complaints Act, whether
the decision of the Trustee’ to seek to correct
an error which had the
effect of reducing the Complainant’s account balance in the Fund by
$161,646 was fair and reasonable
in its operation in relation to the Complainant
in the circumstances.
issue is not what decision the Tribunal would have made on the evidence before
the Trustee but whether the decision was fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal took the whole of the evidence and
submissions into account. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the material it has
relied on has been provided to both Parties
Complainant complains about the inordinate delay by the Trustee in acting upon
its own information and informing her of the misrepresentations
made to her.
However, the Tribunal cannot consider this, or any other issue raised by the
Complainant, to the extent it invites
any form of administrative review of the
Trustee’s conduct by the Tribunal. Rather the Tribunal must only determine
the fairness
and reasonableness of the Trustee’s decision.
Tribunal notes the Complainant asked the Trustee to have her account balance in
the Fund independently audited. The Trustee complied
with her request. The audit
confirmed the overstated amount was $161,646.97. The Tribunal is satisfied the
Trustee erroneously overstated
her Fund account balance by that amount.
the Trustee would proceed to correct the error by simply subtracting the
erroneous amount from the statement of her Fund
account balance, which is what
it seeks to do. The representations about the erroneous amount of itself (even
if it caused her disappointment
was entitled to receive) does not entitle her to receive the erroneous amount.
is, she cannot gain an undue benefit simply because of the Trustee’s
mistake. However, the Complainant submits, in effect,
she made her decision to
retire when she did on the basis of the misrepresentations made by the Trustee
and suffered detriment as
a result. It is her detrimental reliance on the
erroneous representations that is the basis of her complaint, rather than the
in of itself.
Trustee undertook on 20 December 2017 not to correct the error until this
complaint is resolved by the Tribunal, or until a request
for withdrawal of her
funds is made by the Complainant, whichever takes place first. The Tribunal
understands the Complainant has
not, as yet, requested a withdrawal of funds
from the account.
Did the Complainant rely on the Trustee’s
misrepresentations to her detriment?
Complainant submits she relied on the representations made in the benefit
statements in making her decision to resign from her
employment with the
Employer, which was communicated to the Employer in a letter dated 18 April
2017. In a statutory declaration
dated 21 July 2020 the Complainant relevantly
7. I am not a member of any other superannuation fund.
10. I always relied upon the accuracy of the information provided in the
statements received from [the Fund] from 1995 to 2011.
11. On 10 February 2012, I received a statement from [the Trustee] for the
period ending 31 December 2011 for my [DB] Account in [the
17. I contacted [the Trustee] in or around March 2013 to discuss my
superannuation but was advised that [the Trustee] no longer provided
a financial
planning or advice service.
18. In or around May 2013, I contacted [name of financial advisor] (my
previous financial advisor within [the Trustee] who had moved
to [name of
financial advice service] Planning) for financial advice because my tax
accountant at the time did not understand the
operation of [the Fund’s]
19. [Name of financial advisor] has remained my financial advisor since this
20. On 30 July 2013, I received a statement from [the Trustee] for the period
ending 30 June 2013 for my [name of DB] Account in [the
21. On 9 August 2013, I received a letter from [the Fund] confirming I had
transferred my [DB] Account into an Allocated Pension Account
with [the Fund].
22. On 31 January 2014, I received a statement from [the Trustee] for my
Allocated Pension Account within [the Fund] for the period
ending 31 December
30. In or around March 2017, I considered the current balance disclosed in
the statements provided to me by [the Trustee] and as referred
paragraphs above.
31. Based on the current balance of the statement... I determined that I had
sufficient superannuation funds to enable me to retire
from the workforce.
32. Relying upon the statements provided to me by [the Trustee], on 18 April
2017, I resigned from my position as the Chief Executive
Officer of [name of
company]. ...
33. My final day of work ...was 29 June 2017.
Trustee submits the Complainant did not decide to retire when she did in
reliance of receiving the erroneous statements about
the amount of her benefit
(i) there was:
an obvious discrepancy between the [Complainant’s]
Benefit Advice dated 20 October 2011 and the July to December 2011... DBS
Deferred Member Statement... in which time the [Complainant’s] benefit
amount nearly doubled. One would expect a reasonable
person in the circumstances
to have had cause to question the windfall of approximately $173,000
communicated in the July to December
2011 DBS Deferred Member Statement.;
(ii) a disclaimer appeared in each of the benefit statements that would have put
her on notice that complete reliance could not be
placed on the statement
amounts; and
(iii) she had not provided sufficient evidence that her decision to retire was
contingent on her retirement benefit including the
erroneous amount.
(i) Whether the Complainant relied on the Trustee’s representations
in circumstances where there was an obvious discrepancy
between the
representations made in 2011 and 2012?
Trustee submits
The [Complainant’s] assertion she relied on the Error is
unreasonable for the following reasons:
is reasonable to expect that given the [Complainant] had received the Benefit
Advice letter on or about 20 October 2011 outlining
that the benefit would be
indexed at the CPI rate plus 1% per annum until age 55, and then CPI plus 2% per
annum thereafter, that
the [Complainant] had at least a basic understanding of
how much she could expect her [DBS] account to increase by, and how much
would retire with. It is reasonable therefore to expect that the [Complainant]
would have noticed such a significant misstatement
to her [DBS] account.
[Complainant] did not take any steps to query the obvious discrepancy between
her Benefit Advice dated 20 October 2011... and
the July to December 2011 DBS
Deferred Member Statement..., despite the short period of time between the two
statements. It is reasonable
to assume that a person in the position of the
[Complainant] would have been put on notice that an error had occurred,
to have at least taken basic steps to verify such a large
discrepancy, such as telephoning [the Trustee].
is difficult to reconcile how, given the [Complainant] had previously obtained
the advice from [an adviser] and was working as
a CEO..., she would have based
her decision to retire on the misstated statements alone, without first seeking
to verify the accuracy
of the statements, given the obvious discrepancy.
Complainant submits:
[The Trustee] claims I, a person with no training in financial
services, should have picked up the calculation error, and insinuated
deliberately avoided telling [the Trustee] of the error. It is absurd for [the
Trustee], who have made four significant errors
(first, having a systemic
software error, second, choosing not to fix the software error and being willing
to take the risk of providing
wrong information to members, third the manual
checking process not working, and fourth informing me of the incorrect
even when they finally confessed the overall balance error) to argue
that I should be able to accurately calculate my own superannuation
balance. It
is galling given that [the Trustee] actually knew of the error for more than a
year and did not tell me. I am a trained
Social Worker with no background in
financial services. I do not understand the method used to calculate a
superannuation balance
and how this is converted to a final amount within a
defined benefit scheme. I doubt many people do. I also sought advice from [the
Trustee’s] in house adviser. If [the Trustee] and its adviser, trained in
financial matters particularly around public sector
superannuation schemes, did
not pick up the error then how could [the Trustee] realistically expect me to do
another submission she stated:
I sought advice from [the Fund’s] in-house advisory group at
the time I left the [Previous Employer]. That adviser did not pick
up the error.
If [the Fund] and its adviser, trained in financial matters particularly around
defined benefit schemes, did not pick
it up then how could [the Fund]
realistically expect me to do so?
[The Fund] presumably holds an Australian Financial Services Licence, which
requires it to act honestly, efficiently and fairly. [The
behaviour throughout this process raises serious concerns as to whether or not
it has satisfied these requirements.
Complainant’s account balance in the DBS account was not a simple
accumulation of contributions with earnings but was derived
from the application
of a rather complex formula. The Tribunal
accepts it can be difficult for
those not familiar with defined benefits to understand the calculation of their
benefits. Indeed,
the Complainant’s own accountant could not understand
the operation of the DBS.
Trustee did not detect the error in the Complainant’s Fund account balance
for some time, and even when it reported the
error to her in 13 July 2017 it
reported an erroneous amount, which it corrected in a subsequent letter in 22
August 2017, the difference
between the two amounts being about $30,000.
Trustee suggests the increase of the reported account balance from $211,615.40
in October 2011 to $387,765.83 in early 2012 should
have, in effect, rung alarm
bells for the Complainant.
Benefit Advice statement dated 20 October 2011 was provided within a fortnight
of her ceasing employment with the Previous Employer.
The salient parts of the
statement appeared as follows:
Gross Benefit
[Balance Last Statement 199,168.39 [Net
Movement $12,447.01 [Closing Balance] $211,615.40
Net Benefit
$211,615.40
subsequent statement sent to her that was prepared on 10 February 2012 stated in
1 Jul 2011 to 31 Dec 2011
Deferred benefit statement
Balance as at 12 Oct 2011
$384,713.42;
... Balance as at 30 Dec
$387,765.83;
Total benefit as at 31December 2011
-before-tax
$387,765.83
10 February statement overstated her true benefit amount by $176,150.43. A
further statement was sent to her dated 31 August 2012
for the period 1 January
2012 to 30 June 2012 which stated that her 31 December 2011 balance was
$391,733.97 and her 30 June 2012
balance was $400,196.58. Subsequent benefit
statements continued to report on the Complainant’s account balance in the
which were generally consistent with the 10 February 2012 statement with
relatively small annual increases.
assuming awareness of the extent of the balance increase between the 20 October
and 10 February statements, it would not have
been unreasonable for a person in
the Complainant’s circumstances to have assumed the latter statement was
correct. It would
not have been unreasonable to assume the 20 October statement
(which was prepared about three and half months after her retirement)
considered as the 20 February statement, given the calculation of the balance
related to a defined benefit formula. By
contrast, had the statements been
reporting on an accumulation benefit for instance, such an increase might have
been surprising.
In the Tribunal’s view, a reasonable person in the
Complainant’s position would not necessarily have concluded an error
been made. The Complainant submits, in effect, the reported amounts did not
cause her to believe there was an error.
Tribunal is of the view the Complainant did not form the belief before the 13
July 2017 letter from the Trustee that the benefit
statements issued to her
during and after 2012 overstated her account balances in the Fund. A reasonable
person in her position would
not necessarily have believed the statements to be
unreliable nor that they overstated her account balance in the Fund in the
circumstances
of this complaint.
Tribunal is of the view the Complainant, and indeed a reasonable person in her
position, would have reasonably relied upon the
Trustee’s representations
in the benefit statements prepared in 2012 and subsequently, despite the
increase in the Complainant’s
Fund account balance from that reported in
her Benefit Advice statement prepared 20 October 2011.
(ii) The disclaimer
Trustee submits:
Every Member Statement that the [Complainant] received contained
the following disclaimer:
“While every care has been made to ensure the accuracy of
information contained within this member statement, it is not intended
way to be a substitute for the relevant Act and Regulations. Except to the
extent that statutory liability cannot be excluded,
[the Trustee] accepts no
liability (including liability to any person by reason of negligence or
negligent misstatement) for any
loss or damage arising as a result of any person
relying on such information. You should read this in conjunction with other
publications
[the Trustee] has prepared for [its] members.”
In those circumstances, it was incumbent on the [Complainant], upon noticing
the obvious discrepancy, to take steps to verify the
veracity of the statement
before relying on the statement as alleged.
Fund account balances stated in the various benefit statements provided to the
Complainant were clear and unambiguous. They were
not expressed as a
communication of representations made by anyone other than the Trustee or the
Fund. The disclaimer states the
benefit statement is not ‘a substitute for
the relevant Act and Regulations’, and that it should be read ‘in
conjunction
with other publications [the Trustee] has prepared for [its]
members’. The disclaimer provides no specificity as to which provisions
an Act or regulations should be referred to, or what effect they might have on
the stated Fund account balance. Nor does the disclaimer
provide any reasonable
degree of specificity as to what other publications should be read or what
impact those publications would
have on the reliability of the stated Fund
account balance.
the Tribunal’s view, an ordinary person in the Complainant’s
position would not be made sufficiently aware by the disclaimer
that the benefit
statements were not to be relied upon or were in some way contingent or
provisional. The Tribunal is of the view
the disclaimer did not sufficiently
alert the Complainant not to rely on the representations made in the benefit
statements. Further,
an ordinary person in the Complainant’s position
would not have been led to believe by the disclaimer that they were not to
upon the benefit statements. The Tribunal is also of the view the disclaimer did
not lead the Complainant to form doubts about
the reliability of the
representations made in the benefit statements about her Fund account
(iii) Has she provided sufficient evidence of reliance to her
Trustee submits:
Even if [the Complainant’s] reliance on the error was
reasonable (which is denied) [the Complainant] has not demonstrated an
entitlement to damages for the following reasons:
requests for evidence the [Complainant] has not provided evidence of loss or
inability to meet the Correction of the Error.
documents have been provided in respect of the [Complainant’s] decision to
cease working for [the Employer], or her asserted
voluntary redundancy.
questions are relevant here, namely:
Complainant carry the burden of proving she relied on the representations; and
does she need to
establish the sole or main reason she decided to retire was the
misrepresentation?
Tribunal is mindful it must only make a determination on whether the
Trustee’s decision to correct the error in the Complainant’s
account balance is fair and reasonable in the circumstances. In doing so:
The Tribunal’s task is not to engage in ascertaining
generally the rights of the parties, nor is it to engage in some form of
judicial review of the decision of the trustee or insurer. Rather it is to form
a view, from the perspective of the trustee or insurer,
as to whether the
decision of either was (recognising the overriding framework given by the
governing rules and policy terms, respectively)
unfair or unreasonable.
Retail Employees Superannuation Pty Ltd v Crocker; Colonial Mutual Life
Assurance Society Ltd v Crocke
[2001] FCA 1330
Superannuation (Australia) Limited v Billinghurst
[2016] FCA 1274
making its determination, the Tribunal may seek guidance from the general law,
however, the general law might not be determinative
regarding a particular
Does she carry the burden of establishing detrimental
Trustee submits the Complainant has not demonstrated ‘an entitlement to
damages’. The Trustee is saying, in effect,
she must establish she
suffered loss arising from the Trustee’s representations. In
[2014] HCA 19
the Court stated that:
[61] ...The respondent at all times bore the legal burden of
proving that she had been induced to rely upon the appellant’s
promises....
[63] It may be said immediately that to speak of an evidentiary onus upon the
appellant is to create a risk of distraction from the
required analysis. To
speak of the evidentiary onus in its strict legal connotation is to speak of the
burden of adducing or pointing
to sufficient evidence to raise an issue for
determination by the court. In the present case, there can be no doubt that the
as to the respondent’ reliance upon the appellant’s promises
was a live issue.
[64] The real question was as to the appropriate inference to be drawn from
the whole of the evidence...
Tribunal will determine whether the Trustee’s decision is fair and
reasonable within the context of the circumstances taken
as a whole.
What degree of reliance must be established?
appears to the Tribunal the Complainant’s decision to retire when she did
was not entirely founded upon the erroneously recorded
Fund account balance. She
wrote to the Trustee on 21 November 2017 stating that: ‘Determining how
much [the Trustee’s
misrepresentations] has impacted me is
difficult’. In the Tribunal’s view, her decision to retire when she
did was not
exclusively, nor principally, predicated on her belief she was
entitled to the erroneous amount. However, it was a key factor in
decision-making. Her decision to retire was closely connected to her assessments
and the impact her financial
position would have on her retirement lifestyle and enjoyment.
High Court stated in
Gould v Vaggelas
(1985) 157 CLR 215:
The representation need not be the sole inducement. It is
sufficient so long as it plays some part even if only a minor part in
contributing
to the formation of the contract.
Sidhu v Van Dyke
(at paragraph [72]) quoted
Amalgamated
Investment &
Co Ltd (in liq) v Texas Commerce International
Ltd ([1982] QB 84 at 104-105) with approval, where it was said
...the question is not whether the representee acted, or desisted
from acting, solely in reliance on the encouragement or representation
other party; the question is rather whether his conduct was so
by the encouragement or representation ... that it would be unconscionable for
the representor thereafter to enforce his strict legal
to be clear, the Tribunal does not refer to the above court decisions as the
basis for determining questions of legal onus
or determining the degree to
which, as a matter of law, her reliance on the Trustee’s representations
caused her to make the
decision to retire when she did so, or other such
questions. Rather, the court decisions offer broad points of reference or
guidance, which the Tribunal finds helpful in determining whether the
Trustee’s decision is fair and reasonable in the circumstances
determining whether the Trustee’s decision is fair and reasonable in the
circumstances, the Tribunal does not consider it
necessary for it to be
established that the Complainant’s decision to retire when she did was
solely or primarily based on
the belief her benefit included the erroneous
Did the Complainant change her position?
Complainant submits she relied on the representations made by the Trustee in the
benefit statements in making her decision in
April 2017 to give notice of
retirement. This is to say, the representations led her to change her position
from the one she would
have adopted had she known the true state of affairs.
submits she decided to resign for lifestyle reasons, and because she believed
she would have sufficient retirement funds if she
retired in mid-2017. She
described her personal circumstances as one in which
... my husband and I were still putting three children through
private schools and university while paying off our mortgage. This
ceased on or
around Dec 2013 at which point our disposable income rose substantially and I
could make significant contributions to
my retirement account. This is entirely
consistent with how many people manage their retirement savings.
appears to have ceased her role with the Employer on good terms as she
maintained voluntary membership of various committees of
the Employer after she
ceased her employment. She submitted that:
My job at [the Employer] was well-paid and pleasurable. I am in
excellent health, and there was no reason I could not have worked
until at least
age 65, and possibly later. However, I carefully considered my financial
and based upon the misrepresentations made by [the Trustee] over
, determined that I could afford to retire.
Tribunal notes that, while the Complainant claimed to have taken a holiday on
retirement and purchased a second house with her
partner, her complaint
primarily relates to her decision to resign from her employment with her
Employer in reliance on the Trustee’s
representations. Had she known the
true position she says she would have continued working. If the erroneous amount
is deducted from
her Fund account balance it would, she submits, deprive her of
the retirement lifestyle she had planned.
to Gaegler J in
Australian Financial Services and Leasing Pty Ltd (CAN 105
657 681) v Hills Industries Ltd
[2014] HCA 14:
The defence of change of position is established where a defendant
proves the existence of two conditions. The first condition is
defendant has acted (that is, done something the defendant would not otherwise
have done) or refrained from acting (that
is, not done something the defendant
would otherwise have done) in good faith on the assumption that the defendant
was entitled to
deal with the payment which the defendant received. ... The
second condition is that, by reason of having so acted or refrained from
the defendant would be placed in a worse position if ordered to make restitution
of the payment than if the defendant had
not received the payment at all. The
detriment constituted by that difference in position need not, in every case, be
financial or
pecuniary. If financial or pecuniary, it need not, in every case,
be established with precision. It can be an opportunity forgone.
It must, in
every case, be shown by the defendant to be substantial (at paragraph 157).
Tribunal is satisfied in all the circumstances that:
Complainant did something she would not otherwise have done, which was to retire
in mid-2017; and
Trustee’s moves to correct the error in her Fund account balance would
place her at a financial disadvantage relative to
the position she would be if
the representations had been true.
these circumstances, the Tribunal is of the view the Trustee’s decision to
deduct $161,646 from the Complainant’s
Fund account is unfair and
unreasonable.
Tribunal substituted decision
the Tribunal is not satisfied that the decision of the Trustee was fair and
reasonable, s37(3) of the Complaints Act empowers the
Tribunal (amongst other
things) to set aside the decision and substitute another decision.
Trustee submits it is required by law to act in the best interests of all
members of the Fund, and it has an obligation under
common law to recover any
overpayments that are or will become payable to members. It also submits the
Complainant is not entitled
to benefit from the mistake. It further submits:
[The Trustee] can compensate members in relation to errors to the
extent that such compensation returns the member’s account
to the position
it would have been in had the error not occurred. [The Trustee] does not have
the discretion to pay any amounts in
excess of the benefit calculated in
accordance with the scheme rules.
it is generally the case the Trustee does not have the discretion to pay amounts
in excess of the benefit to which a beneficiary
is entitled under the scheme
rules, the Trustee has a fiduciary duty to its members, including the
Complainant, to act in their best
interests. Misleading her over a number of
years about her benefit in all the circumstances of this complaint cannot in
and reasonableness go unremedied. Such remedy cannot be stymied by a
narrow reading of the terms of the Governing Rules. In addition,
the Trustee has
the powers, under the terms of the Governing Rules, to do anything that a body
corporate may do, which would include
the power to settle a claim. The
Complainant offered to have the complaint resolved by her ‘repaying’
an amount of $66,000.
The Trustee has not accepted the offer.
section 37(4) of the Complaints Act:
The Tribunal may only exercise its determination-making power under
subsection (3) for the purpose of placing the complainant as nearly
practicable in such a position that the unfairness, unreasonableness, or both,
that the Tribunal has determined to exist in relation
to the trustee’s
decision that is the subject of the complaint no longer exists.
power granted under the subsection appears to ‘permit full compensatory or
restitutionary determinations’ (
Hannover Life Assurance Re of
Australasia v Membrey
[2004] 1095 per Crennan J at para [45]).
Complainant had not planned to undertake paid work after her retirement for the
purposes of compensating for an erroneous amount
of benefit. She claims that
undertaking the work for those purposes has negatively impacted upon her
retirement plans and her lifestyle.
She also submits it would take her about
three years further employment to ‘replace the $161,646 to accumulate
(after tax and
expenses)’. She also submitted when she lodged her
compliant with the Tribunal that:
...assuming I can secure employment by March 2018 at a salary level
of $100,000, then over three years I will only be able to save
into super about
$66,000. At my [level of employment with the Employer] earning approximately
$130,000pa, I would have been able
to save about $160,000 over the three years.
I expect [the Trustee] to take responsibility for the difference in potential
as this directly relates to my reliance on their incorrect
information.
submissions point to the difficulty in remedying the situation. The Complainant
retired in mid-2017 for reasons including having
been misled by the Trustee. It
is not now possible to remedy the situation by turning back the clock and have
her un-resign her position.
She attempted to recover her position (assuming the
erroneous amount is deducted). As she submits:
Over the next 30 months (July 2017 to Dec 2019) I attempted to find
paid work and have been only mildly successful. I am simply unable
to find work
paying anything like the amount I was being paid at [name of Employer].
Attachment 2 provides a summary of my earnings
in this time period compared with
what I would have earned if I had remained with [the Employer].
difference is $290,695 all due to [the Trustee’s] initial calculation
error and then [the Trustee’s] extended
(and knowing) delay in advising me
of the error.
This discrepancy continues to increase each day I cannot
obtain similar full time paid work. I have found finding full time paid
employment, as an older Australian (l am 62), very difficult.
detriment caused to her lifestyle and retirement plans by her mid-2017
retirement on the assumption the representations were true
cannot readily be
unscrambled (see L Aitken, ‘Unscrambling ‘Detriment’ –
Unjust Enrichment, Mistaken Payments,
and Estoppel’ (2014) 38
Australian Bar Review
269). The Tribunal is of the view that it is not
possible with any reasonable degree of precision to apply a mathematical rule to
calculate, for instance, the extent to which the Complainant might have become
enriched or ‘disenriched’ by receiving
the erroneous amount
Australian Financial Services and Leasing Pty Ltd v Hills Industries Ltd
[2014] HCA 14
). Rather, the Tribunal directs its attention to placing
her as nearly as practicable in such a position that the unfairness,
unreasonableness,
or both, no longer exists. As mentioned, the detriment that
arose from her reliance on the misrepresentations was resigning her employment
for the purposes of undertaking retirement and enjoying related lifestyle
benefits she saw would arise from making that choice when
she so did.
Tribunal is of the view the Complainant’s offer to ‘repay’
$66,000 would not place her as nearly as practicable
in such a position that the
unfairness, unreasonableness no longer exists. The unfairness and
unreasonableness arose from the misrepresentations
that were repeated over a
number of years, which led to her believe she was entitled to a benefit that
included the erroneous amount.
She planned the date of her retirement, at least
in part, on the basis of her belief the misrepresentations were in fact true.
Tribunal is of the view the Complainant will be placed as near as
practicable in the position she would be in if the unfairness or
unreasonableness no longer existed by not having her account balance in the Fund
corrected. This means the erroneous amount of $161,646
is to be treated as if it
were part of her Fund account benefit entitlement.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decision under review
if it is satisfied that the decision, in its
operation in relation to the
Complainant, was fair and reasonable in the circumstances.
the reasons stated above the Tribunal is not satisfied that the decision under
review was fair and reasonable in its operation
in relation to the Complainant
in the circumstances. Under s37(3) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must make
a determination and
it can set aside the decision of the Trustee and substitute
another decision.
s37(1)(a) of the Complaints Act, in reviewing a decision of a Trustee, the
Tribunal has all the powers, obligations and discretions
that are conferred on
the Trustee.
making its decision, s37(5) of the Complaints Act requires that the Tribunal
must not do anything that would be contrary to law
or to the governing rules of
s37(4) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal may only exercise its determination
making power for the purpose of placing the Complainant
as nearly as
practicable, in the position that they would have been in but for the unfairness
or unreasonableness, or both, that
the Tribunal has determined to exist in
relation to the Trustee’s decision.
accordance with these provisions, the Tribunal sets aside the decision of the
Trustee and substitutes a decision that the Complainant’s
account balance
in the Fund not be corrected and that the erroneous amount of $161,646 be
treated as if it were part of her Fund
account benefit entitlement.
Justin Malbon, Presiding Member
Date of Tribunal signature: 3 November 2020
RTF format (379 KB)
Signed PDF/A format