1418858 [2015] MRTA 832 (17 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 832
(17 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
APPLICANTS:
Ms Roop Keshari Shrestha
Ashish Siwakoti
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE:
BCC2014/1251994
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Jonathon Duignan
PLACE OF DECISION:
The tribunal affirms the decision to cancel the first named
applicant’s Subclass 457 (Temporary Work (Skilled)) visa.
The tribunal has no jurisdiction with respect to the second named
Statement made on 17 June 2015 at 9:10am
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision dated 29 October 2014 made by a
delegate of the Minister for Immigration to cancel
the first named
applicant’s Subclass 457 (Temporary Work (Skilled)) visa under
Migration Act 1958
delegate cancelled the visa under
s.116(1)(g)
on the basis that the first named
applicant has ceased to have the intention to perform the occupation of
Café or Restaurant
Manager. The issue in the present case is whether that
ground for cancellation is made out, and if so, whether the visa should be
the purposes of the tribunal’s jurisdiction under
of the Act, the
only decision that is before the tribunal is the decision with respect to the
first named applicant [hereafter the
applicant]. The second named
applicant’s visa was automatically cancelled as a consequence of that
cancellation, not by a decision
but by force of the operation of
Act which made the cancellation of the second named applicant’s visa
self-executing on the cancellation of the first
named applicant’s visa:
Rani & Ors v MIMA
[1997] FCA 1493
(1997) 80 FCR 379
at 385, 393, 400;
& Ors v MIMA
[1998] FCA 1552
(1998) 89 FCR 80
at 96. As no decision was involved in the
visa cancellation under
, the tribunal has no jurisdiction with respect
to the second named applicant.
applicant and her husband appeared before the tribunal on 22 April 2015 and
again on 11 June 2015 to give evidence and present arguments.
For the following
reasons, the tribunal has concluded that the decision to cancel the
applicant’s visa should be affirmed.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
of the Act, the Minister may cancel a visa if satisfied that certain
grounds specified in that provision are made out. Relevantly,
to this case,
these include the ground set out in
s.116(1)(g)
and r.2.43. If satisfied that
the ground for cancellation is made out, the decision maker must proceed to
consider whether the visa
should be cancelled, having regard to all the relevant
circumstances, which may include matters of government policy.
visa may be cancelled under
s.116(1)(g)
if the Minister or the tribunal is
satisfied a prescribed ground for cancelling the visa applies to the applicant.
The prescribed
grounds for cancellation are set out in r.2.43 of the
Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). In the present case, the ground in
r.2.43(1)(kb) is relevant. This relevantly provides in respect of the
applicant’s
in the case of the holder of a
457 (Temporary Work (Skilled)) visa
that was granted on the basis that the
applicant met the requirements of subregulation 457.223(4) — that, despite
of the visa, the Minister is satisfied that:
(i) the holder did
not have a genuine intention to perform the occupation mentioned in paragraph
457.223(4)(d) at the time of
grant of the visa; or
(ii) the holder has
ceased to have a genuine intention to perform that occupation; or
(iii) the position
associated with the nominated occupation is not genuine;
Department of Immigration and Border Protection (the department) file indicates
that the sponsoring employer (the sponsor) of
the applicant contacted them on 23
October 2013 indicating that the applicant had not commenced her employment with
the business,
having put off the date for commencement and then ceasing to take
the sponsor’s calls. She had been nominated to fill the position
Café or Restaurant Manger by the sponsor for a business operated in
Sydney in 2012 and a visa was granted to her in November
applicant’s comments in relation to this were sought at the hearing and
she chose to comment immediately. She explains that
she reached an agreement
with the sponsor that he would employ her after she was unsuccessful at her
bachelor level study in Australia.
She explains that she in fact was willing to
commence work but after one week of work, involving 5 days at the restaurant of
shifts, the owner advised her that he was preparing a roster which never
eventuated. The applicant and her husband had given the
owner AUD 13 000, which
the applicant’s husband had deposited directly to an account of the
owner’s wife at a bank in
Wynyard. She claimed the allegation that she had
not started work and had not responded to the owner’s calls were not
applicant explained that she believed the owner when he kept telling her in
relation to subsequent enquiries that the matter would
be resolved. She did not
subsequently approach the department until she found out her visa had been
cancelled as a result of attempting
to upgrade her mobile telephone. She
explains that she did not contact the department to try to resolve the situation
because for
some period her husband was not with her in Australia and
subsequently when she contacted the owner she thought the matter was being
resolved. She last spoke with the owner in May 2014 by her estimate and last
sought to contact him unsuccessfully in October 2014.
applicant’s husband gave evidence that the owner was paid AUD 6 000 and no
other money. When asked about his wife’s
account of the owner being paid
AUD 13 000 he then indicated that his wife was not aware of the circumstances
because he looked after
the money. AUD 13 000 was originally paid to a middleman
through an account of a friend of the couple. Subsequently AUD 6 000 was
returned by the middle man and the friend directed
to pay this to the
account of the business owner’s wife. The applicant concurred with this
when explaining the difference in
their evidence. She explained she simply gave
her husband AUD 13 000 and thought this was being given to the owner.
applicant’s husband also gave evidence that his wife worked for the
business for 1 day and was then not allowed to continue
employment by the owner.
He had attended with his wife on the day she worked and she had been made to
wash dishes. When told of his
wife’s evidence during the hearing that she
had worked for 1 week, including several 5 hour shifts he looked perplexed and
asked his wife whether this was true. She indicated that it was and that she had
not previously told her husband that she had worked
for the extra time after the
first day. When asked why she would not have told her husband about this she did
not provide an explanation.
applicant’s husband indicated that he had tried to report the matter to
authorities but when asked about this could not
provide details. He then
indicated that he had not approached the department or police or other
authorities because he had been scared.
the applicant and her husband indicated that they were seeking new sponsors
willing to employ them at the time of the first hearing.
The applicant had not
otherwise worked in Australia than the one week for the sponsor. The
applicant’s husband was working
as a cleaner.
wished the applicant’s visa not to be cancelled because they thought they
would have limited prospects in Nepal. The applicant
had not been able to
complete her study in Australia, which was why she had sought a sponsoring
employer in the first place. The
applicant’s husband explained that his
father had passed away and he was responsible for looking after his wife, as
his mother and young brother. The applicant explained that their
families were not wealthy and would not be able to provide money
for the couple
to commence a business.
after the first hearing there was a large earthquake in Nepal which had a
significant effect on the country. The applicant
also provided evidence of a new
proposed employer, being a company running a restaurant in Quakers Hill. The
employer was approved
as a standard business sponsor until April 2016 and lodged
a nomination of the occupation of Café or Restaurant Manager in
to the applicant on 18 May 2015.
a result of these developments the applicant was offered a further hearing
before the tribunal. She explained that she had recently
found the new employer
because he was known to her brother. She had not been able to organise another
sponsor earlier because for
much of the past she had been dealing with her first
sponsor and hoping the situation could be resolved. She did not believe the
nomination had been approved at the time of the second hearing. She had not paid
the employer in respect of this nomination as
she had done in the past.
respect of the earthquake in Nepal the applicant explained that her
family’s home was damaged and the 12 relatives living
there were only able
to live on the ground floor. She showed photographs on her mobile telephone of a
damaged wall, damaged beams
between floors and damage to a concrete roof. The
family of the applicant’s husband lived some distance from Kathmandu and
they were not significantly affected by the earthquake. The applicant and her
husband could not live with them because they had not
planned to do so.
applicant’s husband indicated that he owned a home in Kathmandu which was
currently rented out and could still be occupied.
He referred to the
circumstances of his own family, noting that his mother was depressed after the
death of her husband and recently
his brother had been further injured adding to
the difficulties he faced.
the applicant and her husband explained that life would be very difficult if
they returned to Nepal because of limited employment
opportunities as a result
of the damage and increasing prices and cost of living.
Does the ground for cancellation exist?
the tribunal’s view there is a basis to cancel the visa because of the
operation of
s.116(1)(g)
and r.2.43(1)(kb). Concerns in relation to the
applicant have arisen because of information provided by her sponsor to the
in October 2013 that she had not commenced working in the position
for which she had been nominated, had put off her starting date
and then not
returned their calls.
applicant has now claimed that she did in fact commence that employment but was
never rostered on after one week of work. She
claims to have paid the owner of
the business AUD 13 000, although her husband had indicated that this was
AUD 6 000 with a further
AUD 7 000 provided to an intermediary.
tribunal found the direct evidence of the applicant and her husband to be
unreliable. The extraordinary difference in their evidence
regarding the length
of work performed by the applicant with her first sponsor and the money paid to
the owner left the tribunal
with the view that it was not being given a truthful
or frank account of the circumstances. While some explanations were offered
the differences in evidence the tribunal found it implausible that the couple
would not have discussed the circumstances of the
payments or the work such that
they could provide a consistent account.
tribunal does take note however of the submission from the applicant and her
husband that the business owner’s contact with
the department was some 11
months after the applicant was to have started her employment. There is no
explanation given in the available
material as to why the owner would wait such
a lengthy time before contacting the department to comply with their
requirements as
a sponsor. While there is a reference to the applicant putting
off the time for her commencement, it is difficult to believe that
the sponsor
would have continued his attempts to have the applicant work for him almost 1
year into what was only a 4 year arrangement.
together, the tribunal has reached the view that neither the business owner nor
the applicant and her husband have given a completely
truthful account of the
circumstances here. In the tribunal’s view the available material
indicates that the business sponsor
and the applicant reached an agreement that
the sponsor would employ the applicant after she had been unsuccessful with her
In the tribunal’s view the level of claimed payment involved and
the fact that neither the sponsor nor the applicant took any
timely action to
seek to remedy the situation indicates that in fact a short time after the issue
of relevant visas to the applicant
and her husband there was no longer any
intention for the applicant to genuinely perform the role of a Café or
Manager with the first sponsor.
taking the applicant’s assessment of her work at its longest she worked
for only one week in November 2012 for the sponsor.
That the sponsor would then
not contact the department for some 11 months and then do so apparently out of
the blue in October 2013
indicates that he did not by then expect the applicant
to perform the occupation. The fact that the applicant took no action to contact
the department or any other authorities for the same period and indeed for a
further 1 year after that likewise suggests that she
had in fact lost the
intention to perform any role and was merely hopeful of remaining in Australia.
In the tribunal’s view
if she retained a genuine intention to perform the
role she would have taken concrete steps to either continue her work or contact
appropriate authorities to determine what she should do. While she claims to
have been waiting to hear about a roster from the sponsor
the tribunal finds
this implausible. In the tribunal’s view from very shortly after the grant
of the visas to herself and her
husband she lost the intention to work for the
sponsor and this is why she did not do so, nor take any actions to resolve her
for some 2 years.
nature of the discrepancies in the evidence of the applicant and her husband
suggest that in fact she and he have concocted a
claim of continuing interest in
her employment beyond November 2012 which was not true. If they made the large
payments claimed this
makes the subsequent inaction even more difficult to
understand. That the applicant would make such large payments and then not seek
to continue her work or seek assistance in relation to her position suggests to
the tribunal that the applicant was prepared to remain
quiet in order to retain
her visa which allowed her to stay in Australia.
tribunal believes that after being granted this visa the applicant ceased to
have the intention to perform the occupation of Café
or Restaurant
Manager and she has not done so since. The tribunal is also of the view the
position associated with the occupation
offered by the sponsor was not genuine.
In the tribunal’s view the differences in evidence, the claims of payment
sums to secure the employment and the fact that both the applicant and
the sponsor did not approach the department for such a long
period after the
visa grant despite her not performing the role after November 2012 indicates
that the applicant ceased to have the
intention to perform the occupation which
formed the basis of the grant of the visa to her under cl.457.223(4). The
tribunal also
believes that this supports the view that the position associated
with the occupation offered by the sponsor was not genuine. In
tribunal’s view this is also evidenced by the fact that both the applicant
and sponsor have sought to put forward a version
of events which painted their
actions in the best possible light.
these reasons, the tribunal is satisfied that the ground for cancellation in
s.116(1)(g)
exists, being that specified at r.2.43(1)(kb)(ii) and (iii). As the
ground does not require mandatory cancellation under
, the tribunal must
proceed to consider whether the power to cancel the visa should be
Consideration of discretion
are no matters specified in the Act or Regulations that are required to be
considered in relation to the exercise of the discretion
to cancel the visa.
However, in considering whether to exercise its discretion to cancel the
applicant’s visa, the tribunal
has had regard to the relevant
circumstances including but not limited to matters identified in the
department’s Procedures
Advice Manual PAM3 ‘General visa
cancellation powers’. Although not binding on the tribunal, these
guidelines do identify
a range of matters which can sensibly be considered in
exercising a discretion in circumstances such as these in the tribunal’s
the tribunal’s view the correct or preferable decision is that the
applicant’s visa be cancelled.
if one considers that the applicant commenced employment for one week but was
then never rostered on again the tribunal believes
she did not take any timely
action which was available to her to try to resolve her status. She could have
done so by, for example,
the tribunal’s view she did not do so because she was content to remain
Australia without performing the occupation for the 2 years until she found out
her visa was cancelled. While she may have continued
owner, this was obviously to no avail and in the tribunal’s view, well
before October 2014 when she
learned her visa was cancelled one would have
thought she could have contacted the department or other authorities to deal
applicant was granted a visa for the purpose of working for a restaurant as a
Manager. She is not doing so currently, however
has presented evidence that
another employer has an intention to employ her in such a role. A relevant
nomination by an approved
standard business sponsor has been made to the
department but remains outstanding.
tribunal discussed with the applicant whether it should await the decision in
respect of the nomination before taking a decision
but has decided it will not.
This is because even if that nomination is approved this would not in all the
circumstances satisfy
the tribunal that the visa previously held by the
applicant should not be cancelled. This is because the tribunal does not believe
that the applicant and her husband have given a reliable account of their
circumstances and while recently a new sponsor has been
found there has been no
plausible explanation for why this was not attempted at a much earlier stage.
applicant has effectively been in Australia for two and one-half years of a four
year visa and even if her evidence was accepted
entirely has only worked in the
occupation for which she was sponsored for one week. She had considerable time
to find a new sponsor
before her visa was cancelled and again before the
tribunal considered her application and only near the end of the process was
achieved. Her delay in seeking advice about her situation or seeking a new
sponsor leaves the tribunal unsatisfied that she currently
has any genuine
intention to work in the occupation for which she has been nominated. In the
tribunal’s view this late attempt
to secure a new sponsor is merely an
attempt to resume her stay in Australia notwithstanding claims that she on this
occasion promises
to perform the occupation for which she has been nominated.
the applicant’s husband is working, and he has indicated he is also
seeking a sponsor, this has not been fruitful to date.
In any case, these visas
were not made available for the purpose of his using his skills in Australia and
it would be more appropriate
that any attempt to sponsor him was dealt with by
way of a new application.
couple may experience difficulties in resettling in Nepal especially after the
recent earthquake. The evidence is however that
both have family living in Nepal
and in the case of the applicant’s mother-in-law their home is apparently
undamaged. In any
case the applicant’s husband owns a home in Kathmandu
which is habitable. They may be from poorer families and have obligations
other relatives but both are fit and able to engage in work. While employment
opportunities have no doubt been affected by the
earthquake as claimed, the
tribunal does not believe that this represents a reason for not cancelling the
visa in this case. The
couple only ever held temporary status in Australia and
while there is a current crisis in Nepal the tribunal does not believe that
granting the applicant what remains of her temporary work visa is an appropriate
way to deal with that issue, particularly where
the couple have safe
accommodation to which they can return.
tribunal also did not find the couple to be truthful in their evidence and
believes they have not been completely honest in their
dealings with the
tribunal for the reasons detailed above. The couple do not have children and
have not identified others, apart
from themselves, in Australia or elsewhere who
would be adversely affected by the cancellation.
Considering
the circumstances as a whole, the tribunal concludes that the visa held by the
first named applicant should be cancelled.
The delegate’s decision to this
effect should be affirmed. As explained above the tribunal has no jurisdiction
in respect of
the second named applicant’s
tribunal affirms the decision to cancel the first named applicant’s
Subclass 457 (Temporary Work (Skilled)) visa.
tribunal has no jurisdiction with respect to the second named applicant.
Jonathon Duignan
RTF format (169 KB)
Signed PDF/A format