1419914 [2015] RRTA 327 (24 May 2015)
[2015] RRTA 327
(24 May 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Robert Wilson
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the
direction that the applicant satisfies s.36(2)(a) of the Migration Act.
Statement made on 24 May 2015 at 1:12pm
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration to refuse to grant the applicant
a Protection visa under s.65 of
Migration Act 1958
applicant who claims to be a citizen of Pakistan, applied for the visa [in] May
2012 and the delegate refused to grant the visa
[in] August 2012 (see DIBP file,
[number deleted]).
matter first came before the first constituted tribunal on 15 November 2012. On
8 March 2013 the tribunal affirmed the decision
not to grant the applicant a
Protection visa (see RRT file, 1213707, ff.69-79).
April 2014, the Federal Circuit Court of Australia dismissed the application
SZSSY v Minister For Immigration & Anor
[2014] FCCA 748
ff.43-56 RRT file, 1419914).
appeal from the Federal Circuit Court of Australia, in the Federal Court of
Australia, Her Honour Justice Jagot ordered that the
appeal be allowed, and the
matter be remitted to the Refugee Review Tribunal for determination in
accordance with law. The date
of the Order was [in] October 2014 (see
v Minister For Immigration & Anor
[2014] FCCA 1144; ff.57-71 RRT file,
applicant appeared before the second constituted tribunal on 1 May 2015 to
give evidence and present arguments. The tribunal hearing
was conducted with
the assistance of an interpreter in the Pashto and English languages.
applicant was represented in relation to the review by his registered migration
agent. The representative attended the tribunal
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
criteria for a protection visa are set out in s.36 of the Act and Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An applicant for the visa must
meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That is,
the applicant is either a person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the ‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other
‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same
family unit as such a person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same
36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant
for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the Minister is
satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status
of Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to
the Status of Refugees (together, the Refugees Convention, or the
Convention).
is a party to the Refugees Convention and generally speaking, has protection
obligations in respect of people who are refugees
as defined in Article 1 of the
Convention. Article 1A(2) relevantly defines a refugee as any person
owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group
or political opinion, is
outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is
unwilling to avail himself
of the protection of that country; or who, not having
a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence,
unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to
a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a), he or she may
nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant of
a protection visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
being removed from Australia to a receiving country, there is a real
risk that he or she will suffer significant harm: s.36(2)(aa)
complementary protection criterion’).
accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the Act, the
tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines
prepared by the
Department of Immigration –PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Complementary
Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee
and humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines
– and any country information assessment prepared by the Department of
Foreign Affairs
and Trade expressly for protection status determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
issue in this case is whether the applicant is a person in respect of whom
Australia has protection obligations. For the following
reasons, the tribunal
has concluded that the matter should be remitted for reconsideration.
tribunal accepts the facts which were current at the time the first tribunal
made its decision (see first decision in DIBP [file]),
which are set out under
the headings ‘Primary application’ and ‘Review
application’; unless they are contradicted
The applicant’s relevant history
applicant was born on [date] in [Village 1], Parachinar, Kurram Agency, in the
Province of Khyber Pakhtunhwa, Pakistan. The applicant
is a Shia Pashtun Muslim
from the Turi tribe who is single, and has never married. He has [tertiary
qualifications from a] [University].
He is a citizen of Pakistan.
Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan
(TTP)) is responsible for attacks in
the applicant’s area.
applicant fears that if he returns to Pakistan he will be harmed because he
belongs to a particular social group of educated Shi’a
Muslims vulnerable
to kidnapping. The Taliban kidnap, and then they kill, the person. The
applicant indicates that he falls into
that group.
the applicant fears he will be harmed because of his religion and because he
belongs to another particular social group being
the family relative of a person
targeted by the Taliban. That person, the applicant’s [Relative 1], was
employed as a [occupation].
He held an interview with the [media] where he
disclosed kidnapping and killing by the Taliban. His [Relative 1] disclosed
by the Taliban directed at tribes, especially the Turi.
the second tribunal hearing the tribunal asked the applicant if the Turi people
did not give permission for the Taliban to travel
along the road between
Afghanistan and Pakistan. The applicant agreed and said there are several
reasons. The first is geographical.
The second is that all other areas
accepted the Taliban but the Turi tribe stand against them. Thirdly, regarding
religious beliefs,
the Taliban are Sunni and they think the Turi are wrong, and
they want to enforce their own religion on the Turi. Fourthly, if the
allowed to become educated, then they become more of a problem for the Taliban.
tribunal asked the applicant whether it was not just the doctors and lawyers,
but educated people generally like himself, who
are subjected to particular
attention by the Taliban. He said that was true. He said doctors and engineers
are at risk, as well
as educated people who haven’t surrendered to the
Taliban, who are at high risk.
applicant’s adviser provided written submissions dated 28 April 2015 (ff.
20(a)–38 RRT file 1419914).
Relevantly,
these include the following:
Does the Applicant have a
well-founded fear of persecution on the basis of his religion/imputed political
20.The applicant fears that if he has returned to Pakistan, he will be
subjected to serious harm from Sunni militia groups and other
Sunni extremists
due to his Shia Muslim religion and his (real or imputed) political opinion
against the Taliban and/or Taliban-affiliated
groups. The Applicant is at
higher risk than other Shias as he is from the Turi tribe of the Kurram Agency.
Furthermore, the Applicant
fears he will be imputed with a political opinion as
against the Taliban due to his [Relative 1]’s outspoken criticism of the
the applicant’s adviser’s provided the following written submissions
dated 28 April 2015 (ff. 20(a) –38
RRT file 1419914) which relevantly
include the following. They include what were new claims at the time. The
tribunal accepts them
and the further comments in italics.
ecurity situation when Applicant was at university
9. Further to paragraph 11 of the First Submissions, the Applicant wishes to
clarify that during his time in the [university] communications
infrastructure
was very poor due to the ongoing conflict in the Federally Administered Tribal
Areas. Accordingly there was a process
where trucks would travel between
Peshawar and Parachinar to collect goods from the home villages of the students
and deliver them
to local hotels in Parachinar for the students to collect. It
was very common for students to receive parcels in this way.
10. Extremists used this method to their advantage in order to bait students
and would call students to say that they had received
such a parcel at a local
hotel. Then when the student would arrive at the hotel, the extremists would
kidnap a student and demand
a ransom for their release. These circumstances
made it difficult to know whether any phone call in relation to a parcel which
to be collected was genuine or not. For this reason, the Applicant would
ensure that his mother or father confirmed that they had
sent him a parcel prior
to going to collect it.
Attendance at the Shia Mosque
11. Further to paragraph 12 of the First Submissions, the Applicant wishes
to clarify that he attended his Mosque for the Friday
prayers and all
processions of Ashura but did not attend any additional prayers for fear of his
The applicant indicated at the second tribunal hearing that he would
continue to practise his Shia religion if he were to return to
Letter from the Taliban
12. Annexed hereto and marked
is the letter and English translation
referred to in paragraph 27 of the First Submissions (
the First Submissions
are located at ff. 68-51 of RRT file 1213707
[Sep]-2010: Applicant’s [Relative 2] is shot
13. [In] September 2010, the applicant’s [Relative 2] was travelling
from the [Village 1] Area (about 12 or 13 kilometres from
the Applicant’s
village) when he was shot dead. The Applicant’s family suspect that he
was killed by the Taliban. Annexed
hereto and marked
certificate in relation to [Relative 2].
At the tribunal’s second hearing, the applicant provided further
information, indicating that [Relative 2] was working in [industry].
the local bus stop some distance from the village. On his way back home a group
opened fire and killed him on the way.
[March]-2014: Roadside bomb explodes in [Village 1] Area
14. [In] March 2014, a roadside bomb exploded about 900 metres away from the
Applicant’s house in the [Village 1] Area. [Relative
3] was on his way to
school at this time and was injured in this blast. As a result of his injuries,
both of [Relative 3]’s
legs were amputated. Annexed hereto and marked
is an ‘injured certificate’ in relation to [Relative
At the tribunal’s second hearing, the applicant provided further
information, indicating that from his house to the main road
is only a short
way, and they set the bomb there.
Late-2014: Roadside bomb explodes in [Village 1] Area
15. Sometime in late 2014, a roadside bomb exploded about 2 km from
the Applicant’s home in the [Village 1] Area. [Some] children
were killed
and one was severely injured.
At the tribunal’s second hearing, the applicant provided further
information, indicating that one of the children was paralysed.
The Taliban
took responsibility for this bomb explosion.
-2015: Applicant’s [Relative 1] was attacked by
16. [In] January 2015, the Applicant’s [Relative 1] was
attacked by the Taliban. [Relative 1] was driving home from work with
[relatives] when the car he was driving came under heavy fire. Luckily no one
was injured in this attack.
17. That night [Relative 1] made a complaint to the police about the
attack. Annexed hereto and marked
is the police report and English
translation.
18. [In] February 2015, after making this complaint, [Relative 1] received
another threat letter from the Taliban. Annexed hereto
this letter and its English translation.
At the tribunal’s second hearing, the applicant provided further
information, indicating that the Police arrived at the location
The tribunal will now consider the applicant’s claims
tribunal accepts the applicant’s identity based on the findings of the
delegate in the Departmental decision. The tribunal
finds that he is a national
of Pakistan, and it has assessed his claims accordingly.
reaching its findings, the tribunal has had regard to the evidence in the
Departmental interview, the delegate’s decision,
tribunal’s hearing, evidence before the second tribunal, including the
second hearing; and other sources including
the tribunal’s files, the
Departmental file, and country information including the DFAT Country Report,
Pakistan 14 April 2015
and the DFAT Thematic Report Shias in Pakistan 14 April
Member in the first tribunal made the following findings:
Tribunal also finds that the applicant is a credible witness. The Tribunal
finds that he is a Pashtun Shi’a from Parachinar
and belongs to the Turi
tribe. The Tribunal finds credible the account put forward by the applicant at
the hearing ... as to his
life in Pakistan.
79. Country information... indicates that the conflict taking place in Kurram
agency continues with loss of life and that includes
loss of life through
targeted attacks on the only road into the area. On that basis, the Tribunal
finds that there is a real chance
the applicant will suffer serious harm for the
essential and significant reason of his religion and adverse opinions imputed to
by Sunni’s (and the Taliban and like Sunni extremist groups) who would
wish to harm him if he was to return to Parachinar and,
more broadly, the Kurram
80. For the reasons given above, the Tribunal finds that it is reasonable to
expect the applicant to relocate to Karachi where there
is not an appreciable
risk of the occurrence of the fear of persecution and where the risk of the
applicant suffering harm is remote.
Accordingly, his fear of persecution in
Pakistan is not well founded.
regard to the relevant findings by the delegate and the first tribunal, and the
applicant’s spontaneous responses to
the second tribunal’s
questions, this tribunal finds the applicant to be a credible witness.
applicant fears if he returns to Pakistan, he will be tortured and killed by
Sunni militant groups; the
Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan (
Lashkar-e-Jhangvi
Sipah-e-Sahaba Pakistan
applicant said they are all different groups of the Pakistan Taliban.
tribunal finds that the applicant would be readily identified in any part of
Pakistan as a Turi Shia by members of Sunni militant
groups, and other persons,
because of the following.
applicant’s name [would] identify him as a Shia, as it is a common Shia
applicant’s name and address on his ID card would identify him as both a
Shia and a Turi, as the majority of the people
where he lived in Pakistan are
Shia and Turi.
applicant’s accent would distinguish him as a Turi.
identifier that the applicant is a Shia Turi is a sign on the back of his
continue to practise his Shia religion if he were to return to Pakistan
(referred to in evidence at the tribunal’s
second hearing).
The way he prays
differentiates him from Sunnis.
regard to the first two dot points above, the tribunal accepts the following
country information from the DFAT Thematic Report,
Shias in Pakistan, 14 April
3.6..., Shias often can be identified through common Shia
names such as Naqvi, Syed, Zaidi, Jafri and
. Similarly, ethnic
and tribal names can sometimes identify sectarian affiliation such as Hazara or
Turi, as can
the person’s address
when they are from predominantly
Shia areas.
tribunal also accepts that the greatest threat for Shias in Pakistan is in the
form of targeting by militants or, at times, sectarian
clashes in the community
(paragraph 3.1, DFAT Thematic Report, Shias in Pakistan, 14 April 2015).
tribunal finds that the applicant would be targeted in Pakistan because he is a
Shia, a Turi, educated, and because he will attend
Shia religious gatherings
such as all processions of Ashura, and attending prayers; and the notoriety of
his [Relative 1], who was
critical of the Tehreek-e Taliban Pakistan; and
[Relative 2] who was shot dead by the TTP, and the other members of his family
were adversely affected by the TTP.
‘Ashura’, the 10
of Muharram (the day of
Ashura/Ashoora) is observed as an important day by both Sunni and Shia
Muslims-however, for different reasons.
Most scholars believe that Ashura is
named as such because of ‘tenth’ of Muharram (ten is translated as
in the Arabic language. Sunni Muslims look at Ashura as a
day of ‘respect and gratitude’ (for Prophet Moosa and his nation),
while Shia Muslims believe that day to be a day of mourning and sorrow (
www.iqrasense.com/.../ashura-of-muharram-a-shia-and-sunni-muslim-ob
accessed 4 May 2015).
tribunal accepts the further references in the DFAT Thematic Report Shias in
Pakistan 14 April 2015 as follows (bolding added
Terrorist Attacks
The major threat to Shias in Pakistan comes from anti-Shia and
militant groups,
particularly the
Lashkar-e-Jhangvi (LeJ), Sipah-e-Sahaba
and Jundullah. Ahl-e-Sunnat Wal Jammat (ASWJ) is often
referred to as the political arm of SSP or as the same group operating under
new name. The majority of these networks have broad aims which
strong anti-Shia agenda
. Various Pakistani
groups have also
claimed a number of attacks on Shias.
4.7 Due in part to the visibility and concentration of Shias present,
processions have been a particular target of Sunni militant
groups. For example, in 2012 militant groups targeted
processions
in Rawalpindi, Dera Ismail Khan and
killing at least 30 Shia
participants. Violence broke out between Sunnis and Shias in Rawalpindi during
in 2013, which then spilled over into other parts of the
Militant Groups
is the main perpetrator of anti-Shia violence in Pakistan.
It is a collection of loosely coordinated cells linked to other militant
networks including
. Originally based in the Punjab as an offshoot
of the SSP, the LeJ aims to establish an Islamist Sunni state in Pakistan, by
means if necessary.
It also aims to have all Shias declared
non-believers
and to eliminate followers of other faiths, especially Jews,
Christians and Hindus. The LeJ has claimed responsibility for attacks
Shia community, particularly Hazaras in Quetta,
Shias in the Federally
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA)
and attacks in Karachi. In an open letter
in November 2012, the LeJ’s leadership declared their intention to
this impure sect’, being ‘the Shias and the Hazara
Shias’. Pakistan designated the LeJ as a terrorist organisation
tribunal also accepts the DFAT Country Report Pakistan 14 April 2015 as follows,
(bolding added by the tribunal).
2.24 According to information
provided to Pakistan’s Supreme Court, the Taliban insurgency and the war
on terrorism has resulted
in 49,000 deaths and displaced millions of people
in Pakistan
since 2001. Conflict in the
Pakhtunkhwa is an important factor for internal displacement and external
Militant groups
most potent security threat in Pakistan
remains the
mostly-Pashtun Taliban insurgency based in the FATA
and parts of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa which operates under the banner of the
Tehreek-e Taliban Pakistan
The TTP represents a loose network of Sunni militants groups
originally formed in 2007. Although they are ideologically aligned,
maintains an identity distinct from the Afghan Taliban, which is widely
accepted to have an operational base in Quetta, the capital
of Balochistan
province. Open sources also suggest senior members of the Afghan Taliban have
relocated to Karachi.
The TTP has carried out a number of high-profile attacks in many
parts of Pakistan
against government security forces and institutions,
political rivals, civilian infrastructure and
against non-Sunni
. This has included direct attacks using small arms, suicide
bombings, car bombs, improvised explosive devices and complex attacks
a combination of these methods. For example,
has conducted
complex attacks against the Pakistani military’s General Headquarters in
Rawalpindi in 2010, the Pakistan Naval
Station Mehran in Karachi in 2011 and
against Karachi Airport in June 2014.
2.29 There have also been numerous incidents of religious, sectarian and
communal violence in Pakistan. In some cases, sectarian violence
is mutual, with
both sides acting as belligerents. However, DFAT assesses that minority groups
are often disproportionately the victims
of sectarian violence (see also
‘Religion’, below).
Various Sunni militant groups
Lashkar-e Jhangvi (LeJ), Lashkar-e Taiba (LeT) and Jaish-e Mohammad (JeM)
operate in Pakistan. Shia militant group Sipah-e-Muhammad
Pakistan (SMP) the
main perpetrator of anti-Sunni violence, is also banned in Pakistan.
Pakistani governments’ repeated bans on militant groups, they remain
active across Pakistan,
particularly in Karachi, Quetta and southern and
central Punjab.
the second tribunal hearing the applicant said that, recently in the last 2 to 3
days, the Taliban have killed human rights
activists in Karachi. The applicant
said in all these cities, including Islamabad, Karachi and so on, all law
enforcement agencies
have failed.
applicant’s adviser submitted orally at the second tribunal hearing that
there is now the presence of the Islamic State
(IS) also known as
. She referred to an article in the Jamestown Foundation dated 3
April 2015, which she has provided to the tribunal (ff.82-76(a)
1419914). The adviser stated at the hearing that indications are now confirmed.
This is a problem for the applicant who
is a Shia, as the IS is a Sunni group
and is very dangerous. The adviser indicated that one of the Taliban leaders
has been identified
as the leader of this group in the Khurasan region around
Pakistan/Afghanistan. The adviser stated that it shows the capacity of
make its way further, which would lead to an increased risk to the applicant.
tribunal has reproduced some of the 4 April 2015 report by the Jamestown
Foundation ‘TerrorismMonitor‘ referred to
as “‘Wilayat
Khurasan:’ Islamic State Consolidates Position In Afpak Region’
(Volume XIII, Issue 7 April
4, 2015, page 3, Animesh Roul). (bolding added by
the tribunal).
Amid a series of government denials from Pakistan
and Afghanistan regarding the presence of the Islamic State militant group in
countries and its ongoing outreach activities there, its expansion was
corroborated by none other than the Islamic State’s
spokesperson, Abu
Muhammad al-Adnani, on January 26, 2015 (
[Lahore] September 5,
[Karachi]. November 11, 2014;
February 5).
Al-Adnani, who is believed to be in Iraq or Syria, formally announced the
establishment of Wilayat Khurasan (literally
Khurasan Province, hereinafter IS
Khurasan), a reference to a historical region broadly centering on Afghanistan
and Pakistan. This
claim was made, in an audio statement entitled “Say,
‘Die in your Rage,’” which was released by Al-Furqan
foundation, one of the Islamic State’s media arms. He also endorsed a
former Taliban commander, Hafiz Saeed Khan, as
its governor (wali) in the same
speech. Khan had previously pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the
self-proclaimed caliph
of the Islamic State, along with a network of other
disgruntled Taliban commanders and foot soldiers.
Footprints in Pakistan
Before its existence was formally announced, IS Khurasan’s presence
was felt across Pakistan in the form of occasional unfurling
of the black flag,
graffiti on the walls supporting the Caliphate and the appearance of Islamic
State stickers, mostly in
, Lahore and the Punjab city of Taxila
in late 2014 (
[Karachi], November 13, 2014;
November 30, 2014). At around the same time, the provincial government of
Balochistan uncovered massive
Islamic State
recruitment drives in Hangu
district in
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
tribal agency in
the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA). It also reportedly recovered
secret official communications between
long- established Pakistani militant
Salafist groups like
Lashkar-e-Jhangvi (LeJ),
Ahl-e-Sunnat wal Jamat
(ASWJ) and the Islamic State, which showed the groups planning attacks on
military installations and government
buildings in
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, and on
the region’s Shia minority
[Karachi], November 8,
These developments suggest that similar oaths of allegiance ... in support of
the Islamic State and al-Baghdadi have made it relatively
easy for the Islamic
State to find traction and a foothold in Pakistan. These militant groups also
remain active. For instance,
in January, Ansar ul-Khilafa wal Jihad claimed
responsibility for killing security personnel in Karachi, Multan, and Hyderabad
News, January 22). ... This indicates that it would likely be relatively
easy for the Islamic State members working with these groups
to begin conducting
attacks on their own in Pakistan.
... The emergence of IS
Khurasan... have encouraged fragmented Taliban units to unite once again under
the Pakistani Taliban’s
umbrella group, the Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan
tribunal has considered this report by the Jamestown Foundation. The tribunal
accepts the movement of IS
into Pakistan
, particularly in Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa and in the Kurram tribal agency in the Federally Administered Tribal
Areas (FATA). It also refers
to fragmented Taliban groups reuniting under the
Pakistani Taliban’s umbrella group, the Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP),
the applicant claimed operated in his area. He fears
if he returns to
, he will be tortured and killed by Sunni militant groups,
Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan, Lashkar-e-Jhangvi and Sipah-e-Sahaba Pakistan
which are also referred to above. This information regarding the IS and its
effect is in addition to the country information
which was before the delegate
and the member of the first tribunal.
tribunal further finds that if the applicant returns to Pakistan he will be
subjected to serious harm from Sunni militia groups
and other Sunni extremists,
which now include Islamic State, due to his Shia religion and his (real or
imputed) political opinion
against the Taliban and/or Taliban–affiliated
groups, and IS.
this regard the tribunal accepts the country information provided by the
applicant’s adviser that extremists ‘want
to cleanse Pakistan of its
highly educated Shia minority’ (paragraph 34, f.33 RRT file 1419914). The
tribunal further accepts
the following country information that there have been
targeted killings of Shia lawyers, doctors and other professionals in Pakistan
(see www.dawn.com/news/786738/time-for-shias-to-leave-pakistan, accessed 10 May
2015). Further, the applicant will be imputed with
a political opinion against
the Taliban due mainly to his [Relative 1]’s outspoken criticism of the
applicant indicated at the hearing with the second tribunal that he said it is
not possible to live in Pakistan because of the
Taliban. Further, there are so
many groups working, they are widespread throughout Pakistan, they are in every
corner of Pakistan.
These groups can exchange information. All of them are
interconnected to each other. The groups work for the same cause, and exchange
information. The tribunal finds that this claim is consistent with the
Jamestown Foundation document above.
is also consistent with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs of
Members of Religious Minorities from Pakistan
, 14 May 2012,
HCR/EG/PAK/12/02, available at: http://www.refworld.org/docid/4fb0ec662.html
(accessed 5 May 2015). See in particular,
the third and fourth dot points below
(bolding added by the tribunal).
In the last year sectarian violence targeting the Shia minority,
including through attacks on Shia processions and religious gatherings
sites, reportedly continued.277 Such attacks were carried out predominantly in
the North-West of the country – including
in Dera Ismail Khan, Hangu,278
Kohat and Tank districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, and
and Orakzai Agencies in FATA – as well as in urban centres throughout the
country – including Gilgit (Northern Areas),
Lahore [p.38]
first para]
Sectarian violence has resulted in hundreds of deaths and
large-scale displacements from Kurram.283 Tensions and clashes between Shia
Sunni tribes in
Kurram Agency
kept the main road linking the region to
the rest of the country blocked throughout 2010 and 2011 (with the exception of
reopening in February 2011),284 thereby impeding access to provisions as
well as healthcare services.285 Incidents of violence against
the Shia minority
continued in 2011 in Pakistan's
tribal agency,286 despite an
alleged peace deal between the Taliban and Shia tribes in the area brokered by
Pakistani security forces
in February 2011.
[p. 40 second
In light of the foregoing, UNHCR considers that members of the Shia
community, particularly those in areas where Taliban-affiliated
active, such as the northwest of Pakistan and in urban centres, may, depending
on the individual circumstances of the
case, be in need of international refugee
protection on account of their religion and/or (imputed) political
[p. 42, 4th
Given the wide geographic reach of some armed militant groups, a
viable IFA/IRA will generally not be available to individuals at
risk of being
targeted by such groups.
The operational capacity of certain militant
groups, such as the Lashkar-e-Jhangvi and Sipah-e-Sahaba Pakistan, extends far
FATA or the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province as evidenced by high-profile
attacks, such as suicide bombings, countrywide,
particularly in urban
309 Furthermore, some non-State agents of persecution, such as
local powerbrokers, organized criminal elements, as well as
armed militant
groups, reportedly have links to or are closely associated with influential
actors in the local and central administration,
law enforcement and/or
judiciary.310 As a result, they often operate with impunity and their reach may
extend beyond the area(s)
under their immediate control
the third and fourth dot points, the tribunal accepts the following current
country information (bolding added by the tribunal).
way of background, Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (
Movement of Pakistan’), alternatively referred to as the Pakistani
Taliban, is an umbrella organization of
various Islamist militant groups based
in the northwestern Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) along the Afghan
Pakistan (en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tehrik-i-Taliban_Pakistan, accessed 30
April 2015).
indicate that militant groups operate across provinces, and communicate using
both mobile phones and computers.
, for example, has a federated
structure, with a command structure in the tribal regions, but also smaller
semi-autonomous structures
in other provinces. For instance, while the
Shura makes executive decisions from the FATA and increasingly
Afghanistan, it’s Punjab cells operate in places like Lahore
behalf. In May 2014 The Nation, an Pakistani English language newspaper, stated
that eight men from Lahore were arrested for
planning to undertake terrorist
acts. The men reportedly had planned to target certain places as well as 33
people on a ‘hit
list’. According to the report the ‘the
militants were also in touch with their handlers in Afghanistan by using special
codes through computers’, suggesting that the targets were given to them
from militants located outside of Punjab (Javed, F
2014, ‘Eight
militants netted in Lahore’, The Nation, 21 May
http://www.nation.com.pk/lahore/17-May-2014/eight-ttp-militants-netted-in-lahore
Accessed 30 April 2015 <CX321004>).
a 2014 article in the journal Terrorism and Political Violence, Stephen Tankel
notes that militant cells may be made-up of people
from various militant groups,
with FATA-based handlers often providing vague directions or simply allowing
cells to self-direct.
(Tankel, S 2014, ‘Beyond FATA: Exploring the Punjabi
Militant Threat to Pakistan’, Terrorism and Political Violence,
<CIS2F827D91918>):
In addition to those who
‘‘float around’’ or adopt new positions on their own,
some militant commanders will
deploy their rank and file for different missions
against a variety of targets. As a result, the authorities often break up cells
in which they find individuals from several different groups. In some instances,
these men do not even know who is organizing them.
Further, leaders in FATA may
issue orders for major attacks, but sometimes those orders are simply to
“do something.”
Meanwhile, local operatives engage in opportunistic
attacks. All of this has made it more difficult for the security services to
track militants and interdict those attempting attacks in Pakistan. (p.14)
targets will be threatened directly by individuals situated in places like
FATA/Afghanistan, but killed by militants operating
in their own area. In March
2014 Dawn, a major Pakistani English language newspaper, reported that three men
belonging to the Awami
National Party were killed in Karachi having been
threatened in phone calls by people in Afghanistan (Rehman, Z U 2014,
Enter TTP’, Dawn, 9 March
http://www.dawn.com/news/1091918
Accessed 30 April 2015
<CX1B9ECAB9990> :
On Feb 21 this year, three ANP activists
— Dr Israr, Jamshed Khan and Razeemullah — were shot dead along with
by unidentified people in MPR colony in Orangi Town. Israr’s
relatives said that the three party activists were receiving threats
Swat chapter. Earlier, on Feb 8, grenades were thrown at the Sher
Shah residence of Raza Jadoon, then Sindh president of Pakhtun Students
Federation as well as at the home of ANP leader Rahim Swati in Qasba Colony
area. Jadoon said that he had been receiving threatening
with the phone code of Afghanistan. In a series of interviews with
Pakhtun political and civil society activists, it emerges that
the TTP Swat
faction has killed a number of political activists mainly belonging to the ANP
as well as social activists in different
parts of the city.
report indicates that, in addition to the situation described by Tankel,
has also sent large numbers of its own fighters to areas outside the
FATA, in this case
The report discusses
the role of the TTP
Swat, TTP Mehsud, and TTP Mohmand chapters
, each connected ethnically to
their counterparts in the FATA and KPK and each able to carry out the orders of
those still situated
in the tribal regions. As with the situation in Punjab,
described by Tankel above, the TTP chapters present in
according to the Dawn report, on their own initiative.
regard to this country information, the tribunal finds that the TTP and its
Sunni militia affiliated groups, which now include
Islamic State, are more than
able to execute the applicant wherever the applicant may live in Pakistan.
tribunal is satisfied that there is a real chance that the applicant would be
located, tortured and killed by the Taliban and/or
associated Sunni militia if
he were to return to Pakistan.
focus of the Convention definition is not upon the protection that the country
of nationality might be able to provide in some
particular region, but upon a
more general notion of protection by that country. The international community
is not under an obligation
to provide protection outside the borders of the
country of nationality if real protection can be found within those borders.
even if an applicant has a well-founded fear of persecution in his
could nevertheless
avail himself of the real protection of her country of nationality elsewhere
within that country: Randhawa v Minister
for Immigration Local Government &
Ethnic Affairs
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 52 FCR 437
per Black CJ at 440-1.
this principle only applies to people who can genuinely access domestic
protection, and for whom the reality of protection
is meaningful. If relocation
is not a reasonable option in the particular circumstances, it may be said that,
in the relevant sense,
the person’s fear of persecution in relation to
that country as a whole is well-founded: Randhawa per Black CJ at 442-3,
J at 450-1.
regard to the evidence and findings above in relation to it being not safe for
the applicant to live anywhere in Pakistan,
the Tribunal finds that the real
chance of the applicant being harmed is not localised to his home region and
that there is a real
chance that he will be harmed wherever he might live in
tribunal asked the applicant whether he considered that the Pakistani
authorities are willing and able to protect him if he were
to return to
Pakistan. The applicant said ‘They are unable to protect themselves,
beyond thinking they can protect us.’
applicant agreed that some of the Turi people would tag along behind the army
convoys when they were travelling along through
the main road, thus hoping for
some form of protection. He indicated, however, the Army is now doing other
things and the Turi people
take risks in travelling on the road alone (that is,
without the Army
state protection the Tribunal accepts the following DFAT Country Report Pakistan
14 April 2015, as follows:
State Protection
5.1 Pakistan’s laws and
Constitution
provide for state protection of
people’s property, lives and religious beliefs and places. However, DFAT
assesses that state
protection can be limited by a general lack of resources
and, in some cases, political will. Militant attacks against police, security
forces and the judiciary make it difficult for Pakistani governments to exercise
effective control in some areas, such as the Federally
Administered Tribal Areas
(FATA) and remote areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan.
5.7 Although Pakistan’s individual police forces vary in their
effectiveness, their capacity to maintain law and order is limited
by a lack of
resources, poor training, insufficient and outmoded equipment, and political
manipulation. These factors can result
in an inability and sometimes
unwillingness to undertake effective policing, including to avoid censure by
their superiors, political
actors or the judiciary. Police departments are also
perceived to be among the most corrupt institutions in Pakistan, which further
undermines public trust in police as an institution.
5.11 In practice, Pakistan’s judicial system struggles to finalise
cases quickly, fairly and transparently, due in part to a
lack of qualified
prosecutors and judges. There are credible reports of corruption within the
judiciary. Intimidation of the judiciary,
particularly for blasphemy cases and
usually in lower courts, also occurs.
the tribunal accepts the DFAT Thematic Report Shias in Pakistan 14 April 2015,
which relevantly states as follows:
State Protection
5.2 ..., Pakistani authorities face capacity constraints. A lack of resources
limits the federal and provincial governments’
ability to protect the Shia
community at all times and in all places, given that the population is large and
dispersed. Although
Pakistani authorities have made efforts to capture and
prosecute members of sectarian outfits, conviction rates remain low.
Tribunal is satisfied that there is a real chance that the applicant will be
subjected to attacks on his life by the TTP or other
affiliated Sunni militia
groups if he were to return to Pakistan, and that state protection is not
adequate. The Pakistani authorities
are not willing and able to protect the
applicant if he were to return to Pakistan.
Tribunal finds find that the applicant’s evidence is credible. The
Tribunal accepts his claims as set out above, unless
the tribunal has made
specific findings otherwise.
the Tribunal finds that the persecution which the applicant fears involves
‘serious harm’ as required by section
91R(1)(b) of the Migration Act
in that it involves a threat to the applicant’s life or liberty (s.91R
Tribunal is satisfied that there is a real chance of persecution occurring to
the applicant in the reasonably foreseeable future,
if he were to return to
Pakistan. The Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant’s race, religion,
and political opinion are
the essential and significant reasons for the
persecution which he fears, as required by section 91R(1)(a) of the Act. The
finds that the persecution the applicant faces is being tortured and
killed, which involves a threat to the applicant’s life,
and it involves
‘serious harm’ to the person (s.91R(1)(b)). The Tribunal further
considers that the persecution which
the applicant faces involves systematic and
discriminatory conduct, as required by s.91R(1)(c), in that it is deliberate or
intentional
and involves selective harassment for a Convention reason.
Tribunal finds that there is no safe place in Pakistan for the applicant.
Tribunal finds that, based on the country information before the tribunal, there
is no adequate and effective state protection
in Pakistan for the applicant.
the Tribunal is satisfied on the evidence before it that the applicant has a
well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention
related reason.
Tribunal accepts the applicant’s evidence that the applicant has only
travelled to [certain countries], and he does not
have a right to enter into and
reside in any country other than Pakistan.
tribunal finds on the evidence before it that the applicant does not have a
right to enter and reside in any country other than
the Tribunal has found that the applicant satisfies the criterion set out in
s.36(2)(a), there is no need for the Tribunal to consider
the complementary
protection provisions set out in s.36(2)(aa).
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant is a
CONCLUSIONS
the reasons given above, the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant is a
person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the
Refugees Convention. Therefore the applicant satisfies the criterion set out in
s.36(2)(a).
Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the direction that the
applicant satisfies s.36(2)(a) of the Migration Act.
Robert Wilson
RTF format (232 KB)
Signed PDF/A format