Whitehead & Whitehead [2025] FedCFamC2F 1027 (28 July 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Whitehead & Whitehead
FedCFamC2F 1027
File number(s):
NCC 2868 of 2022
Judgment of:
JUDGE SUTHERS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
FAMILY LAW –
Costs application
where final property and parenting orders were made by consent
conduct contrary to overarching purpose
there were exceptional circumstances to warrant an order for indemnity costs
against the respondent husband as sought by the
applicant wife
where the respondent’s conduct has been poor
just to make a
costs order –
special costs order made against the respondent
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law (Fees) Regulations 2022
reg 2.08 & Schedule 1
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules
(Cth) Chapter 12
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (Family Law)
(Cth) Schedule 1
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors’ Conduct Rules
(NSW) r 17.1
Cases cited:
Albert & Plowman
[2022] FedCFamC1F
Cassidy v Murray
[1995] FamCA 91
(1995) 19 Fam LR 492
Colgate-Palmolive Co. v Cussons Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 536
Fitzgerald (as child representative for A (Legal Aid Commission of
Tasmania v Fish
[2005] FamCA 158
In the Marriage of Munday & Bowman
[1997] FLC 92-784
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
(1990) 7 ALR
Lawson & Glenning
[2021] FedCFamC2F 118
(2021) 64 Fam LR
Lombardi & Rider
[2021] FedCFamC2F 57
(2021) 64 Fam LR
Medlon & Medlon (No. 6) (Indemnity Costs)
[2015] FamCAFC
Penfold v Penfold
[1980] HCA 4
(1980) 5 Fam LR 579
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Moutasallem
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Cole & Butler Solicitors
NCC 2868 of 2022
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
MS WHITEHEAD
MR WHITEHEAD
JUDGE SUTHERS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
to r 12.28 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law)
), the Court certifies
that at the hearing on 9 May 2025, it was reasonable for the respondent, MR
WHITEHEAD (‘the respondent’),
to engage counsel to attend on their
4.00pm Monday 25 August 2025
, the respondent is to pay the costs of the
applicant, MS WHITEHEAD’S (‘the applicant’), fixed in the sum
as directed in writing by the applicant.
by the due date in Order 2, the respondent fails to pay all or part of the costs
awarded THEN the outstanding sum (together with
default interest) shall be
deducted from the respondent’s share of the sale proceeds of B Street,
Town C in the State of New
South Wales (‘
and paid to the applicant as directed in writing by them before the respondent
receives the balance.
facilitate these Orders and better explain Notation B, the applicant is
permitted to provide a copy of the Judgment to the solicitor/conveyancer
appointed to conduct the sale of
COURT DIRECTS THAT:
outstanding applications are dismissed.
THE COURT NOTES
1.f.v.2. made 9 August 2024 specifies the percentage adjustment payable to the
respondent from the nett sale proceeds of
Order 3 is triggered as a result of the respondent’s default and the
parties are in dispute about what the quantum of default
interest looks like; to
avoid further litigation between the parties at the expense of access to justice
being available to other
members of the community, the Court expects the parties
to co-operate to arrange either-
lawyer/conveyancer having conduct of the sale of
to calculate the default interest component with
any costs incurred in doing so
being the sole responsibility of the
and deducted from the respondent’s share of the sale
proceeds of
before the respondent receives the
Calculation
of default interest is specified within rr 12.19 and 10.17 of
. The reason the Court has had to identify these provisions is to
support the parties’ lawyers engaging co-operatively (should
arise) because the evidence to-date would suggest that to varying degrees each
of them has lost some of the objectivity
expected of lawyers.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE SUTHERS
INTRODUCTION
year during the course of a trial, the parties were able to resolve both their
parenting and property disputes. The applicant
subsequently sought indemnity
costs against the respondent because (in part) their position was untenable
and/or their was conduct
poor. The respondent resisted the application and
sought their costs of defending the application. Is it just for me to make a
costs order and if so against whom?
of respect for each person’s gender and social status, other than parties,
persons will be identified by their surnames
and where possible there will be an
avoidance of the use of gendered pronouns.
costs application was initiated by MS WHITEHEAD (‘the applicant’). A
response to the application was filed by MR WHITEHEAD
respondent’). Costs are sought for the parenting and property proceeding
the substantive proceeding
’), the recusal
application and the costs application (with the latter two collectively
described as ‘
summary proceedings
issues and outcomes for determination by me are –
(a) What findings should I make about each party’s conduct?
(b) Has either party been wholly unsuccessful in either
substantive
summary proceedings
(c) Have offer(s) been made to settle
the substantive
summary proceedings
and if so, what were the terms?
(d) If it is just to make a costs order, on what basis should it be made and
upon what terms including whether an enforcement provision
should be built-in?
costs dispute invokes:
Sections 95
Family Law Act 1975
(‘the Act’);
(b) Chapter 12 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family
Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) (‘the Div 1 Rules’); and
(c) Schedule 1 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division
2) (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) (‘the Div 2 Rules’).
this decision are the following uncontroversial circumstances, with the
inclusion of some initial observations by me.
September 2022, the applicant commenced parenting and property proceedings. At
the time that the applicant’s current lawyer
took over conduct of the
case, in summary, the applicant was seeking –
(a) Sole parental responsibility for the subject children,
(b) The subject children to live with the applicant when not attending boarding
(c) Undefined time to be spent between the subject children and the
respondent,
(d) Liberal but undefined telephone communications between the subject children
and the respondent, and
(e) Sole occupancy of a home in B Street, Town C (‘
speaking, through the affidavit of their lawyer, SYLVESTER MARTIN RODRICK
CLAUDIUS JOSEPH (‘JOSEPH’), the respondent
contended that in
commencing proceedings the applicant engaged in poor conduct. The respondent
contended that the applicant failed
to comply with their obligations pursuant to
the Court’s Central Practice
and the pre-action
procedures set out in Schedule 1 of the Div 1
‘H3’ is the applicant’s filed Genuine Steps Certificate which
declares that any failure to take ‘genuine
steps’ to resolve or
narrow the issues in dispute was due to their view that it was unsafe to do so
because there were allegations
of child abuse or family violence or risks of one
(1) of those circumstances occurring.
this submission taking up time during the costs hearing, from the evidence, it
is not apparent to me that at the time of responding
, the respondent sought any
adverse relief against the applicant for alleged poor conduct. Instead, and
despite the applicant’s
process being jurisdictionally out of time, the
evidence suggested he too sought parenting and property relief with the
of SUSANNA MICHELLE DAKIN (‘DAKIN’) suggesting their
relief included –
(a) Shared parental responsibility of the subject children,
(b) The subject children to live with each parent week-about,
(c) The respondent to retain
(d) The applicant to return to the respondent a motor vehicle and
of the controversies between the parties were quelled by a series of consent
orders made in October 2022 including leave to commence
property proceedings out
In these circumstances
one wonders as to the relevance of the respondent’s criticism which
spilled over from evidence into
submissions, and the possible inefficient use of
both the respondent’s capital and the court’s time in hearing about
respondent makes other allegations of poor conduct against the applicant
post-filing, including that in mid to late 2022, the
applicant filed or served
material late, asserting that as a result, an interlocutory hearing was
adjourned by three (3) weeks.
DAKIN says that at some unspecified time before the adjourned interim hearing,
they took over carriage of the proceeding because
of the former lawyer suffering
from ill-health.
interim hearing occurred with orders made in late December 2022
the December 2022 orders
’). Orders 10 to 12
permitted the respondent to have sole occupation of
be responsible for day-to-day maintenance, maintain and pay for various ongoing
obligations such as insurance, rates, and mortgage
repayments with the latter to
be deducted from the respondent’s bank account.
on DAKIN’s evidence
safe to say that neither party’s position was entirely made out, but as
Austin J was quick to point out, that is not
the test embedded within s
117(2A)(e).
a procedural hearing coming up, and a s 62G child impact report
’) pending, the Court enquired whether the
parties wished to retain the pre-existing procedural hearing event or adjourn
event until after
had been released. In the face of
the respondent pressing for the retention of the existing event, the applicant
instructed their
lawyer to reach out to the respondent in an effort to resolve
any outstanding procedural issues and avoid the cost of
exchange of communications
but ultimately the
procedural hearing on 25 January 2023 took place with somewhat generic
orders made about disclosure and the filing
of consolidated affidavits.
21 March 2023, the respondent’s review application of
the December
2022 orders
was determined with a consent parenting order made
increasing the children’s time with the respondent and the respondent
their interim property
costs order was made in favour of the applicant requiring the respondent to pay
$1,760 by 23 June 2023 (‘
any apparent remorse for their conduct, the respondent (through the evidence of
their lawyer) says that their failure to make
multiple mortgage repayments as
the December 2022 orders
was because of their decision to
change their banking details and (presumably) their failure to update their
information as held
says that the applicant informed the respondent of this situation on 26 April
So at that point, the
respondent was aware that they were in default less than five (5) months after
they got what they wanted out
the December 2022 orders
exclusive occupation of
provided they paid the
outgoings).
given their occupation, JOSEPH, appeared to adopt the old chestnut that
“the best form of defence is attack”.
I make this observation
because it seemed that the point of their evidence was to deflect blame for the
non-payment of the
outgoings upon the applicant for not
asking their lawyer to do something sooner to bring the default to the attention
of either the
respondent or
reality, it appeared that the applicant had brought the default position to the
respondent’s attention a month earlier than
disclosed in JOSEPH’s
affidavit, and frankly, the obligation to comply with court orders falls on the
party the subject of
the coercive order and not on anyone else!
4 May 2023, the applicant instructed their lawyer to provide the respondent with
a written offer
which appeared
(a) identify a non-exhaustive list of property that was either “in”
(b) provide for the sale of assets although not particularised in a way as to be
(c) provide for sale proceeds to be held on trust,
(d) provide for two-pool property adjustment regime such that:
(i) the parties each have the benefit of one-half of all nett (unspecified)
assets excluding
(ii) the applicant received 60% of the value of
respondent 40% - although it is unclear what that actually looked like and how
it was to be achieved,
the two-pools offer
that same document, reference is made to a tipper trailer (‘
tipper trailer
’) including a possible transfer of ownership. The
applicant asked for some clarity about what the respondent allegedly had
communicated to themselves, including the production of a copy of the
registration for
the tipper trailer
. There was no evidence that a
response was forthcoming and into that vacuum, in September
, the applicant made another
offer and again referred to the respondent
paying out an
$18,000 debt owed to their parents by way of transfer of
the respondent being formally on notice (via legal correspondence from DAKIN to
JOSEPH), the applicant was forced to initiate
interlocutory proceedings. The
applicant was successful (second-time given they initially and unsuccessfully
sought for similar
relief in 2022). More costs were incurred and in July 2023
Orders were made discharging Orders 10 – 12 of the
December 2022
so that the applicant secured sole occupation of
and all the responsibilities that came with that.
part of this new tranche of Orders, the respondent was to leave
in a clean and tidy state, free from further damage, or
rubbish in order to allow the applicant to take up possession upon
DAKIN (when it
should have been the applicant’s evidence) contended that
was not left in a state fit for their client to take up
occupation, although the exhibited photos were not adduced through the sworn
testimony of the person who allegedly took the photos and so the weight to be
attributed to them was limited because there is no
context, and the Court was
being asked to accept the hearsay evidence of
countered by alleging that the applicant’s decision not to move in was a
voluntary one, again this was not evidence,
but a snide submission which had the
potential to muddy the waters.
deponent lawyer could sensibly give the evidence they tried to adduce - wasting
their client’s money and my time.
the morning of yet another procedural hearing and at the instigation of the
applicant who had re-opened their previous
two-pools offer
the respondent finally responded with their own alternative offers by
way of email communication on 18 August
the procedural hearing, the respondent made another offer and the applicant
responded on 13 September 2023 with a critical
analysis of the
respondent’s last offer (which the
calculated amounted to
property adjustment in favour of the respondent, as well as
providing a further offer which essentially was another “two-pools
approach” identifying the property being disbursed 60:40 in the
applicant’s favour and the rest of the property being
sold with the
proceeds distributed 50:50 between the
correspondence about the payment of
the costs order
was sent to
the respondent on 8 November
The respondent’s
evidence was silent on this follow-up correspondence.
8 January 2024 and still not having received their costs as ordered, the
applicant brought enforcement proceedings which (it seems)
led to payment of
the costs order
on 2 February 2024, almost six (6) months’
So, another interlocutory
application was instituted because of the respondent’s failure to comply
with an Order of the Court.
enforcement application was returnable on 5 February 2024 but was ultimately
dismissed on the same day as the payment was made
by the respondent with a
notation to the Order observing that the application was ...
not supported by
an Affidavit addressing the requirements of Rule 11.06.
No default interest
appeared to have been sought by the applicant, despite them being entitled to
is unsurprising given the respondent’s attitude to-date, which may well
have caused the applicant to conduct a cost-benefit
analysis about throwing good
money (more legal costs in asking for the default interest) after bad (having to
spend the money to
institute the enforcement proceeding in the first place). If
that is what happened, that is not what the proper administration of
looks like. I cannot make any finding because there is insufficient evidence
upon which to do so or upon which a reasonable
inference can be drawn; but a
party should not have to contract away or resile from their rights as enshrined
within the law just
because another party is being intransigent.
release of a s 62G family report, further attempts to resolve the parenting
proceeding occurred without success. Despite
trying to mitigate against the
applicant’s time and money being needlessly spent on trial material,
ultimately the state of
negotiations required the applicant to file their trial
material substantially in compliance with the trial directions made 6 May
June, July and then August 2024 the respondent made various offers to resolve
some, if not all of the outstanding substantive proceedings
Inexplicably,
the respondent’s material was filed about nine (9) days out from the
trial, set to commence on 7 August
I am unsure why the
respondent was so tardy in the filing of their trial material, but again it was
another act of non-compliant
conduct causing (at the very least) inconvenience
to the applicant and the Court and at worst a strategy meant to impinge on the
administration of justice.
of the respondent’s material included an Undertaking as to Disclosure.
DAKIN says that on the first morning of the trial,
she approached JOSEPH
querying the respondent’s reliance upon the Undertaking because ...
fact, no documents had been received despite multiple repeated
his affidavit, JOSEPH made this bald assertion –
Husband had complied with his duty of disclosure and provided documents by way
of disclosure to the wife up to and until the commencement
evidence is proffered in support of that contention. It is mere puffery.
fact what did occur and only after-hours on the first day of the trial, was that
JOSEPH sent email correspondence to DAKIN with
limited disclosure. I make that
finding because there is no other evidence proffered by the respondent to
discount what DAKIN says
was the extent of the respondent’s efforts at
making disclosure when clearly the respondent was on notice that this was a
to be argued against
consistent with DAKIN’s evidence about the respondent’s
non-disclosure about
the tipper trail
(including I infer, who
, on the final day of
the trial, an order was made joining Ms D (‘Ms D’) as second
respondent, after which final property
consent orders (‘
property consent orders
’) were made disposing of the proceeding
which included
the tipper trailer
being transferred back to the
respondent and then for that asset to be sold (along with other specified
assets) at auction.
the substantive proceeding
s being finalised, the question of costs
was unresolved by way of any Order of the Court, and it was common ground that
the parties’
were entitled to prosecute a costs application. As required,
I will return to the terms of two (2) final consent orders
the Court on 7 August 2024 and then 9 August 2024.
6 September 2024, the respondent was served with the applicant’s costs
application which had been set down for hearing on
8 October 2024. On 4 October
2024, the respondent filed a recusal application, which resulted in the costs
hearing being adjourned
to a different judicial officer, notwithstanding that
the recusal application was dismissed. Costs were reserved. There was no
explanation about why the recusal application was filed four (4)
days’ out from the costs hearing when it would have been prudent
least put the applicant on notice of the respondent’s intentions so as to
ameliorate the applicant throwing legal costs
away in preparing for a hearing
that may not happen because the recusal application would need to be resolved
the course of submissions, it became evident that the respondent had not
distributed to the applicant their 60% entitlement
in the sale proceeds achieved
from the sale of the various assets including
the tipper trailer
I heard that JOSEPH had released funds to the respondent, and that because the
applicant had not provided account details but rather
had disputed the
respondent’s contended 50:50 distribution, nothing had happened with
whatever was left in the respondent’s
lawyers’ trust account.
a result of this extraordinary admission, the relevant account details were
provided during the hearing and as I understand it
$10,197.75 would be
transferred to the applicant after the hearing concluded.
part of the 9 August 2024 consent orders,
was to be sold
and when I heard the costs application, the properly remained on the market.
The consent orders provided that upon
settlement any nett balance was to be
divided 60:40 in favour of the
turning more closely to the costs dispute:
the substantive proceeding
, the applicant contended for an
indemnity costs order fixed in the sum of $37,997 and $7,150 for
summary proceedings
(b) The respondent said that no costs orders should be made in
substantive proceeding
and that a party and party costs award should be
made in their favour if they succeeded in having the applicant’s claim for
the substantive proceeding
was no dispute that it was reasonable for counsel to appear at the costs hearing
given the complex nature of the dispute and
the contentious evidence of each
party’s lawyer which may have caused one (1) or both of them during the
costs dispute to lose
their objectivity at the risk of their client’s
interests becoming secondary.
have a broad discretion in exercising the costs jurisdiction, including that I
do not have to find a
to make out a costs order pursuant to s
117(2) of the Act:
Penfold v Penfold
(1980) 5 Fam LR 579
(1980) FLC 90-800
pp 75,053-75,054.
High Court of Australia in
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR
(1990) 7 ALR 45
stated as follows:
...in exercising its discretion to award or refuse costs, a court should look at
the matter primarily from the perspective of the
defendant. To do so conforms to
fundamental principle. If one thing is clear in the realm of costs, it is that,
in criminal as well
as civil proceedings, costs are not awarded by way of
punishment of the unsuccessful party. They are compensatory in the sense that
they are awarded to indemnify the successful party against the expense to which
he or she has been put by reason of the legal proceedings.
this regard, I also take note of the Full Court decision (Fogarty, Kay, and Hase
Cassidy v Murray
[1995] FamCA 91
(1995) 19 Fam LR 492
(1995) FLC 92-633
have considered all of the s 117(2A) matters, but for the sake of efficiency, I
will only reflect on those that had a significant
bearing in relation to the
parties' circumstances and the decision to be made. In that regard I note that
no one consideration under
s 117(2A) prevails over any other and the weight to
be accorded to each of the relevant factors is at my
discretion.
is nothing to prevent just one (1) consideration as set out in s 117(2A) being
the sole foundation for an order for
turn then to the issues.
What findings should I make about each party’s
up each party’s contentions about the other’s conduct and noting
that neither party accepted the opportunity
to cross-examine the other, I should
act cautiously in making findings about contentious issues unless the evidence
s 117(2A)(c) is limited to conduct “in relation to” the proceedings,
s 117(2A)(g) enables me to have regard to
conduct that I consider to be relevant
that would otherwise not fall within the earlier paragraph.
family law jurisdiction has for a long time been concerned about the effect of a
party's conduct on case management. In a bid
to reinforce the importance of the
efficient, cost-effective and equitable management of the Court's caseload (and
the inherent benefits
to families in doing so), parties can face costs orders if
the Court is satisfied that there has been a failure to comply with the
conduct proceedings in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose:
see ss 95 and 96.
paraphrase Alstergren CJ in
[2021] FedCFamC2F 57
(2021) 64 Fam LR 103
elements of the overarching purpose (now found within the Act) seek to ensure
the efficient use of judicial and administrative
resources to ensure the timely
disposal of cases. The Court’s obligation to pursue the overarching
purpose is the driving
force behind the Rules of Court and the Central Practice
fulfilling their duty towards the overarching purpose - it is imperative that
parties (and their lawyers) need to focus on the
just resolution of their case
quickly and ...
in a manner
that does not cause unnecessary use of
Court resources or their own
on the evidence, and despite the written contention of the
, I am satisfied that
the respondent’s conduct has been poor, and some examples are set out
(a) Despite being the subject of Orders of the Court made about their obligation
to be responsible for the maintenance of
including the
payment of outgoings, the respondent has been reluctant to make disclosure of
their compliance (or attempts at compliance)
or has engaged in a pattern of
behaviour aimed at deflecting blame onto the applicant for their own failings,
causing costs to be
expended in replying to the allegations and addressing the
allegations during the hearing before
(b) The applicant has been forced to initiate two (2) separate interlocutory
applications to address the respondent’s default
with Orders of the Court
raising the applicant’s costs, wasting the Court’s time, and denying
members of the community
better access to justice because judicial resources
were being otherwise taken up as a result of the filings.
(c) The respondent has failed in their duty of disclosure by not providing
fulsome and continuing disclosure in a timely manner which
resulted in the
parties being unable to engage in genuine settlement negotiations and
culminating in a settlement only being achieved
once a third party was joined to
the substantive proceeding
on the last day of the trial so that
minutes of consent could then be considered by the Court to resolve the property
the final property consent orders
(d) The applicant’s costs were thrown away because four (4) days out from
the original costs hearing, the respondent filed
a recusal application which
caused the adjournment of the costs hearing to a future date before me.
(e) The respondent incorrectly calculated the applicant’s entitlement to
sale proceeds in accordance with
the final property consent orders
and acted with disregard for the applicant’s protestations about the
calculation error, leading to an impasse in the applicant
receiving their
entitlement which was only addressed in the midst of the costs hearing wasting
more of the Court’s time and
the parties’ legal costs.
of these findings were based on controversial evidence but where there was
controversy I found in favour of the applicant’s
contentions, because the
respondent’s evidence was inherently unreliable because it was
inconsistent with the tendered material
and Orders made by the Court.
also observe that in making these findings I was sorely tempted to make an
adverse conduct finding against not only the respondent,
but also JOSEPH, who in
my view, gave evidence beyond his remit and at the risk of becoming a mouthpiece
for his client and causing
the Court to be misled.
is overly concerning to me that JOSEPH thought it proper to conclude that his
client had ...
complied with his duty of disclosure
up to and until
commencement of the trial
, when on day three (3) Ms D was not only joined,
but then ordered to transfer an asset to the respondent in circumstances where
applicant had enquired about the state of ownership of
over a year before. Whether this evidence meets the colloquial
term of “sharp practice” is not a matter I wish to waste
addition, and whether on instructions or not, it was breathtaking to me that
JOSEPH decided to do nothing about the controversy
regarding the distribution to
the applicant of their share of the sale proceeds in accordance with
final property consent orders
, despite being made aware of the error in
their calculation.
and despite the respondent (on multiple occasions) consenting to orders to
resolve disputes; the respondent’s conduct
caused the applicant to bring
two (2) interlocutory applications and denied the applicant the ability to
properly negotiate to resolve
some, if not all, of the property dispute prior to
the trial commencing almost two (2) years after
the substantive
was initiated.
respondent’s conduct caused the incurrence of significant costs to the
applicant and impaired the community’s access
to justice because, had full
disclosure been made when it was required,
the substantive
may have had a far greater chance of a timely resolution or
at least a reduction in the issues to be prosecuted, resulting in less
time being allocated and costs incurred.
there were issues of poor conduct about the applicant, I am unable to make any
findings of substance that would inform the exercise
of my discretion.
Has either party been wholly unsuccessful in either the
substantive and/or summary proceedings?
respondent’s recusal application was dismissed.
both parties sought to make submissions about
the substantive
, I am not satisfied that it was a key issue in the exercise
of my discretion. Overall, I accept the thoughtful written submissions
respondent’s counsel as to
the substantive proceeding
to the costs application, I will return to that issue later.
Have offer(s) been made to settle the substantive proceedings
or summary proceedings and if so, what were the terms?
circumstances where I have made adverse findings about the respondent’s
failure to disclose that impugned genuine property
settlement negotiations
taking place, I am not going to spend much time reflecting on this issue.
for parenting, I accept the written submissions of the respondent’s
these reasons, I am not satisfied that I can making any findings over and above
that the applicant’s ability to make a genuine
offer was impeded by the
respondent’s poor conduct.
If it is just to make a costs order, on what basis should it be
made and upon what terms including whether an enforcement provision
exercising my discretion, I must have regard to s 117 of the Act which sets out
the Court’s jurisdiction as far as costs
are concerned including a
rebuttable principle that each party should bear their own costs. I say
rebuttable, because if the Court
is satisfied that in the circumstances of the
case it would be just to do so, then a costs order against a party may be made.
am satisfied that it is just for me to make a costs order against the
primarily because
their conduct has been so poor (as reflected in the findings previously made)
and that this conduct then infected
not only the process of engaging in genuine
property settlement negotiations but also in the overall case management of the
including –
(a) right up to day three (3) of the trial when a new party had to be joined to
allow the parties’ rightful property interests
to be adjusted, and
(b) the late adjournment of the hearing of the applicant’s costs
application because of the respondent’s filing of a
recusal application
just days before that hearing was to occur, and
(c) the hearing before me running longer than it should have because
arrangements had to be made to ensure the respondent belatedly
complied with
their obligation to pay the applicant their 60% share of the sale proceeds of
property sold months earlier.
relation to the indemnity costs aspect, the applicant’s evidence does not
meet the bar set by r 12.13(4) of the Div 1 Rules.
far as the trial was concerned, it is regrettable that no one prepared a
schedule for party and party costs for either
the substantive
or either of the summary applications brought afterwards.
Doing the best I can, from the Court Record of court hearings, I am satisfied
that the combined costs would have been in excess of
as calculated
Table 1 – Estimate of party and party costs for the trial
Substantive proceeding
Initiating or opposing an application that includes interim orders (other than
procedural orders) up to the completion of the first
court date before a
judicial registrar (‘JR’) on
(b) Daily hearing fee as per item 13(a) @ $321
(c) Advocacy loading 50% of the daily hearing fee specified in item 13 that
applies to the hearing @ $160.50
Summary (interim) hearing – as a discrete event before a Senior Judicial
Registrar (‘SJR’) on
Summary (interim) hearing – as a discrete event before a Senior Judicial
Registrar (‘SJR’) on
Attendance at hearing on
to take judgment and explain orders
(b) Daily hearing fee as per item 13(a) @ $321
Conciliation conference (including preparation) on
Procedural or summary hearing before a JR on
Initiating or opposing an application for interlocutory orders (including an
interim hearing) before a Judge that is not otherwise
described in item 1 or 2
(a) $2,093.62
(b) Daily hearing fee as per item 13(b) @ $1,255.75
(c) Advocacy loading 50% of the daily hearing fee specified in item 13 that
applies to the hearing @ $627.88
Procedural or summary hearing before a JR on
Other dispute resolution (including preparation) on
Other dispute resolution (including preparation) on
Initiating or opposing an application for interlocutory orders (including an
interim hearing) before a SJR that is not otherwise
described in item 1 or 2 on
18.07.2023***
(a) $2,093.62
(b) Daily hearing fee as per item 13(b) @ $1,255.75
(c) Advocacy loading 50% of the daily hearing fee specified in item 13 that
applies to the hearing @ $627.88
Procedural or summary hearing before a JR on
Application for location order, recovery order or enforcement of an order (other
than an application for enforcement by a Registrar
under item 12) filed on
Procedural or summary hearing before a Judge on
Preparation for final hearing – 2 day matter
Preparation for final hearing – each additional hearing day after the
second hearing day
Daily hearing for 3-day trial between
07.08.2024 and 09.08.2024
counsel for the applicant
Advocacy loading for 3-day trial between
07.08.2024 and 09.08.2024
counsel for the applicant
50% of $7,537.68 =
Court fees and other fees and payments to the extent that they have been
reasonably incurred which, in the absence of a formal assessment
constrained to court filing fees for the initiating application filed on
21.09.23 and the application in a proceeding filed
on 26.05.2023^^ and trial
fees on 07.08.2024. 08.08.2024 and 09.08.2024 that were paid for by the
Filing fee $385
Filing fee $130
$745 x 3 = $2,235
Summary proceedings
Initiating or opposing an application for interlocutory orders (including an
interim hearing) for costs filed by the applicant on
03.09.2024 and up to
completion of the first court date before a Judge on
(a) $3,141.50
(b) Daily hearing fee as per item 13(b) @ $1,255.75
(c) Advocacy loading 50% of the daily hearing fee specified in item 13 that
applies to the hearing @ $627.88
Initiating or opposing an application for interlocutory orders (including an
interim hearing) for recusal filed by the respondent
on 04.10.2024 and up to
completion of the first court date before a Judge on
(a) $3,141.50
(b) Daily hearing fee as per item 13(b) @ $1,255.75
(c) Advocacy loading 50% of the daily hearing fee specified in item 13 that
applies to the hearing @ $627.88
Summary hearing before a Judge on
Court fees and other fees and payments to the extent that they have been
reasonably incurred which, in the absence of a formal assessment
constrained to the hearing fees on 08.10.2024 and 09.05.2025^^^
Hearing fee $0 (exempted)
Hearing fee $0 (interim hearing)
* Initiating Application filed by applicant on 21 September 2022.
** Review application filed by the respondent on 26 January 2023.
*** Application in a proceeding filed by applicant on 26 May 2023 as a result of
respondent defaulting.
^ Enforcement application filed by the applicant was dismissed in chambers on
02.02.2024 prior to formal hearing so no daily hearing
fee applied.
^^ Noting that a fee mentioned in Schedule 1 of the
Family Law (Fees)
Regulations 2022
(‘the Regulations’) is not payable in relation
to a proceeding under the Act when it is an application for an enforcement
order: reg 2.08(1)(3)(k).
^^^Noting that the court filing fees for the costs application were not included
because a fee mentioned in Schedule 1 of the Regulations
is not payable
in relation to a proceeding under the Act when it is an application for costs:
reg 2.08(1)(3)(o).
Self-evidently,
the legal costs incurred by the applicant are less than what the Court assesses
to be fair, reasonable and proportionate
party and party costs which are to be
managed via the Div 1 Rules.
That is to the credit of DAKIN in appropriately managing their costs
notwithstanding the difficult conduct of the respondent and
(to a lesser degree)
the respondent’s lawyer.
make an order for indemnity costs (as sought by the mother) I must be satisfied
that there are exceptional circumstances, see for
in my view, and notwithstanding that the sums claimed are less than party and
party costs, the circumstances of this case
do not reach such a high bar as
identified within the case law including
In the Marriage of Munday &
[1997] FLC 92-784
(1997) 22 Fam LR 321
Colgate-Palmolive Co. v Cussons Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 536
(1993) 118 ALR
Notwithstanding
the above, I am satisfied that there are justifying circumstances to rebut the
presumption that each party bear their
own costs, see
my broad discretion in making costs orders, in relation to
the substantive
, I consider that it is just to award special costs fixed at
$19,000 payable by Monday 25 August 2025.
calculation reflects:
(a) the claimed costs reflecting the work conducted for both the parenting and
property case but the findings about conduct being
constrained to the property
aspect only, and
(b) as foreshadowed above, my condemnation of the manner in which the respondent
conducted themselves including repeated failures
to make disclosure (including
the extraordinary outcome on day three (3) of the trial), multiple defaults of
Court Orders and their
unsuccessful prosecution or defence of interlocutory
proceedings and their recusal application.
the summary proceedings
that have been generated since
the substantive proceeding
was resolved by consent, I also intend
to award special costs fixed at $7,000 payable by Monday 25 August 2025.
reasons for doing so reflect two (2) main findings.
the respondent’s conduct was once again poor including –
(a) The respondent causing to file a recusal application just days before the
applicant’s costs application was due to be determined
at the expense of
the applicant who incurred legal costs for their lawyer’s preparation for
that event,
(b) The respondent failing to pay out the applicant in accordance with
final property consent orders
(c) The wasting of time during the costs hearing to try and resolve the above
the respondent’s recusal application was wholly unsuccessful when it was
heard on 8 October 2024.
total, the respondent is to pay the applicant $26,000 in costs. The usual time
period to pay costs is about four (4) weeks and
I see no reason to order any
differently, particularly given neither party made any compelling submissions
circumstances or “time to pay” more
Irrespective
of what time period I set for costs to be paid, the respondent’s past
history of compliance suggests that they
are likely to default. Given the
respondent’s repeated failure to comply with Orders of the Court, it is
likely that default
interest will accrue in accordance with rr 12.19 and 10.17.
Accordingly,
I am satisfied that to properly manage the Court’s own process, should
settle before the respondent makes payment, then pursuant
to s 105 I will make provision for a distribution to be made to the applicant
out of the respondent’s 40% net proceeds with the applicant permitted to
provide a copy of these Orders to the lawyer/conveyancer
having carriage of the
sale (should neither party’s lawyer be so appointed).
now it should be unsurprising how unimpressed I am with how the two (2) lawyers
have chosen to conduct this dispute. They should
know better than to give
evidence that is not directly within their knowledge. They should know better
than to include in an affidavit,
information which is conclusionary, speculatory
or a submission. Every useless line of text they commit to publish costs their
money and to waste their intelligence and their clients’
money in a useless exercise of chest-beating is concerning. That
said, it was
refreshing to see that DAKIN constrained their legal costs to less than as
calculated for party and party costs.
JOSEPH, the conduct was so egregious as to cause me to wonder whether to have
him referred for acting as a ‘mere mouthpiece’
respondent.
I have carefully
considered my options and have decided to refrain from doing so. I take very
seriously the obligation imposed
upon me, parties and officers of the Court to
conduct ourselves in accordance with the overarching
Engaging in trenchant
warfare that simply hikes up the billable word counts of documents and elevates
the emotional dysregulation
already likely to be experienced by vulnerable
clients in the midst of family law disputes is not what the Act expects of
the above reasons I am satisfied that the Orders, Directions and Notations I
will make are just, proper, and otherwise appropriate
given the parties’
circumstances.
I certify that the preceding ninety-three (93)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 28 July 2025
Affidavit of SUSANNA MICHELLE
DAKIN filed 03.10.2024 at paragraphs [5] & [6]. For convenience, future
references to this affidavit
shall be identified as ‘SMD’ with
paragraphs in square parenthesis.
‘Central Practice
Direction: Family Law Case Management’,
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia Division 1 and 2
(Webpage) <Central Practice
Direction: Family Law Case Management | Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia>.
Affidavit of
SYLVESTER MARTIN RODRICK CLAUDIUS JOSEPH filed 04.10.2024 at paragraph [28].
For convenience, future references to
this affidavit shall be identified as
‘SMJ’ with paragraphs in square
parenthesis.
SMJ-[37]-[40].
SMD-[11] to
[2023] FedCFamC1A 34
(2023) 67 Fam LR 16
3.c. made 18 July 2023.
SMD-[39] to [40].
correspondence.
SMD-[60] to
SMJ-[87] to
See orders 5 to 7
the final property consent
1.f.v.1 & 2 of
the final property consent
& Medlon (No. 6) (Indemnity Costs)
[2015] FamCAFC 157
’) at [24].
Fitzgerald (as child
representative for A (Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania v Fish
[2005] FamCA
Austin J in
[2022] FedCFamC1F 243
See Judge Reithmuller
(as he then was) in
Lawson & Glenning
[2021] FedCFamC2F 118
(2021) 64 Fam LR 414
Exhibit ‘H1’ at
See Orders 11 and 15
the December 2022 orders
and exhibit
example, items 1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14 of Sch 1 of the Div 2
Rules 12.01 &
12.08 of the Div 1 Rules and Sch 1 of the Div 2
See r 17.1 of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors’ Conduct Rules
(NSW) and ss 95 & 96 of the
Sections 95 & 96 of
RTF format (674 KB)
Signed PDF/A format