Abdel-Hady v Commonwealth of Australia [2025] HCATrans 75 (11 November 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 075
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Sydney No S65 of 2021
B e t w e e n
SAFWAT ABDEL‑HADY
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
BEECH‑JONES
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA ON TUESDAY,
11 NOVEMBER 2025, AT 9.59 AM
MR B.W. WALKER, SC
May it please the
Court, I appear with my learned friends
MR M. TANEVSKI
MR A.M. KHADRA
for the plaintiff. (instructed by
Slan Lawyers)
MR S.P. DONAGHUE, KC
Solicitor‑General of the Commonwealth of Australia
it please your Honours, I appear with
MR T.M. BEGBIE, KC
MS J.E. DAVIDSON, SC
MS O.J. RONAN
for the defendant. (instructed by
Australian Government Solicitor)
GAGELER CJ:
you, Mr Solicitor. Do I take it that you are going first?
That is the agreement with the parties, if it is
convenient to the Court.
GAGELER CJ:
Of course, and we
will take the morning adjournment at 10.55 am.
Your Honours, the plaintiff is a citizen of
Austria who has a medical condition that from 28 July 2022 rendered
him medically unfit
to travel by any commercial aeroplane. Your Honours
see that fact recorded in the special case at paragraph 13.5. As a result
that fact, the Federal Circuit Court declared by consent that since that date
there has been no real prospect of the plaintiff being
removed from Australia
becoming practical in the reasonably foreseeable future; a fact recorded at
paragraph 16 of the special case.
For the period between the orders
of this Court in
on 8 November 2023 and his release
on 13 February 2024, when the plaintiff was granted a visa, the
Commonwealth has accepted in its
defence that it is vicariously liable for his
unlawful detention.
What does the Commonwealth mean
by vicarious liability?
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour, that
will be a topic for discussion in the submissions to be developed, but we have
accepted that, in a
sense, the detaining officer was
liable for the detention in that period because the defence for which I am about
to contend would
not have applied from the date of the orders in
The detaining officer being liable for the detention, the Commonwealth accepts
that that liability can be attributed to it.
not deny that a detaining officer is an agent of the Commonwealth, do
MR DONAGHUE:
I accept that the detaining officer is an
employee of the Commonwealth performing a function on behalf of the
Commonwealth.
So, the acts of the officer can be
attributed to the Commonwealth.
MR DONAGHUE:
accept that, your Honour. What we
accept ‑ ‑ ‑
agent whose acts cannot be attributed.
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour, this question goes to what, in my submission, is the second
part of the case really, which is the direct liability
claim that Mr Walker
has sought to phrase, and which Mr Begbie is going to deal
Except if the acts of the officer can be
attributed to the Commonwealth, then the whole premise of your case falls away,
because your
case, as I understand it, is that there is a justification for the
officer but not a justification for the whole of the Executive
Government or the
whole of the polity of the Commonwealth.
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour, we do not accept that. We submit that in the area of the
tortious liability of the Commonwealth, with very few
exceptions, the mode of
analysis adopted in this Court’s jurisprudence is to find liability of the
Commonwealth through the
route of vicarious liability, meaning that an
individual officer must be liable. From the liability of that individual
the liability can then be attributed to the Commonwealth. We submit
that our defence answers the case in that way because the officer
We will also contend – Mr Begbie will develop
why, but we will contend that your Honours should not find direct liability
the Commonwealth, but that if you did – and this is to answer
your Honour’s question – we would submit that the
mode of reasoning with slight modification, but basically the same mode of
reasoning, leads to the consequence that your Honours
should find that the
Commonwealth would also have the defence.
GAGELER CJ:
ask the converse question. If the propounded defence is not available to the
officer, do you submit that the defence is available
Commonwealth?
MR DONAGHUE:
No, and your Honours would never
need to reach that question because, if it is not available to the officer, the
Commonwealth will
be vicariously liable for the unlawful detention of the
officer and no further question would arise.
I understand your response, then, the defence is one that you say applies to
both the officer and to the Commonwealth independently.
I do say that, but I qualify it in this way. We would say that
the question of whether it applies to the Commonwealth could only
arise if there
were a basis for finding the Commonwealth directly liable, and we deny that
premise, but if we are wrong in
Which is agency. Agency is a form of direct liability.
Yes, indeed.
And it is put against you
by the plaintiffs at paragraph 10 of their outline that the officers are
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, and Mr Begbie is going to deal
with that part. That is why I said it arises on that part of the
case – the direct liability
part of the case – but we do
submit that, for reasons we will develop, vicarious liability is the way that
liability is almost
invariably found in matters of this kind, including, as
your Honours would know, in the defence cases like
Shaw Savill
where people who are on military vessels obviously are performing functions in
one sense on behalf of the Commonwealth. Nevertheless,
the Commonwealth’s
liability arises via the vicarious route, not directly.
“Invariably” is doing a lot of work in that sentence.
I said “almost invariably”, your Honour, and I
accept that the qualification is doing some work, but in my submission,
need to meet the case in both ways. I need to meet it in the vicarious
liability sense, turning on the liability of the officer,
and then we need to
meet the direct case. We propose to do both of those
BEECH‑JONES J:
I am sorry to labour the point, but
if the defence is not accepted, there is no need to actually determine whether
the Commonwealth
has a direct liability, is that right?
That is right.
BEECH‑JONES J:
understand.
MR DONAGHUE:
Because if the defence is not available
to the officer, we would accept vicarious liability.
GAGELER CJ:
How does that square with the cases concerned with the independent statutory
authority? Will you address
MR DONAGHUE:
The – in the line?
GAGELER CJ:
Yes. Your acceptance
of vicarious liability.
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. We will address
GAGELER CJ:
All right, thank you.
Again, as part of Mr Begbie’s case. So, the only
question we submit is before your Honours – in light of the
that I have just indicated, that from the date of the orders in
the Commonwealth has accepted vicarious liability – is a
question that concerns liability in the period when
prevailing authority in this Court. From the moment that ceased to be the case,
in orders in
, the question of the defence does not arise because we
have not pleaded it.
Throughout that period, of course, this Court had
that sections 189 and 196 of the
Migration Act
validly imposed a duty to detain an unlawful
non‑citizen until they were actually removed. The question of whether
a real prospect of their removal in the foreseeable future was not
legally relevant on the then‑prevailing authority in this
We now know, of course, that that is not right and that the duty
had not been validly imposed by those sections in that period of
time. However,
the Commonwealth’s submission is that prior to the orders in
the detaining officers were nevertheless under a duty to detain the plaintiffs,
not being a duty that arises from the invalid provisions
themselves but, in our
submission, a manifestation of a deeper duty arising from the rule of law
requirement that the Executive comply
with the law as it has been declared by
this Court.
That deeper duty, in the facts of this case, is both
reinforced by and finds expression in the
Public Service Act,
section 13(4) in particular, which was, as your Honours will recall, a
provision mentioned in
. Our submission is that the question is
whether the law can coherently impose a civil liability on an officer or a
person for complying
with that deeper duty as I have just articulated it,
GAGELER CJ:
the deeper duty of the Executive a deeper duty than that of an
individual?
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, it might well be,
your Honour, yes, for reasons I am going to come to. So, your Honours
will have seen in the written submissions,
Mr Walker says –
South Australia v Commonwealth
– an invalid law is invalid,
anyone is entitled to disregard it. We challenge that premise in relation to
the Executive, we
say your Honours would not accept that the Executive is
entitled just to disregard a law.
GAGELER CJ:
No, of course not,
but the rule of law, if you go back to the Diceyan concept, is that the
Executive – a member of the Executive,
like anyone else, must obey
the law whether it be the common law or the statute law. There is no sense that
I have picked up of
some kind of deeper duty on the part of the Executive. It
is an equal duty on the part of the Executive.
MR DONAGHUE:
my submission, it can manifest differently, because where an ordinary member of
the public confronts a statutory provision that
they think is invalid, they are
entitled – with or without legal advice, with or without a
declaration from the Court –
to back their judgment that that
provision is invalid and to disregard it, and no‑one would suggest that
they were doing the
wrong thing. In that regard, they are gambling with their
legal fate on the correctness of the view that they have taken, but they
doing the wrong thing.
In my submission, that is not the case for the
Executive Government, for the rule of law ideas that I am going to develop, and
means that for the Executive, they really have no choice.
Is this a sort of
Indooroopilly
proposition?
MR DONAGHUE:
That line of argument, yes,
Yes, I see.
you going to take us to section 13(4) in any
MR DONAGHUE:
I am. So, the way that I propose to
structure our submissions, your Honours, is I will first outline what we
submit are the sufficient
elements to establish the defence; I will then take
your Honours to
to develop the analogy that we rely upon
in support of the defence that we ask your Honours to recognise here and to
address the
source of the legal duty that we say engages, by analogy, the
reasoning. They are put in two ways: the deeper rule of law
duty I have just sketched and the 13(4) duty under the
Public Service
I then propose to take your Honours to some overseas
authorities that have confronted the same kind of question. Both the United
States Supreme Court and the Canadian Supreme Court have recognised a defence
that is actually wider than the defence for which we
are contending here, and a
similar line of reasoning has found some favour in the United Kingdom courts as
well, although obviously
not in the context of invalid
legislation.
Having done all of that, I propose to hand over to
Mr Begbie to address the direct liability aspects of the case and the
agency‑type
arguments that your Honours have already raised with me.
We propose simply to rely upon our written submissions on the constitutional
argument of the intervener. As to the elements of the defence, as
your Honours have frequently observed in a variety of contexts,
adjudicative function of the court:
“proceeds best when it proceeds if, and no further than is, warranted
to determine a legal right or legal liability in controversy”.
is a quote from
, at paragraph 58. It is an approach
there explaining the prudential approach of the Court in constitutional cases,
but particularly
apt in cases involving the common law because the common law
method is, of course, to develop incrementally, case by case, deciding
is necessary to determine the case before you.
It is in light of that
methodology and that prudential kind of the principle that we have not
attempted, and we do not invite the
Court in this case to attempt, a definition
of the possible outer boundaries of the defence for which we contend. Our
argument is
the more modest one, that the elements I am about to identify are
sufficient; if they exist, the defence should apply. It might
be in future
cases – perhaps, if the issue arises – that it will be
said that one or more of the elements I am about
to identify are not legally
GAGELER CJ:
Can I just ask, a defence to
what? This is a claim for false imprisonment.
GAGELER CJ:
Do the same
principles that underlie the defence you propound apply to a claim in detinue,
to a claim in money had and received?
MR DONAGHUE:
Again, your Honour, they might, but deciding all that is necessary to
decide in this case is that there is a defence to the tort
of false imprisonment
in the circumstances that I am going to identify. I am putting it in this way
in part because when I get to
the overseas cases, your Honours will see
that they frame the principle much more widely and in circumstances that would
other torts and that would apply even when no court has ruled upon the
validity of a statute. Whether or not Australian law might
end up in that
position is not a question for today. In my submission, the question for today
is a narrower one.
One of the arguments about that,
though, that is put against you is it is just artificial, because we are dealing
not with the incremental
development of the common law by relevance, but by
reference to principle, because the actual outer bounds of the principle cannot
be identified, or you do not seek to identify them.
MR DONAGHUE:
But that would usually be the case, with the tort law case,
Ordinarily, we would test it to see, in a sense, what the consequences are
of what is being put to us more broadly, in order to ensure
that we have the
minimums. Here, you are doing the reverse.
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honours, I am saying I have a paradigm example of a circumstance
where, in the real world, the officers who detained
the plaintiff could not
possibly have done anything different, because a Commonwealth statute that this
Court has held is valid that
imposes a duty to do the thing that that person did
is about as clear as it could get.
BEECH-JONES J:
Just to pick
up a thing Justice Gordon may have raised with you, you have formulated it
by reference to this Court ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
‑ ‑ ‑ in that narrow sense, but that can serve
to avoid a problem when we have other courts, and in particular
the example of,
say, the Federal Circuit Court Division 2 one day deciding it is valid and
then another judge of that court three
weeks later saying it is invalid, and
then it going on appeal. As soon as you move away from this Court, then your
principle would
say you have a defence, you do not have a defence, you have a
defence, you do not have a defence. What is so special about this
this common law field?
MR DONAGHUE:
My principle would say that
it would be necessary, if someone claimed the defence in that case, to confront
a different and wider
question, but what is different is the rule of law
ramifications might be different. I say that really for this reason, and it
up, in some respects, Justice Steward’s question about
Indooroopilly
, it is that at the level of this Court, once this Court has
held that a statute should be interpreted in a particular way and that
valid, there can be no question as to the correctness of that unless and until
this Court says otherwise.
Where a Federal Circuit Court judge has said
the same thing, that is not true, because of the possibility of appeal or
the possibility that there might be circumstances where an appeal
cannot be brought by the Commonwealth. For example, it is won
on some different
ground, so it is trying to find another case to provide the vehicle to test the
In essence, you are talking about the
doctrine of precedent, are you not?
MR DONAGHUE:
I am talking
partly about the doctrine of precedent, but partly about the rule of law
responsibilities of the Executive when faced
with decisions of lower courts with
which it disagrees. That is quite a large topic, and one of the reasons I am
carving it out
from this case is because it is a large topic that could produce
a different answer to the answer that you get when this Court has
authoritatively answered a question.
When you say
“this Court”, you mean a Full Bench of this Court? A single Judge
of this Court could be subject to appeal
MR DONAGHUE:
That is what I mean.
BEECH‑JONES J:
I suppose this
methodology has the difficulty, though, that the carve‑out may avoid
confronting problems with the underlying
points it can make.
The defence that we are relying upon is a defence that here
finds expression and may find expression in some hundreds of other
situation where the position is the paradigm I have identified, where the
decision is a decision of this Court. If your
Honours were to find that
the boundaries of the defence would be unstable when applied to the Federal
Circuit Court, you could not
apply it to the Federal Circuit Court, but that
does not undermine the force of the principle that exists in the circumstances
now confront you. In my submission, that is all you need to decide and all
you should decide.
So, the lower court example is a different one. The
situation where the court has held valid a power rather than a duty might also
be different, because there the officer of the Executive would be making a
choice as to whether to exercise the power or not; a choice
informed by a
decision of this Court, perhaps. The foreign authorities would say the defence
applies in that situation, but again,
that is a line your Honours might
choose to draw.
In my submission, there is nothing methodologically
regular about me saying: just decide what is before you. Indeed, commonly if
came to the Court and I said your Honour should decide a much wider
principle, the Court might well respond: well, are you asking
for an advisory
opinion, why do we not decide all that is necessary for this
Although this is not a submission that just
says: just decide what is before you. It is a submission that says: decide
before you, but other than my reference to principle –
because I find it nearly impossible to articulate in a principled way
defence to an intentional tort that applies, or might apply, only to a single
intentional tort and only in a particular court.
MR DONAGHUE:
So, if your Honours accept that the key elements for which we contend are
an officer is acting pursuant to a statutory duty and that
is a statutory duty
that this Court has held to be valid – they are the first two of the
elements that we are identifying,
and the third element is that you are under a
legal duty to act as the Court has declared, whether it comes from the rule of
Public Service Act
can also come from a contract,
would suggest.
Those elements may well be capable of
being generalised to other kinds of torts. I accept that that is so, but all I
do is identify the way that we submit that the defence is engaged on
the facts of this case. If in formulating the principle, your
formulated principles that apply more generally, then so be it. In my
submission, it is not necessary for you to do that,
because the defence in
, upon which we rely on analogy, really just required that an
officer who detained someone would not be liable for false imprisonment
did so pursuant to a legal duty. That is what your Honours
In my submission, I have that legal duty here. It arises not from
an invalid order of an inferior court but from a statutory provision
Court had held was valid. The real question, in my submission, is that is there
a relevant distinction between an invalid
order of an inferior court and a
statutory provision that requires something that the Court has held is valid?
That means that the
defence that was available in the first case is not
available in the second. We say no.
going to ask one more question about paragraph 2 and then I will be quiet.
As I understand your submission, you accept that
each of those three elements
are equally capable of applying to a lower court in the sense of same statutory
duty, same binding authority,
same independent legal duty imposed on the
detaining officer.
MR DONAGHUE:
I accept that they
are, but in putting element 2 as I have, I have put it by reference to this
Court so as to leave open the possibility
that your Honours might think
that there was a rule of law distinction. I am not putting that there is,
because it may well be in
an appropriate case that your Honours will decide
that there is not, but I can accept that there may be circumstances –
particularly
in respect of decisions of lower courts, the Circuit Court being a
good example – where it might be said the fact that a single
a Circuit Court has held that this provision is valid does not authoritatively
resolve that question, and so that more should
have been done before the defence
would be available.
But part of the narrow case that I am developing
here is that here, in my submission, on no view was there any question as to
the duty of the Executive was. It was to do what this Court had said in
. Your Honour the Chief Justice asked a question about
other torts and I am reminded that it might well be the case, and one would
expect, that
would support a proposition that the defence there
would have applied to battery, for example, with the officers, giving effect to
the detention by physically taking the person from one to another.
it might well be parity of reasoning you would not limit the matter strictly to
false imprisonment, but here it is only false
imprisonment that is before you
and that is all that strictly needs to be decided.
you say that this duty is legally enforceable, even though it is a duty that is
owed by a person who is not a party to the relevant
proceeding?
Being the detaining officer?
MR DONAGHUE:
It is certainly sufficiently enforceable
to enliven the defence by reason of its reflection in the
Public Service
, but in my submission it is, as a matter of principle, not necessary for
the duty to be legally enforceable because the principle
that underlies the
defence recognised in
is the unreasonableness of conflicting
duties being imposed upon the officer in question; the officer doing the wrong
thing no matter
what they do, in effect.
Public Service
overlay, I am on all fours with the case in
because the
officers could have been punished under the
Public Service Act
had not done what the Act suggested. But there is, as I will develop when I
come to the authorities – the duty to
detain, quite independently of
Public Service Act
, would have been enforced by the grant of mandamus
at any time in between
practically enforceable duty against the restraining officers.
Although the retrospective nature of judicial decision‑making
means that, had that duty properly been sought to be enforced
and had the proper
decision been given, it would not have been enforceable.
But in any court other than this Court – and indeed I
think at least three attempts were made in this Court in the period
to have the case overturned –
the reality is that
prevailed. So, we are submitting
your proposition only applies in this Court.
MR DONAGHUE:
my proposition is that the defence applies when this Court has held that the
provision is valid. So, in all lower courts
the duty was, and probably also
in – well, certainly in all lower courts the duty was enforceable in
the very real sense that
mandamus would have issued to enforce it.
Your Honours, our friends have tried in writing to downplay the
role of the judiciary in the defence that we are framing by asserting
is just a question of a legislative duty and by characterising what
your Honours decided in
as a new interpretation of the
statutory provisions in question, and they do that repeatedly. It is in my
friends’ oral outline
in this matter – in paragraph 1 of
the oral outline – but it is also in their written submissions at
paragraphs 15, 19,
2, 16; it is all put that the Court interpreted the
Migration Act
differently in
Your Honours
will recall that the Court separated out, in
, the statutory
interpretation question and the constitutional question, and your Honours
declined to reopen the statutory interpretation
question in
is, with respect, not accurate to suggest what happened in
interpretation of provisions. What happened in
, in our submission,
is that the Court held that in certain applications that sections 189
and 196 were invalid.
There is no dispute that an invalid law is
invalid ab initio. So, what the Court held in
was that in the
situation it identified, there actually was no law that authorised or required
the detention of certain unlawful
non‑citizens. For that reason, we
submit it is not correct to say that the detention that occurred had a
legislative, rather
than a judicial, source of authority.
Is that right? I mean, when one looks to the source of the authority
to do the act, the source of the authority to do the act
here is not the Court
decision, it is a piece of legislation which does not give you the power to do
it. Conversely, in
, the source of the power to do the
detention was the court order. That is the critical first question: what is
the source of the
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour, we would submit that the premise in both cases is actually
that there was no source of authority. So, the invalid
did not provide a source of – it was a purported
source of authority, but it did not itself provide the authority, because
That is not what I
MR DONAGHUE:
It is, I think, what the majority
found, in my submission. As your Honours will recall, there was argument
found on the first limb of the case that the order
was ineffective, and that was how we got to the questions of judicial immunity
and defence for the subsequent officers.
Here, we submit, in a very real
practical sense, the plaintiff was detained because of the holding of this Court
as to the validity of 189 and 196. If the
Court had not upheld the provisions in those cases, the provisions in their
application
scenario, there is no reason to think that the
appellant would have been detained.
your Honours know, all of the people in that category have been released
from detention. So, it was because the Court had held
– incorrectly,
as it turns out – that the provisions validly operated in a situation
that provisions that did not authorise
the detention but which were thought to
do so were given effect to require the detention of the plaintiff. That is why
that this case arises not just as a question of giving effect to an
invalid legislative duty but at the intersection of the role
of the Parliament,
the Court and the Executive. All three are in play in explaining what occurred
in relation to this plaintiff.
That is another reason why we are
inviting your Honours to focus on what I have called the sufficient
conditions, because what I
have just said would not be true in the case of a
statute that has never come before a court. That would engage the defence in
United States and Canada, but it would do so in a way that is quite
different from the factual situation which arises, when officers
take us, at some stage, to the passage in the majority or the joint judgement in
Queensland v Stradford
that supports the proposition that the
judicial order, and in particular, by analogy to this case, a judicial order of
even a superior
court, can be void and have no effect
whatsoever.
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, your Honour’s
question about – I make no such claim about an order of a superior
Except this case is –
is the decision, you say. It was a decision of this Court, a
superior court, that had no effect whatsoever, because of the decision
, at least I understand that is what your submission
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour, I have been unclear, if
that is what I have conveyed. So, the decision of this Court in
was, relevantly, a – just let me make sure I get this right,
your Honour. We are not suggesting that the orders in
‑type effect in the circumstances.
What had the
effect upon which we rely from
was the declaration that
the – well, it was an appeal, actually, so it was not a
declaration – was the judicial determination
of the validity of the
statutory provisions in question. They had effect as a matter of, as it was, a
precedential effect, rather
than an order of a superior court effect, if I can
put it that way.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, it was the
conclusion.
MR DONAGHUE:
The conclusion
BEECH-JONES J:
was an order.
MR DONAGHUE:
invalid order.
BEECH‑JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
Had it been an order of a superior
court ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
would have been a valid order, but it is the difference between one dealing with
a conclusion of a court and one dealing with an
order or a purported order of a
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. So, if I have an order of a court
then this would be
and I would not be seeking an analogical
development ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
MR DONAGHUE:
Kable (No 2)
had a superior court. The reason we developed this defence by analogy rather
BEECH-JONES J:
does that not reflect that courts decide matters between parties, whereas you
are – are you not really giving
this sort of
legislative effect?
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, it is one of the
things they do, your Honour. One of the things they do is decide between
parties. But – and some
of the authorities I am going to come to
later – another thing they do, and another thing particularly this
Court does, is
declare the law in a way that the Executive must then honour.
That is the
Marbury v Madison
effect, and that is the effect that
that I am relying upon here. Can I ask your Honours to go to
Could I just ask one question. Are you going to address how this all fits
with the limited good faith defences in the Act? There
is a series of
provisions – 332E(4), 154, part of 198 – that provide
a good faith defence to both the Minister and officer
for certain acts that
would otherwise be tortious.
MR DONAGHUE:
I was not going to,
your Honour. I will have a look at those, but my answer at the level of
principle is that the fact that the
Act has conferred good faith defences in
particular circumstances would not exclude a common law defence of the kind for
contend. If it otherwise exists, as a matter of principle, they would
be capable of operating concurrently and there would be no
reason to identify
those provisions as abrogating the common law defence.
Sure. It is just that 198 gives you one if you are an officer in
relation, for example, to removal; 196 does not give one; nor does
in relation to detention, for example. The other more general one
is 332E(4), which does apply to an officer but only for the
Minister’s purported performance of any function under the
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. In many cases – I will have
to check whether this applies
I will leave you to think about that.
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour, I will come back to your Honour on that. Can I ask
your Honours to go to
Queensland v Stradford
[2025] HCA 3
99 ALJR 396
, which is in volume 4, tab 35. The relevant part of
the judgment, in our submission, is the quite separate part of the judgment
deals with the defence that was available to the Queensland police officers and
correctional officers, and the MSS security
guards who executed Judge
Vasta’s invalid orders.
Our friends have asserted in writing and
in their oral outline that that defence was an outworking or consequence of the
immunity defence that was recognised in the case, and they are said to
serve the same rationale. We respectfully contend that that
is not so, and
your Honours will find in the joint reasons of the Chief Justice and
Justices Gleeson, Jagot and Beech‑Jones
in paragraph [2], a
summary of the purpose of judicial immunity, reading from about five lines
the purpose of the immunity is the same for judges of all courts. That
purpose is to facilitate the independent performance of the
judicial function
free from the spectre of litigation, as well as to enhance the finality of
judgments quelling legal controversies.
In our submission, that purpose tells you nothing about the purpose of
the separate defence that was accepted to apply to the officers
executing the
orders, which was not about independence of the performance of the judicial
function or finality of litigation, it
was about preserving judicial authority,
the authority of judicial proceedings, and you see that from paragraphs I am
to take your Honours to. The defence upon which we rely by
analogy is summarised in paragraphs [13] and [14], identified as the
“third issue”:
the common law affords some protection from civil liability to those who have
a legal duty to enforce or execute orders or warrants
made or issued in judicial
proceedings of the courts just described, including an inferior court, even if
those orders or warrants
are invalid –
That defence, the
protection from civil liability where there was a legal duty, was applied in
paragraph [14] to the Queensland police,
Queensland correctional officers
and the MSS security guards. It was a defence that, you see from the last line
of paragraph [14],
had the consequence that those officers were “not
liable to Mr Stradford”. It was not a defence that denied relief,
was a defence that denied liability, contrary to the submissions that are put in
writing against us. The reasoning in support
of those two paragraphs commences
at paragraph [128] in the joint reasons under the heading:
Is there any defence for reliance on an invalid court order or
I would ask your Honours to pick up the reasoning at
paragraph [132] where it is recorded that:
the necessity for inferior courts to function by having their orders enforced
. . . justifies an acceptance of the existence of a
principle excusing
some tortious acts undertaken in execution of such orders or warrants even
though they are subsequently found
to be invalid.
And the question is:
who gets the benefit of that defence? That question is answered in the second
half of [133]:
The common law’s protection is engaged by the existence of an
obligation imposed by law to enforce an order or warrant. The
persons who may
be subject to such a legal obligation are not limited to those who are amenable
to supervision and punishment by
It did not turn on contempt,
as your Honours said in a few paragraphs. The reasoning underlining that
turned in significant part
on the unreasonableness of the contrary view, which
would have held the officer liable for doing what they were under a legal duty
to do. Your Honours pick up that idea from a number of the older cases
which were relied upon in argument. At [138], for example,
reference to:
the difficulties resulting from the imposition of liability for acts done in
executing invalid orders or warrants on those who were
obliged to execute
And there is a quote from
Moravia v Sloper
It would be unjust that a man should be punished if he does not do a thing
and should be liable to an action if he does.
The same idea, over the
page in paragraph [140], quoting from
Andrews v Marris
bound to execute their warrants, and having no means whatever of
ascertaining whether they
There would therefore be something very unreasonable in the law if it placed
him in the position of being punishable by the Court
for disobedience, and at
the same time suable by the party for obedience to the warrant. The law,
however, is not so.
Now, as I have already acknowledged, we accept that
this case is different, but the very same – different because we are
with a statutory provision held to be valid when it was not, as
opposed to an invalid order, but the position of the officer is materially
different, in that it would be equally unreasonable, we say, to hold that
officer liable for complying with the statutory duty
that this Court had held to
be valid. At [147] you see a discussion – this is under the
heading at the top of the right‑hand
column on 432:
Who is entitled to protection for enforcing an invalid court order or
Paragraph [147] states that:
an officer who is charged by law with the duty of enforcing court orders or
executing warrants is or is not amenable to punishment
by the court for
Sorry, I have read that incorrectly, but what
your Honours are saying is that liability to contempt was not the
determining factor.
So, that is important, we submit, because that is one
reason why your Honours might think that a duty imposed by a statute is
than a duty purportedly imposed by a court order, but that was not
what was determinative. That was:
an unsatisfactory basis for differentiating . . . In reality,
neither police officers nor correctional officers are any less accountable
the other and each has a system of discipline outside of the courts. Both the
Sheriff and the Marshal of the Federal Circuit
Court were required to be engaged
Public Service Act 1999
(Cth). The Deputy Sheriffs and
the Deputy Marshals could be so engaged. The
Public Service Act
an extensive regime dealing with the discipline of persons appointed under
And there is a reference there to
Service Act
. Those same provisions impose duties on the officer in
issue in this case. There is no relevant point of distinction. Then the
judicial authority foundation for this is explained in the second half
of [148] and [149]. So, in the second half of [148]:
The public interest that the legislation embodies –
that is the
Constables Protection Act
being the conferral of protection from liability on those who act in
obedience to a court order and who bear a “duty to execute
warrant”, is not the exclusive concern of the legislature. The protection
of the authority of judicial proceedings,
that is the role of the courts in
quelling justiciable controversies, is of no lesser
importance . . .
The authority of judicial proceedings is best served by confirming that the
common law affords some protection from civil liability
to those who have a
legal duty to enforce or execute orders –
BEECH‑JONES
How does your defence serve the authority of judicial
proceedings in quelling controversies?
MR DONAGHUE:
Because, your Honour, the whole executive apparatus that gives effect to
sections 189 and 196 of the
Migration Act
was not just entitled
but required, in our submission, to do so in light of this Court’s rulings
as to the interpretation and
validity of those
provisions.
BEECH‑JONES J:
But required
by – you say, required by the Court’s ruling?
No, not required by the Court’s order, not
directly required by the Court’s order, but required by the effect of the
Court’s reasoning in declaring the law for this country.
had been challenged three weeks
later and the challenge was on foot, do you say that there was then a legal duty
on the Executive
– at that point in time, while the challenge was on
foot – to remove people who might otherwise fall within the scope
the challenge?
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. This Court might not
have given leave to reopen that decision – it is highly unlikely,
three weeks later, that it would
have decided it differently. But
your Honour’s question partly explains why I am pitching what
your Honours have to decide
in this case quite narrowly, because if the
situation was that instead of
being decided by this Court
it had been decided by a first instance judge in the Federal Court and that
decision was under appeal,
I might not answer the question in the same way,
because the rule of law duty is more complex in that kind of situation, while a
matter is working its way to an ultimate legal resolution.
If that submission is right, then you say there is a duty to
remove from Australia even the very people who are challenging
in the subsequent litigation.
Yes, your Honour, because the statute has been
held by this Court to operate validly in a particular situation, and the fact
someone is commencing a legal proceeding in which they hope to have the
Court form a different view does not change the fact that
the law of the country
at that point in time is that this Court has ruled that there is – if
there is not an unresolved legal
question, there is no legal uncertainty, there
is an authoritative answer.
If one tests it by a slightly different
example, if the detaining officer, a week after
am very uncomfortable with that decision, I have read it, I think the minority
are right, I am going to release Mr Al‑Kateb
– that would
be an unthinkable state of affairs, in my submission. It would be Executive
defiance of a ruling of this Court,
and it would have, in my submission,
attracted immediate and severe sanction, including criticism from the
So, your Honour Justice Steward mentions
Indooroopilly
. The criticism there was of a harsh kind. It would be all
the harsher in circumstances if the Executive said: I have formed my
Executive just cannot do that that we submit
that there is a very real practical
duty on the Executive to give effect to the way that
decided the law unless and until this Court said differently. It is a duty of a
kind, we submit, amply capable of falling within
the formulation in [147]
and [149] of
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Solicitor, if
had not been decided and the
detaining officer were asked, what is the source of your authority, the answer
would have been section
189 and 196.
MR DONAGHUE:
GAGELER CJ:
The Executive has, fundamentally, a duty to
obey the law that is laid down by the Parliament. What is the added content of
duty that comes from the Court having said yes, those provisions are
MR DONAGHUE:
The added content, your Honour, is
that – as is familiar from a variety of situations – when
Parliament speaks, there
is not uncommonly room for debate about what it means
and there is sometimes room for debate about whether it has spoken validly.
Where there is room for debate about whether it has spoken validly, there is the
possibility that there is actually no law with
which the Executive is required
to comply – it might be that it turns out that the provision is
invalid ab initio in whole
or in part.
So, the Executive, with the
benefit of no court decision, must still comply with the law and must form its
best view as to what requires,
but it is always possible that the judiciary will
explain that the Executive’s best view is not correct, and the
authoritativeness
with which it does that will depend upon where in the judicial
hierarchy that statement has been made. But once it reaches this
Court – as one of the passages that I will take your Honours to
in a moment, shows – in our legal system, the ultimate
authoritative answer, the Court said in
, is this Court’s
decision. The passage I have in mind, which I will take your Honours to,
Constitution
of the Commonwealth the ultimate decision‑maker
in all matters where there is a contest, is this Court.
So, what it adds
is that it removes the possibility of uncertainty or debate about both validity
and meaning and crystallises the
duty of the executive in a way that it might
not previously have been crystallised.
GAGELER CJ:
But did not
in fact remove the possibility of uncertainty and debate, witness
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, but to say that,
your Honour, is to say that everything is always uncertain, because this
Court might always choose to reopen
and overrule its previous decisions. So,
while I accept that that is true and does sometimes happen, in practical terms,
in my submission,
one comes back to the fact that I can readily concede a case
in which the decision of the Federal Court has held that something is
and I stand before your Honours and say that is wrong; your Honours
should hold that the provision is valid. The duty of
the Executive is and has
always been to comply with the law differently understood to the Federal Court,
and you might agree with
In those circumstances, if the Executive
has acted in accordance with its pre‑existing view, it will always have
acted lawfully.
The criticism that could be attached to the Executive for
acting inconsistently with the original ruling of the single judge is,
submission, quite different from the criticism that would have attached to the
detaining officer if a day or two after
the officer had
chosen to disregard what the Court had said and had released.
explains the elements that we have set out in paragraph 2 of our outline
because it is the combination of the fact that the
statutory provision in
question imposed a duty. So, no choice available to the officer at that point,
and then this Court explains
that that duty is valid. That means that the
officer was entirely boxed in, and it was not just boxed in by the statutory
it was boxed in by the statutory provision in circumstances where the
Court had removed any question as to the effectiveness of that
BEECH-JONES J:
Your formulation confines it to the
Executive, as I understand it, but what you have just articulated would equally
apply to a private
citizen who commits some otherwise tortious act because of a
duty imposed on them by an invalid Commonwealth statute, would it
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, it might, your Honour, in the
sense that the legal duty that we submit can enliven the
defence. The legal duty identified in paragraph 149, in the case of the
Executive, can come from the rule of law and
Public Service Act
provisions that I am talking about, but we accept it could have other sources.
To that extent I agree with what your Honour says,
but after the
adjournment, I propose to turn immediately to the rule of law idea and the
distinction that we draw between a member
of the public and the position of the
Executive by reference to a couple of decisions of this Court.
Would that be the most convenient time for us to break,
Mr Solicitor?
MR DONAGHUE:
If it is convenient to
your Honours, it would.
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, we will take the
morning adjournment now.
AT 10.54 AM SHORT
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 11.08
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honours, can I add
marginally to my earlier answer to Justice Jagot about those specific
defence provisions; marginally because
we maintain the answer that they cannot
properly be read as revealing an intention to exclude any common law defence
that might apply
outside the circumstances where they operate.
Sections 154 and 332E are both quite specific provisions dealing with,
in one case,
criminal justice visas, and the other disciplinary matters in
relation to the migration agent framework there far removed from the
context of a statutory duty to act in a particular way.
section 198 provisions your Honour mentioned – I
think (11), (a) and (b) in 12 and 13 – are, I am
instructed, all
recent additions to the Act. They were added in by Act
number 105 of 2024. So, they arose after the circumstances that are in
in this proceeding, but we maintain, in any event, that they do not reveal
an intention to exclude a defence of the kind for which
Your Honours, I turn now to the question of the legal duty
to detain that we submit engages by analogy the
defence. Can I
ask your Honours to turn to my friends’ written submissions at
paragraph 24 as a convenient way for your Honours
to see the principle
upon which they rely, extracted from
South Australia v Commonwealth
It is on page 9 of my friends’ submission, near the top of the page.
There the plaintiff quotes a familiar passage from Chief
Justice Lathan in
South Australia v Commonwealth
[a] pretended law made in excess of power is not and never has been a
law at all. Anybody in the country is entitled to disregard
it. Naturally
[they] will feel safer if [they have] a decision of a court in [their]
favour—but such a decision is not an
element which produces invalidity in
any law. The law is not valid until a court pronounces against it—and
thereafter invalid.
We of course agree with most of that passage. It is
certainly not the case that the decision of the court produces the invalidity,
but we do respectfully join issue with the second sentence:
Anybody in the country is entitled to disregard it.
Indeed, the
plaintiff in the next paragraph comes close to acknowledging our point in that
respect when they say:
The position may be different for courts and public officials, in that there
is a public interest in the conformity by them with the
law stated by
Parliament.
We submit, quite; that is clearly correct. But that has
ramifications for the plaintiff’s reliance on that passage that we
have not been fully confronted by them, because our submission is, for the two
reasons I am about to develop – at least
in the case of the detaining
officer here, a member of the Executive – it is not right to say that
they were entitled to disregard
189 and 196 of the
as a consequence of a combination of two propositions: one, the
Executive is under a duty to follow the law; and, two, the law is
Court states it to be.
The law is statute
as explained by the court.
MR DONAGHUE:
authoritatively explained by the court. So, the
Marbury v Madison
principle is that the ultimate authority – ultimate determinant of
what the law requires – is there the Supreme Court;
I appreciate of course that our friend – at least as I
understand it – is not going to join issue with the proposition
the Executive is under a duty to obey the law. That hardly seems likely to be
controversial, but because of the foundational
role that it plays in our
argument, I want to highlight some of the things this Court has said in the key
authority upon which we
rely, but I will do so, if I may, quite quickly. I am
going to take your Honours to four cases.
Can I start with
New South Wales v Kable
(2013) 252 CLR 118,
which is volume 3 tab 19. We accept of course that this case was
superior court, being an order that
was susceptible to being set aside because the statute upon which it depended
was invalid, but
the order of course was binding until set aside. Nevertheless,
we submit that some of the observations are applicable here by analogy.
in particular on paragraphs 38 through to 40, which commence on
page 135 under the heading:
More fundamental considerations
“fundamental considerations” are identified in
paragraph 38:
The conclusions reached in these reasons . . . accord
with fundamental considerations about the operation of any developed legal
system. There must come a point in any developed legal system where decisions
made in the exercise of judicial power are given effect
despite the particular
decision later being set aside or reversed. That point may be marked in a
number of ways.
One of the ways which the Court goes on to develop is that the
of a superior court –
valid until set aside.
But we submit it is not the only way, and the decisions being made in the
exercise of judicial power can be given effect not just
in the instant case
where the order applies but by the Executive government conforming its behaviour
to the explanation of the law
that is given. In the second half of
paragraph 39, you see the Court saying that part of the problem that would
have arisen in that
case was that:
Both the individuals affected by the order, and in this case the Executive,
would be required to decide whether to obey the order
made by a court which
required steps to be taken to the detriment of another. The individuals
affected by the order, and here the
Executive, would have to choose whether to
disobey the order (and run the risk of contempt of court or some other coercive
here mandamus:
or incur tortious liability to the person –
That in part explained why the orders were held to be valid until set
aside. In 40 it said:
The decision to disobey the order would have required both the individual
gaoler and the Executive Government . . . to predict whether
this Court would accept what were then novel constitutional arguments. More
fundamentally, as the legal philosopher Hans Kelsen
wrote, “[a]
status where everybody is authorized to declare every norm, that is to say,
everything which presents itself as
a norm, as nul, is almost a status of
Much the same might be said if the Executive were
South Australia v Commonwealth
read literally
might suggest – to disregard any law, even a law this Court has
upheld. Can I turn next to
Graham v Minister for Immigration
[2017] HCA 33
, which is volume 3, tab 11. The relevant passages
commence at paragraph 38. The Court at paragraph 38 says:
Resolution of the issue concerning
Constitution
requires a return to first principles.
Paragraph 39:
all power of government is limited by law. Within the limits of its
government is to declare and enforce the law that limits its own power and the
power of other branches of government through
the application of judicial
process and through the grant, where appropriate, of judicial remedies.
So, it is not just enforcing the law in particular circumstances through
orders, it is also part of the function of the judicial branch
to declare the
law. That is developed in the next paragraph by reference to
, which I have already mentioned. So:
By the time of the framing of the
Constitution
, the precept
had come to be associated in the context of a written constitution
Marbury v Madison
In Australia, it has come to be associated with the
Communist Party
, and in particular, Justice Dixon’s famous reference there
Constitution
framed in accordance with many traditional conceptions . . . some
of which . . . are simply assumed” . . .
“[a]mong these
. . . the rule of
Justice Fullagar observing in
Marbury v Madison
has become “accepted as
axiomatic”. We have set out the quote from
Marbury v Madison
in our written submissions in paragraph 33, but the famous quote is that it
the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law
And that is what I meant in the statement that I referred to earlier
in answering Justice Gleeson. Paragraph 44 identifies
section 75(v)
as securing:
a basic element of the rule of law”.
And there is a quotation from
that I am about to come
“Within the limits of its legislative capacity . . .
Parliament may enact the law to which officers of the Commonwealth must
If the law imposes a duty, mandamus may issue to compel performance of that
So, the Court there is expressing the rule of law requirement in part as,
again, what I think is uncontroversial, that the Executive
must comply with the
law, and that is the duty which we say intermeshes neatly with what
your Honours held in
Plaintiff S157
[2003] HCA 2
(2003) 211 CLR 476
is in volume 3, tab 22. The key passages
are at 103 and 104 of the report. Again, the Court here – or
the joint judgment
of five members of the Court – is emphasising the
rule of law function of
section 75(v).
As you see a few lines
, introduces into the
Constitution
of the Commonwealth an
entrenched minimum provision of judicial review. There was no precise
equivalent to
in . . . the United States of America
or Canada. The provision of the constitutional writs and the conferral upon
this Court of
an irremovable jurisdiction to issue them to an officer of the
Commonwealth constitutes a textual reinforcement for what Dixon J
Communist Party v The Commonwealth
It is, as it is said under
that quote in 104, just over the page:
a means of assuring to all people affected that officers of the Commonwealth
obey the law and neither exceed nor neglect any jurisdiction
which the law
confers on them.
Now I emphasise the “nor neglect”, because
it is no accident that 75(v) includes both prohibition and mandamus.
Prohibition
stops the Executive exceeding its lawful functions, but mandamus
makes sure that the Executive does not neglect its duties. And
here, to do
anything other than detain a person, irrespective of the prospect of their
removal from Australia, would have been to
neglect the duty as this Court had
declared it to be. You see at the end of paragraph 104:
In any written constitution –
this is the passage I mentioned earlier:
where there are disputes over such matters, there must be an authoritative
decision‑maker. Under the
Constitution
of the Commonwealth the ultimate
decision-maker in all matters where there is a contest, is this Court. The
Court must be obedient
to its constitutional function.
So, we submit that, whatever the position might be in lower courts, where
one has a decision of the ultimate decision-maker on a question
decision is that the Executive is under a duty to detain, the Executive is under
a duty to detain unless and until this
Court says otherwise. That is the duty
upon it. And that is so even when the Court does say otherwise – it
holds that a provision
is invalid ab initio – there was nevertheless,
in the period of the detention that occurred, a duty to detain.
your Honours, we test the position by reference to what would have happened
but prior to
if an officer had taken it
upon themselves to release the plaintiff or someone in his position. We note
that that is quite close
to the situation that was considered by this Court in
The Commonwealth v AJL20
(2021) 273 CLR 43
volume 3, tab 9. That was a case not where there had been a failure
by the Executive to comply with the duty to detain
but where there had been a
failure to comply with the duty to remove, and that failure attracted criticism
in this Court:
The nature of the duty –
imposed, relevantly, there and
here, is set out in paragraph 33 of the joint reasons, by reference to
“[T]he provision is mandatory; the legislature requires that persons
of the identified class be detained and kept in detention.
No discretion must,
or even can, be exercised. No judgment is called for.
That was the law
then, as a matter of statutory interpretation and constitutional validity; now,
as a matter of interpretation but
not validity. The criticism I referred to
occurs at paragraphs 48 and following, where, particularly in the last six
or seven lines
at paragraph 48, the plurality said:
A failure by the Executive diligently to perform the duties that give effect
to the legitimate non-punitive purposes for which detention
is authorised and
required by the Act erases neither those duties nor the statutory purposes which
those duties support. Were it
otherwise, the supremacy of the Parliament over
the Executive would be reversed and the rule of law subverted.
Footnoting Dicey and
The Communist Party Case
. And then,
Where the Executive is dilatory in performing the hedging duties imposed
upon it . . . mandamus is available to compel the proper
performance
of those duties.
And then the last two lines:
These hedging duties are not things written in water. A failure on the part
of the responsible officers of the Executive to comply
with an order of the
court mandating performance of their statutory duties may result in those
officers being committed to prison
for contempt of court. By this means,
judicial power is exercised to give effect to the scheme of the Act, enforcing
the supremacy
of the Parliament over the Executive.
That was the
situation facing an officer in this case.
BEECH-JONES J:
they did not have an order the court
mandating ‑ ‑ ‑
MR DONAGHUE:
No – they faced one, but there would have been an order of the court,
had they – if they had been dilatory in the conduct
of their duties,
then mandamus ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES
They would not have faced committal to prison for contempt unless there
was an order.
MR DONAGHUE:
Unless there was an order for
mandamus, no, but there would have been no answer to the claim for mandamus,
having regard to
. And your Honours will have
seen – or will see –
GAGELER CJ:
was an order for mandamus, then the
defence would apply to
compliance with that order in its own terms, would it
MR DONAGHUE:
Undoubtedly so.
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, so ‑ ‑ ‑
MR DONAGHUE:
But there can only be an order for mandamus if there is a duty. That is the
premise for obtaining mandamus.
GAGELER CJ:
Of course, a
statutory duty – it is a statutory duty which is subject to the
Constitution
. You can only obtain the order for mandamus in a
court – in this Court or the Federal Court – and
in the proceedings
for mandamus, the validity of the statute could be raised, as
it was sought to be raised on a number of occasions after
MR DONAGHUE:
In theory, that
BEECH-JONES J:
And if it was wrongly given, then it
would not matter if it was this Court or a non‑superior court; they would
have the defence.
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, in my submission,
mandamus could only ever properly be given if there is a duty, and
certainly – if we set aside the
position in this Court for a
moment – in any other court in the country, mandamus would have
issued, because there was a duty,
because that is what the majority in
held. And it was because the duty was
enforceable – the “hedging duties”, as they are termed in
– that mandamus was available. In my submission, it
duty in a different sense, though. There is certainly a norm –
perhaps in some cases, a very clear norm –
that it needs to be
followed by the Executive, but it is not a directly binding duty, certainly not
one that comes from the Court.
You are creating a directly binding duty from a
combination of the statute and the Court’s
MR DONAGHUE:
That is what I am doing, and in my
submission, I am not doing anything particularly novel in taking that approach.
I am not accepting
that there is a distinction between what the law
requires – what the statute requires – and what this Court
the statute requires. And in my submission, to draw such a
distinction is inconsistent with the
Marbury v Madison
what this Court states the law requires is what the law requires; the
authoritative decision‑maker as to what the
law requires is the Court.
So, I am putting them together in the way that your Honour puts to me, but
not improperly.
BEECH‑JONES J:
If you are not drawing the
distinction, then I do not understand why your defence does not arise just
because they relied on the
statute, without the intervention of this Court to
say it is valid.
MR DONAGHUE:
My defence does not depend on
that, your Honour, because if I was in the United States or
Canada – as I am going to show
in a moment – I could; that
is all I would need, but I would be asking your Honours to go far wider
than you need to go to
decide this case, to put my case in that way, because
your Honours might say, well, the statute might always be invalid and
could always challenge that and you can run that through the legal
system in any particular way. What I am resisting is the idea
that there is any
element of provisionality about the validity of the statute after this Court has
said it is valid.
But the court’s decision is
always subject to being overruled. So, it is provisional at least to that
MR DONAGHUE:
I am resisting that, your Honour,
because to that extent everything would be provisional; nothing would be
certain. And if the
consequence of that uncertainty is said to be that there
was no duty on the Executive to administer the law consistently with the
Court’s provisional ruling in that sense, then that, in my submission, is
antithetical to the rule of law.
The foundational principles concerning
the relationship between the different arms of government, in my submission,
require at least
that the Executive fully respect rulings of this Court as to
what statutes mean and their validity. And the consequence of that
uncomfortable, perhaps, in this case, in circumstances, the liability
to – but the consequence of that must be, in
our submission, that the
law cannot coherently both say to the Executive: the only thing you can do is
what the court tells you
to do and you are civilly liable for doing
Are you not creating two, in effect, rules of law?
You are creating one where there is a statute which the court has not propounded
on and one where there is a statute which the court has determined the effect
of. There are two streams, and in relation to both
the duty of the officers and
the liability, one may get different answers. I mean, we have one rule of law
here, and the source
of the law in relation to the exercise of the power is the
exercise of the power provided by the statute. It, in effect, comes along
the question Justice Beech‑Jones asked you. You are creating two
separate streams.
MR DONAGHUE:
With respect, your Honour, I
am not. I am saying that, for the purposes of this case – and the
same will be true for other
people, in relation to the same cohort of people who
are affected by the overruling of
situation where, in my submission, your Honours cannot, consistently with
the rule of law, say that the Executive
should have done anything other than
what they did. They
just talking, then, about degrees of certainty. So, you could have a decision
of this Court – it may be even
left open passages that are ambiguous, left open circumstances that are
ambiguous, so that the norm that was created
by the combination of the statute
and the decision of the Court left open a fair degree of uncertainty. At the
other extreme, you
might have circumstances where the legislation is so clear
that is just have never needed a judicial decision to clarify it. But
divide between those two situations is just drawing a divide between degrees of
MR DONAGHUE:
I am only drawing the divide,
your Honours, in the sense that I am seeking – perhaps
unsuccessfully – to resist the
proposition that I am asking
your Honours to go beyond what you need to do to decide this case and the
cohort of cases with which
I am presently concerned. So, I am not advancing an
affirmative argument that you could not draw the
appreciate that. But if, as a matter of principle, your argument is right, it
must, as a matter of principle, apply at least to
a case where legislation is so
clear that no judicial decision was ever needed, if it applies to a case where
legislation is perhaps
ambiguous and a decision of this Court had not even
resolved all of that ambiguity.
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour, I would not accept that, as a matter of principle, my argument
must go there, because in that kind of situation, you
would not have the
intersection of legislative and judicial power that I am relying upon as an
element of the defence that I am relying
upon in this case. It may well be
that, for the reasons your Honour has put to me, that it would be equally
unsatisfactory to impose
civil liability upon the Executive for complying with
an absolutely and obviously clear statutory duty until the point of invalidity,
and that is what the Canadians would say – if you are relying in good
faith on the provision, then civil liability does not
that might be so, but it is a different argument to the argument that I am
advancing here, because I am urging upon your
Honours that –
accepting, of course, that this Court can always override its own
decisions – that possibility does not
attach a provisional quality to
such decisions as your Honours make.
point, Mr Solicitor, really a qualitative point, namely that with the
presence of a court decision of this Court, the incoherence
and unfairness that
you complain about is rendered all the more
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. That is why I called it the
paradigm. It is at its most acute. So, you can decide this case; it will apply
in other like
cases, which is a not inconsiderable cohort of cases; and you can
leave for another day whether there should be a boundary, whether
that is the
line – decisions of this Court – or whether the line
should, in a future case, be identified further away.
I have promised to
take your Honours to the
Public Service Act
, which is –
sorry, just before I do that, can I, if you still have
will note at the end of paragraph 52, there is footnote (101) to
M v Home Office
. We have given your Honours that case. I will
not take your Honours to it, but in that passage, Lord Templeman is
rejecting an
argument that, he said, if it was upheld, would:
establish the proposition that the executive obey the law as a matter of
grace and not as a matter of necessity, a proposition which
would reverse the
result of the Civil War.
So, he is emphasising the extent, there, of the
duty, and the Court picks that up in the footnote. The
Public Service
provision I can deal with, I hope, quickly. The
Public Service
is in volume 1, tab 5. The Code of Conduct is found in
section 13. Section 13, your Honours will recall, is the
provision that
the plurality cited in
. Here, we submit, it
contains a statutory manifestation of the rule of law duty I have been
developing, in section 13(4):
An APS employee, when acting in connection with APS employment, must comply
with all applicable Australian laws.
Which you then see defined in (a) and (b) in terms that
includes Commonwealth statute law.
GAGELER CJ:
properly construed?
MR DONAGHUE:
As properly
construed – in my submission, it is a point in time. It is as
authoritatively construed at the point in time
when the officer is required to
comply with it. The reason I say that is because, as your Honours see in
section 15, there is a
disciplinary code attached to compliance with the
Code of Conduct. In context, in our submission, it makes no sense to expose
to disciplinary conduct by reference to a standard that is not the
standard that is understood to apply at that point in time. I
would say: as
construed at the time and in a way that extends to its validity.
would not accept, for example, that – well, in my submission, for
a 20‑year period of time, officers who had, because
they had a legal
view that differed from the majority in
or they had a
moral problem with the length of the detention that followed, if they had said:
well, I am not going to detain people
in those circumstances – they
would have breached section 13(4), in my
submission.
BEECH‑JONES J:
But leaving aside the
common law liability, that could not be a command to take some action that is
later demonstrated to be unconstitutional,
Your Honour, the question, in my submission, that
we are asking is: was there a duty on the officer to
BEECH‑JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
A legal duty, in the sense that is
relevant in
. In my submission, the unreasonableness that
underpins the
defence idea is an unreasonableness that did
acutely face an officer bound by section 13(4).
BEECH‑JONES
But not a legal duty that justifies the detention as a matter
MR DONAGHUE:
No, but that is not what I am
seeking ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
I understand. I am just trying to extract what you get out
by this construction – what actually flows from it.
In my submission what flows is that just as in
it was said that there was a disciplinary code – the
legal duty that enlivens the defence in
arises not from the
order, not from susceptibility to contempt but in the case of some of the people
from their susceptibility to
a disciplinary code by which they could have
sanctions applied to them if they did not do
there ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
That was not true of the correction services
officers – sorry, the contractors.
It was not true of the contractors. The duty for the
contractors came from the contract.
BEECH‑JONES
Partly was it because they had a duty to perform a particular
function and then in the performance of that function they were told
something by a judge. That was how it unfolded.
Indeed, but not told to do so in a way that enlivened
contempt power – told to do so by a judge in a way that intersected
with their contractual responsibilities as employees of someone who had
contracted with the Commonwealth to act in a particular way.
the duty there, but for the marshal – and some of the other court
officers – the duty was linked by the court
to section 13 and in
exactly the same way as it applied there, in my submission, the detaining
officers here for a 20‑year
period of time could have been
sanctioned, and would have understood that they could have been sanctioned under
section 15 for failing
to comply with 189 and 196, as this Court
had interpreted them in
. That is a parallel or
reinforcing way – source of the duty.
Mr Solicitor, you do not need to answer this now, but it may
be helpful at some point if you could simply articulate why, as a
judicial function, the creation of this brand‑new defence is not a bridge
too far for us. I understand you want
us to proceed by way of analogy and I
understand the force of your analogy, but is that enough given that what you
want us to do
is brand new? Or should we leave it to the legislative branch to
make that decision? You do not have to answer now.
MR DONAGHUE:
No, I can answer it, your Honour. In my submission, it is not a bridge too
far, and your Honours might be given some comfort in
that regard by the
overseas authorities that I am about to come to, which have shown that ultimate
appellate courts in comparable
countries have faced a similar issue and have
resolved it in a similar way to the – or, indeed, in a way more
generous to the
Executive than the Commonwealth is now asking your Honours
Just as it was the case in
, your Honours
were confronted with the situation where the purported source of legal authority
for detention, which the common law
obviously values, did not provide the legal
authority that it was thought to do, but where it would be, for reasons that
your Honours
explained, wrong to impose civil liability on the officers of
the Executive nevertheless. We submit that that same competing set
considerations arises probably more acutely in this case than it did in
, for this reason, that in
the officers in
question were exposed to liability for what they did in relation to one person.
But this Court at the peak of Australia’s legal system, in
interpreting a provision of the
Migration Act
that applies to hundreds or
thousands of people, created or crystallised – made concrete, made
unchallengeable – the
obligations of officers in the way that they
were going to conduct themselves in relation to many more people than were in
with respect to an individual subject of a court order. So, the liability
to which the individual officers are exposed by reason
of the shift that
occurred between
is very much greater than
was the case in
, and the unfairness of visiting that
consequence upon them equally greater.
Your Honours, I am conscious
of time, so can I ask your Honours to turn briefly to a couple of the
overseas authorities before handing
over to Mr Begbie to address
your Honours on the remainder of the case. A wider defence is well settled
in both Canada and the United
States of America. We have cited some of the
United States authorities, including some recent ones, in paragraph 51,
footnote 77
of our submissions, but I just seek to take your Honours
to one United States case, which is
Pierson v Ray
in volume 4,
It is a 1967 decision of the United States Supreme Court,
and it arose in the context of the civil rights movement. So, factually
concerned as mixed group of white and black clergymen who were attempting to use
a racially segregated space in Mississippi in
1961. Those individuals were
charged with an offence that is analogous to a breaching of peace. Offence
under the Mississippi Code,
and that provision of the Mississippi Code was held
to be unconstitutional four years after the relevant events.
police officers who carry out the arrest were sued for falsely arresting the
clergymen, and there was also a claim against the
judge which failed for
judicial immunity grounds that your Honours do not need to concern
yourselves with. The Supreme Court held
that the police officers had a defence
from liability. Giving the judgment of the court, Chief Justice Warren
explained that in
the report on page 1218 in the Supreme Court Reporter
version, which I hope is the version your Honours have. So, on
page 1218 from
the bottom of the left‑hand column, it is recorded
The common law has never granted police officers an absolute and unqualified
and they do not claim one here. At the top of the
next column:
Their claim is rather that they should not be liable if they acted in good
faith and with probable cause in making an arrest under
a statute that they
believed to be valid.
Then, having cited some authorities, about a third
of the way down that column:
A policeman’s lot is not so unhappy that he must choose between being
charged with dereliction of duty if he does not arrest
when he has probable
cause, and being mulcted in damages if he does. Although the matter is not
entirely free from doubt, the same
consideration would seem to require excusing
him from liability for acting under a statute that he reasonably believed to be
but that was later held unconstitutional on its face or as applied.
That defence, going over the page, was held to be available both in
response to a common law action and a statutory claim under the
Civil Rights
, and it is said right at the bottom – and you see the
reference to the defence also being available under the statute at the
the left-hand column. Then over on the right, about a few lines down:
We agree that a police officer is not charged with predicting the future
course of constitutional law.
But there was a factual dispute which is recounted down the
right‑hand side of the page about, in effect, what had happened
arrest was carried out. Then about two-thirds of the way down the page, the
court records its conclusion that:
If the jury believed the testimony of the officers and disbelieved that of
the ministers, and if the jury found that the officers
reasonably believed in
good faith that the arrest was constitutional, then a verdict for the officers
would follow even though the
arrest was in fact unconstitutional.
So, that is obviously wider than the defence for which we are contending
here. Good faith reliance on the statute was enough at any
point up until the
statute was actually held to be unconstitutional.
There would need to be a good faith element in your defence though as well,
would there not? Because your defence relies upon an
interpretation of a
judicial decision at least of this Court, and that interpretation has to be
undertaken, presumably, in good faith.
There is almost always going to be some
degree of ambiguity in judicial decisions.
MR DONAGHUE:
reason, your Honour, that – I accept there is some force in
that – the reason we have not included that here is
‑related reason in that, because this is a statutory duty, the
requirement to detain does not turn at all upon the state of
mind. It turns on
the state of mind insofar as whether they have the reasonable suspicion that the
person is an unlawful non‑citizen
but does not otherwise turn upon their
state of mind or their purposes, or anything to that effect.
the officer had misunderstood this decision – this Court’s
decision in
– and had thought that they were
entitled to release a person like the plaintiff, that would not change the fact
actually did have a statutory duty to imprison, and so it is hard to
work out. That is perhaps a long‑winded of saying it
is hard to work out
how you would fit a good faith element into a context where there is a duty to
Except there is a very fine line between
saying you have misunderstood the Court’s decision in
and properly understood the Court’s decision in
means X, or the Court’s decision in
was wrong. All of them are questions of
interpretation.
MR DONAGHUE:
In my submission, ultimately the
defence that I am contending for depends upon there being a duty of the kind
that I have –
actually being a duty, not the officer getting it
subjectively right or wrong, but actually being a duty. Here the duty arose by
reason of the Court’s decision and the terms of the statute. There is no
difficulty – the special case records here
that the officer had the
relevant states of mind required to engage the power, and there are no facts
that suggest otherwise. So,
if I am wrong about that and your Honours say
that there is a good faith element, it would have been.
But your duty is not confined to 189 and 196.
It could apply in a completely
different statutory context.
MR DONAGHUE:
But if it was applying
in the context of a – one of the things I asked your Honours to
leave aside is how it would apply
in the context of a power. If we were talking
there would
have to be a good faith element. Absolutely, but it is just not
BEECH-JONES J:
You maybe have a legislative statement
as to what the elements of the tort are that include a belief in good faith that
the power to do it. So, you could have – powers of arrest in
police officers are often predicated on having a reasonable and
honest belief
that an offence has been committed.
MR DONAGHUE:
BEECH-JONES J:
And if so, if the offence is actually
unconstitutional, that may still enliven the power of arrest, and that is kind
Ruddock v Taylor
– because, even though you are
mistaken about the law ‑ ‑ ‑
is a case a bit like that, and some of the
cases are in that category.
BEECH-JONES J:
is not too different.
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, having a
reasonable ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
But that is not here. You want us to create one of the common law right across
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, your Honour, I am trying very
hard to not ask your Honours to do anything across the board. I am trying
to invite your Honours
just to decide this
BEECH‑JONES J:
I understand. Sorry.
So, I am not seeking that, and if I were in the situation of
powers of that kind, my submission would be different, and it would
good faith element consistently with the Canadian and the United States
authorities. Can I take your Honours finally to
the Canadian cases. There
are two, but it may be that it will be sufficient to take your Honours just
Guimond v Quebec
[1996] 3 SCR 347
volume 4, tab 30. This is a case in the Supreme Court of Canada where
the respondent had been imprisoned in default of payment
of fines. He spent
49 days in prison. Once he was conditionally released, he sought leave to
initiate a class action claiming damages
for what he alleged was the
constitutional invalidity of his detention. So, there are some similarities
obviously to the facts now
before your Honours. He sought both a
declaration that his detention was constitutionally invalid and compensation as
GAGELER CJ:
Was this a common law claim at
MR DONAGHUE:
It was both the common law and a charter
claim, your Honour, and the defence has been held to apply to both. So,
at 357 of the
report in the reasons of the court, you can see at the very
bottom of 356 the question is whether there was a denial of authorisation
to commence the class action, and that turned in part upon the tenability of the
claim. At 357, Justice Gonthier said:
In approaching this question, it is helpful to review briefly the
authorities on the liability of the Crown for damages arising from
the enactment
of laws subsequently determined to be unconstitutional. The general
principle –
in tort for civil debt, is:
that an action in tort for civil damages will not lie, was
enunciated . . . in
and you can see there is a quote from Justice Laskin in
in the middle of the page, the last few lines of which
“Invalidity is not the test of fault and it should not be the test of
liability” –
That is a passage that has been picked up in a few of the later cases.
There is then – another of the leading authorities in
Central Canada Potash v Government of
Saskatchewan
GAGELER CJ:
Just going back to
, that could not possibly capture the law in Australia, could
it, in that context?
MR DONAGHUE:
That invalidity is not the
test default and it should not be the test of liability?
GAGELER CJ:
No, the context is the powers of a municipal corporation, as I understand
MR DONAGHUE:
Sorry, your Honour, I have not appreciated
the question.
GAGELER CJ:
It perhaps suggests the breadth of the
doctrine that you rely upon in the Canadian context goes far wider than the kind
of case with
which we are concerned here, which is simply – well, it
is not simply, but it is, as you put it, confined to a defence against
for false imprisonment.
MR DONAGHUE:
It certainly does go wider.
So, in this particular case, in
it is somewhat similar because we
talking about the – but there are other cases where other forms of
tortious action in reliance
on statutory provisions that are subsequently held
to be unconstitutional have been held to enliven the defence. So, like the
States position, it is wider than here, but it certainly, as this case
illustrates, includes this kind of case.
Your Honours see from
– it is a little confusing – there is a
quote from the dissenting judgment below who then in turn quotes from
So, the indented quote that spans pages 357 to 358 is
the Canadian Supreme Court in
it would be unfortunate . . . if it were to be held that a
government official, charged with the enforcement of legislation, could
to be guilty –
there it was the tort of intimidation:
because of his enforcement of the statute whenever a statute whose provisions
he is under a duty to enforce is subsequently held to
ultra vires
And then there is a reference to an academic summary of the case, as
Professor Cooper‑Stephenson – who is about five lines
in that paragraph – says:
these cases endorse a qualified immunity from tort claims where governmental
actors have committed a good faith and reasonable error
in enforcing legislation
which is subsequently found to violate the
Constitution
And then, in the last paragraph on that page on the left, it is
acknowledged that there can be charter damages as well; that the same
“claim of right” doctrine applies to charter damages. There is
another quote from an academic from Pilkington’s
article explaining
that – which runs over onto 359 – the:
qualified immunity for government officials is a means of balancing the
protection of constitutional rights against the needs of effective
government –
Dropping down a few lines to the emphasised
if the official acts reasonably in the light of the current state of the law
and it is only subsequently determined that the action
was unconstitutional,
there will be no liability.
And then Professor Garant, in the middle
of the page:
It seems that there is no right to obtain a compensatory remedy from the
government where the Charter violation results –
No, that one
is not relevant, your Honour, that is a different topic. So, again, wider
than we are inviting your Honours to embrace
but comfortably including the
current case, that authority,
, has been applied multiple times in
the Supreme Court. It was applied in a case called
New Brunswick
, which we have given your Honours, in 2002; it was
applied again in
Vancouver v Ward
similar kind of analysis that I do not have time to take your Honours to in
the United Kingdom, in the context of invalid
by‑laws, in a case
Percy v Hall
, which we have addressed in writing.
There, the by‑law prevented entry into a restricted area of land that was
military purposes.
It had initially been held to be valid,
then it was held to be invalid in the later case, and the plaintiff brought
claims again,
in the detention context, for wrongful arrest and false
imprisonment by the constable who had arrested in reliance on the by‑law
that had been held to be invalid. The Court actually reversed again and decided
the by‑law was valid, but in obiter it then
engaged in an analysis of
whether there would have been a defence available, and it held that there would
GAGELER CJ:
Sorry, Mr Solicitor, what case was
that you referred to?
MR DONAGHUE:
Sorry, your Honour,
Percy v Hall
[1997] QB 924.
It is volume 34,
tab 33. So, it is obiter for the reason I just described, but it held that
the defence – particularly at
page 947 – would have
been available.
has then been referred to with approval by the
Privy Council and the Supreme Court since, including by the Supreme Court in a
[2021] UKSC 46
, which we have cited in
writing, particularly at paragraph 32.
So, there are approving
references to
after the one United Kingdom case our friends
rely on, which is
, which is a case which was not about validity but
Browne‑Wilkinson expressly said that he thought
a different case to where there were questions about validity.
our submission, you have a reasonably consistent body of comparative authority
that might give your Honours comfort in accepting
that there should be no
automatic equation of invalidity, even invalidity which, of course, operates
ab initio, and civil liability
for people who act and, particularly,
members of the Executive who act – not exclusively, but
particularly, here, the detaining officer – in reliance upon the
law as it has been held to be. So, for all of those reasons,
BEECH-JONES J:
that –the way you frame that is a little bit divorced from the
context, which is a particular tort or particular elements
at common law for a
common law defence.
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. That – I
accept that.
BEECH-JONES J:
As opposed to other invalid
administrative law acts where no‑one
MR DONAGHUE:
accept that. What I am asking your Honours to find is that there is a
defence to the tort of false imprisonment that applies
in the situations that I
have identified and that, if your Honours accept that that is so, the
consequence is that the detaining
officer was not liable, and if that is so, the
consequence is that there is no liability that can be attributed to the
Commonwealth,
consistently with the reasoning in
. So, that is how
we answer that part of the case.
Unless your Honours have any
further questions, for the other part of the case, I will ask your Honours
to hear from Mr Begbie.
GAGELER CJ:
Your Honours, I turn to the
question not whether the Commonwealth is liable for the liability of the
detaining officer but whether
the acts of the detaining officer are to be
attributed to the Commonwealth so that the Commonwealth itself is directly
those acts.
GAGELER CJ:
Are you going to explain your
position on vicarious liability?
Well, I think
the Solicitor – is your Honour talking about the
circumstance?
GAGELER CJ:
Yes. It is really your reply
footnote 18 and the text that accompanies it.
I do not have that in front of me. If that is
will explain it immediately, if
GAGELER CJ:
Little v Commonwealth
and you cite
Oceanic Crest Shipping
the proposition that the officer is independently and:
alone responsible for tortious act –
and that no vicarious liability arises. It may well be that you say you
are just prepared to accept vicarious liability, and that
is what you have done
in the pleading, it may be as simple as that, but I just do not understand how
your position squares with that
line of authority.
Perhaps I will start with that, your Honour. The position is almost as
simple as your Honour says. The Commonwealth has not invoked
‑type defence, as I understand it now, for quite some time,
to say that it is not vicariously viable, and we do not do so here.
So, we have
specifically pleaded that we accept the detaining officer’s acts were in
the course of his employment and we therefore
accept that if he is liable for
those acts, we are liable for that liability.
GAGELER CJ:
is statutory abrogation of this line of authority, I think, in some
That might be so, and I am
GAGELER CJ:
though it had occurred at the Commonwealth level as well, but perhaps only in
relation to police officers – I am not
Yes, not so far as I am aware at a general
level, your Honour, but can I be very clear, we do not invoke that line of
The only reason that crept into this case at all was because our
friends cited the case of
in support of their argument that direct
liability arises by a process of attribution.
Our point was simply to
say that that line of authority does not assist them in that way at all. If
that line of authority were
to be in play at all, the most it would do would be
to deny vicarious liability, not to establish direct liability. That is the
only reason that those authorities have made their way into our submissions at
all. And as I say, we do not rely on it, and the
Commonwealth does not
generally rely on that as a way of avoiding vicarious responsibility in the true
sense of vicarious liability.
So, your starting point
is if the officer has a justification, the officer is not liable, and so there
is no liability for which the
Commonwealth can be made vicariously
That is so.
But you accept, as I understand it, that the officer is acting as an agent,
or in the course of employment, of the Commonwealth.
So, you have to go a step
further as well and say that if the officer has a justification for their act,
then the attributed act
to the Commonwealth must give the Commonwealth a
justification for that act as well. So, the justification defence has to be a
that the Commonwealth itself has, as well as the officer.
We say no, for this reason. We do not even get to the
point of attributing the acts to the Commonwealth itself. That is, the
officer does not act as the Commonwealth; the detaining officer, in
the submissions I will develop, acts as the officer and may be
liable for having
done so, and if they are liable, that is the ordinary path, then, to
Commonwealth liability, which is that it is
That is, then, a denial of agency. So, you do not then
accept that the officer is acting as an agent or in the course of employment
any way, because if you are saying they are acting on their own account, then
they are acting for themselves.
there is not a binary world of agent and non‑agent which determines the
answer to this. We start with the passage
Words like “agent” and “representative” might begin
an inquiry about the possible liability of a defendant
for the actions of a
wrongdoer, but they are not the end of the inquiry. No wider proposition than
that just stated has been adopted
by this Court.
Perhaps if I can just unpack the sense in which words like
“agent” and “representative” might be relevant
Just so I am clear, you just said a moment ago that the actions of the officer
under 189 and 196 – whose actions are they?
The officer’s actions.
Personal actions.
Personal actions.
Nothing to do with the
Commonwealth?
I do not say they have
nothing to do with the Commonwealth, but I do say they are not attributed to the
Commonwealth so as to become
the acts of
No, nothing about attribution, I am just trying to work out whose acts they are.
So, your submission is that the officer that is
directed to undertake the
detention under 189 and 196 is doing that in his or her personal
Not a personal capacity devoid of
the relationship or context of the employment with the Commonwealth, but a
capacity in which
they do not act as the Commonwealth, because their acts are
not attributed to the Commonwealth.
circular. I do not quite understand that at the moment, Mr Begbie. Maybe
you will come to this.
I hope I will
develop that, your Honour.
come to a case where an employee acting within the scope of their employment
does not have their actions attributed to
the employer.
Yes, your Honour. That is the normal position.
There are any number of Commonwealth employees doing things within the scope of
their employment who are not aligned with the Executive as their employer for
the purposes of attributing all of their acts to the
employer itself. That is
the point I will need to develop in the common law
BEECH‑JONES J:
Is this the independent
statutory function, you are saying – is that where we are at? They
are exercising an independent
statutory function. Is that the territory we are
in, or not?
They are – that is
one way of putting it. I balk only because I do not want to suggest that, by
using that expression, we
are invoking
BEECH‑JONES J:
I see. So, we take your
acceptance of vicarious liability as simply a pragmatic thing with no legal
consequence. Is that right?
legal consequence, we accept they were working within the course of their
employment, but that is a different thing from
accepting that they were, as it
were, in the shoes of the Commonwealth with everything they did and said. That
is the inquiry that
needs to be unpacked at the statutory level and at the
common law level. So, that, you will see from our outline, is what
of the reasons, or a possible explanation for the form of 189 and 196
is to address the very issues we are facing – it
identifies who is
the person authorised within the Commonwealth to do the task of the
detaining – i.e. authorised officers.
And to suggest that they are
not acting as agents of the Commonwealth, you will have to develop, I
That is so, and perhaps if I start with the
statutory provisions. The argument we wish to develop in saying that the acts
detaining officer are not attributed so as to become, in law, the acts of
the Commonwealth, is an argument that we develop at both
the statutory level and
at the common law liability for tort level. So, can I start with the statute
and can I start with this statement
The critical provisions operate by imposing duties on
“officers” –
That is a pithy encapsulation of the
point we make, to which I will develop also the correlative that the
Migration Act
does not impose the duty to detain on the Commonwealth
itself, on the Executive, and nor does it provide for officers to
I will put it in quotes here – “on behalf
of” the Commonwealth. If your Honours go to those critical
Migration Act
, starting at section 5, in the
definition of “detain” – it is tab 4, but
your Honours might have the full volume
– you will see
(a) take into immigration detention; or
(b) keep, or cause to be kept, in immigration detention –
As to who does that taking or the keeping or causing to be kept, that is
set out in the definition of “immigration detention”.
your Honours turn to that, you see that it means:
(a) being in the company of, and restrained by:
(i) an officer –
And only an officer in that setting, or:
(b) being held by, or on behalf of, an officer:
(i) in a detention centre established under this Act –
So, in both limbs the very concept of detaining is tied to the fact that
it is done by or on behalf of an officer. The words “on
there, we focus on, because they point out a contrast with other provisions of
the Act where Parliament has chosen
to say that certain things are done on
behalf of the Commonwealth.
We have referred in our written submissions,
although not included in the joint bundle, three provisions, but I might hand
now and keep addressing while they are on their way up. They are
sections 261E, section 272 and section 273. Section 261E
– and this is merely illustrative of the use of the
expression:
The Secretary or Australian Border Force Commissioner may, on behalf of the
Commonwealth, cause –
certain seized things:
to be disposed of or destroyed –
So, that is a
parliamentary selection of an act being done by a person on behalf of the
Commonwealth. Perhaps even more relevant
are sections 272 and,
particularly, 273. Section 272 says that:
The Minister may, on behalf of the Commonwealth, cause to be established and
maintained . . .
And 273, of course, is the provision
The Minister may, on behalf of the Commonwealth, cause detention centres to
be established and maintained.
So, when you see the reference to
“detention centres” in the definition of “immigration
detention” you have,
within that same provision, the concept of a person
being detained on behalf of an officer in a detention centre caused to be
established
on behalf of the Commonwealth. If your Honours then
go – I am conscious those provisions have only just been handed
GAGELER CJ:
We have got the gist of what you are
Yes, I understand.
This is really just a submission that officers exercise their own authority;
they are not exercising the authority of the
Commonwealth.
That is so.
Which really means, then, they are not acting in this respect in the
course of employment; they are acting in the course of an
exercise of their own
Well, we say that that is something
they do in the broad course of their employment, but I accept that there is a
tension here,
and this is the very tension that the Chief Justice
identified with the end of the line, and we have practically made that admission
and we accept we are vicariously
liable ‑ ‑ ‑
problem is they are inconsistent positions. To be vicariously liable, you have
to be an employee of someone, doing the work
that is allocated to you within
your course of employment, employed by X. So, that is one aspect. And
then – but now, you
accept, as I understand, in response to your
answer to Justice Edelman – no, they are acting in their own
authority. So, they
are two entirely inconsistent positions about the
construction of the statute.
On one view, it is a tall order, I think,
to say they are exercising their own authority. They are, as I think you accept
submission you make, properly, about vicarious liability, that it is a
person – an officer – doing a job in the course
employment – being employed by the Commonwealth to do the
Commonwealth’s work. Now if that is right, then the
attributable, because they are doing the agent – their acts are the
acts of the Commonwealth. I just do not understand
how the two propositions sit
at the moment. I might be being very slow, Mr Begbie.
No – I might be very unclear,
your Honour, that is the more likely scenario. I would say that our
admission is as to their
position as an employee and their general activity in
the scope of that employment, but that does not change the statutory provisions,
and what I direct attention to with the statutory provisions is what they say as
to who does the detaining.
BEECH‑JONES J:
are not really accepting vicarious liability. Is it not really what you are
saying that, as a pragmatic thing: if they are
liable, we are
liable – rather than really saying: we accept, legally, we are
vicarious liable. Is that not the effect of
where we are at?
I accept there is a degree of pragmatism in that, but we
locate that in an acceptance of their liability by an admission that we
they are working in the course of their employment. That does not change, under
the Act, who detained them.
Who are the
“officers”? The Act talks about “officers”. What is
the office?
I will come to the definition
of “officer”, if I might:
relevantly, here:
an officer of the Department –
so, it means a large number
of individuals within the Department.
all have the duty, every officer? I am assuming – is it
section 5 of the
Migration Act
that says “officer of the
Department”?
Yes, section 5, the
definition of “officer”. So, in a theoretical sense, yes, they do,
your Honour.
Every officer of the
Department – I mean, even the person – can that be
Well, when the duty gets enlivened,
of course, is the critical thing, your Honour. So, we are not suggesting
that every person
in the Department goes about doing this task or exercising
that – certain officers within the Department are given the role
doing the detaining and reaching the state of mind necessary for that purpose.
So, that is what limits this practically, but
definition ‑ ‑ ‑
But there is no office.
There is no separate office.
They are an
officer without an office.
Well, they are
an officer in the sense that they
But with their own authority.
BEECH‑JONES J:
It does sound like an office,
I must say.
When you put it that way, it
does, your Honour, but when you look at the definition, you see that it
actually attaches to persons
of various Commonwealth emanations, and State and
Territory police forces ‑ ‑ ‑
Just to test it, (f) is:
a person who is authorised in writing by the Minister –
That does not fit your category, does it?
How can the Minister authorise it if the Minister does not have the authority?
If the authority vests in this officer but not
the Minister, how can the
Minister authorise?
You have come to the
definition of “officer” – I mean, the Minister can
authorise someone to be in that position.
BEECH‑JONES J:
We did not ask the Solicitor
this, but this includes State police, does it?
BEECH‑JONES J:
Maybe Mr Donaghue can take it on notice – do they get the
benefit of the defence? You can take that on board.
If I cannot answer that immediately, I will come back to
it. The answer, I think, is yes, and I will be corrected if I am wrong
BEECH‑JONES J:
All right, thank
GAGELER CJ:
They do not get the benefit of the
Service Act
provisions, as you would interpret
They would not get the benefit of those
provisions, but they might have their own disciplinary regimes.
Your Honours, I have spent
now, already, quite a bit of my time. Can I be,
I hope, quick through sections 189 and 196.
This, of course,
is the duty, and we identify that it is locating all of the relevant acts and
state of mind with the officer herself
or himself, not with the Commonwealth.
So, the officer has the state of mind of knowing or reasonably suspecting, the
officer has
the duty, and the detention, as we have seen through the
definitions, is the thing the officer does. In 196:
An unlawful non-citizen detained under Section 189 –
that is, taking us back to the definitions, detained by an officer in
immigration detention:
must be kept in immigration –
that is, must be kept by an officer or on behalf of an officer. Our
friends put the general submission at 39 of their written submissions
say the power to detain was exercised by the detaining officer on the
Commonwealth’s behalf, but what is cited for that
Plaintiff M68
, which, of course concerned section 198AHA, and
in our submission, that points out the very distinction we are drawing, which is
that between detention by an officer and detention by the Commonwealth. If
your Honours go to 198AHA, you will see that,
This section applies if the Commonwealth enters into an
arrangement –
Subsection (2):
The Commonwealth may do all or any of the following:
(a) take, or cause to be taken, any action –
Subsection (3):
To avoid doubt, subsection (2) is intended to ensure that the
Commonwealth has capacity and authority –
And, subsection (5):
(a) exercising restraint over the liberty of a person –
So, that provision illustrates, in our submission, that when Parliament
wishes to authorise the involvement of the Commonwealth or
the detention by the
Commonwealth, it says so expressly. Whatever your Honours may think about
the pragmatism of our admission,
we say that the Act is quite clear that the
detention is not the detention by the Commonwealth but by the officer. So, it
by the officer on behalf of the Commonwealth.
your Honours, then, to the common law position and, I think, very quickly
develop two lines of authority, one which sets
out what we say is the general
approach by which the Commonwealth will be liable for the actions of its
employees and officers vicariously,
and then the exception to that general
position, which when it is liable directly because it acts through individuals
who stand in
the shoes of the Commonwealth for the purposes of what it is they
do and think and say.
So, the first line of authority is exemplified by
Shaw Savill, Groves
. And our friends, as
we understand the written submissions, do not generally take issue with that
line of authority but say that
in this case what we are looking at is a
government function of detaining and that those cases should be understood as
being confined
to the defence context, to the negligence context and, possibly,
to the idea that they are concerned with attribution of acts, not
attribution of
liability in a pre‑
world. So, they are the ideas, as we
understand it, that our friends put forward to distinguish this line of
GAGELER CJ:
So, what does the line of authority stand
for, in your submission?
That, ordinarily, the
Commonwealth’s liability in tort will be of a kind that is vicarious, not
direct. So, to build in the
second line of authority I will come to, absent
something that shows that the individual actor was acting as the
Commonwealth –
was standing in the shoes of the Commonwealth itself,
so that you can say when they acted, the Commonwealth itself was
absent that kind of situation, which is the less common
situation, vicarious liability is how the Commonwealth will be
But is that any different from just saying,
in a situation where a person is exercising their own authority as a result of
office, you do not attribute their acts to the
Commonwealth?
Yes, it is different, your Honour,
because – and I will come to this – applying the usual
rules of corporate agency, which
is what our friends invoke, you do not
attribute, even in the corporate setting, all of the acts of the employees of a
large company
as being the acts of the company itself. And in the Commonwealth
setting, by analogy, you do not attribute the acts of every Commonwealth
acting in the course of their employment to the Commonwealth itself.
common law has eschewed that, in our submission, for good reason, which is that
the problems of attribution and accumulation
that emerge when attempting to
ascribe tortious liability to the body politic become very acute if you start
from the proposition
that every person acting in the course of their employment
is acting as the Commonwealth.
So, can I take your Honours to
Shaw Savill
, which I think sets out that proposition. This is at tab 24.
This was a case brought by a company whose private vessel was damaged
collision with the HMAS
while engaged in wartime operations
and the company sued the Commonwealth itself in negligence.
issues in that case was whether the Commonwealth could be liable in tort and, if
so, on what basis. Justice Dixon gave
the leading judgment, and after
noting the now very unsurprising proposition that the Commonwealth can be liable
in tort and explaining
that, his Honour turned to what we are describing as the
general position. If your Honours look at page 360, at about
GAGELER CJ:
this 68 CLR?
[1940] HCA 40
66 CLR 344.
GAGELER CJ:
What page, Mr Begbie?
Page 360, at
It may be assumed that the liability of the Commonwealth to be sued in tort
means that if an officer or servant of the Crown in right
of the Commonwealth
acting in the course of his service under the authority of the
So, just pausing there, this is not a statement just
There is then the proviso:
not for the purpose of exercising or fulfilling an independent power or
which reflects the
commits a civil wrong, then the Commonwealth is vicariously liable for his
breach of duty.
So, that is not a statement about attribution of acts, it
is a statement about the vicarious liability of the Commonwealth for the
attribution of the breach of duty, if you like, the attribution of the
liability. It is expressed, as I say, in very general terms
by reference to
tort law and officers of the Commonwealth more broadly. It goes on to say:
But, putting aside the exceptional case of an immediate duty lying on the
Crown itself –
In fact, our friends offer an example of such a
if the officers and servants of the Commonwealth singly or collectively are
under no liability in respect of the matters complained
of, the Commonwealth
itself cannot be liable.
So, again, a general statement, and it is a
general statement referrable to tort and to officers generally and to the
process of vicarious
liability, not the attribution of acts. And
his Honour then says:
In the present case, at all events, the liability of the Commonwealth must
be vicarious –
and goes on to explain that. That case was
followed in
(1982) 150 CLR 113
, which is at
volume 3, tab 12. As your Honours turn that up, might I make
this observation. While the plaintiff relies on the fact
that detaining, he
says here, is a governmental function, these defence cases highlight something
that is every bit as much a governmental
function – particularly a
Shaw Savill,
where you are talking about conducting the defence
of Australia in wartime – so, that is not a point of distinction
these cases and the present case.
situation was that the case involved an injury, this time suffered in peacetime,
by the alleged negligence of a defence member.
The High Court again, in the
course of considering whether there was liability, examined whether the
Commonwealth itself could be
liable and on what basis. And in the joint
judgment of Justices Stephen, Mason, Aickin and Wilson,
their Honours picked up the
Shaw Savill
analysis and reinforced
that. You find that at 121, at about point 2 on the page:
For such an action as the plaintiff now brings to be maintainable against the
Commonwealth the plaintiff must establish –
Your Honours
can read, first, second and third:
We have expressly referred to vicarious liability because the facts of this
case make it clear that if the plaintiff is to succeed
it will be because of the
tortious nature of acts or omissions of his fellow crew members and not because
of any direct want of care
on the part of the
Commonwealth.
Their Honours then go on – and I will not
labour the reading of it – to consider
Shaw Savill
, including
the leading judgment of Justice Dixon and then the relevantly equivalent
statements of Justices Starke and Williams to
affirm what that case
stands for.
GAGELER CJ:
I just do not know how widely you can
take these statements. The Commonwealth can be an employer,
Yes, it can be an
GAGELER CJ:
And as an employer, it can owe a duty of
care to provide a safe system of work.
GAGELER CJ:
And a breach of that
would ‑ ‑ ‑
the exceptional case in
Shaw Savill
, a case of the duty lying on the
Commonwealth itself.
GAGELER CJ:
It is hardly exceptional, given
how common employment by the Commonwealth is, but – all
Perhaps I will put it this way. The exception
is not that there is not such a duty owed to a large number of people but that
are not many such absolute duties that attach directly to the Commonwealth
itself. What we are talking about here is whether the
Commonwealth –
in these cases, what we are talking about is whether the acts of individual
servicepeople become the acts of
the Commonwealth.
GAGELER CJ:
And the problem in these defence cases was it was understood that defence
personnel were not employed by the Commonwealth. There
was not an employment
relationship, as I understand it.
I accept that
there is a dimension of that in these cases and that deals with the
problem and so forth. I accept that,
your Honour. The point
What is the
proposition we are to take from these, then, given all those
difficulties?
Well, we do not say that those
difficulties ‑ ‑ ‑
distinctions.
Distinctions, whatever word we
apply, we do not say that those distinctions affect what is being said here is a
statement of general
principle. That is what is done in both of these
Another distinction is that in these cases
there was a duty of care that was owed by the tortfeasor, whereas in our case,
we have is a purported statutory duty found to be
That is so. What we are talking about
at the moment is, we accept, somewhat different. That is, what we are talking
these defence negligence cases is the attribution to the Commonwealth
of the acts and knowledge of the employees or defence members,
as the case may
But it is – as Justice Gleeson
says, it is very, very different when you move from ordinary acts to the
exercise of power.
Here what we are talking about is an exercise of power over
people, and the exercise of power, either it is done by the officers’
authority or it is done under the authority of the Commonwealth, and if it is
done under the authority of the Commonwealth, I
really struggle to see why the
acts are not attributed to the Commonwealth.
Can I answer that by going to the next case,
your Honour, which is
, which deals
directly ‑ ‑ ‑
you are going to go
I will go to
if I may, your Honour, but I was going to
finish this general line of authority.
BEECH‑JONES J:
I just want to be clear, is
the proposition that even other employees, because they are exercising this
independent statutory duty,
there is no attribution of acts? Is that the
proposition?
It is a twofold proposition;
that is part of it. That is the statutory part of the proposition, and then the
other part of the
proposition is the one I am developing now, which is that the
common law does not say that all employees – put aside the statutory
duty, the common law does not say that employees generally act as the employer
in the things that they do.
It will be certain officers doing certain
things and the circumstances which reveal them to stand in the shoes of the
Commonwealth
or the employer itself will be various but, as I will come to when
I take your Honours to the cases which mark out what we say is
exception, the point of the exception is that it recognises the general rule,
which is that not everything gets attributed directly.
If everything
got attributed directly, there would be no question of vicarious liability at
all. You would not need an analysis
of who stands in the shoes of the
Commonwealth for this or that purpose. If simply everything done by everyone
within an employment
relationship was the act of the employer, we would be in an
entirely different tort word.
BEECH‑JONES J:
can make a difference when: one, you have an independent duty; and two, where
you have provisions such as they are in the State
Civil Liability Acts that
operate either on acts or on liability. That is when it can bite and make a
difference, but the general
proposition is often they are co‑extensive.
The acts are attributed and so is the liability.
accept that statute can play a part in that, and I accept
BEECH-JONES J:
I am just wondering what is the linchpin of when it is not in here, but you
keep going, Mr Begbie.
I will keep going and if I do
not satisfactorily address that, then I will attempt to do that at the end.
This case I will deal with
very quickly. Your Honours know the circumstances
and, relevantly, this Court was considering whether there was a valid claim for
false imprisonment that had been extinguished by validating legislation. At
paragraph 5 in the joint judgment, you will see that:
the plaintiff brought proceedings . . . in the original
that in so far as he was imprisoned within the Corrective Establishment he was
falsely imprisoned by the Commonwealth, “its
officers, representatives,
Then at paragraph 43, the basis of the
possible liability of the Commonwealth was considered, and their Honours said
liability which the plaintiff seeks to attribute to the Commonwealth for what he
alleges to be his false imprisonment must be
vicarious liability. The
Commonwealth would be vicariously liable . . .
under . . . the
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) only if the
plaintiff could succeed in that claim against the officer who detained him: the
officer in charge of the Corrective
Establishment.
a necessary step in the plaintiff’s case would be to demonstrate that the
officer . . . was liable to the plaintiff
imprisonment.
You see at footnote (70) the passages in
Shaw Saville
that we have already gone to, and we say
that that case, six Judges of this Court, states the ordinary common law
position reflected
in those earlier cases as it applies here in the context of
false imprisonment.
The next case I go to, your Honours, is the
Western Australia v Watson
. The passages are lengthy, so I
will draw them to your Honours’ attention without labouring them, but
we have included this
case because there are not a great many cases which look
at what we are calling the exceptional situation where the acts and thoughts
an ordinary employee get attributed to the body politic itself. This is one of
the cases where that has happened, and it explains
the principal basis for that
kind of analysis.
This was a negligence case in which the plaintiff
had sued the State of Western Australia itself as being liable in negligence and
there was a question about whether it owed a duty of care and, in particular,
of asbestos for a duty to
be located in the State itself. So, that meant looking at where that knowledge
existed so as to attribute
that knowledge to the body politic. The way the
Court of Appeal went about that was to follow United Kingdom authorities
to borrow our friends’ phrase – ordinary
corporate agency, and how they had been applied in the government context in
United Kingdom and therefore applied those cases here in our context.
The relevant passages – I will need to summarise this very
briefly, but the relevant passages are first at page 267, point
through to 271, point 5, where their Honours considered decisions like
explain how, under the corporate principles, the knowledge and acts of a
controlling mind and will are to be attributed to the
entity itself. In the
governmental context, they concluded that the Minister did stand as a
controlling mind and will to the State,
to Ministers in fact as they were in
They then looked further – from page 273,
point 52 to 276, point 48 – at cases like
Supermarkets
who asked the question of how far down the chain of
responsibility the attribution process would work, and recognising –
I will not, I hope, do an injustice in saying this – that the
point was uncertain. They said that, at the least, it could
apply to permanent
heads of departments, secretaries and so forth, so that the knowledge, or what
should have been the knowledge
of the secretaries and permanent heads in that
case were also seen to be those of the State itself.
But we are talking about an exercise of power. If you get the person right
at the bottom, the most lowly employee that turns up with
the authority of the
company to buy some paperclips on behalf of the company, they are still acting
on behalf of the company.
your Honour, that if one looks at all the circumstances of the particular
person and the contractual obligations, how
they hold themselves out and, in a
government context, the statutory provisions and so forth, you can do that
analysis. That is
the analysis you have to undertake.
Our point is not
to avoid the analysis, it is to say that it has to be undertaken. There is not
a process of just starting with
the idea that because someone is an employee,
what they do they do as the employer or, in this case, as the Commonwealth.
in this case, means two things. It means you have to grapple with the
statute and it means that if you are going to prove a case
liability – that is, a detaining officer acts as the
Commonwealth – you have to engage with the facts.
That is why
, we say, do not take this analysis anywhere, because
is a classic case of what we can call a controlling mind and
will – namely, a Secretary and Minister – doing,
and directly, the only things that attach liability to the
Commonwealth in that case. Your Honours can see that – I will
you the references – at 355, point 5, and then in
relation to each of the five seizures for which the Commonwealth was liable,
382, 387, 389 and 394.
In each of those seizures it was the Secretary
personally or the Minister personally, or the Commonwealth directly telling the
Fruit Boards what had to be done with respect to that particular seizure.
There are other cases cited in footnote 42 of our friends’
submissions which are in exactly the same situation, they deal with agency heads
or the like.
So, we say, we are not in that territory here because the
Commonwealth, under the statute, is not doing the detaining. So, it is
question of a controlling mind and will or anyone else doing something that the
Commonwealth itself is not doing under the
statute. If it was to be sought to
be established that someone, as the controlling mind and will or agent in that
kind of way stood
in the shoes of the Commonwealth, then that would have to be
done by building a case and having the facts and all the rest of it
which do not
exist here.
So, your Honours, that brings us to 12.45. Can I
conclude by saying this. If your Honours, contrary to everything I have
concluded that the Commonwealth could be directly liable –
and I say “could be” because you do not have the facts
to determine
whether, in fact, it was – could be directly liable, then we would
contend that, for all the reasons given by
the Solicitor‑General, minus,
perhaps, the
Public Service Act
, the same common law defence as
would be available to the detaining officers would be available to the
Commonwealth itself –
which is not to step back from the concession
at the start. If the detaining officers do not have the defence, we accept the
Commonwealth
will be in the same position, it will not have it,
Just before you leave, in paragraph 7 of
the special case, it says that:
On 22 August 2017, the plaintiff was located and detained by an officer
of the second defendant –
Are we to read that statement of fact in two
ways? One for vicarious liability and then in a different way for the argument
non‑attribution of acts?
your Honour, you are to read it as I have described the statute. That is,
it is a statement of fact about a person who did
the things under those
provisions that we have worked through and, insofar as that creates a practical
awkwardness for our vicarious
liability concession, then we accept that and I do
not offer a perfect answer for that other than that is the decision that the
Commonwealth
has taken and the Commonwealth does that because it does not wish
to stand apart from possible liability in the ordinary vicarious
situations where its employees are doing the things that they are meant to do
and where people who might, therefore, have
a compensable wrong would be able to
look to the Commonwealth to damages through that route.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Begbie. We will adjourn for lunch.
12.47 PM LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT
GAGELER CJ:
May it please the Court. Can I
start by acknowledging the error the learned Solicitor‑General pointed out
in paragraph 1
of our outline. Yes, I have there used the word
“interpretation”, in a broad sense encompassing the
constitutionality
of a law once one understands its meaning. So, could you
please read that proposition and the argument that it refers to in our
submission as referring to an “understanding” of a
So, it is, I think, common ground that the tort that we allege
was committed was committed because of an erroneous understanding,
including its interpretation and constitutional limit, of a statute. Of course,
the difference between interpretation as
the Solicitor‑General advanced it
and constitutionality – or, as he put it, whether there was a law at
if I may so, a distinction which casts doubt immediately
upon the existence of any principle of a kind necessary to found the
defence; it is just one of a number of distinctions which are
produced by the adumbration of that principle for the purposes of the
At that point, we engage at a level of method of argument. Of
course, it is true that the Court lays upon itself the advisability
I would not put it higher than that – of deciding only that which is
necessary for the matter before the Court. But
that which is necessary, when it
is a question of incremental development of the common law,
includes – in all cases, certainly,
that one will find in the
books – it includes in all cases something in the nature of what is
sometimes called consequentialist
reasoning. If this step is taken by reason of
this impulse – call it policy of the law or principle –
then what else
would be entailed or caught up with or produced by taking that
step in developing the law?
There is nothing in the proposition by
which, as it were, the Commonwealth can say: sufficient unto the day is the
question of High
Court authority; your Honours should not consider what the
incremental development sought by the Commonwealth would mean in the case
other courts in other circumstances. Not so. That is a routine, proper and, in
our respectful submission, indispensable intellectual
step in considering
whether or not there exists any such principle as would produce, by that impulse
of the common law, to develop
the change – and it is a
change – which is urged. That is the first point.
submission, although, as we said in proposition 1, that which is before
this Court concerns the tort of false imprisonment
with the qualities we there
note, it is not only the deprivation of liberty, of course, that produces torts
which can be said to
have constitutional significance, by which I mean torts
which control or constitute the boundary line between authorised conduct
unauthorised conduct in a society where individuals have dignity and there is a
rule of law.
Thus, for example, there are also, naturally enough, cases
of unlawfully exacted taxes which, depending upon circumstances, which
various, may well produce torts in the nature of a conversion but more likely,
of course, will produce financial remedies such
as money had and received. In
relation to real property, laws lacking validity can by their invalidity produce
the occurrence of
torts of trespass, for example. And obviously enough, in the
case of duties of customs, for example, the impoundment of property
produce, if it were invalid, a tort of conversion.
So, this is an area
of the supposed defence at question in this case which must, of its
nature – bearing in mind it is the
common law and will not be
developed in some sort of pointillist fashion – the policy of the law
needs to be observed, the
principle producing the increment needs to be
identified and honoured. It will, in our submission, necessarily entail
implications
in other areas as well.
Now, the idea that there could not
or should not be a remedy for money had not received for an overpaid
tax – particularly
a tax paid under protest, because those
responsible for taking the money, whether pursuant to a judgment or otherwise,
did so because
they considered that there was either authority granted by
statute or authority granted by the latest judicial explanation of an
understanding of the statute – is, in our submission, astonishing and
dangerous. It would not be the rule of law for an unlawful
tax to remain with
the Commonwealth simply because there was no malice in those who collected
The same is true of somebody who has used somebody’s land
under a statute which purportedly but invalidly authorises its taking.
absence of malice, of course human sympathy would go out to a person who as a
natural person officer of the Commonwealth
might be held liable in trespass. Of
course, that we will list later as an impulse in favour of the proposition that,
not that officer is liable, then obviously the Commonwealth is as
well and not merely vicariously, to which I will come.
BEECH-JONES
Mr Walker, do you say it does or it does not follow from
that the Commonwealth could not pass a law purporting to give a
defence against an action for damages if the officer reasonably believed
reasonable grounds that the person was liable to be
that very difficult.
BEECH-JONES J:
Going forward –
going ‑ ‑ ‑
Going forward. The ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES
Maybe take it on board.
I hope I have
absorbed ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
So, a sort of power that a police officer has to arrest on reasonable cause that
an offence is being committed, which it might
turn out the offence is
unconstitutional, but just because the offence is unconstitutional does not mean
you do not have the power
to arrest. It may not mean
That has, I think, no analogy with our
case at all.
BEECH-JONES J:
I am not saying it has any current
one, but it could be done. I do not know.
think I may come back to that in the course of argument. May I make this clear.
This case and the arguments of the Commonwealth
have nothing to do with what I
am going to call remedial legislation, that treat invalid matters, conduct,
perhaps a statute or conduct
under a statute as things in fact notwithstanding
they were invalid;
Duncan’s Case
, obviously at the State level;
Kable (No 2)
This case does not entail any of those
matters, and if there be considered to be something in the nature of a social
discordance
raised by the position of officers of the Commonwealth in this case,
then naturally enough, no doubt, Parliament can take that in
hand and consider
what, if anything, it might do. None of that, with respect, casts any light on
the question here as to whether
there should be, as it happens with full
retrospectivity, common law pronounced to deal with the consequences of the
misunderstanding
– the wrong understanding – of the
statute taken in
and being the cause of what perhaps
officers did in this case.
GAGELER CJ:
I suppose the
and the way in which section 189 was
interpreted may give some scope for an argument of an available legislative
solution, but that
is not something we need to consider in this
Not before this Court. I have put
that in because available legislative expedience is all that need be said and
should be enough
to dispel any notion that there is an imperative to be
expressed by making the common law so as to avoid the dilemma, so called,
presented to these officers.
This is not the first case in which that
has occurred by reason of the inherent retrospectivity of the Court’s
determination
that a statute was valid only so far – for example, as
in this case – any more than somebody is misunderstanding the
law may produce the fact that they are liable for a tort. There is no great
concern to be entertained. That does not prevent
Parliament, in an appropriate
way, dealing with a matter as they see fit.
Historically, the
policeman’s lot produced statutes which led to the – I suppose
one of the fervent wishes of the police
association or whatever it was called in
those days – namely, that individual policemen would not be mobbed
financially for
matters for which the State could be made financially to answer.
In our submission, that is just one way in which dilemmas facing
might be dealt with. It does not call for a distortion of the common law, which
is the Commonwealth’s aim, in our
submission, in this case.
the time constraints, I will pass over a detailed explication to its authors of
. I simply want to make clear that, in our submission, the only
possible reading of
is that it was the nexus – a
direct nexus – between the actions of the officers, upon whom I am
concentrating, and the
orders, vitiated thoroughly as they were, of the court
which produced the outcome in favour of no liability for them.
plainly had to do with the institutionally essential respect, by way of
observance, of the outcomes of a court process, which
are obviously always, at
any level below this Court, provisional by reason of the possibility of judicial
review or an appeal, and
again in this Court, provisional by reason of the
possibility of a reopening.
But the finality within that universe, the
finality of the decision of a matter resulting in a judgment or order is, in our
submission,
obviously the main spring of the necessity of expanding immunity
beyond the judicial officer who had committed the wrong course of
without any justification, to the officers who – not having the job
of deciding whether to issue orders, let alone
whether they are
right – obeyed the order or the warrant, as the case may be. That,
in our submission, is the only way in
which that recent decision of
your Honours can be understood so far as extending the immunity or giving
the defence to the actors
in that case other than the judicial officer.
In proposition 3, we seek to explain in a principled
way – including in the paragraphs of our submissions there
why there is that difference between the nexus suppled by the
execution, enforcement or observance of a court or warrant by an officer
one way or the other with that duty or function on the one hand, and on the
other hand the interests that everybody, be they
professional or otherwise,
takes in what this Court pronounces from time to time to be, say, the meaning of
The nexus in the latter case is obviously indirect because
it is a question: (a), of understanding a matter which is notoriously
arguable – that is, leads to debate and dispute – which
sometimes ends up in this very Court; and (b), of course is predictive
to how will things turn out in a case yet to happen or a course of action about
to be taken. Quite different, of course, from
the finality of an adjudicated
matter producing an order or a judgment required for institutional purposes.
That is, for the existential
significance of the court as a place to determine,
in a binding fashion, justiciable matters; observance of
Is that submission to the effect that
although – I think you used the expression “thoroughly
invalid” – the
orders did have some legal effect or legal
consequence, as opposed to any reasons that might be given which themselves do
any direct legal effect or consequence?
that is right. We have drawn to attention in writing Lord Hobhouse’s
description of the matter, which we would respectfully
urge as being an
appropriate, if perhaps colourful, way of making the distinction, and
your Honours know I mean no disrespect when
I say that what
your Honours write in your judgments are different in kind, in systemic
terms, from the judgment or orders which
result after the requisite majority is
reached among those reasons for a particular outcome.
In our submission,
the very fact that there is a serious field of scholarship in understanding what
this Court’s reasons mean
for future cases – not those that are
exactly alike, if there were any such thing, but those with sufficient
similarity –
would show that of course there is a difference in
immediacy, in the directness of nexus, between what this Court’s reasons
mean for legal scholarship.
That is, the corpus of the law as understood
by the varying views and opinions formed about this Court’s judgments and,
the other hand, the immediate, direct institutional nexus between a
court’s decision – for whatever reasons, good, bad
indifferent, subject to appeal or not – and the orders or judgments
that result which, at least for the time being, must
be observed for the sake of
the institutional existence of the administration of justice by courts charged,
ultimately, with their
peculiar form of finality as the quality they bring to
dispute resolution.
In our proposition 4 we adopt what has already
been the subject of some discussion today. Of course, it is the statute which
the one and only source of the authority for the officers in this case. But
it was a statute misunderstood, as had been revealed
by the reopening and
overruling, relevantly, of
. That is why we say what we
call in our proposition 4, “the rationale for the Defence”,
being that which we have sought
to identify both in writing and in what I have
just said in
, is simply lacking in this case and cannot be
supplied, in particular, by reference to the reasons in the majority in
, for example.
Can that first sentence
in paragraph 4 be correct, as a bald statement? If, for example, there
were ambiguity in 189(1) and 196(1)
had resolved
or purportedly resolved, surely
must be part of the source of
authority for the meaning and the explication of the meaning of 189 and
No, and it comes down to this: this Court does
not authorise any officer to do anything under the
Migration Act
Court does not authorise – we are not talking about warrants, at the
moment – this Court did not authorise detention.
This Court in
held that the statutory provisions in question meant that there
was an authority, without exception, relevantly, for detention.
That does not
make this Court the source of authority. The statute is still the source of
authority, and the statute is to be understood
– we accept everything
the learned Solicitor says based on
Marbury v Madison –
it will be understood as from time to time explicated by the Court, but that
does not make the Court the source of the authority.
I do not think anyone is suggesting that the Court is the sole source of
authority. I think the question is whether or not, in addition
to the statute,
the reasons that are given by the Court provide part of the source of
No. They enable you to understand
the source of the authority – which is why it matters that, from time
to time, the court’s
view may change. The statute does not change, and
the retrospective principle necessarily means the statute always meant what the
last court to pronounce on the matter says it meant –
But, in our submission, if one were to say of a statute that it
comes encrusted with extant judicial explications which are still
standing, if that can be said of a statute, then in that composite sense, then
the statute according to the understanding
revealed in the latest case law could
be said, in a general sense, to be the source of the authority. But in terms of
– that is, the power of a polity being exerted against
individuals – the true source is the legislation, which requires
be understood.
And does that mean that the
Commonwealth is no part of the source of the
When your Honour says “the
Commonwealth”, I think, we immediately get
the polity, which gives rise to the recognition, obviously, of the three
relevant organs, political organs;
the organs of government. So, Parliament,
the Executive, and the judiciary. If your Honour is asking whether the
Commonwealth is
responsible, in the terms, of being the source of the authority,
then yes, the Commonwealth is the source of the authority –
say, through its Parliament, and its judiciary will from time to time explain
what Parliament meant and how that applies in
a particular matter before the
The Executive, meantime, will obviously abide by the outcome of
any such litigation, but as to its day‑to‑day administration,
proceed to act in accordance with its understanding – which might be
right, which might be wrong – of what Parliament
has required. Each
of the three arms are “the Commonwealth”, relevantly, but in this
case, it is the Executive arm with
which we are entirely concerned. That is,
this Court, for obvious reasons, is not responsible in any legal sense of that
So, we can put all that to
one side. We are simply talking about the Commonwealth in the sense of the
polity which has an executive
power. And here, it was executive power which was
exercised. There is no other form of power which led to the detention. And one
asks, may it be supposed that there is a power to detain located in this polity
outside the Commonwealth? The short answer is:
not for federal matters, no, it
is the Commonwealth. At that point one asks: well, what are the natural
persons – the officers
of the Commonwealth, as they are called and
admitted to be in this case – for whom are they acting? And the only
answer, virtually admitted on the pleadings, is that they are acting
for the Commonwealth in their perceived extent of authority
and duty to detain,
which is the heart of this case.
In proposition 5 we put, as
central notions in support of our argument, that there is no functional
requirement, let alone desirability,
of the immunity which is sought in this
case. It is, in our submission, absurd for the Commonwealth as a polity, acting
its Executive, to say that there will be any decrement in the rule of
law by full observance of the retrospective nature of a determination
the true meaning, including its validity, of an enactment giving rise, obviously
enough, to such civil remedies as may
be available on the common
law – perhaps there may even be a statute, but we can content
ourselves with common law –
when it can be seen that an action was
merely purportedly authorised and was not truly authorised.
The rule of
law, in our submission, is vindicated, not compromised, by saying that in the
absence of authority, that which you cannot
do except with authority is a legal
wrong. Particularly, that is so when one considers that false imprisonment may
be a tort concerning
integrity of the person, but there are other Executive
acts, such as forcible restraint, which might produce permanent injury, which
would produce no remedy for the individual if the forcible restraint were
If not lawful, the idea that there could be no compensation for
the lifetime crippled limb because there was no malice involved –
that is, it was considered that what was done was authorised, though
wrongly – is, in our submission a very jarring proposition
Commonwealth to advance as a vindication of the rule of law. It is, in our
submission, quite the opposite.
Proposition 6 – I am
sorry, before I leave proposition 5, your Honours will recall that the
Solicitor‑General embraced
the notion that the Commonwealth as a polity
would have the defence for which they argue if the officer had the defence.
Now, leaving
aside, at the moment, whether it is direct liability or vicarious
liability – I will come back to that – that, in our
submission, is the height of what we would submit to be an unattractively
extreme notion, dangerous for the rule of law, engaged
proposition.
It, in effect, says if the Commonwealth makes an
enactment – and you can add by way of a footnote, which in
practicably every
imaginable case it will regard as having been valid, the
notion of the Parliament knowingly passing unconstitutional enactments ought
be rejected – it is an unreal test of anything, but the notion that
the Commonwealth has enacted a law and therefore presumably
intended it to have
effect because it was, among other things, valid, as being an answer to a claim
that there has been an infringement
of a personal right, such as physical
integrity or freedom, is, in our submission, again so obviously contrary to a
proper understanding
of the rule of law as to provide no principle whatever and
to find no location in the so‑called policy of the law to produce
increment in the common law.
In proposition 6, as I have already
put in opening remarks, of course this Court cannot and certainly should not
confine itself to
the case as urged by the Commonwealth. That is, blinker
yourself to consider only the point of this Court, at the apex of the
judicature,
and what its reasons may have by way of an aura that no‑one
else’s reasons have. That is undoubtedly correct. Mind
you, it does not
mean that they cannot be changed from time to time. Indeed, part of the
scholarly industry to which I referred
looks to those developments that may
involve or entail reopening and overruling former holdings. One need only think
90 and 92 to see what a long‑term project that
That, in our submission, means that one is immediately at sixes
and sevens as to what is meant by the duty to – and then one
know what verb it is – obey, observe, honour, respect –
the reasons of courts as opposed to the obvious duty
of a sheriff, an officer of
the court in the courtroom carrying out a warrant or order, as occurred in this
case. There could not
be a larger difference, in our submission, and there is,
as we put, no stability whatever in a principle which would start by saying:
think only of the High Court.
The finality of litigation, the
administration of justice, the rule of law is, as your Honours well know
from annual reports of courts
around the country, mostly practiced in courts
other than this Court, just as a matter of number. How could it be otherwise?
yet a principle, therefore, that would start by talking about rule of law
and the administration of justice and then would leave
out the vast bulk of how
that is actually operated in this country is a principle without any sound
foundation.
In proposition 7, we refer to something that does not
seem to really be in contest, at least overtly. The retrospective operation
which there is a pronouncement as to the validity of laws –
relevantly in this case – and their meaning – relevantly
in this case – once their partial invalidity has been discovered is,
in our submission, so cardinal as not possible to be removed
by this supposed
incremental development of the common law. Query whether the common law is
even, itself, institutionally capable
of doing so; that does not require any
consideration in this case.
It is, in our submission, on any view of it,
an unprecedented notion that the common law would depart with such a skeletal
of judicial adjudication as the principle of retrospectivity. But
though there is no overt attack, it is pretty plain from the way
in which our
friends both write and address on this matter that they do intend that there be,
prospective only, an effect of the
detection of a partial invalidity and the
resultant limited interpretation of the statute in this case which purported to
– which the officers understood to authorise –
the detention.
That, of course, has precisely the effect of saying:
that which we now pronounce was unlawful will be treated as unlawful only from
now on. Now, whether it is prospective overruling – which this Court
has carefully considered and rejected – or whether
it is a broader
feature of retrospective operation of adjudication, that, in our submission, is
an impossibility, both to embrace
retrospectivity and to say that the detected
unlawfulness is a justiciable unlawfulness only from now on.
It is not like
, though, is it? It is not the
creation of new rights and obligations, or is it – the defence? So,
it was said it is concerned about, in the exercise of judicial
The adjudication of existing rights and obligations –
the creation of new ones. It is not that kind of problem, though, is
Probably, at a deep level, they are all the same
thing, because you are talking about the state of the law at an earlier time
the Court determines it, both in
and in a case like
today. But they are, obviously, different at another level.
They are different, I am just working out if the underlying issue that you
are seeking to raise is that kind of issue.
Commonwealth, here, does not say that the Court was not competent to say that
was wrong and that that which was upheld in
should not have been upheld, if I can put that in shorthand. Now, that is real
retrospectivity.
I suppose in
you can say
no‑one said that the Court cannot revisit – I do not know if it
is just one case or about 43 cases there
– you cannot revisit that
and say all or most of them got it wrong and that there never was the capacity
for States to levy
this tax because it was an excise. There is a commonality
there. In both cases, it is accepted that it is of the essence of the
administration of justice when the validity of something that has occurred or
the legal consequences of something that has occurred
You could say the same thing about
could say that the justification recognised in
has, in your
language, eroded the retrospective nature of judicial decision-making, but it is
not the same thing as saying that judicial
decisions operate retrospectively and
saying that some of the consequences of those judicial decisions operating
retrospectively
will not bite.
Yes, I understand
that. We are not saying of
that it casts any special or
particular light on what I will call the notion of retrospectivity. It was
retrospective in the thoroughly
ordinary sense of it simply asked: did this
thing that happened have these legal qualities and these legal consequences? It
decided it did, and they apply from the time they happened. That is our
But that is the Commonwealth’s point as
Commonwealth says, well, from the time the events happened there was just a
slightly broader defence.
If I may say so, all
changes to the common law are, under the full-blown fairytale, utterly
retrospective. It is for those reasons,
in our submission, that one notes the
puzzle at the heart of the Commonwealth’s argument that, in truth, they
are trying to
get a prospectivity for something which is always, thoroughly,
properly and appropriately retrospective.
Your Honours, we have in
proposition 8 drawn to attention two decisions which perhaps did not
receive major attention in the arguments
from my learned friends this morning.
But your Honours are familiar with
Cowell’s Case
, which was
the New South Wales Full Court whose reasoning was adverted to favourably in the
House of Lords in
Evans (No 2)
. I am not going to take
your Honours in detail to
Evans (No 2)
because we have set
out the relevant passages and citations in our written submissions.
is significant, in our submission, about
Evans (No 2)
as in this case, it involved the Executive acting in accordance with what the
executive officers understood to be the position
by reason of earlier court
decision which had later been overruled. So, that is surely a piquantly
interesting case, even if it
is only comparative law, for this Court to consider
in this case, which has those features. Their Lordships in particular
the distinction between acting, no doubt in good faith, on the basis of
what the Home Office had itself promulgated as being proper
understanding of the
law, as adumbrated by and articulated by the judges, but got it
At stake, of course, was one of the most important personal
interests protected by the rule of law, namely, liberty. And in our
it is not possible to put to one side
Evans (No 2)
Commonwealth has done both in writing and in address very briefly today. It
produces, at the level of an understanding of
what it means for an officer to
rely upon an order on the one hand and an officer to be relying upon judicial
reasoning on the other
hand – one cannot put that to one side, it is
exactly the difference that drives what the proper outcome should be in this
Mr Walker, can I ask you about
Evans (No 2).
Do you take the view that it is not reconcilable
with the earlier Court of Appeal decision in
No, I do not. It has to be said that
there is not what I might call an over-anxious attention in
their Lordships’ reasons
to a full reconciliation with
On the other hand,
was a by‑laws case, and the two later
decisions to which the Privy Council and the Supreme Court – to which
has been made in the written submissions – make it fairly
clear it is an English approach to the authority apparently given
by‑laws which are themselves defective, which was in question in
, which simply, as I think
Evans (No 2)
clear, as I say – particularly the reasons of
Lord Hobhouse – was correctly seen as not in question where
was an order or warrant issued which detained but required, then, the time
of imprisonment to be determined.
There was no order or warrant to hold
beyond the stipulated date required by law. There was simply a change in the
understanding
of the law, not the law itself, a change in the understanding of
the law that meant that the continued detention beyond a particular
unlawful. Now, that did not present, according to their Lordships’
understanding, that did not present any analogy
at any of the relevant points
with the irregular by‑law which was the subject matter of the decision in
Can I ask another question. In
Lord Slynn’s speech, his Lordship seems, at page 26 of the
report, to sum up the issue before
us. He says, at about point 7:
If the claim is looked at from the governor's point of view liability seems
unreasonable; what more could he have done? If looked
at from the
applicant’s point of view she was, it is accepted, kept in prison
unlawfully for 59 days and she should be compensated.
Which is to
And he says, well, of course, obviously, the person who was
detained in prison must prevail. Is that reasoning you embrace?
Yes, that is proper reasoning. We do not put it forward as
see a dilemma here?
There may be a dilemma. Can I
try and explain the way we submit the principled outcome is. The rule of law,
we submit, has never
been seen in this country as an engine for the
aggrandisement of the majesty of a monarch. It is rather opposite. It is for
dignity of individuals living in society, living in a political
Now, it follows from that being a change – a change
which had been accomplished a bit before 1901 – that where there
are supposed dilemmas of a kind that Justice Steward’s question
brings to attention, it might be enough to say, as perhaps
hints, that there are aspects of individual dignity –
integrity of the person, personal liberty, the right to own property,
et cetera, et cetera – which are always and of their nature
to the forefront of the imperatives. Now, all of these things
are subject to
exception – the most obvious one is warfare – but we can
put it aside, perhaps, as an exception that proves
also, of course, the taking of property for public purposes which the
Constitution
requires to be on just terms, no doubt recognising the very
important private right and interest of private property. So, it may
that sense, if you like, the dilemma is always solved by preferring the
interests of those that, if you will forgive me,
the Sermon on the Mount would
privilege, that is, the poor, et cetera – the vulnerable. And
that is a very satisfying resolution
to that kind of dilemma.
our submission, there is another and perhaps more realpolitik way of looking at
it, and that is the notion that one would
start by sparing the officers of the
law – that is, those with apparent authority – the
consequences of exceeding their
authority because it would be tough on them for
that to be so is not an immediately attractive proposition unless you regard as
lesser the individual interests of the multifarious individuals who
make up the community, which is, after all, the community whose
will gives the
ultimate political power to the officers of the law.
In our submission,
if there is one thing to be said about this dilemma it is that it is overwrought
to see it as somehow alien to
the position of somebody exercising authority that
they should not only be held to the limits of their authority but that also
may be consequences, depending upon what their excess of authority
produces. I have given the example of the unlawful arrest or
the unlawful
exertion of personal force, say, by a policeman.
For a policeman without
any malice, it is no doubt entirely shocking and life‑altering to be held
liable, but in our submission,
one need only ask: why would you privilege that
above the interests of somebody who, without there being any lawful authority
it to have occurred, finds that they are crippled for life by reason of what
was an unlawful restraint? Now, in our submission,
these are not so difficult
as prefatory remarks such as those drawn to attention by Justice Steward in
Lord Slynn’s reasons.
These are not so difficult, as perhaps, some
of that rhetoric would propose.
One first needs to appreciate what and
who government was for. That is, it is for the community of individuals. Is
government to
be limited? In this country the answer is emphatically yes.
Finally, what is the consequence of there being a limit? There has
consequence which produces, in the appropriate case, the result that that which
would have been a wrong – a tort –
but for authority is,
lo and behold, in the absence of authority, a tort.
Mr Walker, are these two cases authority for the Commonwealth’s
vicarious liability rather than for its direct liability?
When your Honour says “these two
Evans (No 2)
Can I – I think the answer
is yes. I think that is right. The difference between the two was not prime
in, I think, the
reasoning to which I have been referring. Your Honour, I
am going to come to the question of so‑called direct or vicarious
liability, and I am going to do that through some other cases, I think. If I
have another or a better answer for your Honour, I
will supply
Your Honours, still apropos proposition 7, one of the
oddities about the proposing of this defence when there is no order or warrant
of a court being executed but simply that which is available to the whole
world – namely, a statute and what judges say it
that is equally available to private actors as to public officers. Probably
more freely available to private actors,
because they are not subject to public
service discipline from their superiors as to how the statute is to be
understood.
Yet it would be unthinkable, as I think
Justice Beech‑Jones asked my friend to contemplate, that a private
person misinterpreting
a statute by whatever combination of circumstances would,
for that reason, have an answer, particularly, to torts of strict liability.
our submission, there is nothing in the policy of the law – indeed, a
deal contrary to it in the policy of the law –
for any such defence
to be available.
May I say this about the cases which are the object of
the reasoning both in
Evans (No 2)
. They involve
the notion of an officer responding to the officer’s perception of the
duty, which, in the case of a warrant
issued by a judge, an order issued by a
judge, is a correct perception, for the reasons adumbrated by this Court in
. One simply cannot have orders of a court, however
questionable they may be, in the ways appropriate to questioning orders of
– one cannot have them being questioned, disobeyed, by officers
of court who are the executive means of completing the administration
by quelling a dispute.
In our submission, when – as my friend
the Solicitor repeatedly did – there was reference to the officers
acting pursuant
to their legal duty, one has to distinguish between the duty
which has in fact been held not to exist because of the correction of
. The duty imposed on officers of court –
officers of court – to obey orders and execute orders of court, that
exist in this case; or the so‑called deeper rule of law duty
which is said to be the case for officers of the Executive.
We think it
might be that last of those that my friend was referring to. In our submission,
there is no such thing as a deeper rule
of law duty. Depending upon one’s
position in the community, there are different contents to what matters to you
with respect
to, say, enactments of the Parliament. Many enactments of the
Parliament will pass many an individual by, not impinging upon them
others will require particular individuals to do things or not do
There is no deeper duty of law depending upon which camp you are
in; everyone is simply bound by what is conveniently called the
rule of law. In
our submission, that is equally true when officers execute something which
requires limits of authority to be observed.
When those limits have been
exceeded, there is neither any dilemma nor is there any deeper rule of law duty
which would render it
In proposition 9, we have made the
point about one of the statutory,
Judiciary Act
workings‑out of the
matter. Of course, the imposition on the Commonwealth of a tortious liability,
to which I am about to
come, is also an important aspect of the matter. Could I
then come to the point concerning which of the avenues of liability –
perhaps it could as well have been called which kinds of liability –
are available in this case, if we are correct.
GAGELER CJ:
just understand your argument about
section 64.
Does that apply only to
the defence as applicable to the Commonwealth, or is it something you deploy in
answer to the defence as
said to be applicable to the officer?
No, the recognition of the purported defence in this case is dual.
It is not possible, we say, if it were proposed – as we
it, in at least one case it is proposed by our friends – to be
directly available to the Commonwealth.
GAGELER CJ:
I understand
in that context, but do you say it has any operation insofar as
the defence is said to be applicable to the liability of the
No. I mean, it is tempting to attempt
something like that, but I cannot, within acceptable bounds of an understanding
section 64.
One of the challenges for us, obviously, is if there is an
answer for the officer in this so‑called defence, because it
– and I am really jumping to proposition 13 now –
something which is available only in light of everything having happened
would otherwise make out the tort, that is, produce liability, then though
the – I will call it the officer – though
the officer is
therefore not liable, the Commonwealth should be liable because the aspect of
matters that will produce the defence
cannot possibly apply to the Commonwealth
as a polity.
It might apply to an officer if, contrary to our argument,
the statute alone were enough to say the officer is simply complying with
duty thought to be imposed by the statute.
Public Service Act
, though, is it not?
The question then is: does the defence work
without the
Public Service Act
That is right.
So, it is frankly very difficult to come up with a principle which would weather
proper consideration whereby the
Commonwealth can be rendered liable as if
vicariously, although the wrongdoer hypothetically is not a wrongdoer, given the
of the defence. If I may, I am going to come back to that topic in
another aspect a little later.
Can I just ask you
Is the flipside of your
argument to say: Michelle Gordon, as an individual, has no
power to detain; the only power of detention exists with the polity,
therefore, in those circumstances, the defences available to the polity are
defences limited to the polity and therefore cannot
be extended in that way. Is
that the way you use 64, in a sort of reverse way?
That is one way we would attempt to use it, yes.
But may I make it crystal clear, as I am sure
your Honours have appreciated, we say that it is a bizarre possibility that
the Commonwealth
should directly have the defence in question.
There is just nothing about the
position of the Commonwealth as a polity which has the monopoly on the detention
power, relevantly,
at the federal level.
one thinks of the defence in a more principled way, rather than just limiting it
to the facts that are involved here,
the defence would be a defence for any
person – whether it be a polity or an individual – who
seeks to rely upon legislative
authority, arguably, as mitigated through
judicial decisions.
Whether that person is the polity or the individual – in that sense,
it is quite comfortable with
section 64.
agree. Yes – for
purposes, you get the similitude.
Mind you, that is a state of affairs which is unthinkable in itself, incredibly
unstable as a
contributor to the rule of law – because it tends to
privilege subjectivity, and therefore to reward misunderstanding –
and it sits extremely oddly with crime, with anything which is
The short answer is that in crime, a misunderstanding of the
law is perhaps a matter in mitigation in punishment; in civil, it will
nowhere. If the law of contract entitles me to something, my misunderstanding
of a statute that makes me or leads me to
refuse to give somebody their right
will not avail at all; nor should it.
the contention that only the polity has the power of detention seems to be
supported in your submissions by
Plaintiff M68
, which was suggested,
by I think the Solicitor‑General, not to do the work that you suggest
because it was relying on a particular
provision where detention was within the
power of the Commonwealth.
It may be we are at
cross‑purposes. When I say that, I mean, under our
Constitution
– I am just talking about at the federal level,
so leave aside questions of States – there is no other location of a
right to detain people, just as there is no other location of a right to punish
people. Human actors, be they officers or not, who
participate in such conduct,
are doing so, ultimately, by authority of the Commonwealth. That is all I mean
by it. We do not have
a private enterprise, endeavour, of detaining people. If
contractors were involved, they would be involved through the authority
Commonwealth.
That comes back to the question that I
asked earlier about whether the Commonwealth was the source of authority. How
work, if you were applying that logic in the
Evans (No 2)
scenario, where you have a governor who is the entity that is fixed with
liability, although the expectation is that it is the State
that will pay the
compensation? Is it not – I mean, are these not individuals fixed
with responsibility in order to address
the underlying original concept that the
King could do no wrong?
Your Honour, yes is the
short answer. I am going to come in particular to the – yes, I am
going to come to that question
and how that has affected – perhaps
infected – the matter. Can I make this clear. In
source of the authority was a combination, in that case, of an order that does
not play a part for our purposes – that
is, the order
committing – and the legislation that said it could only be for a
time calculated in a particular manner.
So, the number of the days came
from the legislation, not from the order of the court. If it had come from the
order of the court,
there would have been a different outcome, as
their Lordships made clear, but in both cases the source of the authority
was the parliament
of the United Kingdom. So, I think that is how we say
there is no difficulty in us calling in aid the reasoning in that
I am just not entirely clear what it means to
say that the polity has the power of detention beyond that the legislature
confers power
of detention on individuals under statute.
That is all it means. I do not suggest that there is an executive
power of imprisonment.
When I say it is the polity, operating through the appropriate organ and, as it
happens, for punishment, that will have to be a combination
of all three arms:
the Parliament will create the offence – there are common law
offences, but if Parliament perhaps creates
an offence, certainly, the judiciary
adjudges guilt and sentences and the Executive executes the sentence, but it is
always the polity,
through its organs.
In proposition 10, we
propose as the first and most attractive way of attributing
liability – that is, the direct attributing
to liability of the
Commonwealth, because the Commonwealth, being an artificial person, can act only
through natural persons who
are its agents in both the broad and narrow sense of
that word; indeed, might be called servants in many cases such as,
appropriately,
But they are not agents in the
sense that they are exercising the legal authority of the
They are, really. If the Executive says:
these people are to be detained and it is to be achieved by imposing a duty on
my officers
to detain them upon forming a particular state of mind concerning
unlawful, et cetera, then that is precisely what is happening.
the agents – that is, they are the means by which something is
done – and they are obviously acting on behalf
of the Commonwealth.
There is no other authority source or control on their conduct than the
Commonwealth, which has created the
might be. If they were an independent office‑holder, then they could be
seen to be exercising their own power, rather
than the power of the
Commonwealth.
And that is a relatively venerable
carve‑out – I do not say exception, but a different
case – which simply does
not apply in this case, it being common
ground that there is no independent discretion being exercised for what might be
common or garden formation of a suspicion.
And would an example of that be the Commission in
Commission, I think, that had the authority to detain in
Your Honour, I do not think that
was the issue there, but yes, a commissioner at that level would ordinarily have
those attributes,
yes. Now, we have drawn to attention the old case of
Zachariassen
[1917] HCA 77
for the purposes of making this good.
Could I – we have had that supplied to your Honours.
was a case where what was held to be a common law right to depart a port on the
part of a foreign ship had been purportedly regulated
by the denial of a
necessary certificate of clearance for which the Comptroller‑General or
the local Controllers of Customs
were responsible. The question at hand
concerned the responsibility of the Commonwealth. You will see the questions
that were posed
for the Court at page 175:
(a) Whether . . . the defendant Commonwealth of Australia is
responsible for the acts and omissions of the defendant
Comptroller‑General
(b) Whether under the circumstances. . . the plaintiffs are entitled
to maintain this action –
Now, it is the combination of (a) and (b), but really (a)
that produces the results. By the way, the affirmative answers to (a)
(b) are found at page 185 in the plurality reasons. At 179,
in the middle of that page, there is reference to the history of the
recognition
and continuance in the Commonwealth of certain departments. Halfway down that
page, this observation:
difficult to see how the Commonwealth can so far
dissociate itself
from the administration of the Department as
to say any of its functions
are not functions of the Commonwealth, but of some person in his own individual
capacity, entirely independent
of the Commonwealth.
We say that is
certainly true of the Commonwealth in this case with respect to the officers who
from time to time become subject to
the duty to detain. Then, having noted some
other possibilities concerning so‑called superior officers, there is a
possibility they note of laying:
a personal duty on an officer towards the public.
That is the
independent discretion idea; does not apply here. Then they return to their
main theme here:
quite another matter to say that the Commonwealth is or can be, in its
corporate capacity, a stranger to any part of the administration
Department of Trade and Customs.
Then they go on to refer to the fact
that the Department, after all, is one:
with a Minister to supervise its administration –
I put this to Mr Begbie during the course of his submissions that
if you pick up the sort of language and ideas that are set out in
this passage,
here you have under 189 and 196 a duty to detain imposed upon an
officer. “Officer” includes a long list
of kinds of people set out
in the definition, including relevantly:
an officer of the Department –
And here it is common ground
on the pleadings in the special case that this person was detained by officer of
the Department, which
one then reads with
Constitution
Is that sort of a list of integers in the argument?
Yes, very much, and on the next page of
Zachariassen
, on page 180,
there is a similar aspect there. “Collector”, with a
capital C, sounds important, but it is not as important.
There are very
important duties but they are to be performed by certain people. There may be
others called in from time to time,
as the first paragraph points out. Then in
the next paragraph they say:
The functions . . . are limited with respect to the duty
and authority of officers as between the Crown and the officers, and as
the Crown and the individual. They are not intended to create rights and duties
on the part of the “Collector”
personally and the
individual.
It is all, in other words, departmental administration. Then
over the page, you see at page 181, having referred to the liberty of
masters to leave port, in the second half of the case, after the cluster of
citations, their Honours say:
So reading it –
that is, reading the statute subject to
that expectation of mercantile freedom:
there is a duty on the Commonwealth (by the hand of the Collector) to grant
the clearance –
et cetera. And then, a couple of
sentences down, they preserve the possibility of:
an honest and not unreasonable belief on the part of the Collector acting for
the Commonwealth –
they did not pursue that thought, but in both of those locutions they are
plainly leading up to their affirmative answer that you
sue the Commonwealth.
That, in our submission, is
because ‑ ‑ ‑
bit more than just suing the Commonwealth, it is saying that the source of the
power is the Commonwealth and the Commonwealth
is the one to be
Yes. That is right, that is right. But
the Collector is, if you like, the agent, in those senses of the word
agent, the person who can do something for a fictitious
entity, an artificial legal person; and an agent in the sense of acting
to and in the interests of, on behalf and bound by the limited authority given
by what I am going to call the principal.
That, in our submission, is an
entirely satisfying way of regarding this as a case where the defence never
arises because it is
absurd to propose that this defence would appertain to the
Commonwealth directly.
In proposition 11, we seek to tackle the
proposition said to be founded on case law concerning vicarious liability as
being, so to
speak, the only way in which it can happen. We respectfully submit
in what I am about to address that that is a misreading –
certainly an over‑reading – of some relatively well‑known
passages. Can I start with
GAGELER CJ:
Sorry, Mr Walker, just going back to 10 – that is not a
proposition that denies the possibility of vicarious liability, is
I am sorry?
GAGELER CJ:
you saying in your proposition 10 that it is direct liability of the
Commonwealth or nothing?
No, no, not “or
nothing” – I will take as much vicarious liability as we
GAGELER CJ:
no, no. I am grateful to the Chief Justice for raising that matter and I
am sorry that that was left unclear.
GAGELER CJ:
Perhaps only in
I am sorry,
your Honour?
GAGELER CJ:
Perhaps only in my
Your Honours, the reason why we urge
so‑called direct liability without the need of reverting to the doctrine
of vicarious
liability is because, in our submission, the natural and ordinary
view of the facts of this case is it is that the Commonwealth that
has committed
a wrong. It is the Commonwealth who sent the officers out to do this very
thing. This is not anyone on a frolic of
their own. This does not test the
boundaries of “in the course of employment”.
On any view,
an artificial person – an entity, a polity – seeking,
pursuant to its laws, to detain people for deportation
is, in our submission,
required – like artificial private corporations – to act
through humans. We do not have to use
abstract noun attribution simply to say
that when the Commonwealth, just as when BHP has one of its servants or
employees do something
for it, that something is the action of the
corporation.
And when it is a wrong, such as a trespass on land, there
is absolutely no reason when, say, BHP has sent someone to peg something
they cannot peg it, there is absolutely no reason why anyone would say the only
way we could get BHP would be by vicarious
liability – which, it is
to be remembered, is the liability of somebody who has not committed a wrong by
reason of the connection
between them and the actual wrongdoer and the nature of
the conduct of the actual wrongdoer with respect to the enterprise of the
And so, the natural and obvious view of the facts in this
case is that of course it is the Commonwealth’s act which led to
detention. It is an act through natural persons – everything the
Commonwealth does is through natural persons. The fact
that it is done through
natural persons does not mean that, lo and behold, the Commonwealth is inactive,
that it does nothing. That
is nonsense.
So, that is why we say the
preferable view is the direct, obvious one. Who detained? Well, it was the
Commonwealth, by the officer.
Zachariassen,
who detained the
ship there? It was the Commonwealth, by the Collector. Now, in our submission,
the significance of vicarious liability
in this case comes down to simply
whether or not (a), there is a defence at all for the officer, because it
may well be, in that
case, we are in trouble; because, (b), there is no
doubt, on the concession of the Commonwealth – very properly
that if, but for the defence, this was done in the course of
employment and falls in the very heartland of the legal responsibility
Commonwealth for the conduct of an employee acting in the course of the
employment.
It is, as we say, strange to reflect that that is a means of
the Commonwealth’s liability when vicarious liability posits that
no breach of duty or infringement of norm by the Commonwealth. And for the
reasons I have already put, that is a very difficult
proposition to maintain, on
the facts of a case like this.
Part of the difficulty
with some of the older authorities – you see it particularly in
Darling Island
Stevedoring
, is that the phrase
“vicarious liability” is sometimes used to mean direct liability and
sometimes used to mean attributed
one can be forgiven, in some of the older cases, it is sometimes there to mean:
of course the King will pay ‑ the King
is not liable; the authority
In other words, it does not matter which
That is right. Now, in this case, the
difficulty for us, which I hope we have made clear, is there arises the question
can only be vicarious liability – which we stoutly resist,
but if that was so – then we do have to confront the problem
the officer has the defence, does that leave us stranded, without the capacity
to link it to the Treasury? And we have written
the argument that says, as a
matter of principle, if the defence is available it is by reason of matters
appertaining to an officer
only and not at all acceptably appertaining to the
Commonwealth itself, such as obedience to orders – the Commonwealth
the subject of orders, it is the place from which orders
If that is so, then, as a matter of principle, on the
admittedly difficult foundation of the cases we note in our submissions, it
ought to be the case that an answer special to the wrongdoer for whom vicarious
liability is sought to be made out on the part of
an employer, there ought not
to be an answer by the employer to say, look my employee is not liable not
because he or she has not
done the things that would make out the tort, and,
furthermore, in the course of employment, but because they have an answer
In our submission, it is not surprising that some of
the statutes that have addressed the vicarious liability of, say, the State
policemen, have dealt with this by statutory provisions which produce a much
more acceptable response, namely, that there may
well be an answer by the
individual officer in question, but if there is otherwise all the lineaments of
tort and vicarious liability
for the tort then there can be no answer to a
defendant who is sued vicariously. I cannot point to any case law beyond that
we have noted in our written submissions.
Exactly, exactly.
So, you have got the bizarre nature of the husband‑wife immunity and not
sparing the employer who, there
being no polygamy, was not in on that exercise.
We called it in aid, and it shows that the law does have the commonsense
of saying, why would you defeat vicarious liability when everything
which is a wrongdoing has been committed?
An answer which nothing to do
with the quality of the conduct, nothing to do with what I call its wrongness,
but only to do with
the unseemliness of husbands and wives suing each other in
tort, which has got nothing to do with whether or not, were they not married,
there would be a wrongdoing. So, it is a very bizarre case, but it does provide
a foundation to say well, look, there is a common
law response. And we would
urge that in the case of vicarious liability even if, against our arguments, the
defence were available
to the officer.
Could I take you over to the
cases which are relied upon against us in this regard. The first is
[1940] HCA 40
, tab 24. Could I draw to attention in
Mr Justice Starke’s reasons, before we get to
Mr Justice Dixon, at page 352 of the Commonwealth
Law Reports at
the foot of that page, his Honour’s explanation of the effect of the
very important
, as well as 64, of the
Judiciary Act
concluding:
The Commonwealth is thus made responsible for the acts, neglects or defaults
of its officers in the course of their service as in
a suit between subject and
subject unless –
and then there is the independent duty with
, with which your Honours of course are familiar. Can I go
over, then, to page 357, the beginning of
Mr Justice Dixon’s reasons.
He starts, again, with
and then takes care to point out that by
“Commonwealth”, he means:
the Crown in right of the Commonwealth.
The polity, as I would put it:
the provision, though procedural in form of expression, casts upon the
Executive a liability for tort from which at common law the
A state of affairs which perhaps explains a deal of what has been
It assumes that, from the mere statement that the King may be sued in tort,
enough appears to enable the courts to ascertain in the
light of the general
substantive law what kind of acts or omissions on the part of the servants of
the Crown would amount to a civil
wrong for which the Treasury would be
responsible.
Now, I think that language talks about the Commonwealth
being responsible, not some more shadowy notion of the Commonwealth is not
responsible but the Treasury will be. I think that is a way of his Honour
saying that is the task. Now, that is a task which refers
not merely to
vicarious liability, but the language is entirely apt to refer to the liability
for the conduct of your servants which
is your conduct.
At the foot of
page 358, you see there is a plea concerning what I will call military
exigency, to capture a deal of material. And
then at the foot of page 359,
that substantive answer, which has nothing to do with the issues in our case, is
set up in a way that
ultimately produces the finding. So, the ratio in this
Apart altogether from any question whether it is the Commonwealth which is
responsible for what is done or omitted in acting under
the British Admiralty’s:
authorization, it is clear that the duty
undertaken . . . forms a part of the Crown’s function
of waging war by sea –
et cetera, and that concludes at
page 362 at the middle of that page. I will not read the passage, it
starts off:
It may not be easy –
his Honour then proceeds to
decide the matter. So, this case is – there is no ratio in this case
concerning you can only have
vicarious liability, there could not be direct
liability. So far, at least, the wording I have taken your Honours to does
not support
any such surprising rule.
Then we come to page 360, to
which you have already been taken, which, in our submission, has been either
misread or over‑read.
Your Honours see that the middle paragraph
starts with as general a proposition as you can get with respect to
negligence:
The obligation of due care to avoid harm to others –
we know that – particularly, given
Commonwealth can be liable for that in a mundane, unexceptional fashion. And we
know that the Commonwealth, being an
artificial entity, can only commit
negligence by the conduct or actions of its servants or agents. Halfway down
that page, there
is a sentence, which is, with respect, not an adequate
foundation for what is being argued against us:
It may be assumed that the liability of the Commonwealth to be sued in tort
means that if an officer or servant of the Crown in right
of the Commonwealth
acting in the course of his service under the authority of the Crown, and not
for the purpose of exercising or
fulfilling an independent power or duty,
commits a civil wrong –
so, there you have the person, the
natural person, committing a civil wrong:
then the Commonwealth is vicariously liable for his breach of
That is plainly correct. That is a plain, ordinary statement of
vicarious liability. It does not answer the question as to whether
Commonwealth can, by the conduct of its officers or servants, itself be
negligent. His Honour turns to that in the next sentence
and describes it,
we submit, wrongly, as a sociological or statistical observation –
perhaps his Honour had not been directly
involved in run-of-the-mill
negligence cases against the Commonwealth – in any event,
his Honour says:
But, putting aside –
so, this is just a parenthesis:
putting aside the exceptional case of an immediate duty lying on the Crown
Well, with respect, since
, that is not
“exceptional”, conceptually, and one can be pretty sure that since
well before World War II it was not “exceptional”
in terms of
claims. But nothing can be spelled out of a dubious epithet like
“exceptional”. It does not say it is anomalous
or wrong. It is, we
think, a very inaccurate statistical generalisation.
Then he gives an
example which, plainly enough, would commonly arise: the Commonwealth asks its
officers to do something which affects
another person’s land. The notion
of painstakingly saying the Commonwealth has not committed a wrong is absurd,
with respect,
and there is no authority for it.
Then the next
paragraph – I do not know whether reliance is based upon this, but
the next paragraph, of course, has very little
to do with our present case and
does not contribute a lot to that case, bearing in mind how it was decided by
reference to the exigencies
of war. In that paragraph, commencing:
In the present case, at all events –
which is a way of saying, leaving aside the discussion I have just
completed, in this case:
the liability . . . must be vicarious –
and it would appear to be that is the result of the way in which it was
argued, and his Honour had already observed that in the passage
it must depend on the existence of a duty of care –
natural persons. Now, his Honour could not possibly be taken as saying one
cannot imagine a duty of care being owed directly by
the Commonwealth. In our
case, which is really distant from a duty of care case, in our case we have the
intentional torts –
I do not mean malicious, I just mean intentional
torts – in this case, of false imprisonment. In another case it
trespass to the person, an unauthorised but sincerely believed to be
authorised laying of hands on an individual, for example.
Then one sees
that the way in which that is to be understood includes practice in England
going back to 1842 and 1812 – if
I may say so, neither the right
place nor the right era for a consideration of the effects of
Judiciary Act
. And where his Honour refers to what was
necessary for the vicarious liability as:
sufficiently appears inferentially from the practice obtaining in England,
where the Crown is not liable for tort.
Then one sees that in England:
no plaintiff is entitled to succeed unless he selects as defendant an officer
personally liable –
None of that, however interesting it may be historically, has anything to
do with the position of the Commonwealth as possibly a person,
a legal person,
having, itself, a duty of care – that is, an everyday
occurrence – and breaching that duty of care, as
is invariably the
case, by the acts or omissions of some human being or other acting on its
behalf, that is, as an agent in the true
sense of agency.
That is not a
case of vicarious liability and, in our submission, the present case is a very
strong example of why we would simply
say the detention in this case was that
which the Commonwealth willed, sought and deputed an actual person to do it.
, which you will find at tab 12, is a case which, if anything,
surely would favour us. In
150 CLR 113
the way, can I call to attention Chief Justice Gibbs’
description at 116, those two paragraphs there commencing:
The question in the present case –
The submission made on behalf of the Commonwealth –
will not stay to read, are, in our submission, powerful descriptions why, as a
matter of the policy of the law or even a lay
intuition of justice, there would
appear to be no possible reason why there could not have been the liability
which was sought in
We then come to the passage which was
relied upon against us, in particular at page 121 in the plurality reasons.
The action, as
the plaintiff now brings, was an action which, as we read it, was
an action calling in aid vicarious liability: I was injured by
the failure of
my brother in arms not to tell me about the missing pin in the collapsing
ladder, and you are the employer of, et
cetera. And as your Honours
know, the case is quite a striking example of the not mere survival but
flourishing of the special approach
of the law, in the interests of military
discipline, to relations inter se among members of the armed forces,
including in the command
structure, et cetera, et cetera.
our submission, is enough to say it is really not going to cast any light on the
startling proposition that the Commonwealth
can only ever be vicariously liable.
In our submission, it can be seen that the paragraph starting
The question can be best be considered –
is one that is deliberately and specially directed to this case and does
not promulgate any rule beyond the facts of this case –
see the last
sentence of that paragraph, in particular. The last words of that last
not because of any direct want of care on the part of the Commonwealth.
Those are not words that say the Commonwealth cannot be guilty of want of
care which is actionable, but rather that in this case it
was not and,
apparently, had not been alleged in that fashion. So,
simply says
nothing adverse to us but, if anything, accepts that of course the Commonwealth
can be directly liable for cases which
– depending upon the facts and
how they are pleaded and argued – will pin liability directly on the
Commonwealth by reason
of acts or omission of, say, employees or
Then there is
(2011) 244 CLR 22
which your Honours will find at tab 13. Now, there is a superficial
attraction to considering this case in our case, because it
after all is part of
the sequelae of
Lane v Morrison
in which the Australian Military
Court was held to be devoid of constitutional footing, but that is a superficial
and short‑lived
matter, in our submission.
If one goes to the
matter at hand, which starts at page 41, in paragraph 43, that first
sentence, which sets up the issue and leads
to paragraph 44 which presages
the outcome in that case, the outcome being that the warrant was not attacked
and was enough to justify
the actions of the officer who carried out the
detention. In our submission, paragraph 43 does not hold, nor does it
explain any
holding by which the Commonwealth simply could not ever be directly
It would not appear there was any such argument in that case.
You see in paragraphs 47 and 48 how the way in which that case was
and argued produced two propositions that might not have sat easily, but in any
event, they were put together. First, there
want of valid legal power –
for the orders of the AMC which led to the issue of the warrant. Then in
paragraph 48, there was no assertion that the warrant was
Paragraph 49, the position taken ultimately in argument of not pressing a
submission that the warrant was:
“without authority and unlawful”.
And then, of course, paragraph 50, the reasoning continues in a way
which produces the outcome of this case, which has absolutely
nothing to do with
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Walker, can I just relate just to
the actual question of law that is before the Court?
GAGELER CJ:
It is just the one question, and it is:
do the Commonwealth and its officers have a defence to liability of the nature
that is pleaded?
As I understand the Commonwealth position, if its officers do
not have that defence – it does not say that it has it either
matter of defence to vicarious liability or as a matter of defence to direct
liability – I understood Mr Begbie to accept
that there may be
circumstances in which the Commonwealth could be directly
GAGELER CJ:
says that there are no facts agreed or pleaded that would allow us to address
direct liability. So, my question is: if the
defence is not available for
officers, do we need to get into any of this?
No, and echoing my friend the Solicitor, you better not. That is not a
threat ‑ ‑ ‑
the reason ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes quite, no quite.
‑ ‑ ‑ why the defence is not available for
officers is concerned with the
Public Service
Yes, I am not trying to circumscribe
what your Honours think about in answering that single question, and I do
accept that if you
answer that single question, that will suffice to deal with
the matter. In proposition 12, we
perhaps ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
sorry, can I just clarify one other thing. Are you saying that there is
sufficient – in the materials, that is the
pleadings or the agreed
facts for us to form a view as to direct liability? Or is it sufficient for
your argument that there might
be direct liability depending on the way in which
the facts were to be found at trial?
is pleaded and admitted. Certainly, the special case involves the actions of
the officer in question as being his acts
as an officer of the
Commonwealth.
GAGELER CJ:
One, “public servant”; and
two, “officer” within the meaning of the Act. I think that is as
agreed. Is that enough for you to say direct
Yes, yes, the Commonwealth cannot
administer what it wants with relation to the detention of aliens pending
deportation otherwise
done by natural persons.
Well, the only question, really, from your submission, is whose exercise of
power is it.
That is right.
Is it the officer’s own exercise of power, or is it the
Commonwealth’s exercise of power?
so, the terms of the statute are a most unlikely way of giving the officer
power. It imposes a duty; it involves exercising
a power, but it is not his
power ‑ ‑ ‑
officer of the Department.
not – I am sorry, your Honour.
paragraph – sorry, there are too many people trying to speak.
Paragraph 18.2 of the stated case is that the officer
who did the detaining
in this case:
was required –
it must be by the Commonwealth:
as part of his duties –
as opposed on him by the
Commonwealth.
That is right, so that serves a
double purpose. It certainly has the vicarious liability nexus, but that does
not seem to be in
question; it is not in question, but we say it also describes
what is the position when the Commonwealth does anything for which
directly liable.
Well, the Commonwealth says do X as
part of your duty and – well, it will be one thing if it was a
discretionary, but you
say that is not this case – do X is the
equivalent of doing X yourself.
Yes, that is a
different issue. So, you have the job of forming an independent judgment, say,
on an administrative tribunal.
We are not talking about that.
We are talking about here the
imposition of a duty by reason of a policy decision enacted in the legislation
by the Commonwealth
for Commonwealth purposes; the duty is imposed on officers
of the Commonwealth. The power in question, the authority in question
is – and is only – the power and authority of the
Commonwealth.
The officer does not have power and authority other than
the power and authority of the Commonwealth, which for any officer is the
of an answer to some imaginary quo warranto inquiry from some passing
citizen. Why are you doing this? What gives you the
right to do this? It is
because of the authority I have been given by a Commonwealth
I was just going to say I may be being
heretical, but I am struggling to see what section 13(4) of the
APS Act has to do with anything
because it is not every – I know
the section refers to an officer, but section 13(4) is about “acting
in connection”
with your employment; not every officer of the department
is employed to have anything to do with section 189.
To me, I find
it very odd to read that as saying somehow that means this section has anything
to do with an officer whose duties
are as per 18.2; somehow this adds something
to their duty. I just am not sure how all that – it seems to me to
have nothing
to do with it, frankly.
Well, if I may
say so, in any event, in this case it is question begging,
It is a question of what, sorry, did you
The obligation is: must comply with all
applicable Australian laws. That has nothing to do with this
Yes. Well, anyway, that seems to me to be
Does that mean – so, does that drive
you back to the passage you took us to in
Zachariassen
? In other words,
explains the interconnection between
law and the departments? Yes.
I mean, it is
either – that is either the right point of entry and exit, or it is
all applicable . . . laws –
I suppose one way of putting it, I do not know that we are at odds with
our friends on this:
all applicable . . . laws –
does not mean all apparent enactments until – not unless, but
until they are declared invalid. Now, in terms of the good order
of the public
service, no‑one wants public servants not merely second guessing but
predicting what the High Court will do in
a reopening application that might be
years off. We are not talking about that, and that trivialises the importance
of the proposition.
Section 13 is not even a tail that could wag a
dog, it does not even begin to answer the question: was what happened to our
unlawful? The answer to that is agreed: yes. Can there be an action
brought to vindicate, in the way the common law has long provided
constitutionally and socially significant way, a remedy for that wrong? That is
when this idea of a defence comes up. In our
submission, section 13, as
Justice Jagot has asked me to consider, is really not to the point. You
cannot – it does not give
rise to an impulse in the common law to
find this defence, whatever else it may mean.
Your Honours, I think
we have probably said enough about proposition 12, and proposition 13
I have already, I think, said enough
or written enough in those paragraphs of
the submission. Could I go back to two matters that your Honours Justice
Jagot and Justice
Steward raised with my friends.
As to what I am
going to call statutory exemptions – or limited liability,
et cetera – that are found in various places
and in various ways in
Migration Act
. Of course, care should be taken to assess in
each case whether they purport to or whether they are effective to deal with
but not actual, as well as actual, exercises of power. I think most
of them are just actual, in which case they really do not speak
to the present
As to a bridge too far, I suppose as a summary answer to that
suggestion for consideration by counsel, we would say that it follows
everything that we have tried to assemble in argument about the absence of a
principle that lends itself to sensible articulation;
sensible in the sense of
being able to be grasped. In terms of any available policy of the law generally
and in terms of the proper
method of considering punitive developments of the
common law, this case is a very poor candidate for any step to be taken,
particularly
of such an important kind as is proposed by the Commonwealth
Mr Walker, could you go to
paragraph 2 of the outline of the defendant, which sets out the three
elements of the common law defence?
your Honour.
The third element is that:
the detaining officer was under an independent legal
You say that factual premise is not
Yes, I do. The word
“independent” there is very problematic. Does it add anything?
What is an independent duty as
opposed to a legal duty? It has got the verbiage
of the independent responsibility, which is the exception to vicarious
but it is not an independently – if it means a separate
legal duty – that is, separate from the statutory duty –
then I understand that, with respect. The word “independent”,
perhaps, is not as good as “separate” or “distinct”.
The notion of that distinct legal duty being in tension with the
question: does the statute authorise what was done – and
the statute
is one that purports to oppose a duty – is, in our submission,
intolerable, by which I mean that tension cannot
last; it has to be resolved
because they pull in opposite directions. The short answer is that all rule of
law considerations require
that there be a resolution by the fact that there is
no duty to have detain because what is retrospectively pronounced by the Court
, and there is no such thing as an independent
legal duty, or separate legal duty or distinct legal duty to act contrary to
It is for those reasons that, in our submission, that was a wrong
starting point for our friends.
May it please the Court. I am sorry,
would your Honours just excuse me. In answer to Justice Gleeson’s
questions about
Evans (No 2)
, on our reading
the explicit holding in
is not vicariously liable – 734
at point D– directly liable – 737 at point D. Our
Evans (No 2)
, perhaps less clearly, page 26
point G in Lord Slynn, page 47 point E Lord Hobhouse,
particularly the phrase “inform the governor”
is in reality the
State. That list suggests that that is direct liability – that is,
the natural person occupying, admittedly,
important office – is to be
treated as the State for the purposes of liability.
If it please the
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you. Mr Solicitior.
Your Honours, I propose to work backwards through some of the
points made by Mr Walker and then, if possible, reserve a couple
at the end for Mr Begbie to address on his part of the case. On that last
point in relation to
, in our submission, the result was that the
first defendant, the Corrective Services Commission of New South Wales was held
directly liable. The State of New South Wales was held not to be liable;
I will own the result in that case.
So, one needs to be careful about
who is being held directly liable. It is not an authority in support of the
direct authority of
the State. The Commission was held liable following a
careful analysis of the statutory scheme which reposed responsibility for
detention on the Commission. So, it was a direct statutory duty that led to a
direct finding of direct liability, not really analogous
to what is in play
The independent duty language your Honour
Justice Gleeson asked about, what we mean there is separate in the sense of
a duty separate
from the provisions held valid in ab initio in
we were looking for a duty outside section 189 and 196. That is what we
mean there. As to your Honour Justice Jagot’s
Your Honours will recall that what 13(4) says
An APS employee, when acting in connection with APS employment, must comply
with all applicable Australian laws.
So, it is directing attention, in our submission, to the Australian laws
that bear upon the discharge of the relevant employee’s
public service
duties, so that we say if, for example, an officer in Services Australia does
not give effect to the requirements
of the Social Security Law, that can have
consequences under section 15 – disciplinary consequences under
section 15. Similarly,
if an officer under the
Migration Act
notwithstanding the fact that I have a duty to detain, I am going to release
certain unlawful non-citizens – that can
not only attract mandamus
but it can attract a sanction under section 15.
That is just the sanction theory of duties. You could repeal
section 13(4)
Public Service Act
, and, if you are right, that
would not do anything to the duty, it would just remove the
MR DONAGHUE:
You could – on my
primary argument, that is correct, but in terms of the analogy I am drawing with
, it was, as we understand the reasoning of the plurality in
relation to the MSS guards and Queensland officers, it was the –
well, whether or not it is essential, the same duty and penalty structure that
applied in that case applies in this case. We submit
that that arises
notwithstanding the invalidity of 189 and 196.
What is the duty outside section 189? Did you just say you are looking
for – to be independent, it has to be outside 189.
Yes – and 13(4) is that duty because, we submit,
it is a point in time question so that, at the point in time, if
your Honours
ask – if we posit an officer who released a group
of non‑citizens in 2020, in my submission,
law – it had been the law for 16 years – and if the
manager of the APS employee had said: I am now going to
deal with you for
breach of the Code of Conduct under
section 13(4)
because you have acted
not in compliance with your legal duties – that officer would have
faced sanction under
section 15(1)
on the law as it was then
understood.
But duty is there, irrespective of the
sanction, if you are right.
MR DONAGHUE:
I am not disagreeing
with your Honour. I am just trying to tie the analogy. But the reason I
say it is a separate duty is that
that officer faced a real threat –
not, in any way, an imaginary threat – of actual repercussion by
acting in a way that
was contrary to what was understood to be the effect
of 189 and 196, notwithstanding that they were subsequently held to be
– your Honour the
Chief Justice asked my friend, does he say it is relevant to an officer.
The answer was no. That means
that when the plaintiff brings action against the
individual detaining officer, there is no claim that the defence is –
defence is accepted to be available, notwithstanding – well, not
accepted to be. If we win on the other points,
intercept the availability of the defence in that case. That is an action
between subject and subject.
That concession means that
has no work to do, because the defence, on that scenario, was correctly conceded
as not affected by
section 64.
I could make the same point in relation to
a claim akin to the claim against the MSS guards if, for example, a claim was
against the Serco officers who at that time were officers under the
definition of the Act with contractual duties, the independent
duty or separate
duty there being the contract. It would be available between subject and
subject, and so, again,
does not bite.
your Honour Justice Steward’s question about Lord Slynn in
and the question looked at from the Governor’s point of view,
the liability is unreasonable; from the applicant’s point
of view, false
imprisonment – what do we do with that situation which is to prevail?
That is the kind of situation your Honours
are now confronting.
could well have asked that exact same question in
, because in
one had an innocent officer detaining, or an innocent series of
officers, and one had an innocent litigant in the Family Court who
imprisoned for a period of time. Neither had done anything wrong. This
Court’s analysis was that a defence exists
in that circumstance. So, it
is not ‑ ‑ ‑
It is just in
we did have, as a starting point, hundreds of
years of judicial immunity.
MR DONAGHUE:
MR DONAGHUE:
But for the
Queensland police officers and corrective services, there was a line of
authority going back that recognised a defence,
as your Honours explained
it, that applied to people not who were subject to contempt but who had a legal
duty to act as they did,
and that is the analogy that I am drawing in this case.
We say, similarly, the legal duty arose there. So, it is just not the case,
our submission,
shows that the law always privileges the
vulnerable. It did not privilege the vulnerable in
One needs to have a principled answer to the question
of which is to prevail, and in our submission, the principled answer both by
analogy with
but also with the apex court decisions in Canada
and the United States and with the Court of Appeal in England all suggest that
is a principled balancing of the kind for which we contend, indeed,
broader than the kind for which we contend, and we ask rhetorically
Australian courts balance those competing interests in a way that differs
fundamentally, that is directly opposed to the
way they have been balanced by
apex courts in those other countries?
Two points we would seek to raise,
just to discard. Our friends mischaracterise our case in two ways. There was a
series of submissions
in no way takes your Honours into that territory. If that is what we
saying, then we would not need a defence. Sections 189 and 196 would
validly have authorised the detention that occurred in
the period up to
and then from
forward, they would not. No question of a
defence would arise.
The defence for which we contend is a defence in
the true sense described in – we have given your Honours an
extract from it
– Goudkamp,
Tort Law Defences
, and he talks
there about the proper use of the word “defence” as a way of
establishing, in a case where all of the elements
of a tort are established,
that, despite the fact that all of the elements of the tort are established, no
liability should be imposed.
That is what we are asking your Honours to
recognise here, just as has been recognised in those overseas
authorities.
So, that is the first point. We say there is –
the point we are making is not that the law was not retrospectively invalid
that there is a defence which attributes different consequences, in terms of
civil liability, depending on whether or not a court
had yet held a provision to
be invalid. That line is the line that the overseas authorities draw and it is,
we submit, a principled
The other point very briefly is that,
your Honours understand, it is no part of our case to say the defence
extends to any case
where there is no malice, or that the defence applies in any
case where someone is relying on a statute, or that the defence applies
the property torts, or to invalid taxes or any of the other things that were
being mentioned. Those examples do not assist
your Honour in answering the
There was a distinction drawn by our friend in quite strong
terms between orders and reasons, and we of course accept that they are
different. The order, as between the parties, determines rights and liabilities
which merge in the judgement, potential contempt
might follow from breach of the
orders. Obviously, that is an important judicial function, but to describe the
effect of the reasons
as providing matters for scholars to examine is massively
to understate the true legal significance in our system of the reasons
Your Honours’ reasons are of course binding as
precedents, and what that means in the real world is that a lower court,
an intermediate appellate court in this country, might be
required – the judges of that court might be required,
notwithstanding
their judicial oaths, to give legal effect to a statute in a way
that they think is wrong, in a way that they themselves would have
concluded is
not the appropriate exercise of judicial power; they will be bound, as a matter
of precedent, to do what your Honours
said in your reasons. So, to seek to
dismiss the precedential effect of the reasoning of this Court as being
incapable of affecting
duties in the way that the orders would is, in our
submission, to draw an unsustainable distinction.
Your Honour Justice
Gleeson, in particular, asked a number of questions of my friend about legal
authority. We submit that there
are two different notions of legal authority
that are in play in this Court that had been merged to some extent by our
submission. There is a question of the legal authority to
detain. That legal authority comes from a statute, and it imposes a duty;
Commonwealth Parliament imposes a duty on the officer.
separate question, or the other sense of authority is the authority from the
employer to act. We accept, of course, that
once one hires a person to become
an officer of the Department, they fall within the statutory definition and they
may then act in
the course of their employment which – in some cases,
as you have seen here in 18.2 of the special case – this officer
As part of their employment, they had to exercise that statutory
That is not to say that their authority to detain comes from the
employer. Their authority to discharge the functions of their employment,
include the exercise of the statutory power, is one thing, but one cannot equate
the fact that someone is acting in the course
of their employment with them
gaining their authority to detain from their employer in the way that is said to
be relevant to the
agency relationship. I have put that briefly, but
your Honours have the point.
Finally, before – if
your Honours will permit Mr Begbie a minute or two, can I say that in terms
of the answer to the special
case, our submission is that if your Honours
are against the submissions that I have made so that your Honours find that
the detaining
officer does not have the defence, then, as you know, the
Commonwealth has admitted that it will be vicariously liable. In that
situation, we submit the answer to the single question posed on page 53 of
the special case book should be, as to the officers:
no – that is,
the officers do not have the defence – as to the Commonwealth:
unnecessary to answer. I am not sure there
is any departure between
Mr Walker and I on that point.
If the Court
GAGELER CJ:
Might I ask to have
30 seconds or three minutes?
GAGELER CJ:
You can have
three minutes.
Thank you, your Honour. We
have strong agreement with the plaintiff on this, that if you decide there is no
protection for the
officer you do not need to go to direct liability and you
therefore should not go to direct liability.
GAGELER CJ:
that is just what has been said.
Yes, and the
reason, by way of response to submissions on that, is that there is strong
disagreement with many of the propositions
that were put. One was that anything
done by a person for a company or polity is done by the company or polity, a
proposition that
was said to follow from
Zachariassen
. That is far too
broad, with respect, and it is not what
Zachariassen
Zachariassen
deals with the – let us avoid the
word “exceptional” –special situation where the duty
under the statute
was on the Commonwealth itself. The Court looked at that and
said the duty is not on the officer; it is on the Commonwealth. The
that acted, as it were, for the Commonwealth in that duty was none other than
the Comptroller‑General. That is, the
agency head.
So, it does
not stand for the broad proposition that our friends suggest, and were it
otherwise, you would be taken to all of the
cases which show that anything done
by any person in the Commonwealth is done by the Commonwealth and gives rise to
correlative duties,
and your Honours have not been taken to those
Can I just ask – if you are right
that the answer that should be given is “no” and unnecessary to
answer if the
submissions of the defendant in relation to the officers are not
accepted, then there is a real disjoint between the answers that
are given and
the actual case before the Court, because the defendant is not the
Your Honours could
would be answering a question that is not live in relation to people who are not
parties to the Court.
BEECH-JONES J:
Or does it become live
because of your concession about vicarious
That is what we would say. Might I
just check something. I do not want to, of course, be at odds. We stand by the
Solicitor‑General’s
formulation, but we would also say, as an
alternative, that it would be possible to say, simply, no; the Commonwealth and
its servants
do not have that protection.
The point I was developing
Zachariassen
for that kind of
general proposition leads you to
, which would be an explicable
statement if the orthodoxy was that all of the acts of individuals were simply
the acts of the polity,
because there the officer in charge of the corrective
establishment would simply have been the Commonwealth and you would
GAGELER CJ:
not been taken to
or a whole line of cases that deal with
Yes, and our point is this. These are large
questions and your Honours understand you do not need to – if
you do not need
to decide them, you should not. The last point, which is to the
effect, is that the facts are not enough here, as agreed in the
special case.
When you look at the actual true direct liability cases, they involve a granular
factual analysis of the events that
occurred as between the polity and its
offices, and you see that in
, you see that in
see that indeed in
Zachariassen
as well. Those facts are not
Thank you, your Honours.
GAGELER CJ:
you, Mr Begbie. The Court will consider its decision in this matter and
will adjourn until 10.00 am tomorrow.
AT 4.23 PM THE
MATTER WAS ADJOURNED
RTF format (1.79 MB)
Signed PDF/A format