GH PTM Pty Ltd trading as Griffith Hack v Clipex IP Limited [2022] ADO 3 (5 August 2022)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR
OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re: Request for examination by GH PTM Pty Ltd trading
as Griffith Hack of 22 designs all registered in the name of Clipex IP
Nicholas Barbey
REPRESENTATION:
GH PTM Pty Ltd trading as Griffith Hack
Ben Fitzpatrick of counsel instructed by Davis IP
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) – third party
request for examination under
of the Act of 22 design registrations
considered – designs new and distinctive over the prior
art base – certificates of examination to issue.
’) is the owner of the following 22 Australian
design registrations (collectively
Registrations
Design number
Representation
Product name
Priority date
Short title
of the Registrations include the following Statement of Newness and
Distinctiveness (‘
Newness and
distinctiveness reside in the pattern or ornamentation as applied to a ground
anchoring region of a steel post, as represented
by grayscale shading in the
accompanying representations, wherein: the grayscale shading represents any
colour or texture that contrasts
with the colour or texture of the unshaded
region; and, when considering newness and distinctiveness, little or no weight
given to the shape or configuration of the post.
of the Act, GH PTM Pty Ltd trading as Griffith
’) requested examination of all the Registrations.
Each request was accompanied by 5 prior art documents which, in the
Requestor’s
view, rendered each of the Registrations neither new or
distinctive when compared to the prior art base. The Owner and the Requestor
paid the relevant fees and the Registrations were subsequently examined.
examinations resulted in no grounds for revocation having been established in
respect of any of the Registrations. A Statement
’) for each examination outcome was issued and the
Requestor was given an opportunity to request a hearing if it objected to
examiner’s intention to issue certificates of examination against each of
the Registrations. The Requestor exercised its
right to be heard in respect of
all the Registrations.
for filing evidence and submissions were subsequently issued to the parties. In
accordance with those directions, each
party filed Evidence in Support
’) and Evidence in Answer (‘
The Owner objected to certain aspects of the Requestor’s EIA and requested
permission to file Evidence in Reply (‘
’). This request
was granted by a delegate of the Registrar of Designs
’) and the Owner duly filed EIR. In turn, the
Requestor sought to file EIR on the basis that the Owner’s EIR introduced
new evidence. This request was declined by the delegate who informed the
Requestor that a compelling case needed to be established
in order to justify
any addition to the properly filed evidence. Prior to the hearing, the Requestor
filed EIR accompanied by submissions
which will be addressed below.
Registrar arranged for all 22 examination requests to be heard in a
single hearing. The Requestor filed submissions on 26 April
Requestor’s
Submissions
’) and the Owner filed
submissions on 3 May 2022 (‘
Submissions
’). As a delegate of the Registrar, I heard the matter by
video conference on 6 May 2022. Robert Wulff of Griffith Hack
submissions on behalf of the Requestor and Ben Fitzpatrick of counsel
presented submissions on the Owner’s behalf.
Legislative framework
of the Act, a registered design must be examined if any person
requests, or a court orders, the Registrar to do so. Examination of
requires the Registrar to consider whether a design should be revoked because,
inter alia, it is not a ‘registrable
‘registrable design’ is a design that is ‘new’ and
‘distinctive’ when compared with the ‘prior
for the design as it existed before the priority date of the
In this matter, all the
Registrations claim a priority date of 27 May 2019 (‘
’). The ‘prior art base’ relevantly includes designs
publicly used in Australia and designs published in a document
within or outside
constitutes a ‘new’ and ‘distinctive’ design is defined
of the Act which relevantly provides:
Designs that are
identical or substantially similar in overall impression
(1) A design is new unless it is identical to a design that forms part of the
prior art base for the design.
(2) A design is distinctive unless it is substantially similar in overall
impression to a design that forms part of the prior art
base for the design (see
section 19).
design is ‘new’ unless it is an exact copy of a design that forms
part of the prior art base. The absence of a single
visual feature, irrespective
of its significance, in either of the designs under comparison will therefore be
sufficient to establish
that a design is ‘new’.
Determining
whether a design is ‘distinctive’ requires a holistic assessment of
the factors prescribed in
of the Act. This provision relevantly
Factors to be considered in assessing substantial
similarity in overall impression
(1) If a person is required by this Act to decide whether a design is
substantially similar in overall impression to another design,
the person making
the decision is to give more weight to similarities between the designs than to
differences between them.
(2) The person must also:
(a) have regard to the state of development of the prior art base for the
design; and
(b) if the design application in which the design was disclosed included a
statement (a
statement of newness and distinctiveness
) identifying
particular visual features of the design as new and distinctive:
(i) have particular regard to those features; and
(ii) if those features relate to only part of the design--have particular
regard to that part of the design, but in the context of
the design as a whole;
(c) if only part of the design is substantially similar to another design,
have regard to the amount, quality and importance of that
part in the context of
the design as a whole; and
(d) have regard to the freedom of the creator of the design to innovate.
(3) If the design application in which the design was disclosed did not
include a statement of newness and distinctiveness in respect
of particular
visual features of the design, the person must have regard to the appearance of
the design as a whole.
(4) In applying subsections (1), (2) and (3), the person must apply the
standard of a person who is familiar with the product to which
relates, or products similar to the product to which the design relates (the
standard of the informed user
the party seeking to establish that a ground for revocation exists, the burden
lies with the Requestor to establish, on the balance
of probabilities, that each
of the Registrations are not registrable
following declarations were filed in this
Owner’s EIS
Declaration made
on 19 October 2020 by William Julius, co-owner of BSJ Rural Contracting, with
Annexure BJ-1 (‘
Julius Declaration
Requestor’s EIS
Declaration made
on 21 October 2020 by Robert Philip Wulff, Principal at Griffith Hack, with
Exhibits RPW-1 to RPW-3 (‘
Wulff Declaration
Owner’s EIA
Declaration made
on 20 November 2020 by Dr John Pickard, fence consultant and independent
researcher, with Annexures JP-1 to JP-5
Declaration
Requestor’s EIA
Declaration made
on 22 January 2021 by Ross Lourie, National Sales Manager at Waratah Fencing
Products, with Exhibits RL-1 to RL-9
Declaration
Owner’s EIR
Declaration made
on 17 June 2021 by Ashley Dean Olsson, Director of the Owner, with Annexures
AO-1 to AO-2 (‘
Olsson Declaration
Additional evidence - Requestor’s EIR
Declaration made
on 25 January 2022 by Robert Fabien, Innovation and Intellectual Property
Manager at InfraBuild Wire Pty Ltd, with
Exhibit RF-1
Fabien Declaration
Owner’s EIS
Julius is a co-owner of BSJ Rural Contracting (‘
he founded approximately 15 years ago. BSJ ‘specialises in general
livestock and exclusion fence installations’
and Mr Julius’
role includes ‘acquiring and installing steel fence
Prior to establishing
BSJ, Mr Julius was a station hand for approximately 30 years and part of this
role involved installation of
farmland fencing.
to the Julius Declaration, as at the Priority Date, the ‘vast majority of
steel posts used in rural fencing in Australia
consisted of a three flanged Y
shape posts known as “star
states that differences exist between Y shaped posts notwithstanding that they
all consist of the same fundamental Y shape.
For example, the size and thickness
of the post flanges can be uniform or they can differ in size and/or thickness
depending on the
in overall length with shorter posts generally used for animal grazing
and longer posts used for exclusion fencing.
Julius explains that the ‘numbers and types of apertures (also known as
holes) and keepers (also known as
as well as their
location on the post will vary depending on the purpose of the fencing. For
example, the number of holes in a post
can vary from 8 through to 30 depending
on how close the wiring needs to be spaced. Mr Julius declares that steel posts
have round shaped holes but ‘elongated shaped holes’ are
to the Julius Declaration, ‘[a]ll steel posts have some form of corrosion
resistance’.
This may be
achieved by applying a galvanised coating or a bituminous paint coating over the
entirety of the post. Another method
of providing corrosion resistance is to
apply a coating to the lower portion of a post which results in the post having
toned or two coloured
appearance’.
also observes that stabilising plates are an important feature of steel posts
because they have a functional purpose of
preventing posts from sinking into the
Requestor’s EIS
Wulff Declaration alleges that each of the Registrations have ‘copied
known steel post designs and has simply applied grayscale
shading to a ground
anchoring region of each steel
To support this,
the following prior art is exhibited (collectively ‘
Representation
Short title
Australian design no. 201012179
Australian design no. 201211798
‘Wikipedia.org – “Steel fence
‘Farmers Weekly internet publication’
‘Google Images search – “part painted T
Wulff Declaration contends that each of the Registrations, when properly
interpreted, are for ‘a “pattern or ornamentation”
interpretation is said to be consistent with the SoND for the Registrations
which emphasise the shaded, ground engaging region,
of each steel
On this basis, Mr Wulff
submits that for each of the Registrations, ‘the “design” is
the steel post,
is it the shape or configuration of the
steel post,
is it the individual structural features of the steel
Wulff Declaration also dissects the SOR provided in support of the intention to
certify the Registrations.
Attention is drawn to a perceived deficiency in the rationale provided –
namely, the examination was conducted ‘on the
assumption that the shape
and configuration of the “steel post” (the product in each of the
[Registrations]) was distinctive
over the prior
Exhibit 3 to the
Wulff Declaration contains results obtained from searches of the prior art base
which, in Mr Wulff’s opinion,
illustrate ‘that the shape and
configuration of each of the [Registrations], including the combination of
features, was known
and published before the [P]riority
remainder of the Wulff Declaration contains submissions engaging with the
factors set out in
of the Act. It posits that the Prior Designs
‘disclose the same pattern or ornamentation features in the same locations
on the same or similar steel posts to that of the steel posts of the
[Registrations]’.
submits that ‘the “shape and configuration” features of each
of the [Registrations] was already part of
the prior art
and should be
‘disregarded when applying the factors set forth in
A correct analysis
of the Act, so the argument goes, should ‘be limited to
features of “pattern or ornamentation” of each of the
[Registrations]’.
context, Mr Wulff asserts that ‘[i]t does not matter that some of the
steel posts of the [Registrations] have a different
overall shape to the [Prior
Designs]’ because '[t]he “pattern or ornamentation” features
are the same and/or are
substantially
Pickard Declaration annexes a report prepared by Dr Pickard which compares each
of the Registrations to designs contained in the
’) as well as some of the Prior Designs. Dr Pickard describes
himself as being ‘a consultant on the heritage of rural
fencing since
2011’ and an independent researcher that has ‘written a number of
articles on fencing in
Australia’.
Pickard Report outlines several reasons as to why none of the Registrations are
identical or substantially similar in overall
impression to the any of the prior
art base designs. Dr Pickard’s conclusions are based on his
understanding of chapter 9 of
Designs Examiners' Manual of Practice and
’) in combination with his own personal
knowledge and observations.
Requestor’s EIA
to the Lourie Declaration, Waratah Fencing Products
’) is ‘the market leader for fencing products
in Australia’.
Through his
role at Waratah, Mr Lourie has acquired ‘an intimate and extensive
knowledge of fencing products promoted, sold
and made available in
Australia’ and is aware of ‘current market conditions and
declares that the application of an additional coating (be it partial or in
full) to the galvanised coating of a steel
post has ‘been in use in the
Australian steel fence post market for many
as a way of
counteracting corrosive soils.
Lourie provides reasons as to why none of the Registrations are new or
distinctive when compared to the Prior Designs. Relevantly,
understands the SoND which accompanies each of the Registrations as instructing
him to focus on ‘the pattern or ornamentation
as applied to a ground
anchoring region of a steel
‘disregard differences in shape or configuration’ between the
Registrations and the Prior
Mr Lourie opines
that the shape or configuration of each of the Registrations is well known to
himself and many other people in the
‘could immediately recognise and identify the source of each post’
in the Registrations.
Exhibit RL-3 contains Mr Lourie’s comments on the alleged
provenance of each steel post disclosed in the Registrations.
Lourie Declaration also discusses the SOR. In Mr Lourie’s opinion, the SOR
erroneously focuses on the shape and configuration
of each of the Registrations
and fails to give due weight to the pattern or ornamentation of the shaded
region of the post in each
of the Registrations. Mr Lourie also applies his
understanding of the factors detailed in
of the Act to a comparison of
the Registrations against the Prior Designs. Having regard to these factors,
Mr Lourie declares that
he is ‘even more convinced that none of the
[Registrations] are
distinctive’.
Lourie Declaration responds to the Julius Declaration. Relevantly, Mr Lourie
clarifies that not all steel posts have some form
of corrosion resistance and
points out that a post ‘will be highly susceptible to corrosion out in the
field of application’
unless it has some basic form of
Mr Lourie acknowledges
that stabilising plates are a feature that ‘can change the appearance of a
post’ but highlights
that stabilising plates are ‘well-known
features of American T-posts and have been well known for many years prior to 27
Lourie Declaration also comments on the Pickard Declaration. Mr Lourie queries
Dr Pickard’s expertise in relation to steel
posts and whether Dr
Pickard fully comprehends the intricacies of the Manual. Criticism is levelled
at the Pickard Report including
the incomplete nature of the prior art
considered as well as the weight attributed to differences in the
‘shape/configuration’
features between the relevant designs. In Mr
Lourie’s opinion, the ‘shape/configuration’ features of each
Registrations should ‘be given no
in assessing their
distinctiveness. Mr Lourie submits that Dr Pickard’s consideration of such
features means that the Pickard
Report is fundamentally flawed.
remainder of the Lourie Declaration introduces further prior art. Specifically,
Exhibit RL-4 contains two photographs of steel posts with ‘additional
coatings on a lower ground-anchoring region’ that
were trialled in New
South Wales in 2005.
Exhibits RL-5 to RL-8 contain photographs of posts which have a ‘two-toned
appearance’ that were purportedly
trialled in various Australian locations
between 2006 and 2018. Mr Lourie also refers to a ‘European-type trellis
which displays a ‘two-toned appearance’ and provides a
website link to archived photographs of this post.
Olsson Declaration challenges the prior art introduced by the Lourie
Declaration. Mr Olsson disputes that the trialled posts contained
Exhibits RL-4 to RL-8 of the Lourie Declaration were publicly used in Australia.
The implication being they do not form part of
the relevant prior art base for
the Registrations.
Olsson’s experience, ‘it is the usual practice for some form of
non-disclosure or confidentiality agreements’
to be used during these
The Olsson Declaration
details commercial and non-commercial reasons as to why the trials disclosed in
the Requestor’s EIA
are likely to have been conducted in confidential
circumstances. However, for the purposes of this decision, it is not necessary
to summarise these in detail.
Olsson Declaration also responds to the nature of the photographs that form part
of the Requestor’s EIA. Broadly speaking,
Mr Olsson submits that the
photographs are not time stamped and only partially disclose the exhibited
post(s). As such, visual features
including the number of holes (if any), shape,
length and/or extent of coating on the exhibited post(s) cannot be discerned
any certainty. On this basis, Mr Olsson concludes that the prior art
disclosed in the Requestor’s EIA is dissimilar in appearance
and overall
impression to each of the Registrations.
Additional evidence -
Requestor’s EIR
Fabien Declaration responds to allegations made in the Olsson Declaration
regarding confidentiality agreements and practices associated
with developing
and trialling new products. Mr Fabien declares that the product trials disclosed
in Exhibits RL-4 to RL-8 of the
Lourie Declaration were not subject to
confidentiality agreements.
nothing in the Fabien Declaration affects the outcome of this decision. This is
particularly so given it has not been necessary
to determine whether the trials
disclosed in Exhibits RL-4 to RL-8 of the Lourie Declaration constitute public
use of relevant designs
in Australia. As such, I give the additional evidence no
turning to consider whether each of the Registrations are new and distinctive,
it is prudent to discuss 2 preliminary matters
that have had significant bearing
on how the parties have framed their submissions. These matters pertain to the
scope of the Registrations
and the nature of the prior art relied upon by the
Scope of the Registrations
central issue in this matter is the impact of the SoND on the scope of the
Registrations. The Act mandates that if a design application
statement of newness and distinctiveness, then particular regard must be given
to the visual features of the design which
are identified as being new and
distinctive.
It is common ground
that regard must be given to the SoND. Where the parties diverge is with respect
to how the SoND should be interpreted
and what affect its presence has on the
scope of the Registrations.
Requestor’s position is that the scope of the Registrations is exclusively
confined to the pattern or ornamentation features
of each steel post disclosed.
Reliance is placed on the SoND which stipulates that ‘newness and
distinctiveness reside in the
pattern or ornamentation as applied to a ground
anchoring region of a steel post’ and ‘little or no weight is to be
to the shape or configuration of the post’. On this basis, the
Requestor asserts that consideration should only be given to
the visual features
of pattern or ornamentation in each of the Registrations. The corollary being
that their shape or configuration
disregarded.
Conversely,
the Owner contends that the scope of the Registrations is not limited to the
pattern or ornamentation features of each
steel post disclosed. It asserts that
the Requestor’s position is ‘fundamentally misconceived’ and
premised on
an artificial construction of the
The Owner highlights that,
by definition, a design ‘in relation to a product, means the overall
appearance of the product resulting
from one or more visual features of the
feature’ is defined in the Act as ‘in relation to a product,
includes the shape, configuration, pattern
and ornamentation of the
Owner’s opinion, the reference to ‘overall impression’ in
s 19 of the Act further illustrates that the product
must be considered as
a whole and ‘not just that part of the product bearing the particular
visual features of the
In this context,
the Owner submits that the SoND provides some weight to the visual features but
it does not permit specific visual
features to be excluded from consideration
my view, the Owner’s position is preferable. The statement of newness and
distinctiveness was introduced in the current Act
and replaced, inter alia, the
statement of monopoly that existed under the
Designs Act 1906
As the name suggests, a
statement of newness and distinctiveness is intended to be used to identify new
or distinctive visual features
of a design. In the context of s 19 of the Act, a
statement of newness and distinctiveness serves to inform the overall visual
conveyed by a design but its mere presence is not determinative. In
contrast to the statement of monopoly, a statement of newness
distinctiveness does not operate as a mechanism by which to disclaim visual
features or disregard visual features not expressly
identified within
On its face s 19(2)(b) of
the Act requires particular regard to be paid to visual features identified in a
statement of newness and
distinctiveness, but this must be considered in the
context of the design as a whole. Applying the ordinary meaning of this
to the SoND at hand, particular regard is to be given to the pattern
or ornamentation features but some regard must be given to the
configuration features. Pursuant to
s 15AB(1)(a)
Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth), guidance to confirm this ordinary meaning may
be drawn from the Australian Law Reform Commission’s example regarding
potential introduction of a statement of newness and
distinctiveness:
For example, if a cup is designed with a new and
distinctive handle, the design owner will be able to register the design of the
and identify the handle as the new and distinctive feature for which
protection is sought. If a competitor takes the handle and places
differently shaped cup, the court will be directed to consider when determining
whether the exclusive right has been infringed
whether the design of the new cup
is substantially similar in overall impression to the design of the old cup,
paying particular
attention to the designs of the handles in each case
not disregarding other parts of the cups
. The design of the handle would
only be considered in isolation from the cup if the handle was a component part
that was a product
in its own right and the design was registered as a design
for that product, not for a
Requestor’s position is akin to comparing the cup handles in the above
example insofar as it essentially submits that the
pattern or ornamentation of
the ground anchoring region of the steel post should be considered in isolation.
I do not accept this.
Here, all the Registrations are in respect of a
‘steel post’. They are not for a component part that is a product in
its own right, for example, in respect of a ‘steel post anchor’ or a
‘reinforcing plate of a steel post’.
It is true that the SoND claims
that the new and distinctive visual features reside in ‘the pattern or
ornamentation as applied
to a ground anchoring region of a steel post’ in
each of the Registrations. However, consistent with the above example, this
not mean that the residual visual features are to be wholly disregarded. Rather,
such residual visual features should be given
diminished attention. Accordingly,
there is no cogent basis to read down the scope of the Registrations in the
manner advanced by
the Requestor.
Nature of the prior art
Requestor’s Submissions state that reliance is placed on the Prior Designs
together with the material contained in Exhibits
RL-3 to RL-9 of the Lourie
Declaration as the relevant items of prior art in this
Prior Designs are produced at [18] of this decision. In relation to the material
contained in the Exhibits of the Lourie Declaration,
the relevant documents are
set out in Annexure B to this decision. By relevant documents, I note that some
of the Exhibits do not
contain any material that is capable of being used for
comparative purposes. For example, Exhibit RL-3 contains a table setting out
Registrations and Mr Lourie’s comments and Exhibit RL-9 contains a written
opinion issued by the International Searching
Authority in respect of Patent
Cooperation Treaty application number ‘PCT/AU2020/050521’ that is
devoid of any imagery.
Exhibit RL-5 contains the findings of ‘Metallurgical Investigation –
No 061548’ and includes photographs
of a blistered epoxy coating of a
fence post. The photographs are taken close up to the post such that they
plainly cannot assist
the Requestor’s
Finally, the Lourie
Declaration provides a website
which allegedly contains a
‘European-type trellis post’. In Mr Lourie’s view, this
is at least substantially identical
to the 687 Design. However, it is not
appropriate for a delegate of the Registrar to navigate links to locate possible
on a website given such links may change or redirect over time. It is
incumbent upon the party to file any material, such as screenshots
relevant part of the website, during the evidence stages if reliance is to be
placed on same.
Owner’s Submissions are highly critical of the prior art. Specifically,
the Owner points out that it ‘is readily apparent
that the posts shown in
the various photographs are not all the
and the general
nature of the photographs is such that, in some instances, it is not possible to
determine the length or shape of
the post. Nor is it possible to ascertain the
totality and arrangement of the apertures in the post or whether the post has
any additional
coating applied to
my assessment, there is considerable merit in the criticisms levelled at the
prior art notwithstanding the fact that some of the
prior art establishes that
partially coating a post was a known practice before the Priority Date. Whilst
it is by no means a requirement
that the alleged prior art disclose each of the
Registrations in full, many examples of the prior art relied on suffer
deficiencies
that are fatal to their capacity to form the basis of a valid
ground for revocation. Deficiencies arise from the fact that the photographs
the posts are obscured, incomplete or simply fail to disclose sufficient details
to render any of the Registrations invalid.
the above in mind, I have no hesitation in finding that PA3 and PA4 do not
warrant further consideration. At their highest, each
example of prior art
therein merely discloses a post end which is partially coated. For similar
reasons, the examples of prior art
disclosed in Exhibit
RL-7 as well
‘Fig.2’ and ‘Fig.7’ to ‘Fig.9’ in Exhibit
RL-8 may also be dismissed. Meanwhile,
the examples of prior art disclosed in
PA5, Exhibit RL-4, Exhibit RL-6 and ‘Fig.4’ to ‘Fig.6’
RL-8 show posts which are partially coated. However, the posts are
displayed from such a distance that, even with the assistance
magnification, it is impossible to discern with any degree of confidence the
relevant visual features of same. For this
reason, I am satisfied that each of
the Registrations are new and distinctive over these alleged prior art
ease of reference, the residual prior art to be considered in this decision is
set out below (collectively ‘
Representation
Short title
Australian design no. 201012179
Australian design no. 201211798
‘Fig. 1’ in Exhibit RL-8
‘Fig. 3’ in Exhibit RL-8
Requestor alleges that the 672, 673, 677, 686, 689, 691, 694 and 702 Designs are
not new because each is ‘identical to the
designs shown in Exhibit
, However, for the
aforementioned reasons, I am of the view that consideration is only required to
be given to PA6 and PA7.
Requestor’s allegation as to newness is easily disposed of given neither
PA6 or PA7 disclose additional views of the prior
art. As such, I am unable to
conclude that either PA6 or PA7 is identical to any of the particularised
Consequently, I am
satisfied that the Registrations and, in particular, the 672, 673, 677, 686,
689, 691, 694 and 702 Designs are
‘new’ for the purposes of s 16(1)
of the Act.
Accordingly,
I must now determine whether each of the Registrations is
‘distinctive’ over the Citations. This involves
consideration of the
factors listed in s 19 of the Act.
Standard of the informed
to s 19(4) of the Act, the factors prescribed in s 19 must be assessed from the
perspective of the informed user. The requisite
standard of the informed user is
that of familiarity.
informed user is a notional person who is familiar with the products to which
the Registrations relate or similar
It is not necessary
for an informed user to be an actual user of the products, however, familiarity
can be acquired through use.
Notably, the requisite standard of familiarity does not automatically exclude a
design expert.
Requestor submits that the informed user in this matter is ‘likely to be
one of: a farmer, a fencing contractor, a fencing
salesperson, a steel post
The Requestor
accepts that William Julius is an informed user but asserts that the Julius
Declaration should be given little weight
due to certain views expressed
regarding the repute and size of some of the known post
manufacturers.
With respect to
the Pickard Declaration, the Requestor contends that Dr Pickard is, at
best, ‘an aficionado of agricultural
history’ but is not an informed
user of steel posts.
Owner submits that the informed user ‘would be someone with [a] high level
of familiarity with features and functions of
and on this basis
asserts that Mr Wulff, a patent attorney, is clearly not an informed user of the
product. The Owner accepts that
Mr Lourie ‘has relevant experience in
relation to fence posts’ but highlights some aspects of the Lourie
Declaration
which it believes requires
Requestor’s characterisation of the informed user is reasonable. It
encompasses persons who would be familiar with the functional
and aesthetic
features of posts and recognises that the informed user is not strictly confined
to a single class of persons.
accept that the professional and personal experiences of both Mr Julius and
Mr Lourie would qualify them with the requisite degree
of familiarity to be
considered informed users. It is apparent that both individuals are
knowledgeable as to the availability and
the features and end uses of such products. That said, I acknowledge that Mr
Julius and Mr
Lourie make some problematic statements as highlighted in the
submissions filed by each party. Nevertheless, these statements do
not taint all
of the information disclosed and guidance may still be drawn from some
statements provided in the Julius Declaration
and the Lourie Declaration.
respect to the Pickard Report, many of the conclusions drawn by Dr Pickard
appear to be based on a comparison of the relevant
Registration as against the
prior art as a whole and not against each individual prior art design. This is
evident in the summaries
provided which compare the similarities and
dissimilarities of the relevant Registration against the prior art base as a
For this reason, I do not
attach significant weight to any of the conclusions arrived at by Dr
State of development of the prior art base
state of development of the prior art base is an important consideration when
assessing the distinctiveness of a design. The maturity
of the prior art base
directly influences how the informed user will interpret differences between the
design and the prior art.
If the prior art base is highly developed, the
informed user will generally attribute greater significance to smaller visual
differences
between the design and prior art for the purpose of distinctiveness.
On the other hand, if the prior art base is underdeveloped,
the informed user
will generally require more significant visual differences between the design
and prior art to avoid a finding
of substantial similarity.
Requestor submits that ‘the prior art base is small and less
well-developed’ and ‘differences in extent and/or
percentage of
end-coating can be assumed to have no impact on the consideration of
distinctiveness’.
submission is problematic. First, this purportedly underdeveloped prior art base
is difficult to reconcile with the fact that
the Requestor simultaneously
asserts that the shape and configuration of the steel posts in each of the
Registrations were well known
before the Priority Date. Second, the Requestor is
construing the prior art base too narrowly by seemingly limiting it to pattern
or ornamentation features of the posts and not the posts in general.
Owner submits that the prior art base is ‘very well
developed’.
I agree. It is
uncontroversial to say that steel posts have been around for a lengthy period of
time and the prior art before me
indicates that a diverse range of posts as well
as different types of apertures and keepers (and combinations thereof) exist.
informed user would therefore appreciate that the prior art base is highly
developed and is likely to place greater significance
on smaller differences
between each of the Registrations and the relevant prior art.
Statement of newness and distinctiveness
to s 19(2)(b) of the Act, the informed user must have particular regard to the
visual features identified in the SoND. In
this instance, the SoND emphasises
‘the pattern or ornamentation as applied to a ground anchoring region of a
steel post, as
represented by grayscale shading in the accompanying
representations’ in each of the Registrations. However, it is important
note that, for the reasons discussed at [35] to [39] of this decision, the
presence of this SoND does not mean that other visual
features can be completely
disregarded. Rather, these other visual features should be given diminished
Freedom to innovate
designer’s freedom to innovate is largely entwined with the development of
the prior art base. This is because the emergence
of industry norms or
particularly coveted features can directly curtail a designer’s potential
scope for innovation. In the
present matter, the prior art base for steel posts
is highly developed. It is apparent from the maturity level of the prior art
that certain constraints have emerged with respect to the design of a steel
post. It is evident that, for example, posts generally
have to be a certain
length, be thin and have flanges that run along the length of the post.
Similarly, there are additional functional
requirements of posts that further
limit the freedom to innovate. These requirements include the incorporation of
spaced apertures
to allow wire to pass through and a pointed end which enables a
post to be driven into the ground more easily. To a lesser extent,
deployment of some form of corrosion resistance on the part of the post which is
exposed to soil is arguably a functional requirement
itself, given both Mr
Julius and Mr Lourie identified corrosive soils as a known problem.
informed user would recognise these inherent functional constraints and
understand that this will dictate the general appearance
of a post. Therefore,
the informed user would place less significance on any visual similarities
arising from such constraints when
considering the overall impressions conveyed
by the respective designs.
Amount, quality and importance of the
similarities in the context of the design as a whole
cursory comparison of each of the Registrations with the Citations reveals some
obvious similarities. Each design depicts a thin
post that is partially coated
with one end being pointed. However, these similarities arise from design
features which are inherently
present in posts. The informed user is therefore
unlikely to conclude that any of the Registrations lack distinctiveness simply
they share visual similarities with the Citations in the general
positioning of such features.
as the Owner submits, it is the location and extent of the coating relative to
visual features such as the number of apertures,
flanges or reinforcing plates
of the post that the informed user’s attention will be drawn
Similarity in overall impression
determine the distinctiveness of a design, a decision maker is required to
carefully analyse the factors prescribed in s 19 of
the Act from the perspective
of the informed user. This analysis involves a studied comparison of the overall
impressions conveyed
by the respective
and the Act expressly
provides that more weight is to be given to the similarities between the designs
than to differences between
Bearing this in mind, I
now turn to consider each of the Registrations against the prior art submitted
by the Requestor.
Requestor alleges that the 874 Design is ‘substantially similar in overall
impression to “equivalent” pattern
or ornamentation features in each
of: [PA1]; and each of the designs shown in Exhibit RL-4 through to Exhibit
regards to PA1, the 874 Design shares general similarities with this prior art
insofar as the ground anchoring region of each post
contrasts with its top part
and each post has 6 apertures. However, the similarities end there. Significant
differences exist in
the variance of the spacing between apertures, the presence
of latches and a reinforcing plate (part of which is depicted as shaded)
874 Design and the flanges being moderately curled. An informed user would be
alert to these visual differences particularly
as many serve a functional
relation to PA6 and PA7,
only similarity shared with the 874 Design is the fact that the ground anchoring
region of each post contrasts with its top part.
Otherwise, it is readily
apparent that these designs are dissimilar in overall impression.
into account the highly developed prior art base, the constraints imposed on the
designer and the inherent functional nature
of the product, I am satisfied that
the informed user would conclude that the 874 Design is substantially different
in overall impression
to the alleged prior art even when particular regard is
had to the visual features identified in the SoND.
Requestor submits that the 672 Design is ‘substantially similar in overall
impression to “equivalent” pattern
or ornamentation features in each
of: [PA1]; and each of the designs shown in Exhibit RL-4 through to Exhibit
respect to PA1, the 672 Design shares broad similarities with this prior art
insofar as the ground anchoring region of each post
contrasts with its top part.
However, stark differences emerge when consideration is given to the number of
apertures, the presence
of the notch at the post’s top and the extent of
ground anchoring shading in the 672 Design. An informed user would not overlook
such notable differences even when particular regard is given to the visual
features identified in the SoND.
relation to PA6 and PA7,
Design shares similarities with this prior art insofar as the ground anchoring
region of each post contrasts with the body
of the post and each share a similar
number of apertures. However, there are significant differences in the
proportion of shaded
area of the grounded anchoring region as well as its
application. In particular, numerous apertures fall within the shaded ground
anchoring region of PA6 and PA7 whereas only 1 aperture appears in the shaded
region in the 672 Design. Further, the application
of the shading to the 672
Design is clearly delineated and this notably contrasts the haphazard almost
blended shading which appears
in PA6 and PA7.
view of the highly developed prior art base, the constraints imposed on the
designer and the inherent functional nature of the
product, I am satisfied that
the informed user would conclude that the 672 Design is substantially different
in overall impression
to the alleged prior art even when particular regard is
had to the visual features identified in the SoND.
Requestor submits that the 673 Design is ‘substantially similar in overall
impression to “equivalent” pattern
or ornamentation features in each
of: [PA1]; Exhibit
regard to PA1, the 673 Design shares broad similarities with this prior art
insofar as the ground anchoring region of each post
contrasts with its top part.
However, stark differences emerge when consideration is given to the shape of
the apertures, the presence
of the notch at the post’s top and the extent
of ground anchoring shading in the 673 Design. An informed user would not
such conspicuous differences even when particular regard is given to
the visual features identified in the SoND.
relation to PA6 and PA7,
only similarity shared with the 673 Design is the fact that the ground anchoring
region of each post contrasts with its top part.
Otherwise, it is immediately
apparent that these designs are dissimilar in overall impression.
Considering
the highly developed prior art base, the constraints imposed on the designer and
the inherent functional nature of the
product, I am satisfied that the informed
user would conclude that the 673 Design is substantially different in overall
to the alleged prior art even when particular regard is had to the
visual features identified in the SoND.
Requestor submits that the 674 Design is ‘substantially similar in overall
impression to “equivalent” pattern
or ornamentation features in each
of: [PA1]; and each of the designs shown in Exhibit RL-4 through to Exhibit
similar reasons given in respect of the 874 and 672 Designs above, I am
satisfied that the informed user would conclude that the
674 Design is
substantially different in overall impression to alleged prior art even when
particular regard is given to the visual
features identified in the
677, 686 and 702
Requestor submits that the 677, 686 and 702 Designs are ‘substantially
similar in overall impression to “equivalent”
ornamentation features in each of: [PA1]; and each of the designs shown in
Exhibit RL-4 through to Exhibit
similar reasons given in respect of the 672 Design, I am satisfied that the
informed user would conclude that the 677, 686 and
702 Designs are substantially
different in overall impression to the alleged prior art even when particular
regard is had to the
visual features identified in the SoND.
691 and 694 Designs
Requestor submits that the 689, 691 and 694 Designs are ‘substantially
similar in overall impression to “equivalent”
ornamentation features in each of: [PA1]; Exhibit
similar reasons given in respect of the 673 Design, I am satisfied that the
informed user would conclude that the 689, 691 and
694 Designs are substantially
different in overall impression to the alleged prior art even when particular
regard is given to the
visual features identified in the
693, 695, 696, 698, 699, 700 and 701 Designs
Requestor alleges that the 693, 695, 696, 698, 699, 700 and 701 Designs are
‘substantially similar in overall impression
to “equivalent”
pattern or ornamentation features in each of: [PA1]; and each of the designs
shown in Exhibit RL-4 through
similar reasons given in respect of the 874 Design, I am satisfied that the
informed user would conclude that the 693, 695, 696,
698, 699, 700 and 701
Designs are substantially different in overall impression to the alleged prior
art even when particular regard
is had to the visual features identified in the
678, 685, 688, 692 and 687 Designs
completeness, I am satisfied that the informed user would conclude that the 678,
685, 688, 692 and 687 Designs are substantially
different in overall impression
to each of the Citations even when particular regard is had to the visual
features identified in
am satisfied that no grounds for revocation exist. As such, examination of the
Registrations has been completed and certificates
of examination may now issue
for Australian design numbers 201912874, 201914672, 201914673, 201914674,
201914677, 201914678, 201914685,
201914686, 201914687, 201914688, 201914689,
201914691, 201914692, 201914693, 201914694, 201914695, 201914696, 201914698,
201914700, 201914701 and 201914702.
the Registrar is served with a notice(s) of appeal within the relevant
timeframe, the certificates of examination shall not issue
until the appeal has
been discontinued or dismissed, or in the event of a decision from the court,
the examination of these Registrations
will be subject to that decision.
parties sought an award of costs. Costs usually follow the event. Accordingly, I
award costs against the Requestor per s 127
of the Act in the amounts set out in
Schedule 3 of the
Design Regulations 2004
Hearing Officer
Delegate of the Registrar of Designs
Design number
Representation(s)
Classification
Priority date
Representation
Exhibit RL-4
Exhibit RL-6
Exhibit RL-7
Exhibit RL-8
Relevant details and
representations of each design registration are listed in Annexure A to this
The original requests
for examination were filed by Watermark Intellectual Property Pty Ltd. However,
by letter dated 17 May 2022,
the Requestor informed IP Australia that this
entity was ‘integrated into Griffith Hack in 2019 and no longer
Pty Ltd v Sun-Wizard Holding Pty Ltd
[2021] FCA 208
, [35]–[37]
(Greenwood J).
Declaration, [3].
Ibid [8]. Mr
Julius comments that ‘there was also some use of galvanized round (or
cylindrical) posts’ on non-farming
properties.
Wulff Declaration,
Ibid (emphasis in
As noted at [9]
of the Wulff Declaration, the SOR provided was ‘effectively
identical’ for each of the
Registrations.
Declaration, [12].
The prior art base
under consideration is based on the website links disclosed in Exhibit 3 to the
Wulff Declaration.
Declaration, [1]–[4].
Lourie Declaration, [2].
Ibid [3]–[4].
Ibid, [22],
Act s 15(2)(a) which
provides that the ‘prior art base for a design (the designated design)
consists of designs publicly used
Australia’.
Declaration, [20].
Declaration, [8], [10].
s 19(2)(b)(i).
Requestor’s Submissions,
Submissions,
(definition of
Submissions, [100].
Designs Act
(Cth) s 4 (definition of ‘statement of monopoly’) provided
that a ‘statement of monopoly, in relation to a design,
means a statement
relating to the representations of an article to which the design is applied
that indicates ... (b) those features
of the representations that are to be
disregarded in considering the extent of the monopoly
protection.
Multisteps Pty Limited v Source and Sell Pty Limited
[2013] FCA 743
Australian Law Reform Commission,
(Report No 74, 1995) para 6.21
(emphasis added).
Requestor’s Submissions,
An illustrative
example is set out in Annexure C to this
https://industry.arcelormittal.com/news/06-2017/MagnelisValentevineyards
Owner’s Submissions,
Owner’s Submissions, [114], [116], [121], [141], [151], [153],
Requestor’s
Submissions,
World of Technologies (Aust) Pty Ltd v Tempo (Aust) Pty Ltd
, [60] (Jessup J).
Act s 19(4) as it stood prior to the amendment brought about by the
Amendment (Advisory Council on Intellectual Property Response) Act 2021
(Cth) sch 7 pt 1. The ‘standard of the informed user’ applies to
designs registered pursuant to applications made before
11 September
GME Pty Ltd v
Uniden Australia Pty Ltd
[2022] FCA 520
, [15] (Burley J);
(n 49) [67].
Pacific International Pty Ltd v Martec Pty Ltd
[2016] FCA 796
(Nicholas J).
Requestor’s
Submissions, [9].
Requestor’s
Submissions, [18].
Owner’s Submissions,
See, eg, Pickard
Report, 9, 13, 28, 32. Such an approach is equivalent to ‘mosaicing’
which is impermissible under the
Act. See, eg,
Keller v LED Technologies Pty
[2010] FCAFC 55
, [245] (Besanko J);
Requestor’s
Submissions, [69].
Owner’s Submissions,
Requestor’s
Submissions, [98].
reasons outlined at [44]–[45] of this decision, consideration is only
required to be given to PA6 and PA7 which are
contained in the ‘designs
shown in Exhibit RL-4 through to Exhibit
Requestor’s Submissions,
For the reasons
outlined at [44]–[45] of this decision, consideration is only required to
be given to PA6 and PA7 which are
contained in the ‘designs shown in
Exhibit RL-4 through to Exhibit
Requestor’s Submissions,
For the reasons
outlined at [44]–[45] of this decision, consideration is only required to
be given to PA6 and PA7 which are
contained in the ‘designs shown in
Exhibit RL-4 through to Exhibit
Requestor’s Submissions,
Ibid[126]–[130].
[138], [140], [142].
[106]–[118].
RTF format (193 MB)
Signed PDF/A format