Singh v Minister for Immigration & Anor [2013] FMCA 216 (3 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SINGH v MINISTER FOR
IMMIGRATION & ANOR
[2013] FMCA 216
MIGRATION – Judicial review – decision
of Migration Review Tribunal – no jurisdictional error found –
application
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth), cl.572.223
Plaintiff S 157/2002 v The Commonwealth of
(2003) 211 CLR 476
Craig v The State of South Australia
(1995) HCA 58
BHUPINDER SINGH
First Respondent:
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP
Second Respondent:
MIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
File Number:
ADG 189 of 2012
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
The Applicant:
Counsel for the Respondents:
Mr d'Assumpcao
Solicitors for the Respondents:
Australian Government Solicitors
(1) Application dismissed.
(2) Applicant shall pay the first respondent’s costs fixed in the sum of
SIX THOUSAND, FOUR HUNDRED AND SEVENTY ONE DOLLARS
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
BHUPINDER SINGH
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION &
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
MIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
have before me an Application for Judicial Review of a decision of the second
respondent, the Migration Review Tribunal (“the
Tribunal”). The
Tribunal affirmed a decision of the Delegate of the Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship not to grant
the applicant a Student (Temporary) (Class TU) Visa.
applicant seeks orders that the decision of the Tribunal be quashed and that a
writ of mandamus directed to the Tribunal or Minister,
requiring them to
determine the applicant’s application according to law.
grounds of the application are as follows:
1. Tribunal
made decesion (sic) based on evidence that I stopped studying in college in June
2010 and the court I late (sic) enrolled
was different (sic) from the course
which I was earlier enrolled. Whild (sic) making the decesion (sic) tribunal
failed to consider
the fact that my former college (Cambridge International
College) was having problem (sic) with giving placement to students, also
had issues related to record maintenance which was identified and acknowledged
by Department of Education. Hence the Tribunal
has made “jurdictional
(sic) error in judgement”.
2. Tribunal
made finding that I had enrolled in a different course but failed to see the
fact that since mid 2010 no college has
been offering this course to new
students. I had to change the couse (sic) and seek admission in another course
due to this. In
any case if a person intends to change his occuation (sic) in
life then it does not mean that the intentions are not guniene (sic).
(sic) that Tribunals judgment will force students to study the course in which
they are enrolled and take away freedom
to choose or change their career
according to their wish. Thus there is “jurdictional (sic) error”
in judgment.”
applicant was unrepresented at the hearing. He had the assistance of an
interpreter. The applicant indicated through the interpreter
that he did not
wish to make any submissions and that he wished the Court to determine the
application on the papers.
for the second respondent provided a detailed Outline of Submissions. The
applicant had had the Outline of Submissions read
to him by an interpreter prior
to the hearing. I gave the applicant the opportunity of putting submissions and
to say anything that
he wished to about the Outline of Submissions but he
declined to do so.
16 November 2012, the applicant swore and filed an affidavit. At the hearing
the applicant did not say whether or not he wished
to rely on the affidavit. I
have read the affidavit and come to the conclusion that, apart from the first
item, the Migration Review
Tribunal Decision Record which is already to be found
in the green book prepared for the hearing, all other annexures were not
and were therefore inadmissible. The additional annexures were as
A statement from
Cambridge International College Australia, being a Statement of Academic Results
together with certain cover sheets
and feedback forms for assessments in the
course Diploma of Community Welfare Work;
Two Statutory
Declarations of individuals who the applicant says faced record keeping problems
from College;
details of the applicant in courses of study at Derbin International College Pty
Tax Invoice from
Australian Health Management in the sum of $476.05.
he was before the Tribunal the applicant was given an opportunity to provide
what ever evidence he wished. He declined to provide
the information now
contained in his affidavit at that time. In all of the circumstances, it is not
appropriate that I allow this
affidavit to be used in this hearing.
applicant is a citizen of India who arrived in Australia on 1 May 2008 as the
holder of a Student (Temporary) (Class TU) subclass
573 Higher Education Sector
Visa which was valid until 4 April 2011. On 4 April 2011, the applicant lodged
an application for the
visa with the Department. On 6 April 2011, the delegate
sought further information by letter. By 8 July 2011, no documents had
received. The Delegate refused the application that day. In particular, the
Delegate noted that:
date, no evidence of funds or other documents previously requested had been
received by this office in support of your
student visa application. As a
result, I am not satisfied that you meet the requirements of Clause 5A 405(1)
and therefore you do
not satisfy Migration Regulation 572.223
5A405 in Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) (“the
Regulations”) concerns financial capacity.
or about 22 July 2011, the Tribunal received the Applicant’s Application
for Review of the Delegate’s decision. On
3 July 2012, the Tribunal
invited the applicant to appear before it to give evidence and present argument
relating to the issues
arising in the case. The Tribunal’s letter advised
that the Tribunal would seek to make a decision on the review at the conclusion
of the hearing. Accordingly, the applicant was invited to provide a range of
evidence said to be pertinent to the criteria for the
grant of the visa.
1 August 2012, the applicant’s representative sent a package of material
to the Tribunal including evidence of enrolment
into courses, namely, a
Certificate IV in Business and a Diploma of Management.
2 August 2012, the Tribunal conducted a hearing at which the applicant was
present and represented by a Migration Agent. At the
conclusion of the hearing
the Tribunal affirmed the decision under review.
3 August 2012, the Tribunal published its Statement of Reasons and furnished the
applicant’s representative with a copy under
cover of letter dated 6
August 2012.
29 August 2012, the applicant applied to the Federal Magistrates Court for
judicial review of the Tribunal’s decision.
The Tribunal’s Decision
Tribunal canvassed the relevant law in relation to the visa. In particular, it
referred to Clause 572.223 which read in part:
(2) An applicant meets the requirements of this subclause
applicant who is not a person designated under
regulation 2.07AO:
Minister is satisfied that the applicant is a genuine applicant for entry and
stay as a student, having regard to:
stated intention of the applicant to comply with any conditions subject to which
the visa is granted; and
other relevant matter; ...
at the time of the Tribunal’s decision, Clause 572.223(2) had been amended
Migration Amendment Regulations
212 (No 10 (Cth), No 35 of 2012
(the Amending Regulations). The amendments relevantly came into force on 24
March 2012: s2(e) of
the Amending Regulations. As the visa in this case was
applied for on 4 April 2011, I find that the Tribunal referred to the correct
version of Clause 572.223 in its decision.
Tribunal recounted the background facts, including the topics canvassed at the
Tribunal hearing. Specifically, it relevantly
noted that immediately prior to
the hearing, the applicant provided two certificates of enrolment. At the
hearing, the applicant
gave evidence that he studied community welfare because,
among other things, he wanted to work for people with mental health issues.
decision records that the applicant confirmed at the hearing that he had not
completed the course, and that the last time he
attended a lesson was in June
the applicant was questioned on his current course(s) that he was enrolled in.
The applicant gave evidence that he enrolled
in the current CoE the day before
the hearing. Of this, the Tribunal said:
Tribunal explained to the applicant that one of the things it had to consider
was whether there was any matter before
it that might lead it to conclude that
he was not (a) genuine applicant for entry and stay in Australia as a student.
The Tribunal
explained that it had listened to his evidence and considered that
there was a real issue as to whether it considered him to be a
genuine applicant
for entry and stay in Australia as a student. The Tribunal indicated that it
was very concerned about his evidence
and that he had not attended any lessons
since June 2010, had only enrolled in a course the previous day, and that this
in an unrelated field to his earlier course. The Tribunal indicated
it was seriously considering whether to conclude that the applicant
genuine student in light of this evidence.
Tribunal adjourned to enable the applicant to consult with his representative.
Upon resumption, it was submitted by the applicant’s
representative that
the Tribunal should have regard to the fact that the applicant had paid partial
fees towards his education in
2010 in order to maintain his place in that
course, the course had not been offered by the college after 2011, and the
had approached other colleges regarding enrolment in a Diploma of
Community Welfare.”
its “findings and reasons”, the Tribunal found that the
Applicant’s course of study for which he was enrolled
fell within subclass
572. The Tribunal also found that the applicant was not a person designated
under Rule 2.07AO of the Regulations
and that the Applicant held an eligible
passport for India.
observed that it considered that the issue in the review was whether, on the
evidence before it, there was any relevant matter
that would cause it not to be
satisfied that the applicant was a genuine applicant for entry and stay as a
student. It explained
that the factors relevant to this topic were as
that he had not
undertaken any study in Australia since June 2010;
he had only
enrolled in the course the day prior to the hearing; and
the course was
in a different field to the course he ceased studying in June
Tribunal stated that it “... considered carefully the applicant’s
response to this issue, and the submissions made
on his behalf as to why the
Tribunal should not conclude from his evidence that he is not a genuine
applicant for entry and stay
as a student”. But it then expressed its
lack of persuasion with the evidence. In the result, the Tribunal
considered the applicant’s response to the concerns raised with him at
hearing, arising from his evidence, the
Tribunal finds that there are relevant
matters before it that lead it not to be satisfied that the applicant is a
genuine applicant
for entry and stay as a student. The Tribunal reaches this
conclusion after having regard to, and notwithstanding, the applicant’s
stated intention to comply with any conditions subject to which the visa is
basis of the above, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the applicant is a
genuine applicant for entry and stay as a student
within the terms of Clause
572.223(2)(a)(ii)(B) [sic]”.
Tribunal concluded that the applicant had not met an essential requirement of
Clause 572.223 and that there was no evidence that
he met the criteria for any
other Student (Temporary) (Class TU) visa subclass. Thus, the Tribunal affirmed
the Delegate’s
Respondent’s Submissions
second respondent submits that both grounds relied upon by the applicant are
without foundation. The respondent’s submissions
1 may be taken to be a complaint that the Tribunal failed to consider a relevant
issue. However, the Tribunal expressly
stated that it had regard to the
Applicant’s response to the issues raised at the hearing. The Applicant
was provided with
an opportunity to respond to the Tribunal’s concerns,
even with the benefit of an adjournment and input from his representative.
is for the Applicant to provide to the Tribunal whatever evidence or argument he
wishes to advance in support of his claims.
It is not for the Tribunal to make
the Applicant’s case for him. The Tribunal is not obliged to stimulated
elaborations that
the Applicant did not choose to give or to act as his
“nursemaid”.
2 can be defeated for similar reasons. The Tribunal expressly considered the
Applicant’s contention about contact
with other colleges. The Tribunal
said at [27]:
Tribunal was not persuaded that evidence of payment of fees in 2010 materially
changed the picture that emerged from the
applicant’s evidence. Nor did
the Tribunal consider that the applicant’s evidence of very limited
colleges in 2011 changed its impression about the
applicant’s genuineness arising from his evidence that he had not engaged
with study in Australia for over 2 years.”
22. Earlier
at [21] in the ‘claims and evidence’ part of the decision, the
Tribunal stated:
Tribunal explained to the applicant that it was interested in his
representative’s submission regarding approaching
other colleges for
admission. The applicant said he had approached Salford College and ACTC. The
applicant said he had done this
in 2011, but had been informed that they did not
run that course. The applicant said the course can now only be undertaken at
or in Melbourne, but he wanted to stay in Adelaide. The Tribunal
asked the applicant why he wanted to stay in Adelaide. The applicant
his friends were here, and he has only lived in Adelaide since arriving in
Australia.”
face of the Tribunal’s express consideration of the Applicant’s
complaints, it is submitted that ground 2
is bound to fail. Inasmuch as the
complaint is that the Tribunal should have accepted that other courses were not
available, that
involves an impermissible shift from the proper province of
judicial review to a consideration of the issues before the Tribunal
factual merits.
Court should reject both grounds of
Conclusions
decision of the Migration Review Tribunal is a privative clause decision as
Migration Act 1958
Section 474
Decisions under Act are final
privative clause decision:
final and conclusive; and
not be challenged, appealed against, reviewed, quashed or called in question in
any court; and
subject to prohibition, mandamus, injunction, declaration or certiorari in any
court on any account.
clause decision
means a decision of an administrative character made,
proposed to be made, or required to be made, as the case may be, under this
or under a regulation or other instrument made under this Act (whether in the
exercise of a discretion or not), other than a
decision referred to in
subsection (4) or (5).
reference in this section to a decision includes a reference to the
(a) granting,
making, varying, suspending, cancelling, revoking or refusing to make an order
or determination;
(b) granting,
giving, suspending, cancelling, revoking or refusing to give a certificate,
direction, approval, consent or permission
(including a visa);
(c) granting,
issuing, suspending, cancelling, revoking or refusing to issue an authority or
other instrument;
(d) imposing,
or refusing to remove, a condition or restriction;
or revoking, or refusing to make or revoke, a declaration, demand or
requirement;
(f) retaining,
or refusing to deliver up, an article;
or refusing to do any other act or thing;
(h) conduct
preparatory to the making of a decision, including the taking of evidence or the
holding of an inquiry or investigation;
decision on review of a decision, irrespective of whether the decision on review
is taken under this Act or a regulation or
other instrument under this Act, or
under another Act;
failure or refusal to make a decision.
avoid doubt, the following decisions are privative clause decisions within the
subsection 474(2):
decision of the Minister not to exercise, or not to consider the exercise, of
the Minister’s power under
subsection 37A(2)
section 48B
paragraph 72(1)(c),
section 91F
subsection 503A(3)
decision of the Principal Member of the Migration Review Tribunal or of the
Principal Member of the Refugee Review Tribunal
to refer a matter to the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal;
decision of the President of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to accept, or
not to accept, the referral of a decision under
section 382
decision of the Minister under Division 13A of
to order that a
thing is not to be condemned as
Federal Magistrates Court has no jurisdiction to deal with a privative cause
decision or purported privative cause decision mentioned
in subs.474(7).
Section 476
provides as follows:
(1) Subject
to this section, the Federal Magistrates Court has the same original
as the High Court has under
paragraph 75(v) of the Constitution.
Federal Magistrates Court has no jurisdiction in relation to the following
primary decision;
privative clause decision, or purported privative clause decision, of the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal on review under section
privative clause decision, or purported privative clause decision, made
personally by the Minister under section 501, 501A,
501B or 501C;
privative clause decision or purported privative clause decision mentioned in
subsection 474(7).
(3) Nothing
in this section affects any jurisdiction the Federal Magistrates Court may have
in relation to non-privative clause decisions
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
section 44AA
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(4) In this
means a privative clause decision or purported privative
clause decision:
(a) that is
reviewable under
or section 500 (whether or not it has been
reviewed); or
would have been so reviewable if an application for such review had been made
within a specified period.
Federal Magistrates Court can only review a decision if it can be shown that the
decision was tainted by jurisdictional error.
explained by the High Court in
Plaintiff S 157/2002 v The Commonwealth of
(2003) 211 CLR 476.
There have been many High Court decisions
explaining the concept of jurisdictional error. A leading authority is
v The State of South Australia
result of the case of
Plaintiff S 157/2002
is that if a Court is
reviewing a “privative cause decision” then the grounds of review
remain governed by the Hickman
principles. The grounds for review as set out by
Dickson J in that case were:
decision maker was not acting in good faith in making the decision;
decision is not reasonably capable of reference to the decision making power
given the decision maker;
decision does not relate to the subject matter of the legislation; or they add,
decision exceeded the limits set out in the Commonwealth
Constitution.”
should be noted however, that a decision involving “jurisdictional
error” is not a “privative cause decision”.
In practice, this
means that applicants frequently seek review of decisions affected by
“jurisdictional error” by way
of the constitutional writs (Mandamus
prohibition, injunction) or the related writs of certiorari or habeas corpus.
“Jurisdictional
error” extends to such matters such as denial of
procedural fairness, failing to comply with statutory procedures, error of
the inflexible application of policy, consideration of irrelevant material and
failure to consider relevant material.
note that the Tribunal says at paragraph 19 that it:
explained to the applicant that one of the things it had to consider was whether
there was any matter before it that might
lead it to conclude that he was not a
genuine applicant for entry and stay in Australia as a student. The Tribunal
explained that
it had listened to his evidence and considered that there was a
real issue as to whether it considered him to be a genuine applicant
and stay in Australia as a student. ... The Tribunal indicated it was seriously
considering whether to conclude that the
applicant was not a genuine student
little later at paragraph 21 the Tribunal said:
Tribunal explained to the applicant that it was interested in his
representative’s submission regarding approaching
other colleges for
admission. The applicant said he had approached Salford College and ACTC. The
applicant said he had done this
in 2011, but had been informed that they did not
run that course. The applicant said the course can now only be undertaken at
or in Melbourne, but he wanted to stay in Adelaide.
little later at paragraph 27 of the reasons, the Tribunal said:
Tribunal was not persuaded that evidence of payment of fees in 2010 materially
changed the picture that emerged from the
applicant’s evidence. Nor did
the Tribunal consider that the applicant’s evidence of very limited
colleges in 2011 changed its impression about the
applicant’s genuineness arsing from his evidence that he had not engaged
with study in Australia for over 2 years.”
Tribunal ultimately concluded that the applicant was not a genuine applicant for
entry and stay as a student within the terms
of cl. 572.223. That clause
relevantly provides as follows:
minister is satisfied that the applicant is a genuine applicant for entry and
stay as a student, having a regard to:
stated intention of the applicant to comply with any condition subject to which
the Visa is granted; and
other relevant matter.
applicant has failed to establish any jurisdictional error and his claim must be
make the orders to be found at the beginning of these reasons.
certify that the preceding thirty-three (33) paragraphs are a true copy of the
reasons for judgment of Simpson FM
Date: 3 April 2013
RTF format (148 KB)
Signed PDF/A format