Corbin & Corbin [2025] FedCFamC1F 576 (22 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Corbin & Corbin
[2025] FedCFamC1F 576
File number(s):
MLC 15384 of 2024
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– ADOPTION – Leave
to commence proceedings – Where the Applicant seeks parenting orders and
leave to commence adoption
proceedings in the County Court of Victoria to adopt
a child – Where the First Respondent biological mother consents to the
parenting orders as sought and to the Court granting leave to the Applicant
pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) – Where the
Second Respondent biological father did not participate in the proceedings
– Orders as sought by the
Applicant and biological mother made.
Legislation:
Adoption Act 1984
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Peter Bourke Legal
The First Respondent:
Litigant in person
The Second Respondent:
No appearance
MLC 15384 of 2024
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
First Respondent
Second Respondent
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
the Applicant and the First Respondent have joint responsibility for making
decisions about all major long-term issues in relation
to the child V born 2011
(“the child”).
the child live with the Applicant and the First Respondent.
the Applicant and the First Respondent be authorised to apply to the Registry of
Births, Deaths and Marriages to change the name
of the child previously
registered as V and the said Registry to register the child's name as W.
sealed copy of these orders be served upon the Registry of Births, Deaths and
Marriages and such Registry IS REQUESTED to give effect
to them and to any
application made to the Registry pursuant to them.
section 60G(1)
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) the Applicant be
granted leave for proceedings to be commenced for the adoption by the Applicant
of the child V born 2011,
it being determined that such order is in the best
interests of V.
all extant applications be dismissed and the matter removed from the
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Corbin & Corbin
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
PRELIMINARY
the Court is an application for parenting orders and application for the
Applicant stepfather (“the applicant”)
to have leave to commence
proceedings in the County Court of Victoria for the adoption of the child, the
subject of the proceeding,
V born 2011 (“V”). V is now aged 14
second respondent biological father of V did not file any material, nor did he
participate in the proceeding. I am satisfied he
was served with the Initiating
Application for Final Orders; the Amended Application for Final Orders; together
with all material
as relied upon and all Court orders.
of the orders sought by the applicant were consented to by the first respondent
mother (“the mother”).
proceeding commenced in the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 2) on 5 December 2024. It was transferred
to the Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 1) pursuant to
Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
(Cth) (“the FCFCOA
Act”) on 24 April 2025.
LEGAL PRINCIPLES
proceedings in Victoria are determined by application of the relevant State
legislation, being the
Adoption Act 1984
(Vic). Notwithstanding this,
there is provision in the the
Family Law Ac 1975
(Cth) (“the
Act”) for the Court to provide leave to commence adoption proceedings in
other courts, and in this instance
the County Court of Victoria.
60G of the Act relevantly provides:
(1) Subject to subsection (2), the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 2), may grant leave for proceedings to
be commenced for the adoption
of a child by a prescribed adopting parent.
(2) In proceedings for leave under subsection (1), the court must consider
whether granting leave would be in the child's best interests,
having regard to
the effect of paragraph 60F(4)(a), or paragraph 60HA(3)(a), and of sections 61E
Notwithstanding
that s 60G(1) of the Act expressly provides that the Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 2) may
grant leave, pursuant to s 25 of the FCFCOA
Act, the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 1) has
to hear matters which have been transferred to the Court.
to s 60G(1) of the Act, the meaning of a prescribed adopting parent, in relation
to a child, is included in s 4(1) of the
Act which provides:
(a) a parent of the child; or
(b) the spouse of, or a person in a de facto relationship with, a parent of the
(c) a parent of the child and either his or her spouse or a person in a de facto
relationship with the parent.
to s 60G(2) of the Act, the “best interests” considerations the
Court must have regard to, are as set out in
s 60CC of the Act. Indeed, the
Court must have regard to the best interests considerations as the paramount
consideration when deciding
to make a particular parenting order in relation to
a child. A parenting order, pursuant to s 64B of the Act, may deal with the
or persons which whom a child is to live and the allocation of parental
responsibility for a child.
Additionally,
s 60F(4)(a) of the Act makes provision in relation to the child of a marriage
who is adopted by the prescribed adopting
if a court granted leave under section 60G for the adoption proceedings to be
commenced—the child ceases to be a child of the
marriage for the purposes
of this Act.
60HA(3)(a) of the Act provides a reciprocal provision of s 60F(4)(a) of the Act
in relation to children of de-facto partners.
to s 61E of the Act, the effect of adoption on parental responsibility is
relevantly if:
(a) a child is adopted; and
(b) immediately before the adoption, a person had parental responsibility for
the child, whether in full or to a limited extent and
whether because of section
61C or because of a parenting order.
(2) The person’s parental responsibility for the child ends on the
adoption of the child, unless the adoption is by a prescribed
adopting parent
and leave was not granted under section 60G for the adoption proceedings to be
to s 61E of the Act, s 65J of the Act provides the effect of adoption on a
parenting order is relevantly if:
(a) a child is adopted; and
(b) immediately before the adoption, a parenting order was in force in relation
to the child.
(2) The parenting order stops being in force on the adoption of the child,
unless the adoption is by a prescribed adopting parent
and leave was not granted
under section 60G for the adoption proceedings to be commenced.
regard to s 61E and s 65J of the Act, I note that the definition of prescribed
adopting parent as detailed above includes provision
for a parent of the child
being an applicant, in addition to the spouse of a parent. These are the factual
circumstances in this
MATERIAL RELIED UPON
applicant relied upon:
(1) Amended Application for Final Orders filed 19 February 2025;
(2) his affidavits filed 19 February 2025 and 20 August 2025;
(3) the affidavits of service of Mr C filed 19 February 2025, 26 May 2025 and 13
June 2025; and
(4) the mother’s affidavits filed 21 April 2025 and 26 March 2025.
applicant’s affidavit filed 20 August 2025 has annexed to it a
‘Letter of Support’ written by Ms D from E Mental
Health Service,
dated 11 August 2025.
mother relied upon:
(1) Response to Final Orders filed 26 March 2025;
(2) her affidavits filed 26 March 2025 and 23 April 2025.
RELEVANT FACTUAL FINDINGS
1986, the second respondent was born. He is the biological father of V. The
second respondent is currently serving a prison sentence,
having been convicted
in the County Court of Victoria of criminal offences.
1987, the mother was born. The first respondent is the biological mother of
1987, the applicant was born.
2010, the mother and the second respondent began cohabitating.
2011, V was born.
2011, the second respondent was convicted and imprisoned.
2012, the applicant and the mother began cohabitating. V has lived with the
applicant from this time, and the applicant has provided
solely for V’s
financial support.
2013, the applicant and the mother married. There are three children of their
marriage, X born 2013, Y born 2015, Z 2017. The mother
also has another child
from a previous relationship, B born 2009. All five children live with the
mother and the applicant in their
March 2024, the second respondent contacted the mother and asked to see V. The
mother and the applicant made arrangements for the
second respondent to see
April 2024, the second respondent met with V. The meeting lasted approximately
four to five hours. During that time, the second
respondent made minimal effort
to communicate with V. Following the visit, the mother and the applicant
to arrange for a second visit with V, however,
the second respondent did not respond to the message, nor did he make any
attempts to see V. The second respondent subsequently disabled the
account through which the mother and applicant were contacting
him, that being
the only contact they had at that time.
31 July 2024, the applicant’s solicitors contacted the second respondent
via Facebook Messenger to advise of the applicant’s
intent to adopt
5 October 2024, the second respondent responded to the applicant’s
solicitors via Facebook Messenger to advise of his email
address, being
14 November 2024, the applicant’s solicitors sent the applicant’s
initiating Court documents by way of service to the
second respondent’s
email address.
31 January 2025, the applicant’s solicitors sent a letter enclosing sealed
court documents and orders sought in this matter
by way of service to the second
respondent’s email address.
12 February 2025, the applicant’s solicitors resent Court documents
together with a request for Acknowledgement of Service
by way of service to the
second respondent’s email address. The second respondent did not respond
to any email sent to him
by the applicant’s solicitors.
April 2025, Child Protection Services from the Department of Families, Fairness
and Housing (“the DFFH”) attended the
residence of the applicant and
the mother in the course of conducting an investigation into significant
allegations against the second
respondent. The applicant was told to remain
upstairs in the house and was not present at the time of the meeting. The
information
conveyed to the mother by Child Protection as against the second
respondent was:
(1) that there had been a history of allegations of a sexual nature involving
the second respondent and children, and some of the
allegations had been
substantiated;
(2) that police were investigating charges of sexual assault against children as
perpetrated by the second respondent;
(3) the second respondent was currently under arrest and was in police custody;
(4) the then current Safety Plan stipulated that there was to be no contact by V
with the second respondent at all. The mother agreed
to the no-contact
requirement of the DFFH.
Protection Services also asked the mother during the course of the above visit
whether the second respondent was in contact
with V. The mother informed Child
Protection Services that the second respondent had met with V the previous year.
Child Protection
then informed the mother that she should not allow any further
CONSIDERATION
applicant has enabled the mother to provide V with a stable and loving
environment for the last 13 years. The applicant has been
a constant presence in
V’s life, and has contributed enormously to her positive development. The
applicant has actively participated
in V's upbringing, from attending school
events to engaging in her hobbies, and has established a deep and nurturing bond
This relationship is built on trust, shared experiences, and mutual
affection, which are crucial foundations for her future growth.
applicant has shown a willingness to support V's aspirations and interests,
fostering an environment where she can thrive academically,
socially, and
emotionally. His dedication to her wellbeing is evident in his proactive
approach to her needs, including her emotional
and intellectual needs in the
context of her health difficulties, and his continuous support of her ongoing
development.
has, of her own volition, expressed a desire to be adopted by the applicant. She
is also desirous of having the same name as that
of the other children in her
family unit. The mother stated in her affidavit evidence
[V], recognizing the unwavering support and love provided by the Applicant, has
expressed her request to be adopted by him. She has
conveyed her wish to be part
of a family where she feels secure and cherished. [V’s] request stems
from her deep bond with
the Applicant, who has been a steadfast figure in her
life, embodying the qualities of a caring and dedicated father.
D, the principal psychologist at E Mental Health Service, opined as follows in a
letter of support dated 11 August 2025:
[V] has been a client of [E Mental Health Service] since April 2022 and has
completed regular sessions with the writer since this
Rapport appeared to establish readily with [V]; she has consistently presented
as engaged and candid in sessions.
During the treatment episode, it was assessed that [V] met criteria for
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, further screeners
have subsequently
supported the need for further assessment for Autism Spectrum Disorder, with [V]
presenting with a number of characteristics.
Treatment targets for the current intervention have been to support [V] to
develop strategies to assist with symptoms of anxiety
and lowered mood,
friendship difficulties, and self-harming ideation.
More recently, [V] has discussed the potential adoption by her stepfather [Mr
Corbin]. [V] has three half siblings born to the union
of her mother and
stepfather and has largely been raised with [Mr Corbin] as her paternal
[V] has indicated that she does not want contact with her biological father, [Mr
Pryce], having only met him on few occasions, and
more recently being advised of
significant alleged offending.
In light of the above, and in accordance with [V's] expressed wishes, I
respectfully request that she be permitted to proceed with
the adoption by [Mr
Corbin]. This step is expected to reinforce [V's] sense of belonging within the
family unit, with all siblings
sharing the same mother, father, and surname.
Given [V's] estrangement from her biological father and her mental health
challenges,
it is anticipated that the stability and cohesion offered by this
adoption will provide significant emotional and psychological support.
(As per the original)
second respondent has had contact with V only once since her birth. The second
respondent has not sought to see V. Otherwise,
he has a lack of commitment to
the child. He presents as a risk to the child as evidenced by Child Protection
Services’ investigation
concerning his alleged assaults upon children.
applicant will continue to provide a loving and nurturing environment for V.
Conversely, the second respondent has been absent
in V’s life and
represents an ongoing risk of harm to V. The mother supports the Court granting
both parenting orders, at this
time, and leave to the applicant to commence
adoption proceedings in respect of V. V herself desires for the applicant to
She wishes for her surname to be one which is consistent with the
family surname and makes recognition of her membership of such
family. Such
orders are overwhelmingly in her best interests.
Court shall make the orders sought by the applicant (as consented to by the
I certify that the preceding forty-one (41)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 22 August 2025
Mother’s affidavit filed
26 March 2025, p.4.
RTF format (381 KB)
Signed PDF/A format