Application by Isentia Pty Limited [2021] ACopyT 2 (15 October 2021)
Application by Isentia Pty Limited
File number:
CT 2 of 2017
CT 2 of 2018
The Tribunal:
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT)
DR RHONDA SMITH
MS MICHELLE GROVES (MEMBER)
Date of decision:
Legislation:
Cases cited:
Application by Isentia Pty Limited
[2020] ACopyT 2
Audio‑Visual Copyright Society Ltd v New South Wales Department of
School Education
[1997] ACopyT 1
(1985) 4 IPR 5
(2013) 102 IPR 85
[2013] ACopyT 1
Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd v Reed International Books Australia
[2010] FCA 984
(2010) 189 FCR 109
General Tire and Rubber Co v Firestone Tyre and Rubber Co Ltd
IceTV Pty Limited v Nine Network Australia Pty Limited
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Limited v Copyright
Tribunal of Australia
[2019] FCAFC 95
(2019) 270 FCR 645
Re Applications by MCM Networking Pty Ltd
Reference by Australasian Performing Right Association Ltd
Re Australian Broadcasting Corporation
(1985) 5 IPR 449
Reference by Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd under
(2007) 73 IPR 162
Re Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Limited (under
(2015) 114 IPR 316
Re Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd (under
(2016) 117 IPR 540
Re Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd Under
Section 154(1)
(2016) 125 IPR 1
[2016] ACopyT 3
Roadshow Films Pty Ltd v iiNet Ltd
(2011) 194 FCR 285
Roadshow Films Pty Ltd v iiNet Limited [No 2]
[2012] HCA 16
University of Newcastle v Audio‑Visual Society Ltd
WEA Records Pty Ltd v Stereo FM Pty Ltd
(1983) 1 IPR 6
Date of hearing:
8 - 26 February 2021, 16, 18, 23 March 2021
No Catchwords
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Counsel for Isentia Pty Limited:
Mr C Moore SC and Ms L Thomas
Solicitor for the Isentia Pty Limited:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for Meltwater Australia Pty Ltd:
Mr J Hennessy SC and Ms F St John
Solicitor for the Meltwater Australia Pty Ltd:
Baker McKenzie
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr R Lancaster SC, Mr R Yezerski and Ms S Ross
Solicitor for the Respondent:
MinterEllison
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 2 of 2017
APPLICATION BY:
MELTWATER AUSTRALIA PTY LTD (ABN 91 121 849 769)
MELTWATER AUSTRALIA PTY LTD (ABN 91 121 849 769)
001 228 799)
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT)
DR RHONDA SMITH (MEMBER)
MICHELLE GROVES (MEMBER)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL DIRECTS THAT:
applicant submit to the Tribunal proposed orders giving effect to the
Tribunal’s decision as set out in the Reasons for
Determination generally
but having particular regard to [862] and [863] of the reasons.
question of the costs of the proceeding for the purposes of
(Cth) are reserved for later determination.
Tribunal’s decision and reasons for determination be published from the
Chambers of the President, the Hon Justice Andrew
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 2 of 2018
APPLICATION BY:
ISENTIA PTY LIMITED (ABN 11 002 533 851)
ISENTIA PTY LIMITED (ABN 11
002 533 851)
001 228 799)
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT)
DR RHONDA SMITH (MEMBER)
MICHELLE GROVES (MEMBER)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL DIRECTS
applicant submit to the Tribunal proposed orders giving effect to the
Tribunal’s decision as set out in the Reasons for
Determination generally
but having particular regard to [862] and [863] of the reasons.
question of the costs of the proceeding for the purposes of
(Cth) are reserved for later determination.
Tribunal’s decision and reasons for determination be published from the
Chambers of the President, the Hon Justice Andrew
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT), DR RHONDA SMITH AND MS MICHELLE
Procedural and general contextual background
Introduction
proceedings engage a broad sea of dispute between each of the applicants,
Isentia Pty Limited (“Isentia”) and Meltwater
Australia Pty Ltd
(“Meltwater”) on the one hand, and the respondent, Copyright
Australia Limited (“CA”) on
the other hand, in relation to separate
applications made to the Tribunal by Isentia and Meltwater under
(Cth) (the “Act”).
each application, the applicant claims, put simply for present purposes, that it
requires a licence to exercise the reproduction
and communication right
comprised in the bundle of exclusive rights subsisting in the copyright in
literary works (articles) published
print editions
of newspapers and
magazines (although “press clips” are now supplied digitally as PDF
images of hard copy articles), or
online editions
newspapers and magazines (the “online” services) published by a
number of well‑known and some less well‑known
publishers. The
well‑known publishers include
News Limited
and its related entities
(“News Corp” or “News Corp Australia”),
Fairfax Media
and its related entities (“Nine Publishing” or
“Nine/Fairfax”),
Australian Provincial Newspapers Pty Ltd
Rural Press Ltd
(“Rural”) and
Australian Newspapers Ltd
. Those publishers publish editions of their
publications under prominent and some less prominent
the more prominent Mastheads, among others, are these:
The Australian
The Sydney Morning Herald
The Financial Review
The Daily Telegraph
The Herald Sun
publishers are the owners of the copyright subsisting in the works they cause to
be originated including works they then publish
(putting to one side the rights
they enjoy to publish the works of other (foreign) publishers under particular
arrangements). That
being so, they enjoy the exclusive right to reproduce each
work in a material form
(s 31(1)(a)(i)
of the Act); to communicate the work
to the public
(s 31(1)(a)(iv))
; and to exercise any of the other exclusive
rights set out in
of the Act.
almost goes without saying that the copyright in the relevant work is infringed
by a person who, not being the owner of the copyright,
does in Australia or
authorises the doing in Australia of “any act comprised in the
the owner of the copyright:
of the Act. The reference to the doing of an act comprised in the
substantial
of the relevant work:
of the Act. The term
“communicate” means “make available online or electronically
transmit (whether over a path,
or a combination of paths, provided by a material
substance or otherwise) a work or other subject matter ...”:
of the Act. It follows that in order for anyone to engage in an act of
reproducing or communicating to the public the
of a published
article, it is necessary to obtain the licence of the publisher.
the doing of an act in relation to a part or
of an article (using those terms in a non‑technical and
non‑definitional sense for present purposes), such as a headline
article plus a sentence or a headline and some limited number of characters is
said to constitute the doing of an act comprised
in the exclusive reproduction
or communication right, such an act may, or may not, be properly characterised
as the doing of an act
in relation to a “substantial part” of the
relevant work. Whether it is, or is not, an act in relation to a substantial
part of the relevant work engages a question of fact and degree and
consideration of the extent of the copying, the quality of that
which is copied
and the importance of the part copied to the work in which the copyright
the relevant part, portion or snippet is
a substantial part of the
relevant work, the doing of the act will not engage an act of infringement and
thus the licence of the
to undertake that act, as a licence is not necessary in order to render the
a non‑infringing act.
the part or portion is a substantial part of the relevant work, doing the act
will require the licence of the copyright owner as
the act will otherwise be an
infringing act.
also follows, at least as a foundational matter of principle, that in order to
determine whether an act of reproducing and/or communicating
a part, portion or
snippet of a published article engages the doing of an act in relation to a
substantial part of a published article
(whether a press or online article)
requires an evaluative judgment to be made concerning each and every act in
issue and each and
every corresponding article.
a person seeks to engage in acts which
the reproduction of a
work or the communication of a work to the public (for example, the whole of an
article) which thus requires
the licence of the copyright owner (or, for present
purposes, a licence from CA), and the
seeks to bring
the licence
(that is, within the scope of the grant and the price and
non‑price terms) as a condition of the grant concerning those acts
require a licence,
, a question arises as to
whether bringing those other acts within the licence (and particularly as a
basis for the payment of charges),
is “reasonable”. A further
question is, can a licence in relation to acts of reproduction and communication
is necessary
, also bring within the scope of the
grant and the price and non‑price terms, activities (acts or uses) which
do not involve
an act of reproduction or communication (such as value added
services provided by an organisation dedicated to media analysis and
intelligence) but which might be said to be “enabled” by
“access” to the copyright works of a publisher
of those works in the sense that
acts of reproduction and
communication (at one level, perhaps a threshold “ingestion” level),
the value added services
simply could not be undertaken. If those circumstances
were to be the fact, is a licence adopting such an approach one which is
“reasonable” in the circumstances of the particular licensee?
related to the principles concerning acts said to involve a “substantial
part” of a work have been the subject
of extensive evidence in these
proceedings in the context of particular conduct and services. We will return
to the specific
of the matter later in these
reasons. For present purposes, it is sufficient to simply note, at least as a
matter of principle,
that when it comes to extracts of online articles, on some
occasions an evaluative judgment might result in a conclusion suggesting
act engages the notion of a substantial part of the article and on other
occasions not.
do not propose to try and answer in these proceedings the question of whether
the acts of extracting a portion of an article whether
“Portion” in the context of the evidence or called a
“snippet” or a “teaser” or some
other term such as
“ingress” is or is not an exercise of the reproduction and/or
communication right on the footing that
the extract constitutes an act in
relation to a substantial part of a corresponding article. Such a task is not
possible and, in
any event, impractical without looking at
each article
corresponding extract
. What can be said is that, portion by
portion, article by article, a relevant extract, however described, when
forensically examined
in the context of the article from which the extract is
taken or assembled, may or may not, engage an act in relation to a substantial
part of the article. We will, however, return to this topic.
it should also be noted that whatever the evaluative judgment may be, article by
article, should such a task be undertaken,
Isentia and Meltwater contend that
there must necessarily be a
qualitative
difference of some substance
between exercising a reproduction or communication right in relation to an
entire article (that is,
of the article) as compared with an
act engaging, for example, a headline plus the first sentence or a headline and
a limited number
of characters from the text of the article.
present purposes, we note that CA contends that the true qualitative character
of the extracts in issue in the evidence suggests
an act in relation to a
substantial part of the corresponding article and thus an exercise of the
reproduction and communication
right by acts undertaken by each applicant. CA
makes a broader point about these acts to the effect that even if an extract
engage an act in relation to a substantial part of the relevant
article, there is nevertheless a “use” of the works the
the article which needs to be taken into account in determining the
“value” of the works and the value of
applicants.
Two preliminary matters
this point, it is convenient to note two matters.
much of the material in evidence is either confidential or highly confidential
or enjoys a particular characterisation within a
hierarchy of confidentiality.
In these decision reasons, the Tribunal makes reference to evidence without
seeking to isolate whether
the references are confidential or not. Previously
in these proceedings, the Tribunal has given decision reasons which removed
confidential
references into a separate confidential schedule. That exercise is
a time consuming one in the course of writing. Having regard
to the scale of
the matter and the extensive evidence put on in the proceedings, it is simply
not possible to take that step in the
course of writing the decision reasons.
Accordingly, the decision reasons will be published to the principal solicitor
party who enjoys access to the highest level of confidentiality under
the prevailing arrangements. The principal solicitor can then
determine which
persons within the representative cohort for the client can properly be given
access to the reasons. In due course,
the decision reasons will be reviewed
with a view to either redacting particular information or removing it to a
confidential schedule.
The decision reasons will not be published on the
Tribunal’s website or the Federal Court’s website until the process
just described is undertaken.
set out below is a list of the witnesses who gave evidence in the proceedings
either by affidavit or orally or both and a reference
to the party who
“put on” or otherwise “relied” upon the evidence of the
relevant individual. The schedule
below identifies the relationship between the
witness and the party. Subject to later addressing a particular contention
by the applicants concerning the evidence given by Mr Andrew Ross
which we address separately, we are satisfied that all of the witnesses
evidence were doing the best they could to assist the Tribunal in the resolution
of the issues (and, for present purposes,
by referring to Mr Ross we do not
mean to convey that Mr Ross was actively seeking not to assist the
Tribunal, but rather a question
needs to be later addressed in relation to his
Previously the Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director of Isentia
Group Ltd (“Isentia Group”) (parent company of
Isentia Pty Ltd
(“Isentia”)) until May 2018. Currently employed as a consultant to
Isentia Group. He is a shareholder
in Isentia Group.
Chief Operations Officer, Isentia Group since February 2018.
Chief Commercial Officer, Isentia since November 2019.
Dr Christopher
Expert witness: Economist and Vice President at Charles River Associates.
Solicitor, Clayton Utz, legal representative for Isentia.
Director of Accounting and Financial Controller, Meltwater, since
1 April 2020.
Gafert-Stephan
Senior Director and Global GL Controller, Meltwater News International GmbH
since 1 January 2021.
Owner and director of AG Consulting Limited contracted to provide services
to Meltwater. Under this arrangement, Mr Grace also holds
the title within
Meltwater of Global Director of Solutions Engineering (since 1 April
Vice President, Sales and Marketing (Asia Pacific), Meltwater, since
February 2019.
Mr Christian
Vice President, Sales Operations and Enablement, Meltwater, globally since
August 2020.
Expert witness – accounting and valuation. Managing Director of
Sapere Research Group Limited. Mr Samuel is a Forensic Accountant
Solicitor, Baker McKenzie, legal representative for Meltwater.
Global Head of Product Marketing and Partnerships for the Meltwater Group
globally since February 2019.
Expert witness: Economist, Managing Director and Co‑Chair of the
Communications, Media and Internet Practice at NERA Economic
Consulting.
Director, Subscriptions and Growth, Nine Entertainment Co Pty Ltd, since
January 2019
Solicitor, MinterEllison, legal representative for CA
Mr Nicholas
Managing Director of the Australian, New South Wales and “Prestige
Titles”, News Pty Ltd (“News Corp Australia”),
(previously the Chief Executive Officer of
The Australian
Sales and Client Services Manager, NLA Media Access Limited, which is a
publisher services provider business registered in England
and Wales. It is
also a licensor of rights in relation to published content.
Expert witness: Forensic technologist and Principal at CYTER.
Mr Campbell
Group Executive, Corporate Affairs, Policy and Government Relations, News
Corp Australia.
Expert witness: Partner and Forensic Accountant, KordaMentha
Chief Executive Officer, CA, since August 2015.
Chief Executive Officer, Streem Pty Ltd (who gave an affidavit affirmed on
28 January 2021 filed on behalf of CA).
The publishers
to the publishers that own the copyright in the particular works, some of the
publishers have elected to establish a vehicle, CopyCo
(“CopyCo”) to represent their interests in relation to the licensing
of specified works in which they (or their
related entities) own the copyright.
CopyCo is described by CA as a “joint venture” entity. Its current
shareholders
are Fairfax Digital Pty Limited, News Corp Australia, Bauer Media
Pty Limited (now known as Are Media Pty Limited), Rural (or a Rural
entity) and
publishers have entered into agreements with CopyCo granting it a
non‑exclusive licence to sub‑licence specified
rights in certain of
their publications. Those publishers include Fairfax Media Limited, News Corp,
Rural, Bauer Media Pty Limited,
West Australian Newspapers Ltd, Elliott
Newspaper Group Pty Ltd, The Border Watch Pty Ltd and Torch Publishing Company
The scope of the non‑exclusive licence conferred by each
publisher on CopyCo is a function of the terms of each “Publisher
Agreement”. Aspects of these matters have been previously addressed by
the Tribunal:
Application by Isentia Pty Limited
[2020] ACopyT 2
(“July 2020 Tribunal decision”).
publisher that has conferred such a non‑exclusive licence on CopyCo is
referred to in the proceedings as a “CopyCo
Publisher”.
are, of course, many publishers that have not entered into a Publisher Agreement
with CopyCo. They are referred to as “non‑CopyCo
Publishers”
and their publications are described as “non‑CopyCo
Publications”. They consist of a large number
of smaller and independent
Australian publishers including, for example, the McPherson Media Group, Star
News Group and Private Media
which is the publisher of
. They include publishers of specific publications (such as
Australian Mining
Australian Photography
Fishing World
Australian Doctor
Medical Observer
). The non‑CopyCo
Publishers and Publications also include publishers that are members of CA
to CA, it describes itself relevantly for these proceedings, as a
non‑exclusive
of “certain reproduction and
communication rights with respect to works contained in:
(a) a printed edition of a newspaper,
magazine or similar
periodical; and (b) an electronic edition of a newspaper, website or
other electronic news service (other than
a journal)”. It offers
“voluntary licences” on both a “blanket” and a
“transactional”
basis to a range of users.
to CA’s relationship with CopyCo Publishers, CopyCo by an Agency Agreement
dated 20 March 2000 appointed CA to act as its
granting to classes of users, including media intelligence organisations
otherwise known as media monitoring
organisations (“MMOs”), (such as
Isentia and Meltwater), “sub‑licences” (falling within the
the primary grant by CopyCo to CA) to exercise particular exclusive
rights of CopyCo publishers.
describes its “primary role” with respect to CopyCo licensed content
as one of proactively suggesting potential licences,
negotiating licences within
its mandate and administering those licences. Mr Suckling (for CA)
describes CA’s “function”
as one by which CA
“develops” and “negotiates” copyright charging models
and licence terms for consideration
by CopyCo against the background of market
conditions and a function of calculating, collecting and distributing licence
to non‑CopyCo Publishers, CA says that it has been authorised by its
publisher “members”, “other rights
holders” (the large
number of smaller and independent Australian publishers mentioned earlier), the
publishers of “over
5,000 NLA titles” (including
The Financial
and others) and the publishers of “4,000
CFC titles” (including
grant licences to MMOs of the right to copy and communicate “over 17,000
websites, newspapers and magazines” (which
includes CopyCo material).
describes its “repertoire” for licensing as spanning:
... some of the most trusted sources of quality journalism in Australia as well
as more popular news sources including
The Sydney Morning Herald
Brisbane Times
The Daily Telegraph
The Herald Sun
Courier Mail
news.com.au
titles owned by Rural Press Limited; independent editions including
The Mandarin
; and [the 5,000 titles mentioned earlier including
dailymail.co.uk
The Guardian
, including the UK and Australian
editions of each].
from the role already described, CA is also a declared collecting society that
manages certain statutory licences under the
Act (such as educational and
government copying licences). Although CA’s role as a
collecting society is not engaged by these proceedings, it seems clear enough
that by reason of its role as a statutory collecting
society (and thus its
familiarity with the notion of “equitable remuneration”) and its
role (exercised as early as 1999/2000)
in negotiating and acting as a
of “certain reproduction and communication rights”
(as earlier described), CA would necessarily be astute to the statutory
(and the corresponding statutory constraint upon CA in proposing and negotiating
licences), that a person claiming to require
a licence from CA in relation to
those reproduction and communication rights enjoys a right to test whether
certain terms relating
to the “payment of charges” or the
“conditions” of such a licence put to that person are
unreasonable
, in the particular circumstances.
circumstance that the
of the rights the subject of the proposed
licence (a sub‑licence to be granted by CA as “licensor” under
is one or more of a bundle of
rights conferred on
the publisher copyright owner (with CA standing in the shoes of the copyright
owner within the limits of the
grant) does not mean that CA is
unconstrained
, as a statutory matter, in calling for or
“subjecting” a licence to terms and conditions that are, in the
relevant circumstances,
“unreasonable”.
The statutory provisions and aspects of the claims of the
source of the statutory constraint upon such a licensor in this regard is to be
of the Act.
for these proceedings,
provides that a person “who
claims” that they require a licence, and one of either
s 157(3)(a)
(b) is engaged, may “apply to the Tribunal”, and if the claim is
shown to be “well‑founded”, the
make an order under either of
s 157(6B)(a)
s 157(6B)(b)
of the Act.
“licence” contemplated by
is a licence to be granted
“by or on behalf of the owner or prospective owner of the copyright in a
work ... to do an act comprised
in the copyright”:
term “licensor” is a defined term under the Act and it is common
ground that CA is a licensor for the purposes of
recognising of
course that
is not concerned with a case to which a “licence
scheme” (as defined in
of the Act) applies and nor, as
mentioned, is CA engaged in its role as a statutory collecting society when
engaging with Isentia
and/or Meltwater or any other potential licensee of works
in respect of which it has a mandate from the copyright owner.
s 157(3)(a)
and (b), the first of the two alternatives (in circumstances
where a person claims that they require a licence), is that a licensor
to grant, or to
the grant of the
licence, and that in the circumstances it is unreasonable that the licence
should not be granted:
s 157(3)(a).
second limb of
is that a licensor proposes that the licence
be granted subject to the payment of charges, or to conditions,
that are unreasonable:
s 157(3)(b).
case propounded by each applicant in these proceedings is that they require a
licence to exercise the reproduction and communication
right in literary works
of the relevant publishers for the purpose of providing a “press
monitoring service” and an “online
monitoring service” (and,
having regard to earlier licences, they required such a licence from 1 July
2018). They say that,
in the case of
, the licence proposed by CA
to Isentia on 21 May 2018 contained terms relating to the payment of
charges, and non‑price conditions,
that are unreasonable. That licence as
so proposed, otherwise called the “CA Licence” (CA’s
Further Amended Statement of Points in Answer
, 15 December 2020 at
[46]) was attached to an email and letter both dated 21 May 2018 from
Mr Suckling (CA’s CEO) to Mr Croll
(Isentia’s CEO at the
relevant time).
Isentia contends that
s 157(3)(b)
is engaged. CA does not contend that the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction is not properly enlivened.
also proposed a licence subject to the payment of charges and particular
conditions. It contended that the terms and conditions
as proposed were
reasonable. It did so by the document annexed to its
Statement of Points in
Support of the Applicant’s Case
Statement of Points in Answer
filed on 1 October 2019, CA
confirmed that it would not grant a licence in the terms proposed by Isentia.
Isentia claims that
s 157(3)(a)
is thus also engaged. Isentia has amended
the terms and conditions of its proposed licence to take account of the findings
July 2020 Tribunal decision
. The terms of Isentia’s
proposed licence are now set out in “Isentia’s Proposed
Licence” annexed to Isentia’s
Second Further Amended Statement of
: see [132]‑[146] of that
document. Isentia contends that the terms are reasonable.
seeks an order under
s 157(6B)(b)
that it be granted a licence in the terms
proposed by it.
Alternatively,
it seeks an order specifying the “charges” and the
“conditions” the Tribunal considers reasonable
circumstances in relation to Isentia”.
, CA proposed to Meltwater on 18 May 2018, a licence in
the terms of the “CA Licence” by the document described as
Statement of Points in Answer
as to which,
see [33] of the document. Meltwater contends that the terms as to the payment
of charges (which it says increases the
fees payable by it by (redacted) are
unreasonable and so too are the non‑price conditions. Thus,
s 157(3)(b)
is said to be engaged. Meltwater also proposed a licence in
the same terms, in effect, as the licence proposed by Isentia. That
document is
an annexure to Meltwater’s
Further Amended Statement of Points in
Support of the Applicant’s Case
[49] and [49A]. It too says that the terms are reasonable.
Isentia and Meltwater contend that they have a well‑founded claim pursuant
s 157(3)(b)
because the 2018 CA Licence proposed to each of them (and
which CA continues to support) contains terms as to the payment of charges
non‑price conditions which are unreasonable. Alternatively, they both say
s 157(3)(a)
is made good and well‑founded.
is convenient to now set out the text of
and its relationship with
of the Act. The provisions are in these terms:
No licence scheme and licensor refuses or fails to grant reasonable
(3) A person who claims that he or she requires a licence in a case to which a
licence scheme does not apply (including a case where
a licence scheme has not
been formulated or is not in operation) and:
(a) that a licensor has refused or failed to grant the licence, or to procure
the grant of the licence, and that in the circumstances
it is unreasonable that
the licence should not be granted; or
(b) that a licensor proposes that the licence should be granted subject to the
payment of charges, or to conditions, that are unreasonable;
may apply to the Tribunal under this section.
Order dealing with application under subsection (2) or (3)
(6B) If the Tribunal is satisfied that the claim of an applicant under
subsection (2) or (3) is well‑founded, the Tribunal
must either:
(a) make an order specifying, in respect of the matters specified in the order,
the charges, if any, and the conditions, that the
Tribunal considers reasonable
in the circumstances in relation to the applicant; or
(b) order that the applicant be granted a licence in the terms proposed by the
applicant, the licensor concerned or another party
to the application.
The ACCC guidelines
is also convenient to note at this point
of the Act in relation to
the Tribunal’s obligation to have regard to guidelines issued by the
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
(the “ACCC”)
should a party to an application request the Tribunal to have regard to the
guidelines. The applicants
have made such a request.
Section 157A
these terms:
157A Tribunal must have regard to ACCC guidelines on request
(1) In making a decision on a reference or application under this Subdivision,
the Tribunal must, if requested by a party to the
reference or application, have
regard to relevant guidelines (if any) made by the [ACCC].
(2) To avoid doubt, subsection (1) does not prevent the Tribunal from
having regard to other relevant matters in making a decision
on a reference or
application under this Subdivision.
in these decision reasons, the Tribunal will address the ACCC guidelines and
their relevance for the purposes of these proceedings.
We propose to examine
the guidelines in a little detail as we understand that this is the first
proceeding before the Tribunal where
parties have requested the Tribunal to take
the guidelines into account.
Pty Ltd (“Streem”) is also a media intelligence organisation or
media monitoring organisation.
29 May 2018, Streem was also offered a licence by CA in terms reflecting
the “CA Licence” as described by Mr Forbes
Commercial Director) as the “CA Proposed Licence”). Mr Forbes
took the view that the CA Proposed Licence
contained unreasonable terms.
Mr Forbes sets out his criticism of the terms of CA’s Proposed
Licence at [112]‑[152]
of his affidavit affirmed on 26 June 2020.
That affidavit was filed in support of Streem’s application to the
Tribunal under
s 157(3)(b).
On 9 September 2019, Streem served on CA
a licence on terms and conditions proposed by it together with its
of Points in Support
of its case in the Tribunal. On 4 June 2020,
Streem was given leave to file an
Amended Statement of Points in Support
annexing an “Amended Proposed Licence” which is substantially in the
same terms as the licence proposed by Isentia.
s 157(3)(a)
said to have been engaged.
Some procedural matters
orders were made by the Tribunal that the Isentia, Meltwater and Streem
applications under
be heard together. It will be necessary to
examine later in these decision reasons the particular history of the licence
arrangements
(including the interim licence arrangements) between CA and Isentia
and also CA and Meltwater (and aspects of the terms of the interim
arrangements
between CA and Streem).
hearing of the three applications which engaged extensive evidence including
expert opinion evidence was set down for hearing
for three weeks commencing on
Monday, 12 October 2020. The proceeding as between Streem and CA settled
on the preceding Friday,
9 October 2020. The settlement of the Streem
proceeding had a profound effect upon the proceedings generally.
the morning of the second day of the hearing on Tuesday, 13 October 2020,
CA contended that the arrangements between CA and Streem
gave rise to a licence
agreement which represented terms and conditions agreed upon as between CA and a
media monitoring entity concerning
the grant of a non‑exclusive licence in
relation to articles published in a printed or electronic edition of a nominated
magazine or Masthead publication to undertake
as (redacted). We will return to the scope of the grant later in these reasons.
significance of CA and Streem having agreed to enter into the licence on
9 October 2020 as just described is that CA contended
before the Tribunal
on 12 October 2020 that the Streem licence is “very indicative”
of a directly comparable market transaction
to which the Tribunal ought to have
regard in deciding the questions arising in the present proceedings under
and (6B) of the Act. CA maintained that contention throughout
the proceeding.
Aspects of the Streem licence of 9 October 2020
is convenient to identify some aspects of the licence.
Licence Agreement entered into between CA and Streem, described as a “Full
Service Media Monitoring Licence” (the
“FSMM Licence”),
provides for the payment of a “Licence Fee” (cl 4;
Schedule 1, cl 1) as specified in Schedule
2. (redacted)
Three documents related to the Streem Licence of 9 October
to the FSMM Licence between CA and Streem, it became clear during the course of
opening submissions on 12 October and 13 October
2020 that entry into
that licence needed to be understood in the context of three other documents: a
Deed of Settlement
of the Streem proceedings dated 9 October 2020
(the “Settlement Deed”); a
dated 9 October
2020 given by News Corp Australia to Streem; and a
9 October 2020 given by Nine/Fairfax to Streem.
background to the licence arrangements between CA and Streem is this.
July 2017, CA and Streem entered into a
Press Monitoring and Online
Monitoring Licence
which expired on 30 June 2018. On 29 May 2018,
CA offered Streem the “CA Licence” (again described in CA’s
Press Monitoring and Online Monitoring Licence
mentioned earlier, Streem contended that terms of that licence as to the payment
of charges and other conditions of that licence
were unreasonable, leading to
Streem’s application to the Tribunal under
of the Act.
11 July 2018, the Tribunal made interim orders under
pending the final determination of Streem’s application. The interim
orders granted Streem an interim licence applying
the terms of the previous
agreement (which had expired on 30 June 2018) on a continuing interim
basis, commencing on 1 July 2018.
The interim orders contained, put
simply, an adjustment mechanism such that the terms of the licence as to the
payment of charges
as determined by final orders of the Tribunal would also
apply during the interim period from 1 July 2018 with the result that if
the final terms proved to be more favourable to CA than the prevailing interim
terms, Streem would pay CA an amount representing
the quantum of the difference,
and should the final terms prove to be more favourable to Streem than the
interim charges, CA would
pay Streem the difference.
The procedural consequences of CA and Streem having entered
into the Streem Licence, the Deed of Settlement and the Deed Polls
a result of CA’s proposition put to the Tribunal on Monday,
12 October 2020, that it would seek to rely on the FSMM Licence
struck with
Streem (contextualised by the Settlement Deed and the two Deed Polls all of the
same date) as significant evidence of
an immediately comparable transaction
reflecting a market price concerning participants in the same market in relation
to a licence
of the same subject matter, Isentia and Meltwater contended that
they would need to take instructions on many aspects of the arrangements
CA and Streem and would likely want to put on further evidence including further
expert evidence. Isentia and Meltwater
made those enquiries and confirmed that
they would wish to put on further evidence. CA contended that it would wish to
that evidence.
The 11 November 2020 CA proposed licences
the result, the hearing was necessarily adjourned at the request of Isentia and
Meltwater without objection from CA.
11 November 2020, CA filed a document described as:
Alternative licence
proposed by [CA] to Applicants
that document, CA put two separate proposals to Isentia and Meltwater for the
purposes of
of the Act. The two proposals are true
“alternatives” in the sense that CA maintains its contention that
the terms as
to the payment of charges and the non‑price conditions of the
(the subject of
s 157(3)(b)
contentions by each
applicant) are “not unreasonable”.
there are now three proposals put to the applicants.
to the 11 November 2020 proposals, the
first alternative
licence be granted to each applicant (which is open to acceptance by either
applicant independently of the other) on the
Pro Forma Licence
which, (redacted) (including a “Revenue Fee” for the purposes of
Schedule 2, cl 2 of 23% of “Revenue”) for
a term of two
years commencing on 1 October 2020. CA contended in the 11 November
2020 document that if such a licence were to be
granted in respect of that
period, it would resolve each application but leave unresolved questions
relating to the interim period
up to 1 October 2020. The Tribunal had also
made interim orders in the case of Isentia and Meltwater providing for an
mechanism along the lines mentioned earlier concerning the Streem
Interim Licence.
first proposal of 11 November 2020 is described in these proceedings as the
Alternative CA Licence
second alternative
of 11 November 2020 proposed that a licence be
granted to each applicant (again open to acceptance by either or both
independently
of the other) on the terms of the
Pro Forma Licence
(redacted) but with the Schedule 2, cl 2 Revenue Fee (redacted)
from 23% to (redacted) by operation of a proposed
Deed of Settlement
the relevant proceeding in each case and that the applicant enter into a
Pro Forma Deed of Settlement
of the relevant proceeding
any additional payment to be made in
relation to the interim licences in the period from the grant of those interim
licences to 1
October 2020 is to be either agreed between the parties or
determined by the Tribunal.
second alternative of 11 November 2020 is described in these proceedings as
Amended Alternative CA Licence
Amended Alternative CA Licence
is a proposal for the grant of a licence
on terms that the relevant proceeding be settled on the terms of a proposed deed
question held over.
to “assurances of the kind given (redacted) CA recites in the
11 November 2020 document that it “enjoys no guarantee
of a perpetual
right to licence this content” (para 6) and “such assurances
can only be offered voluntarily by the publishers”:
para 8, CA recites that having made enquiries of the Publishers, CA
“understands” that if Isentia or Meltwater
accepted the terms of
either of the two proposals of 11 November 2020, that is, the
Alternative CA Licence
Amended Alternative CA Licence
similar assurances were sought, then those assurances would be given by each
Publisher effective from 1 October 2020 on “substantially
terms” as the respective (redacted) “and subject to any necessary
adjustments to reflect individual supply arrangements”.
follows that the
Amended Alternative CA Licence
proposal comprises a
proposal to enter into a Pro Forma Deed of Settlement of the relevant proceeding
coupled with the grant of, in
effect, (redacted) as contemplated by the proposed
Settlement Deed (annexing the proposed Pro Forma FSMM Licence) giving effect to
(redacted) in the percentage of Revenue calculation of 23% to (redacted) and
taking into account CA’s “understanding”
“assurances” “similar” to those (redacted) by the third
party Publishers would be given, not on the
same terms, but
“substantially” on the same terms “subject to any necessary
adjustments to reflect individual supply
arrangements”. Those assurances,
as so put, would endure presumably for the two year term of the Pro Forma
Licence commencing
1 October 2020.
says that each of the two alternatives are made for the purposes of, and engaged
of the Act and the terms as to the payment of charges and
other non‑price conditions of each alternative are “not
unreasonable”.
and Meltwater contend that, in effect, CA has abandoned the “CA
Licence” proposal and now, in truth, only relies
Alternative
Amended Alternative CA Licence
. Each applicant
says that the
Amended Alternative CA Licence
is nothing more than a
settlement offer rather than a licence proposal. They say that the terms of the
to the extent that that licence remains a proposal at all are
unreasonable and so too are the price and non‑price terms of
each of the
two proposals of 11 November 2020.
applicants urge the Tribunal to grant a licence to each of them on the terms and
conditions proposed by each of them.
CA alternative licence proposals of 11 November 2020 are taken up in
Further Amended Statement of Points in Answer
application. CA says this at [55V] of that document:
... the Alternative CA Licence, the amended Alternative CA Licence, the Streem
Licence and the Streem Arrangements (as defined in
paragraph 1(b) of the
Comparison Document) are all comparable bargains. The Streem Licence and the
Streem Licence as amended by
the Streem Deed [of Settlement] represent
contemporaneous bargains struck between a willing buyer and a willing seller
render those bargains the most up to date and applicable evidence of
market value available to the Tribunal.
The written submissions
these proceedings, there are very many issues of fact and expert opinion in
contest going to the issues raised by
evidence has been filed on the various issues. The parties have filed extensive
written submissions supported by schedules
such as CA’s schedules:
Overview of Acts comprised in Copyright by Isentia
Meltwater’s Services
Overview of the Parties Positions on
Non‑Price Terms in the CA Licence and the Alternative CA Licence
Meltwater relies on two schedules cross‑referenced to its closing
submissions. The submissions and schedules are extensive,
before also taking
into account the folders of closing (and opening) tender bundles handed up in
support of the submissions.
from the primary submissions, the following additional material has been put to
the Tribunal:
(a) Isentia’s Reply Note and Corrections, 22 March 2021;
(b) Isentia’s Evidence References in relation to its closing submissions,
22 March 2021;
(c) Isentia’s Note in Reply to CA’s Oral Submissions, 1 April
(d) Supplementary CA Note in Reply to Isentia’s Note dated 1 April
2021 (as adopted by Meltwater on 7 April 2021), 29 April
(e) Isentia’s Note in Response to CA’s “Rejoinder
Submissions” of 29 April 2021, 21 May 2021;
(f) Meltwater’s Note in Reply to CA’s Note in Reply, 31 May 2021;
(g) A joint submission by the parties in relation to aspects of the affidavit of
Mr John Fairbairn dated 16 August 2021.
this background, we simply want to note one further preliminary matter. The
Tribunal only asked one thing of the parties
in these proceedings which was that
the submissions on the many contested questions should, in effect, exhibit a
degree of synthesis
and reduction (to the extent possible) so as to enable the
decision to be made and the decision reasons, explanatory of the decision,
written as efficiently as possible. However, we now move on to address the many
issues raised by the proceedings.
The Tribunal’s approach to determining the questions
to the method of deciding the questions in issue, the Tribunal has adopted the
following approach. The Tribunal has considered
the very extensive and detailed
written submissions, heavily footnoted, supported by comprehensive oral
submissions over three days
from the parties. The written submissions advance
the case sought to be made by each party and, point by counterpoint, extensively
seek to answer each contention put against the party by its opponent.
do not propose to develop a narrative of all of the detailed evidence we have
heard. Rather, we propose to provide reasons for
the decision we have reached
on the key topics in dispute. We will, of course, address the evidence going to
these topics and the
relevant context. We do not propose to address in these
decision reasons any evidence that has not been expressly relied upon by
in the course of the written or oral submissions. The key topics are designed
to be broad topics which capture the discussion
before us and the various points
of contention between the parties on so many fronts.
The key topics
key broad topics which we propose to address are these:
(1) The history of the licence arrangements between CA and Isentia and CA and
(2) In that context, the 2016 Licence between CA and Isentia, the circumstances
in which it came to be entered into, and its relevance.
(3) Aspects of the statutory question to be determined by the Tribunal under
of the Act.
(4) The elements of the ACCC guidelines and their application.
(5) The activities of and services offered by Isentia and Meltwater.
(6) The question of whether the Streem FSMM Licence in the context of the
arrangements between CA and Streem made on 9 October 2020
is a comparable
market bargain or market rate.
(7) The extent to which Dr Eisenach’s benchmarking exercise and
robustness check is of assistance to the Tribunal in deciding
the questions in
Alternative CA Licence
Amended Alterative CA
and aspects of the evidence of Dr Pleatsikas.
(9) The licence proposals of the Isentia and Meltwater.
(10) The evidence of Mr Samuel and the critique of aspects of that evidence
by Mr Ross.
(11) The non‑price conditions of the licences.
topics, of course, overlap but we will seek to address each topic and the
resolution of the issues raised by each topic in the
context of the statutory
questions to be determined by the Tribunal. There is nothing rigid about these
categories.
turning to each of the topics the following further important matters of fact
can be conveniently noted now.
The withdrawal of titles
23 January 2020, the solicitors for CA sent a letter to the solicitors for
Isentia, Meltwater and Streem, referring to
interim orders
interim licences
granted by the Tribunal on 23 May 2018,
11 July 2018 and 23 April 2019 in the Meltwater, Streem and Isentia
proceedings respectively,
advising that News Corp had notified CA that
The Weekend Australian
would no longer be publications
licensed by News Corp to CopyCo. Formal notification would follow once CopyCo
gave notice to CA under
the provisions of the Agency Agreement.
5 February 2020, formal notice was given by CA’s solicitors to
Isentia, Meltwater and Streem, that CopyCo had notified it
that as from
CA would cease to have the right to sub‑licence
The Australian
Weekend Australia
“for press clipping
or webscraping”. Thus, the source of the right to copy and communicate
“press clips”
of those titles or “webscrape” those
titles was no longer to be found in a licence (sub‑licence) from CA.
well, by the same letter, CA notified the three MMOs that CopyCo had notified it
that CA would cease from
to have the right to
sub‑licence the following titles of Nine/Fairfax for “press clipping
or webscraping”:
The Australian Financial Review
The Financial
Review Smart Investor
The Financial Review BOSS
The Australian
Financial Review Magazine
The Weekend Financial Review
the nominated News Corp and Nine Publishing titles were withdrawn from the
interim licences ordered by the Tribunal as from
20 March 2020 and
17 January 2021, respectively. (redacted) CA does not contest the
proposition that these titles are important
titles for a licensee seeking to
provide media monitoring services. (redacted)
In closing submissions,
notes that (redacted).
Meltwater’s submissions also note that (redacted)
Topic (1): The history of the licence arrangements
between CA and Isentia and CA and Meltwater
proposals put by CA in terms of the
to Isentia on 21 May
2018 and Meltwater on 18 May 2018 did not come out of thin air. There is a
history of licence arrangements between
CA and each applicant which provide
examples of transactions reflecting price and non‑price terms in relation
to related subject
matter as between the licensor and licensee which illustrate
agreements CA and each applicant have entered into over time. It is
to recognise these various methods of licensing between the same parties and,
where relevant, take them into account.
CA and Isentia
27 August 2001, CA and Isentia entered into an agreement described as:
Press Clipping Service Licence: Newspaper and Magazines: Copying &
Communication Rights
(the “2001 Isentia Licence”). (redacted).
The 2001 Isentia Licence provided for a payment of a licence fee of $1.00
article communicated
to the customer. It provided for annual increases in
the $1.00 rate to take account of increases in the Consumer Price Index
2001 Isentia Licence contained an acknowledgement that articles (works) of a
publisher might become “Excluded Works”
and thus removed from the
2001, CA and Isentia also entered into an agreement described as:
Clipping Service Licence Newspapers and Magazines Fax Transmission Licence
(the “2001 Isentia Fax Licence”). That licence provided for the
payment of a fee by Isentia to CA based on a
revenue percentage
(redacted) of the total amount invoiced by Isentia to its customers for
transmitting articles to customers by facsimile during
the previous quarter.
The end of the process of transmitting material by facsimile resulted in no
transmission and no further payment
of fees under that licence.
2016 Isentia Licence addresses not only “press monitoring” but also
“online monitoring”. The notion of
“scraping” or
“extracting” the works of publishers from electronic editions of
Mastheads and communicating
a portion of such works to a customer of Isentia was
the subject of a previous agreement in 2014 (the “2014
”). Under that licence, CA granted Isentia a
non‑exclusive licence to systematically copy or extract (that is,
works of publishers (“Licensed Works”) from
electronic editions of the “Mastheads” set out in Annexure A
the licence and to communicate a
of the scraped work to
Isentia’s customer together with a link to the publisher’s website
where the customer (if they
elected to engage with the link) could see the
entire article
displayed on the
publisher’s website
term of the 2014 Isentia Scraping Licence was 1 July 2014 to 30 June
2015. It provided for (redacted). Notwithstanding the term,
the agreement
continued to operate until 30 June 2016. It too contained an
“Excluded Works” provision.
clients of an MMO receiving press clippings as a result of Isentia’s
upstream licence with CA would want to internally
distribute and store the
clippings either by email or by means of an intranet. In order to do so, the
must also have a licence from CA to reproduce and communicate
the works (solely
the customer’s organisation). These
“downstream licences” were administered by Isentia on behalf of CA.
mentioned, in 2016 Isentia and CA entered into a new licence for the period
1 July 2016 to 30 June 2018, the
2016 Isentia Licence
necessary to examine the terms of the licence and the circumstances in which it
came to be concluded, for a number of reasons.
the licence represents a significant change to the charges for the grant of the
licensed rights the subject of that agreement compared
with the previously
prevailing charges between CA and Isentia. That matter is material as an
example of a licence between the parties
conferring a grant of reproduction and
communication rights over relevant subject matter relatively close in time to
the licence
CA proposed in 2018, the
. The 2016 Isentia
Licence was in place for two years to 30 June 2018.
the circumstances in which a significant change occurred to the basis for the
terms as to charges to be paid by Isentia for the
grant of a licence bear on the
question of the extent to which the exclusive rights subsisting in the works of
News Corp conferred
by the Act find expression in the market positions taken by
CA in the negotiations to obtain particular terms as to charges and,
ultimately,
the terms and conditions of the licence. Isentia and Meltwater contend that the
exclusive rights conferred by the Act
on News Corp (compounded, in effect, by
aggregation of those rights by the publishers acting together through CA) give
substantial degree of market power which was
unmoderated
in its dealings with Isentia in relation to the 2016 Isentia Licence. Isentia
and Meltwater contend that the terms as to charges
and non‑price terms of
the proposals put by CA to each of them are unreasonable and represent the
expression of the market
power of News Corp which was aggregated with the market
power of other CopyCo publishers.
Mr Suckling and Mr Gray gave evidence about the factors leading to the
position adopted by News Corp in CA’s negotiation of
the 2016 Isentia
Licence. In addition, Mr Suckling accepts that, put simply, the
negotiations did not represent CA’s finest
hour. (redacted). No attempt
was made to identify a
basis for the quantum of the fee demands
made of Isentia which might have enable Isentia to assess the
reasonableness
of the proposal.
examining the 2016 Isentia Licence, aspects of the historical arrangements
between CA and Meltwater ought to be noted.
CA and Meltwater
and Meltwater were parties to two licence agreements both of which expired on
30 November 2017. The first is an agreement described
. It commenced on 1 December 2014 and was amended on
7 October 2016. The second agreement is described as:
Press Clipping
Service Licence Newspapers and Magazines: Copying and Communication Rights
(the “Press Clipping Agreement”). It was made on 12 October
in its service offerings when displaying the results of online monitoring to a
customer, describes a
of an article as an “ingress”.
It represents the same thing as a portion as it consists of details of the
publication
in which the article appears (from which the extract is taken) and
includes a limited amount of text and a link to the article.
two licences expired on 30 November 2017. On 23 May 2018, the
Tribunal made interim orders granting Meltwater a licence pending
determination of the proceeding on the terms of those earlier licences.
The elements of the 2016 Isentia Licence
this licence, CA grants Isentia a licence to copy and communicate Licensed Works
for the purpose of providing a
Press Monitoring Service
and store those
works for up to 12 months in a “Secure Portal”.
licence authorises Isentia to make a “Scraped Copy” and to
communicate a Portion to its customers (including by making
that Portion
available for up to 12 months in a Secure Portal) for the purpose of providing
Online Monitoring Service
to its customers. This right includes the
right to communicate a Portion to a customer with a link to the work on the
relevant publisher’s
website which will allow the customer to view the
work including in circumstances where the work is behind a paywall and the
has not separately subscribed for access.
the agreement, Isentia is licensed to “create” a “searchable
archive” of Licensed Works for access by Isentia’s
customers of its
Press Monitoring Service, and access to Portions by customers of its Online
Monitoring Service, accessible in each
case for up to 12 months.
agreement licences Isentia to “use” the archive it has created to
“display” Licensed Works or “parts”
of such works to
customers of its Press Monitoring Service, and to display Portions to customers
of its Online Monitoring Service.
order for Isentia to obtain PDF or other digital files of Licensed Works from
publisher members of CopyCo, cl 3.2 makes plain that
Isentia would need to
“obtain appropriate access agreements with the relevant publishers”.
“Licensed Work” means an Edition (as defined) and any other work
which CA has been authorised to licence “other
than an Excluded
Work” and any work for which Isentia is licensed under another agreement
(including agreements directly with
publishers). A “Portion” means
an extract from a single article or item published in a Licensed Work comprising
of the headline, citation and up to the greater of 50 words or 255
characters or the first sentence from the article or item. A
Copy” means a “reproduction” of a work in digital or other
electronic machine‑readable form
obtained by “Scraping”. The
term “Scraping” means the “systematic copying or extraction of
works by means of any automated or manual process”.
to downstream licences, CA authorises Isentia to act as its agent in providing
Isentia’s customers with a licence to make
“downstream uses”
of “Licensed Works” and “Portions” copied and
communicated to them.
to the Licence Fees, the total annual
licence fee was increased
to (redacted) (excluding GST) made up of these components: a
Monitoring Fee
Online Monitoring Fee
Downstream Use
Press Monitoring Fee
(described as copying and communicating
“full text print and digital print editions for [the] Press Monitoring
the fees were these. For “press clips”, (redacted)
multiplied by the number of clips supplied by Isentia to its customers
(called the “variable fee clips”) if greater than the minimum number
of press clips. For services described
in the licence as the
“subscription services” in relation to press monitoring, the fee was
Online Monitoring
(described as copying and communicating
“portions from online editions for the Online Monitoring Service and
downstream use
by customers of content from online Editions”), a fee was
payable of (redacted) (the “Minimum Fee Online”) or (redacted)
“Online Monitoring Revenue” (the “Variable Fee Online”)
if greater than (redacted). The term “Online
Monitoring Revenue” is
defined in the licence to mean “per link revenue attributable to the
Online Monitoring Service”.
Recognising that the licence to scrape and
communicate a Portion includes the right to communicate that Portion with a link
work, the variable fee seems to be measured by the links communicated.
Downstream use
(defined to mean “use by Isentia’s
customers of content from print Editions”), the fee in relation to
customers was (redacted) (the “Minimum Fee Corporate
Downstream”), or an amount based on the application of CA’s
corporate rate card to Isentia’s customers (otherwise called the
“Variable Corporate Downstream Fee”) if greater
than the Minimum Fee
Corporate Downstream. For government customers, the fee was (redacted) (the
“Government Downstream Fee”)
plus any amount received from
government customers in excess (redacted) where such additional amount would not
form part of the Minimum
Total Annual Licence Fee: (redacted). The licence also
provides that if CA licences an Isentia customer
in respect of
downstream use and the customer elects not to enter into a downstream licence
with Isentia
, the so‑called Minimum Fee Corporate Downstream or the
so‑called Government Downstream Fee (whichever is applicable)
by the amount of the customer’s downstream use.
licence makes clear that if the sum of the components just described is greater
than (redacted) the greater amount is the Licence
Fee (plus the relevant excess,
as just described), and if the same or less, the Licence Fee is (redacted) (plus
the excess above
(redacted) concerning rate card government customers, as just
described).
2016 Isentia Licence is the agreement which prevailed between CA and Isentia
immediately before the
proposal was put to Isentia. The
circumstances in which the 2016 Isentia Licence came to be reached is a matter
in controversy in
these proceedings and we turn to that matter now.
Topic (2): The 2016 Isentia Licence and the circumstances in
which it came to be negotiated and entered into
June 2015, the former CEO of News Corp and Foxtel, Mr Kim Williams, became
Chair of CA. In August, Mr Suckling was appointed CEO
of CA having
formerly been the Director of Policy, Corporate Affairs and Community Relations
at News Corp. Mr McCaul was CA’s
Director of Commercial Licensing.
Isentia had other content licences including licences with: non‑CopyCo
publishers; broadcasters including substantially
all television and radio
broadcasters; licences with non‑CA publisher members of print and online
publications including
The Guardian
Australian Broadcasting
Corporation
and content licences with social media networks.
again notes and emphasises Mr Suckling’s oral evidence that
Mr McCaul’s response of 17 December 2015 reflected
the position
that CA had not itself undertaken any analysis of how that fee of approximately
(redacted) for News Corp Mastheads was
justified or supportable.
Isentia notes Mr Suckling’s evidence that he did not know how the
Nine/Fairfax number had been reached and nor did CA
undertake any analysis of
whether the figure was reasonable. (redacted)
(redacted).
Again, Isentia notes Mr Suckling’s evidence on this topic to the
effect that because he had been present at a CopyCo
Board meeting with
representatives of News Corp and Nine/Fairfax where discussion of the fact of
increases sought from Isentia had
occurred, to the best of his knowledge
Nine/Fairfax knew that News Corp wanted an increase in their licence fees
failing which News
Corp was prepared to remove their mandate for their
publications. However, Mr Suckling did not know whether Nine/Fairfax knew
quantum of the increase News Corp was seeking.
observes that Mr Croll’s account of the 2016 Isentia Licence
negotiations was not challenged in cross‑examination.
Isentia also
emphasises the evidence of Mr Croll as to the effect of the 2016 Isentia
Licence. His oral evidence was this:
We lost a number of clients to Meltwater over the next 18 months. The price
increases that we put into the market, there wasn’t
that price elasticity
in the market for clients to take on those increases. They hadn’t seen
the value that we presented to
them warranted a price increase. They looked for
other providers in the marketplace at the time. And our churn increased
significantly
over that period of time, so we had to roll back the price
increases. And it was a difficult competitive environment for us for
period of time.
notes that the evidence of Mr Hickey for Meltwater was that Isentia’s
2016 licence fee was a significant price increase
that caused them
“irreparable harm in the market because they ended up with a [CA]
agreement that was worse than ours”.
(redacted) Isentia contends that
while heightened competition from Meltwater and Streem and other factors played
a role in these
events, the circumstance that a (redacted) of Isentia’s
revenue from all sources is expended on the licence with CA as a copyright
it would be unrealistic and thus unreasonable not to recognise the burden
imposed upon Isentia by the CA licence fee and the
impact it has had upon
Isentia’s ability to operate a sustainable business.
Conclusions in relation to the negotiation of the 2016
Isentia Licence
2016 Isentia Licence does not assist the Tribunal in determining whether the
terms as to the payment of charges contained in the
CA Licence or the
Alternative CA Licence or the Amended Alternative CA Licence are reasonable.
The licence fee payable under the
2016 Isentia Licence to News Corp is the
expression of the market power News Corp enjoyed in
The Australian
The Weekend Australian
to (redacted) unconstrained by rivalry and
substitution possibilities. (redacted). Four other features of the chronology
above should be noted.
neither CA nor News Corp nor Nine Publishing explained the methodology it had
applied to derive the number it sought, in any way
that took account of any of
the propositions advanced by Mr Croll.
the negotiations with Isentia by CA on behalf of News Corp were conducted
against the background of the threat by News Corp to withdraw
access to the
titles from the current arrangements.
CA exercised no moderating voice of “reasonableness” in the
negotiations but simply passed on the raw demands of News
Corp and then Nine
Publishing.
CA exercised no voice of reason or reasonableness (redacted). Thus, a licence on
the terms demanded by News Corp and also Nine Publishing
had to be delivered.
Topic (3): Aspects of the statutory question to be determined
by the Tribunal under
scope of the statutory questions to be answered by the Tribunal begins and ends
with the statutory text construed in the context
of the Act taking into account
the state of the jurisprudence aiding in the construction of the text.
Section 157(3)
is set out earlier in these reasons at [41].
Section 157(3)(b)
engages the
question of whether the licence proposed by the licensor is subject to
“the payment of charges” or to “conditions”
“unreasonable”. Thus, the text is concerned with the relevant
subject matter (charges and/or conditions) and
whether the provisions are
reasonable or unreasonable.
Section 157(3)(a)
is concerned with a
refusal or failure to grant the licence or to procure
the grant of the licence, and that, in the circumstances, it is unreasonable
that the licence should not be granted.
Section 157(3)(a)
s 157(3)(b))
, expressly inquires whether “in the circumstances”
it is unreasonable that the claimed licence should not be granted.
Section 157(3)(b)
is concerned with whether the
or conditions (or both) are unreasonable (although the text of
s 157(3)(b)
does not use the phrase “in the circumstances”).
the Tribunal is satisfied that the claims of the applicants under either limb of
are “well‑founded”, the Tribunal
either make an order specifying the charges and the conditions the Tribunal
considers reasonable in the circumstances in relation
to each of Isentia and
(s 157(6B)(a))
or order that each applicant be granted a licence
in the terms proposed by, relevantly here, the applicant or the licensor:
s 157(6B)(b).
s 157(3)(b)
is concerned, the Tribunal must determine whether any
one or all of the three licences proposed by CA is or are subject to the payment
of charges or non‑price conditions that are unreasonable. The Tribunal
must also consider whether CA has refused or failed
to grant or to procure the
grant of the licence each applicant claims it requires and whether in the
circumstances it is unreasonable
that the licence should not be granted.
propose to consider the unreasonableness or otherwise of the impugned price and
non‑price provisions of each of the three
CA proposed licences as we are
required to do by
s 157(3)(b)
and also to consider whether it is
unreasonable that the licence proposed by each applicant should not be granted.
We propose to
address the evidence going to each of those questions in the
course of these decision reasons rather than sequentially. We note,
that Isentia and Meltwater contend that they rely
predominantly
s 157(3)(b)
and thus we will focus on the challenge to the reasonableness
of the terms as to the payment of charges and the non‑price terms,
also address the MMOs’ proposed licences in the circumstances prevailing
between CA and each applicant.
also note that although it was previously contended by CA that demonstrating a
“well‑founded” claim under limb
confined the scope of a possible order under
and so too a claim
made good under limb (b) confined the scope of a possible order under
subsection (6B), it is now common ground
that if the Tribunal is satisfied
that either ground of
is well‑founded, the Tribunal may, in
discharging the obligation under subsection (6B), make an order under
either subparagraph
(a) or (b) of subsection (6B) recognising that the
, should the relevant state of satisfaction prevail, make an
order under one of those subparagraphs.
The terms “unreasonable” and
“reasonable”
statutory text of
and (6B) uses the terms
“unreasonable” and “reasonable”. These terms are
concepts of broad familiar use
given content, however, in principle, by a number
of considerations: the context in which the parties find themselves; the
matter of the licence; the contended value attributed to rights granted
by the licence; the content, burden and benefit cast upon
the parties by the
proposed terms as to the payment of charges and the non‑price conditions;
factors drawn from the history
of previous dealings that may be relevant; and,
no doubt, other matters, all informing an evaluative judgment of what is or is
reasonable including the proper approach to such questions reflected in the
jurisprudence.
Background and role of market power
applicants emphasise that the
(1968) for the Act was
described by the then Attorney‑General introducing the Bill, the Hon Nigel
Bowen, as largely based on
the work of the
(“CLRC” or “Committee”) chaired by Sir John
Spicer. In the final CLRC Report, the Committee recommended that
although one
of the collecting societies,
, had proved to be a useful vehicle for
both copyright owners of music and music users, it nevertheless controlled such
a large amount
of music that it could “fairly be described” as
having “monopolistic control” over the public performance
works in Australia in which copyright subsisted. The Committee recognised a
concern “expressed in many quarters”
regarding “actual or
potential abuse of this monopolistic power”. In the second reading speech
for the Bill, the Attorney‑General
observed that in the musical field, the
“in a strong bargaining position” and “thus in a
position to dictate the terms” on which music may be performed
The Attorney also recognised that the new Act, with the establishment of the
role and jurisdiction of the Tribunal, would
have an effect upon
“substantial economic interests” built up under the existing law.
Attorney was thus recognising that the conferral of a bundle of exclusive rights
in relevant works coupled with the aggregation
of the rights owners (as to
music) for the exploitation of those rights
rise to substantial economic interests. Aggregation was a particularly relevant
matter in the case of musical works as it brought
together in
virtually all of the rights owners enjoying the rights in music capable of
public performance in Australia. The critical role of
aggregation was that it
extinguished any possibility of supply side substitution and brought together a
very wide group of rights
owners who would otherwise have been rivals. As a
result, a user seeking to exercise the public performance rights in preferred
music could not just go to other music rights owners and obtain a licence to
perform their works or a select number of musical works
of particular copyright
owners, should other particular copyright owners seek to extract terms thought
to be unreasonable.
circumstances where there is a narrow concentration of rights owners such as two
critical publishers of print and online news,
one or more of such entities may,
without aggregation, be in a position to exercise a significant degree of market
power derived
from the exclusive rights they enjoy in the relevant works. If a
licensee claims to require a licence to exercise rights in articles
published in
The Australian
, no other print or online publication is a substitute
because the demand is for content in articles published in
particular publication. The Parliament has conferred those exclusive rights on
owners so as to provide incentives to originate works
in which copyright is
capable of subsisting. However, the conferral and subsistence of those rights
in the context of the particular
supply side and demand side dynamics of the
transactions in which a person needs a licence and an owner has the capacity to
or simply subject the licence to particular charges and conditions as a
function of exclusivity, may give rise to charges and non‑price
(adopted by the licensor, CA), which are properly characterised as the
expression of market power. Such terms or conditions,
so expressed, may be
unreasonable.
almost goes without saying that it is not the function of the Tribunal to
determine, in a proxy or surrogate way, whether the terms
as to charges and
non‑price conditions of a proposed licence are the expression of a misuse
of market power in the sense of
analysing conduct against the background of, for
example, the statutory integers that would be engaged if the question was one of
a contended contravention of
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth). However, where copyright owners have elected to confer licence
rights in their works on CA (as a
, as defined), the question of
whether the terms as to the payment of charges or non‑price conditions are
“reasonable”
or “unreasonable” is the statutory rubric
by which the Tribunal is to form a view about the terms.
the terms as to the payment of charges or as to conditions are properly
characterised as the expression of the market power of one
or more copyright
owners effected through the agency of CA as a licensor for the purposes of
of the Act, such terms, so expressed, may be
“unreasonable” and the Tribunal is rightly engaged in examining that
The circumstance that the relevant terms as framed reflect the
emphatically
held conceptions of a copyright owner (through the vehicle
of CA), or one or more copyright owners, of a right to subject the licence
they own the copyright in the works, that circumstance
is not and cannot be
determinative
of what is reasonable or unreasonable
as to “the payment of charges” or as to “conditions” of
the licence.
The Tribunal must decide for itself what is
“reasonable” or “unreasonable” and in doing so, the
value of the rights is, obviously enough, an important matter in that
question. However, ownership of the copyright subsisting in
the works and thus
“exclusivity”, by itself, does not connote a right to render a
licence “subject to the payment
of charges, or to conditions, that are
unreasonable”.
Incremental market power
contends that the Tribunal is only concerned with any “incremental market
power” that CA may have by reason of the
aggregation of the rights of
multiple copyright holders.
the extent that CA is in a position, by reason of aggregation, to subject a
licence to the payment of charges or conditions that
are unreasonable where it
is said that those terms reflect an expression of CA’s market power
, the Tribunal must determine whether the impugned terms are
unreasonable by reason of the exercise of that market power: that is,
the claim is well‑founded. Terms so expressed may be unreasonable. They
are likely to be so in the absence of supply
side rivalry where a supplier can
act unconstrained by supply side substitution possibilities.
the extent that CA finds itself subjecting a licence to terms going to the
relevant subject matter dictated, for example, by a
CopyCo publisher that has
market power (such as News Corp and then Nine/Fairfax in the example of the 2016
Isentia Licence arrangements),
and the terms are the expression of
market power (with CA acting as licensor for the purposes of
statutory text is engaged and the Tribunal must decide whether the relevant
terms so expressed are “unreasonable”.
Again, they may be
unreasonable in the absence of supply side substitution possibilities.
it is perfectly consistent with the statutory text that where a copyright owner
engages CA to act in the capacity of a licensor
(in terms of the definition in
of the Act in respect of a licence on behalf of the owner or
prospective owner of the copyright in the relevant work), the Tribunal
called upon to determine whether a claim is well‑founded to the extent
that the relevant terms (charges and non‑price
conditions) of the licence
are unreasonable as the expression of the exercise of market power by CA acting
on behalf of the relevant
owner. The text of
subparagraph (6B) is not subject to the qualification of incrementalism in
the market power of the “licensor”.
How does the Tribunal go about deciding whether the relevant
terms are reasonable or unreasonable?
question then is how does the Tribunal go about deciding for itself whether the
terms as to the payment of charges or non‑price
conditions are
unreasonable? Generally, the Tribunal does so by examining whether there is a
“going rate” which places
a transactional “value” on
that which is being supplied under the licence. If not, a “going
rate”, there
might be a particular licence transaction in the same field
of rights which represents a contemporary comparable market bargain reflecting
transaction between a willing, but not anxious, licensor and a willing, but not
anxious, licensee. The Streem transaction is said
to be such a transaction.
Alternatively, the Tribunal might seek by reference to the evidence overall to
postulate a “notional
bargain”, not expressly determined by an
analogical particular transaction but a hypothetical or notional bargain which
the value a willing but not anxious licensor and a willing but not
anxious licensee would ascribe to the rights being licensed.
If all else fails,
an “exercise in judicial estimation” (better described as an
exercise in “judicial synthesis”)
is called in aid:
Applications by MCM Networking Pty Ltd
(1989) 25 IPR 597
MCM Networking
”), President Sheppard J, Members
A Horton and Professor S Ricketson at 611;
Reference by
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd
(2007) 73 IPR 162
[2007] ACopyT 1
”), Deputy President
Emmett J, Members Professor D Pearce and Dr R Smith, at [10]
Fundamentally,
the Tribunal by these techniques seeks to
the challenged
provisions of the licence in the way described above by reference to at least
some of those mechanisms but in the absence
of identifiable, relevantly
material, benchmarks, the Tribunal seeks to determine the reasonableness or
otherwise of the impugned
provisions by seeking to understand the
methodology
by which the licence fee (or other conditions) has (or have) been set,
determined or calculated as appears in the licence instrument.
PPCA/Foxtel 2016
Re Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd Under
Section 154(1)
(2016) 125 IPR 1
[2016] ACopyT 3
PPCA/Foxtel 2016
President Perram J and Member Professor McMillan), the Photographic
Performance Company of Australia Ltd (“PPCA”)
made a reference of a
licence scheme
to the Tribunal under
of the Act for
approval. The licence scheme concerned a scheme for the subscription television
industry for the use of copyright
sound recordings owned or controlled by the
persons or entities represented by PPCA. The scheme, if approved, was to
existing agreement between the parties made in 2004. In its proposed
terms, the licence scheme was to apply only to a subscription
provider supplying services exhibiting particular characteristics. As it
transpired, there was only one supplier exhibiting
those characteristics, Foxtel
Management Pty Limited (“Foxtel”). Under the proposed licence
scheme, PPCA sought to calculate
the fee for use of the sound recordings by
Foxtel based on Foxtel’s revenue rather than a payment calculated on a
subscriber per month” (“PSPM”) basis. PPCA is a
licensors and registered artists including record companies and Australian
recording artists (the owners or exclusive licensees
for Australia of the
cinematographic films) who have licensed
their rights to PPCA. PPCA’s
role involves granting licences authorising the exploitation of the sound
recordings and music
videos in its repertoire, including the public performance
and forms of communication including broadcast. As a collecting society
discharging that role, it receives and distributes licence fees for those uses
to its licensors and registered artists.
statutory jurisdiction exercised by the Tribunal in relation to such a reference
is one of considering the licence scheme referred
to it and making “such
order, confirming or varying the scheme or substituting for the scheme another
scheme proposed by one
of the parties, as the Tribunal considers reasonable in
the circumstances”:
the frame of reference is what is “reasonable in the circumstances”.
That frame of reference required the Tribunal
to consider the methodology
adopted in the licence scheme for the payment of charges based on Foxtel’s
revenue rather than
the PSPM. At [35], the Tribunal took the view that the
standard of what is “reasonable in the circumstances” required,
relation to the imposition of a pricing structure, that the remuneration be
“reasonable
or equitable
” [emphasis added]. That is not,
however, the language of the text. The Tribunal also said at [35] that in
relation to non‑price
terms, the question was whether “the term is
reasonable in the circumstances”.
to the approach to the assessment of “equitable remuneration”, the
Tribunal said this at [36]:
The approach of the Tribunal to the assessment of equitable remuneration in
cases such as the present is fourfold.
, if a market price is
available then that price will be imposed.
, if no direct market
price is available, then an attempt will be made to determine what bargain the
parties might have reached in
a hypothetical negotiation (on a willing but not
over anxious basis).
, if this is not possible then the Tribunal
will examine comparable transactions to see whether they can throw any light on
, if that cannot be done, the Tribunal will engage in a
process of judicial estimation which will involve a synthesis of the relevant
facts and circumstances into a rate which the Tribunal regards as reasonable or
equitable in the circumstances: see as to these
four matters,
Reference by
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd under
[2007] ACopyT 1
(2007) 73 IPR 162
; ACopyT 1.
[emphasis added]
principles properly apply in determining what is reasonable for the purposes of
of the Act. The above statement of principle from
PPCA/Foxtel
was affirmed in
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia
Limited v Copyright Tribunal of Australia
[2019] FCAFC 95
(2019) 270 FCR 645
‑[53], Besanko, Middleton and Burley JJ.
The reference to the decision in PPCA 2007
PPCA/Foxtel 2016
, the Tribunal relied upon the earlier observations
of the Tribunal in
where, at [10] and [11] the Tribunal
] In each reference under
, the tribunal must make a
value judgment
as to what it considers reasonable in the circumstances.
It is not usually possible to calculate mathematically the correct licence
in any particular case:
Australasian Performing Right Association Ltd v
Federation of Australian Radio Broadcasters Ltd
[1999] ACopyT 4
(1999) 46 IPR 20
[11] and [19] (
APRA v AFRB
). Where approval of a scheme would lead to a
substantial increase in fees, the increases can be phased in over a period of
rather than being introduced immediately. In the present case, the
society proposes that there be a phasing in of the increase claimed
] In determining whether a proposed scheme, and the licence fee
payable under it, are reasonable, a number of approaches might be
adopted. The
approaches include the following, which may overlap to a certain extent:
Market rate
: the rate actually being
charged for the same licence in the same market in similar circumstances.
Notional bargain rate
: the rate on which the tribunal considers the
parties would agree in a hypothetical negotiation, between a willing but not
licensor and a willing but not anxious licensee.
Comparable bargains
: bargains not in the same market but
sufficiently similar to such a notional bargain as to provide guidance to the
Judicial estimation
: the rate determined by the tribunal after
taking into account a range of matters such
previous agreements or negotiations
between the parties;
comparison with other jurisdictions;
comparison with rates set by other licensors, capacity to pay, value of the
interests of consumers;
administrative costs of a licensing body: see
Audio‑Visual
[2006] ACopyT 2
identifies the following range of factors that may need to be taken into account
in seeking to determine the reasonableness of
the proposed licence fee. We
accept that the identified factors reflect a field of factors which may need to
be taken into account
depending upon the circumstances of the case:
MCM Networking
General Tire and Rubber Co
v Firestone Tyre & Rubber Co Ltd
[1975] 1 WLR 819
General Tire v Firestone Tyre
Department of Education of New South Wales
(1985) 4 IPR 5
CAL v Education Department
WEA Records
Pty Ltd v Stereo FM Pty Ltd
(1983) 48 ALR 91.
The factors (other than
those already mentioned above) are these:
[(a) to (d)] are matters already mentioned drawn from the authorities.
(e) the nature and purpose of the business in question, and its place in or
relationship to the market;
(f) the nature and purpose of the copyright owners’ right to restrain the
communication and reproduction of works;
(g) whether the licence sought is exclusive or not (a non‑exclusive
licence leaves the door open to competition in the same
(h) the nature of the use of copyright material;
(i) the benefits of the use for the user, the copyright owner and the relevant
(j) [any] creative input of the licensee and the relative value of that
contribution to the value of the works;
(k) the value of neighbouring rights;
(l) costs of production;
(m) relevant legislative policy or provisions; and
(n) the public interest. ...
contends that in these proceedings the question of the public interest has
“particular resonance” as continuing access
to high quality
journalism from a number of news media publishing sources is said to be
essential to the democracy.
Reasonableness does not connote exactitude
evaluative judgment called for by
of the Act was put this way in
Re Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Ltd (under
(2016) 117 IPR 540
[2016] ACopyT 2
, Deputy President Jagot J and Member Dr R Smith (which is
also useful in relation to the Tribunal’s task under
Consistent with our reasoning below in respect of selection bias, we do not
consider that an approach that attempts to result in
exact equivalence
payments under this scheme between the two possible payment methods or with the
APRA – CRA Agreement is necessary or desirable.
Such an approach involves
unjustifiable and inappropriate assumption that the process in which we
are involved embodies values of accuracy, precision and exactitude
consider it counter‑productive to the interests of the parties to adopt
any suggestion to this effect. The fact is that,
of its nature, the task we
must perform leaves
a wide range within which any selected value
might be considered reasonable. If the parties and experts called by them do
the existence of this wide range then, as the course of this matter
shows, the capacity for
sensible debate
factors that might assist in selecting from the range, is undermined. A
commercial resolution
the context of this Tribunal then becomes
impossible. Instead, as occurred in this case, enormous expense is incurred in
to unearth every possible factor that might be relevant to value, no
matter how insignificant. Equally of concern, no doubt also
at great expense
and with good intentions, experts are permitted to create economic models which,
when all is said and done, merely
translate a series of
broad‑brush
evaluative assessments into a mathematical form
. Such an approach tends to
suggest that there is one answer to the problem, rather than a range of
reasonable outcomes based on
an evaluative assessment. In case it was suggested
to the contrary, we wish to say that we do not consider it inappropriate that
experts and parties expressly accept and adopt a range within which they believe
the value should fall. To the contrary, we think
that doing so would be
beneficial. It would work against the artifice involved in the expression of
singular values and the adverse
consequences of such artifice – namely,
the tendency to lose sight of the artifice and for a party to lock itself into a
point value from which no deviation may be contemplated.
[emphasis added]
Unaffordability and incapacity to pay
determining a reasonable licence fee, CA contends that if the rights the subject
of the licence have the value contended for by
CA, the circumstance that a
licensee finds a fee deriving from that value “unaffordable” is no
reason to reset the fee
on the footing that those who CA represents ought to, in
effect, subsidise the licensee. CA relies on the following statement of
principle from
at [200] which, in the context of [199], is
in the following terms:
] It is true that the proposed licence fee is
very substantially
than that presently charged by the society. However, in the absence
of assistance from the nightclub respondents, the economic and
consequences of the increase for nightclubs as a whole throughout Australia are
a matter of
pure speculation
. If any inference is to be drawn from the
state of the evidence, it is that evidence from the industry as a whole would
supported the assertions by the nightclub respondents that the proposed
licence fee would force large numbers of nightclubs to close.
] The assertion, of course, is not to the point.
If it be the
that the right to play recorded music has the value claimed by the
society, the fact that many nightclubs presently operating cannot
afford to pay
for that privilege is not a reason for them to be
whom the society represents. Ultimately, market forces will operate. That is
to say, one of the consequences of the introduction
of the proposed licence fee
may be to reduce significantly the number of nightclub operators who are
prepared to pay the fee for
the privilege of playing recorded music at their
venues. Inefficient operators who are required to pay a market price for all
services they require in order to conduct their businesses may be forced out
of business. That is the nature of a competitive market.
[emphasis added]
also relies upon an observation from
MCM Networking
to the effect
that in determining what would be a reasonable fee in the circumstances, the
licensee’s “capacity to pay”
was not a relevant consideration.
CA relies on the following passage at
... MCM tendered a schedule in confidence which showed its financial results for
the years it has been in operation. The purpose
of the schedule was to show us
that increasing rates of royalty could have a disastrous effect on the viability
of MCM. We accept
the evidence given about the figures by Mr McGinn and
the figures themselves. But the fact is that MCM is in business. It is
to pay reasonable rates for all goods and services which it needs. It
must pay a proper price or rent for premises, proper amounts
for salaries and
wages, appropriate amounts for equipment which it needs for its operations and
so on. We see no reason why it should
pay anything but a commercial rate for
the music which it requires, which, after all, is at the heart of its
operations. In other
words, we are firmly of the view that the record companies
ought not to have to carry MCM or, by receiving less than a fair rate
royalty, subsidise its operations. We are of the view that this is the approach
which parties bargaining in the way we have supposed
would approach the matter.
also relies on the Tribunal’s observation at [85] in
PPCA/Foxtel
that “generally speaking”
Foxtel’s capacity to pay was not relevant to the fixing of remuneration.
also notes that in
the Tribunal observed at [232] that in
determining a reasonable fee payable by an entity characterised as a public
instrumentality
or charity, such bodies were not entitled to a licence
“without paying a commercial price for the grant of it” and
is not the role of copyright owners to subsidise the activities of
however, recognises that in the case of
compulsory licences
, the Tribunal
has taken “capacity to pay” into account in determining a reasonable
Audio‑Visual Copyright Society Ltd v New South Wales Department of
School Education
[1997] ACopyT 1
University of Newcastle v
Audio‑Visual Society Ltd
[1999] ACopyT 2).
Where the question is
one of determining a price point which would be reached notionally between a
willing but not anxious licensor
and a willing but not anxious licensee (but
taking into account for the purpose of the hypothesis “the actual position
parties”), and being astute to
matters which
“either side or both sides would necessarily and relevantly take [into]
account when seeking agreement”
Re Phonographic Performance Company of
Australia Limited (under
114 IPR 316
[2015] ACopyT 3
PPCA Commercial
General Tire v Firestone Tyre
at 833), the Tribunal has recognised that “if no prospective
licensee can afford to pay the value claimed by the licensor so
otherwise useful activity cannot be carried out at all, it tends to suggest that
the rate claimed does not reflect a notional
bargain into which the parties
could have entered”:
PPCA Commercial
seems little doubt that where there is a readily identifiable “going
rate” or perhaps a readily “comparable
bargain” that takes
into account factors that bring that “relative concept” close to the
circumstance in which
the price setting task is to be undertaken, the
circumstance that the rate is “unaffordable” for a particular
is not going to be relevant to the reasonableness of the fee. Where,
however, the task falls outside the scope of determining a
fee in those settings
and engages a transaction where a licensor is seeking to reset the entire
framework of the licence, address
disruption due to loss of advertising revenue,
increase the licence fee substantially as a percentage of revenue and bring to
in the calculus of all that is reasonable all of the factors that have
been the subject of substantial evidence and lengthy submissions,
circumstance that the proposed reset may be substantially prejudicial at a
foundational level to the business undertaking of
each licensee, is plainly a
relevant matter. The statements of general principle about
“unaffordability” and “capacity
to pay” have diminished
relevance in
particular context, which is the relevant context in
the proceedings at hand.
One further aspect of PPCA/Foxtel 2016
other aspect of
PPCA/Foxtel 2016
can be noted here about the
difficulties presented in determining a so‑called “market
value” in circumstances where
there is no supply side rivalry and thus no
substitution possibilities. In the context of assessing “market value and
hypothetical bargain”, the Tribunal said this at [37]:
In the Tribunal’s opinion, there is no mechanism by which the market value
of the rights that PPCA proposes to licence may
be ascertained. This is
principally because there is
. In relation to sound recordings,
PPCA’s licensors include the three major record labels, Universal, Warner
and Sony, so that
practically possible
to use a sound recording
belonging to them without PPCA’s agreement. The Tribunal accepts that
PPCA occupies the
position of a monopolist
in the market for the
provision of such sound recordings. If it were not for the role of the
Tribunal, PPCA would be able to raise
its prices without suffering any adverse
competitive consequences.
[emphasis added]
A workably competitive market
determining whether the relevant provisions are reasonable, the Tribunal will
take into account whether a contended market rate
suffers from distortions
brought about by market power in the price setting mechanism. The applicants
contend that in determining
whether a contended “market rate” as to
charges (thus ascribing a market value to the rights) is reasonable, the rate
must be one prevailing in a “workably competitive market” and thus
rates nominated or set in circumstances where no supply
side substitution occurs
(characteristic of rivalry), are not likely to assist the Tribunal in deciding
whether the rate so arising
is “reasonable”.
The notion that the licence fee ought not be greater than a
possible award of damages
feature of determining whether the proposed licence fee is reasonable,
emphasised by the applicants (derived from authorities
dealing with
“equitable remuneration”), is the principle that the fee for
exercising rights comprised in the copyright
in the work should not be greater
than the amount a court would assess as damages for the relevant act, if the act
were an infringing
act: see the discussion in
WEA Records Pty Ltd v Stereo
(1983) 48 ALR 91
WEA Records
President Lockhart J, Members RNJ Purvis QC and
DK Malcolm QC, at 110;
CAL v Education Department
at 180‑183.
authorities recognise that a determination of equitable remuneration (or
analogically that which is reasonable) “could
not, of course, be greater
than the amount of damages for infringement of copyright” (
Education Department
at 181 adopting
WEA Records
at 110), and then
examine the various methods for making that assessment: sometimes, a loss of
profit analysis is available where
the “normal” profit (of a going
concern rights owner) can thus be determined; sometimes, where licensing is the
of the rights owner for monetising the rights, the prevailing royalty a
user would have had to pay to act under the usual licences
granted by the owner
determine the measure of damages; sometimes, when neither of those approaches
apply, an assessment of more general
considerations is necessary recognising
that the “ultimate process is one of judicial estimation of the available
indications”:
General Tire v Firestone Tyre and Rubber Co Ltd
[1975] 1 WLR 819
, Lord Wilberforce at 825‑826.
of these statements of principle have led in one form or other to the approach
reflected at [245] and [247] of these reasons.
These approaches are, in effect,
techniques for measuring the value to the owner of the rights exercised, or to
be exercised, by
the licensee.
feature of this approach that is apt to render the analysis of what is
“reasonable” one sided (although not necessarily
so as the relevant
factors are properly synthesised) is that the orthodox monetary remedies for
addressing an infringement of copyright
are, at the election of the rights
owner, damages or an account of the profits derived by the party exercising the
right (who would
otherwise be an infringer in the absence of a licence),
. However, when the statutory question is one of whether a proposed
licence fee recited in a proposed licence is reasonable or unreasonable
purposes of
of the Act, the scope of the notion of what is
reasonable would, as a matter of principle, take into account the value of the
to the licensor (through CA standing in the shoes of the relevant owner)
the value of the exercise of the rights to the party claiming to
require a licence. That bilateral consideration is the very point
of inquiring
into a price or fee which would represent something a willing but not anxious
licensor and a willing but not anxious
licensee would have agreed upon, as
willingness to bargain (without anxiety) would take into account assessments
made by each, of
the value to each, of the rights the subject of the licence.
The notion that “consumption” of the article is
the central matter
applicants contend that a reasonable licence fee protects the publisher’s
interest in receiving remuneration for the effort
that has gone into creating
newspaper articles which the publisher monetises principally through the sale of
advertising and subscriptions.
They say, in effect, that the act of
which reflects the publisher’s interest in
receiving remuneration is the
consumption
of an article (or, where
relevant, a substantial part of an article) by an
MMO’s customer
and thus the act of
communicating
the article (or, where relevant, a
substantial part) to the end customer is the act that ought to be remunerated by
means of a licence
fee and it is
focus which ought to determine
whether the fee is reasonable or not.
The criticism of a granular deconstruction of the
applicants’ services
applicants also contend that an analysis which is focused upon deconstructing to
a granular level each of the services offered
by an MMO in order to isolate each
and every technical process which may or may not result in copies of works
occurring (or copies
of a substantial part of a work occurring), made
“along the way” to undertaking the relevant act of
communication
to the end user
, misunderstands the substance of the licence relationship.
They contend that each granular act ought not to be separately nominated
remuneration but rather the remuneration ought to take account of communication
to the end customer as the dominant character
and focus of the fee which
appropriately accommodates other multiple steps along the path to communication
to the customer.
illustration of that principle is
(2013) 102 IPR 85
[2013] ACopyT 1
, Acting President Perram J
and Member C Riordan. In that case, the “LPI” Division of the
State Department of Finance
& Services supplied copies of registered survey
plans to persons either by directly providing a physical copy over the counter
or by providing them electronically from its online shop or by providing them
online to intermediaries described as information brokers.
The Tribunal found
that each time the LPI Division made an electronic sale of a survey plan
(particularly in the case of plans supplied
to information brokers),
“multiple acts of uploading, storage and sending” occurred.
However, the Tribunal in determining
the relevant rights fee observed that
to treat these [multiple acts] as other than
in substance
, are: that is the provision to a single user of
a copy of a plan” [emphasis added]: Tribunal at [67]. As to the actual
the Tribunal determined that the same rights fee ought to apply whether
the plan was supplied as a physical plan over the counter
or whether supplied
electronically (with the multiple acts previously described not ranking for
separate remuneration).
takes an entirely different view about this matter. It contends that the
correct approach must necessarily be to examine each
and every one of the
services offered by each applicant and subject those services to an analysis so
as to determine the extent to
which, in each service, each applicant exercises
one or more acts of reproduction or communication, and to then bear all of that
particular conduct engaging the rights of the owners in mind when deciding what
is a reasonable fee for undertaking all of those
The notion of “relevantly connected”
to percentages of revenue, the applicants say that an important consideration is
that the rate (apart from the percentage itself,
having regard to the evidence),
is applied to revenue
relevantly connected
with the extent of use of the
works, not just any or all sources of revenue of the applicant. The applicants
seek to illustrate that
point by reference to
PPCA Commercial
(Deputy President Jagot J and Member
Dr R Smith). In that decision, the Tribunal considered a proposed
licence scheme referred to
the Tribunal under
of the Act by PPCA.
The scheme was concerned with the grant of licences to radio broadcasters to use
sound recordings in simulcasts.
The evidence demonstrated that on average
approximately 10% of a radio station’s audience listened through a
simulcast. Commercial
Radio Australia Ltd (“CRA”) had also
developed its own licence scheme and that scheme was also referred to the
The Tribunal was asked to confirm PPCA’s proposed scheme which
involved the payment of fees on a “per stream basis”.
In the case
of CRA, it proposed alternative schemes for licensing the same rights on the
basis of a percentage of revenue with CRA
acting as the agent for radio
stations. At [84], the Tribunal accepted PPCA’s submission that it cannot
sensibly be disputed
that, all other factors being equal, “a rate that is
closely tied to the actual extent of use of the copyright subject matter
activity in question will be more reasonable and equitable than one that is
On the evidence
, however, the Tribunal did not accept that
all other factors were equal. The Tribunal also said this at [84]:
As discussed above, history and circumstance, which are important factors, weigh
against the imposition on radio stations of a requirement
that they be forced to
implement a new system for payment of fees for use of sound recordings in
simulcasts of their radio broadcasts
given that they are
already paying for
the use of the sound recordings in their broadcasts on a percentage of revenue
. We do not say this because of any concern about double counting. If
there is double counting (discussed below), because radio
stations pay on a
total gross revenue (which includes revenue derived from simulcasting), an
adjustment could be made to address
this issue. We say this because, unlike the
position in the US, there is a long history in Australia of radio stations
use of protected sound recordings in radio broadcasts on a percentage
of revenue basis and, irrespective of this matter, they will
continue to do so
for the foreseeable time.
[emphasis added]
applicants emphasise the following passages in the Tribunal’s
We accept that, unlike the position in the US when per stream rates
were adopted for the simulcasting of radio broadcasts, we do
not have the
freedom of a blank slate.
In circumstances where radio has paid for the use
of sound recordings in broadcasts on a percentage of revenue basis
continue to do so for the foreseeable future, to impose a scheme which requires
all radio stations to pay for the use of
sound recordings on a per stream basis,
in our view, would not be reasonable in the circumstances.
That said, if, as in the US, we were confronted with the need to
determine a reasonable scheme for payment for the use of sound recordings
simulcasts where there was no arrangement already in place for payment for use
of sound recordings in broadcasts, then the advantages
of a per stream approach
would be overwhelming and no consideration would need to be given to any role
for a percentage of revenue
[emphasis added]
into account all those historical factors, the Tribunal created incentives for a
fee to be paid on a volume‑based per
stream footing with radio stations
having the choice of paying a fee on a percentage of revenue basis. The schemes
were referred
Tribunal. In the subsequent proceedings, the Tribunal determined a
quite modest
percentage, according to the facts of the case, of 0.35% of gross revenue.
is convenient to address at this point, as a matter of principle, the
authorities relating to the calculation of a licence fee
as a percentage of
revenue (or in some cases as a percentage of expenditure).
enough, there is nothing unsound
in calculating a licence fee
(either entirely or in part) on the basis of a percentage of the revenue
derived from
an exercise of the relevant right subsisting in the
of the copyright in a literary work (a book) receives remuneration as a
percentage of the sale price of the book. The same approach
is evident where an
author (owner) of sheet music typically receives a percentage of sales of the
work, and the owner of the copyright
in a dramatic work typically receives a
percentage of the box office receipts (ticket sales) for the public performance
of the dramatic
work. The same principle can apply where a broadcaster
broadcasts the musical works of authors (represented by APRA) as a collecting
the example of a broadcaster illustrates how the question can become a little
more complicated because not all music publicly
broadcast remains protected by
multiplicity of services
some of which do not use any music at all and some use
a little as mere background. Should the percentage apply to all revenue (or
the case of the ABC all appropriations representing its operational
expenditures)? Should the rate be discounted to take account
of programs
(services) where no music is “used” (“talk” services,
parliamentary broadcasts etc) and those
services where very little use is made
of music (introducing programs, closing programs, some theming). Alternatively,
should revenue
(in the case of the ABC, expenditure appropriations) be adjusted
before applying the rate or should both approaches be adopted?
Reference by Australasian Performing Right Association Ltd
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
(1985) 5 IPR 449
Re APRA v ABC
”), President Sheppard J; Member
A Horton, some of these issues were addressed. The Tribunal accepted that
the formula that
had been in place of a lump sum did not reflect the true value
of the APRA licence; that more often than not the remuneration to
owners is calculated upon the revenue the licensee/user receives for “the
broadcast” or the “performance
of the works”; that the
adoption of a percentage of revenue (or expenditure) provides the parties with a
formula which will
continually reflect inflationary (or deflationary) trends;
that in determining or fixing the percentage, the Tribunal attempts as
reasonably possible, to suit the circumstances of the parties; that the
considerations in doing so include the nature and
extent of the licence, the
need for the ABC to pay a commercial price for the right conferred, the
circumstance that the commercial
percentage should be regarded as a ceiling and
the fact of the continuing trend within the broadcaster in programming to
“talk programs” and other non‑music programs, needed
to be taken into account: at 481‑482.
of the special character of the ABC and the circumstance that its revenue is a
function of parliamentary appropriations, the
percentage was more conveniently
applied to expenditure. As to that, the percentage was levied on
“operating costs only”
all expenditures
general factor taken into account was the circumstance that the ABC’s
costs included the cost of providing radio and
television programs to remote
parts of Australia. In the result, the Tribunal calculated the
“operational costs” of
the radio services and applied the percentage
to those costs (which excluded the costs of parliamentary broadcasts, the costs
orchestras and concerts, merchandising costs and other costs not related to
the broadcast of music), although the costs of news services
and sporting
services were not excluded from the calculation notwithstanding that these
services did not use the licensed musical
to television programming costs, those costs amounted to 40% of the total
operating costs incurred in providing television services.
The Tribunal
regarded the appropriate percentage for use of the works in television
broadcasts as 1.5%, and recognising that the
programming costs were 40% of total
costs, the appropriate rate was to be discounted to 0.9% (that is 60% of 1.5%).
The Tribunal
observed that “we think that the best way of making proper
allowance for this deduction [the removal of the programming costs]
is by taking
it into account in the percentage which is fixed rather than in any deduction
from the base upon which the percentage
is charged”.
mention the circumstances in
in a little detail simply as an
illustration of the considerations in seeking to fix a reasonable licence fee
where the licensee
provides a multiplicity of services and where the issue of
the fee payable to a copyright owner is not a simple linear one of work
sale, percentage of sale price.
examples are these.
WEA Records
the Tribunal was required to determine the fee
payable by the respondent for the right to broadcast published sound recordings
the applicants were WEA and six other record companies and
“PPCA”). The Tribunal concluded that there were obvious sound
practical reasons why the assessment of the relevant amount was best expressed
as a percentage of gross revenue: at 139. At that
time, the Act contained a
prohibition against the Tribunal requiring a commercial broadcaster to pay an
amount exceeding 1% of the
gross earnings of the broadcaster (a ceiling) in the
relevant period. The Act, however, did not require the amount (the fee) to
calculated by reference to a percentage of gross revenue. Nevertheless, the
Tribunal adopted that practical approach. The Act
contained provisions
concerned with the money value of gross earnings derived from broadcasting
relevant “matter”. The
rate applied was 0.45% having regard to
“all relevant matters”. Although, of course, every case turns on
its own considerations,
WEA Records usefully illustrates some of the balancing
factors. Two factors were said to be
interdependencies
substitution possibilities
to the first, the Tribunal found that “airplay” of sound recordings
was important to the record companies in promoting
sales of records, and the
supply of records and new releases was important to broadcasters in the conduct
of their business. The
Tribunal noted that the listening audience was related
to the capacity to sell advertising attracted by the audience. The Tribunal
concluded that in determining a fair and reasonable amount to be paid by the
broadcaster, “it would be wrong, in our view,
to ignore the benefit
accruing to record companies by increased sales of sound recordings” as
doing so “would confer
an additional benefit on the relevant record
company (the copyright owner) above that to which it is entitled from the
use of its property”: at 133; (described by the Tribunal as a
“double benefit”, also at 133). The Tribunal concluded
remuneration amount (the fee) “must be reduced on account of the
benefit” accruing to the record companies by
the broadcaster playing
protected sound recordings. The Tribunal recognised that the extent of the
reduction was “impossible
to quantify ... with any precision” and
was to be taken into account as part of the “overall complex of relevant
second factor considered by the Tribunal was the Tribunal’s acceptance as
a “realistic consequence” that airplay
acted as a substitute for the
purchase of records due to the over‑exposure on the radio of some sound
recordings. That factor
was also impossible to quantify in “precise
terms” but would be weighed in the balance: at 134.
of the recent authorities addressing this issue is
PPCA/Foxtel 2016
already mentioned, PPCA had proposed a licence scheme for the subscription
television industry for the use of sound recordings
owned or controlled by PPCA
represented entities. As it turned out, the proposed scheme only applied to
Foxtel. The licence granted
by PPCA was a “blanket licence”
covering all sound recordings in its “vast repertoire” of over
40,000 licensor
labels: at [7] and [8]. Previously, the licence fee had been
calculated on a “per subscriber per month” (“PSPM”)
basis. PPCA sought to change the pricing model to one based on revenues derived
from Foxtel’s subscription television business.
The Tribunal considered
that a monthly charge based on the
of subscribers no longer
reflected the revenues raised by Foxtel as there were “pay per view”
services (among others)
generating revenue from subscribers not included in the
PSPM calculation (at [126]) and a remuneration structure based on the number
subscribers rather than the amounts they were actually paying for the activities
undertaken did not reflect a “reasonable
and equitable” pricing
structure: at [126].
Tribunal accepted that the PSPM model left out of account “other revenue
streams” generated by Foxtel “
[among other things]
PPCA’s repertoire
but for which it currently pays nothing”
[emphasis added]. These other revenue streams included “expanded
advertising
revenues” and “ad hoc arrangements”: at
[126]. Also, the Tribunal accepted that the “revenue complexion”
Foxtel’s business “had been changing and may continue to
change” with the result that a revenue basis for licence
payments was
“far more likely to take account of the greater value that Foxtel can
derive over time from its PPCA licence”:
of these observations simply recognise that circumstances had changed such that
exercise of the licensed rights
was producing options for
subscribers resulting in revenue to Foxtel through the use of the works, not
brought to account in the
monthly charge per subscriber. However, as to
Foxtel’s revenue streams that did
involve the exercise of any
rights in sound recordings (such as “Foxtel Broadband”), Foxtel
contended that PPCA ought
not to share in any of its revenue from that service.
PPCA seemed to accept that proposition as the Tribunal noted that the definition
of “Gross Revenue” in the scheme document “only pick[ed]
up” revenue related to the subscription television
business. Other
revenue streams outside that service were not available to PPCA for
participation: at [128].
example of a service provided with little or no use of commercial sound
recordings (which was discussed by the Tribunal in
the context of a discussion
“pay per view boxing match”.
The Tribunal accepted “at least
as a matter of impression”, that such a service would be unlikely to
involve the use
of sound recordings and that there seemed to be something
“unfair about giving PPCA a cut of such revenue”. In the case
Foxtel, there were other pay per view services that did, however, engage a use
of the licensed works: at [131].
third example of activities which Foxtel contended ought to fall outside any
revenue share with PPCA was Foxtel’s “entrepreneurial
activities”. The contention was that PPCA ought not to share in the
revenue if it does not share in Foxtel’s
risk taking
. The Tribunal
thought that such an argument would have “greater purchase” if the
proposed fee was levied on “profits”:
no profits, no fee; at [132].
The Tribunal observed that the PSPM fee structure was itself a
“revenue‑based model”
in that the fee was calculated on
revenues from subscribers but failed to capture other forms of revenue
“related to Foxtel’s
subscription television business” and
under either the revenue model or the PSPM model, PPCA was not exposed to losses
of Foxtel: at [132]. The Tribunal then repeats the point previously
it had made that not to widen the revenue captured beyond that
raised from
subscribers would permit Foxtel to generate revenue “by using PPCA’s
sound recordings without compensation”:
is no suggestion in these observations of the Tribunal that
the revenue capture to include revenue from services
using the licensed
, not otherwise captured from subscribers on a PSPM basis, provides a
basis for capturing revenue from Foxtel’s “entrepreneurial
the licensed works
. In fact, the
examples discussed by the Tribunal suggest otherwise.
Some qualitative factors
further point the applicants make on this topic is that in determining a rate
that is “closely tied to the actual extent
of use of the copyright subject
matter in the activity in question”, the Tribunal will not simply take
into account a numerical
calculation of how many times a work is communicated or
reproduced but weigh in the assessment of the rate whether the
work is reproduced or whether only a
of a work is used in the
relevant activity, and if a part only, whether that part is a substantial part.
Ultimately,
on that basis, the Tribunal is required to decide what is the actual extent of
use; how does it arise; does it engage
a reproduction of the whole or a
substantial part; if not the whole (and a percentage of revenue fee is thought
to be reasonable),
what ought the rate be and how is it to be discounted (if at
all) if the
of use is a part not amounting to a use of a
substantial part
? Moreover, if the imperative (of reasonableness) is to
ensure that the rate is applied to revenue
from the “actual
extent” of the use of the works (perhaps otherwise understood as
“directly related revenue”),
to what extent is the rate to be
discounted (if at all) to recognise that revenue of a licensee includes revenue
from other sources
directly related to use of the works, and
especially where “bundling” occurs.
Statutory limits in the language of s 154(4) of the
further aspect of
PPCA 2015 Commercial Radio 1
presently noted.
Tribunal concluded that none of the licence schemes put to it were
“reasonable in the circumstances”. That conclusion
presented the
Tribunal with a difficulty in terms of the statutory language of s 154 of
the Act. Section 154(4) as mentioned earlier
conferred a power on the
Tribunal to make such order “
substituting
for the scheme another scheme proposed by one of
the parties, as the Tribunal considers reasonable in the circumstances”
added]. The limiting language of s 154(4) is the language of
“confirming”, “varying” and “substituting
scheme proposed by one of the parties”. The Tribunal took the view,
applying earlier authorities concerning s 154
of the Act, that it did not
have jurisdiction to “substitute a scheme of an entirely different
kind” in light of that
language and nor did it have the power to construct
and thus determine a scheme
it considered
would be reasonable in the
circumstances:
Commercial Radio 1
[35]‑[37] and [332]. That, however, is not the language of s 157(6B)
which provides that if the Tribunal is satisfied that
the claim of an applicant
under s 157(3) is well‑founded, the Tribunal must make one or other
of the orders contemplated by
s 157(6B)(a) or (b), and
subparagraph (a) confers power to make an order specifying, the
, if any, and the
the Tribunal
considers reasonable in the circumstances
in relation to the
. The scope of the power is conferred in more broad terms than
s 154(4) largely because s 157(3) and (6B) are concerned with an
licence with a particular claimant for
licence rather
than a “licence scheme” of more general application.
Some aspects of CA’s contentions: the relevant
licences for the purposes of the proceeding
contends that the Tribunal can “conveniently proceed” on the basis
that CA’s “principal offer” to
the applicants is the
Alternative CA Licence
read “in the context of”, which we
understand to mean, read “together with”, the Deed Polls offered by
Corp and Nine Publishing. However, the
abandoned. We have already noted the structural elements of the proposed
Alternative CA Licence
and, more particularly, the way in which the
Amended Alternative CA Licence
is put, related as it is, to the
Pro Forma Deed of Settlement
. Importantly, the fee proposal of the
Alternative CA Licence
is a revenue component of 23% of Revenue as
defined. The
Amended Alternative CA Licence
, within the matrix
within which it operates, is (redacted) of Revenue.
Digital engagement and decline in advertising
contends that the decline in “press clippings” generally as a result
of a decline in print publications coupled with
behavioural changes in the way
in which information is consumed in the community, has resulted in a
“massive expansion”
of online published content which is the
“valuable content” of the publishers that the MMOs choose to monitor
and communicate
to their customers. CA says that notwithstanding the withdrawal
of titles described earlier (at [109] to [122]), CA continues to
“major masthead” news publications and a large number of
“high‑quality non‑masthead”
publications. CA also
contends that a credible factor going to the reasonableness of the 23% of
Revenue fee (redacted) is the circumstance
that a decline in print publishing
and a corresponding movement of advertisers away from print publishing has meant
that revenue
which previously, in effect, cross‑subsidised the cost of
production of news content has fallen away such that publishers must
raise their
prices for content in order to receive “full value” for the content
and to “cover the high fixed costs
of journalism and publication”.
CA contends that the “value” of the content is necessarily
“affected by”
the prices at which publishers, as sellers, are
willing to supply their content with the result that as “fundamental
have occurred in the publishing industry, those prices have gone
factor in the methodology for determining the “value” of the content
undoubtedly takes into account the price for
which a willing but not anxious
publisher is willing to licence its content but the determination of value also
takes into account
the price a willing but not anxious licensee will pay for
that content. The applicants say that disruption to orthodox business
the publishers requires flexibility and response but it is not
“reasonable” for the purposes of s 157(3) for
a publisher to
set a licence fee for particular uses of content that seeks to recoup in some
significant measure lost advertising
revenue, because that measure of that loss
is not a corresponding reasonable measure of the
of that content in
the business circumstances of each applicant.
The centrality of ingestion
contests that notion and says that each applicant engages in an act of ingestion
of online publisher content which involves copying
the full text of works from
the websites of publishers and storing those copies on their own databases
(servers). CA says that the
act of ingestion engages an act of
reproduction
which is “critical” to the ability of each
applicant to monitor the online content, prepare extracts for communication
customers and supply those extracts (portions) to customers. CA contends that
there are “numerous and constant acts of
copying” involved in the
step of ingestion, and the “centrality of ingestion” to the services
provided by the applicants
to their customers is an important element in valuing
“accurately and on a fair commercial basis” the rights being
by Isentia and Meltwater. (redacted). The position is a little
different for Isentia. We will come to that matter later in the
discussion of
that topic.
to a licence fee set by reference to a percentage of the revenue of each
applicant, CA contends that, in principle, there is
unreasonable
of revenue is appropriate (reasonable)
in the case of each of its proposed
licences because the underlying content and the rights licensed to each
applicant is central
to each of the services each applicant provides and neither
applicant could provide their media monitoring services to customers
licence to copy and communicate copyright works through the activities of press
clipping, ingestion and the supply of portions.
CA says that the value of the
licence must necessarily reflect those circumstances. CA says that the services
such as the “analytics
services” of each MMO “always
use” copied content and often the provision of the services involves
or other acts comprised in the copyright”. More
fundamentally, CA says that the analytics services are “only made
initial act
of copying (ingestion) which creates
the media database that MMOs “then use” to provide such services.
CA says that
it is not seeking a share of revenue “unrelated to the rights
it is licensing”. Rather, it says that the rights licensed
by CA are the
“essential foundation of, and used directly in” various services
supplied by each applicant beyond basic
media monitoring, including the
analytics services of each applicant. CA says that those services
be provided without the
anterior actions
of each applicant in
copying copyright content by ingestion and when attributing value to the licence
is undertaken, the analysis
must necessarily account for the value it enables
each applicant to realise which includes the revenues they earn from their
services. CA also contends that a fee based on a percentage of
revenue reflects the “mutuality of interest” of publishers
in the production and distribution of high quality content reflecting the
“interdependencies between publishers and
needs to be kept in mind that the transaction in question is a
exercise rights comprised in the copyright on terms as to charges and conditions
, not the determination of the commercial terms of a
joint venture
says that to the extent that either applicant derives revenue from services that
do not engage the exercise of a reproduction or
communication right, each
applicant has the “capacity” to “unbundle” the services
detaching those services
that “depend” on the works from those that
uses other emphatic language to describe the “centrality of
ingestion” to the services of each applicant: for example,
the copyright
content is the “bedrock” for “all the MMOs “activities
and output”; “all MMOs activities”
use the initial copy
ingested and reproduced; the value of the MMO’s business derives from
access to the “universe of
content”; the MMO generate revenue from
their “pervasive and extensive use of copyright content”. These
propositions
and the factual contention they convey give rise to CA’s
following proposition. CA contends that “
[a]ll purposes licensed
uses undertaken
with respect to the content by the MMOs,
acts comprised in the copyright
, are relevant to assessing the
quantum of the licence fees” [emphasis added].
proposition is a “but for” test to be applied in determining a
reasonable licence fee. In other words, “but
for” the initial act
of ingestion, neither applicant would be able to provide any of its services
that engage with the licensed
works (whether in analysing trends, writing
commentaries or writing specific reports for customers about topics of currency
media about them or otherwise), and even though
of the content do not involve
comprised in the copyright of the
publisher, it is nevertheless commercially reasonable that the licence ought to
provide the publisher
with a fee of either 23% or (redacted) of the
“Revenue” derived by each applicant from all sources including those
(subject to a licensee unbundling the services if it is able to do so).
That is said to be so, and thus reasonable, even though the
publisher has not
contributed to the actual value‑added component of the MMO in writing the
analysis, isolating the trends,
writing the report or undertaking the
interpretive tasks sought by the customer.
will put these contentions in context when referring to the services offered by
each applicant as one of the topics to be addressed
in these decision reasons.
We have already mentioned briefly that evidence of the Publishers and
particularly the evidence of News
Corp concerning the effect of disruption to
the historical business model in which advertisers contributed significantly to
Now, much of that advertising revenue is directed to the major
platforms (Google and Facebook). (redacted) We note the revenue
recent years and the period of the transition. We also note the challenge that
this has presented. (redacted) We have
also noted the challenges presented by
the use of news alerts and news services by Facebook and Google. We also note
the steps taken
by the Commonwealth government to seek to encourage each major
platform to contribute reliable annual revenue to the Publishers for
their content in those alerts and other news services. Later in these reasons,
we note the recent agreements made with
the platforms and the annual revenue
contributions over the term of those arrangements. We will not set out that
data here. We
address it later.
Topic (4): The elements of the ACCC guidelines and aspects of
the issues in the present proceeding
ACCC has developed guidelines to assist in the determination of reasonable
licences and licence
schemes before the Tribunal and to assist users and collecting societies in
determining reasonable and equitable
remuneration. The guidelines recognise
that arrangements might exist where copyright owners have come together to be
represented
collectively in circumstances where they might otherwise have been
in competition
. The guidelines also recognise that the Tribunal is
“intended to act as a constraint on the exercise of market power”
such circumstances by making decisions with respect to the reasonable terms and
conditions of copyright licences, including licence
fees. The focus of the
pricing principles in the guidelines is upon constructing a hypothetical bargain
between a licensor and a
licensee “with equal bargaining power” as a
“practical means” of determining a price that reasonably reflects
equal bargaining position having regard to the current regulatory environment
and the practices of the Tribunal.
of the guidelines addresses the economics of copyright and copyright licensing.
of the guidelines addresses “pricing principles”.
the Tribunal has taken the entirety of the guidelines into account, we
particularly note these matters drawn from the guidelines
(together with
comments in relation to aspects of these proceedings).
(1) Generally, the best way to ensure that the resources of an economy are put
to their most efficient use is through open competitive
markets that maximise
welfare. However, markets may fail to promote efficiency and welfare. Reducing
the financial incentives for
the creation of new works is not a desirable
outcome where, for example, in unregulated markets the non‑exclusionary
of the good might reduce the financial incentives to a point where
creators and producers cannot expect to secure an adequate return
investments: cl 2.1.
(2) However, copyright can go some way towards addressing a “market
failure” of this kind by conferring a bundle of economic
(and legal)
rights in the works of authors (the copyright material) which enables owners to
exclude potential users and enhances
the creator’s ability to receive
remuneration and thus enhances the incentives for the production of content.
The copyright
system involves finding the right balance between the benefits of
enhancing incentives for the creation of copyright material with
the cost of
restricting access to that material: cl 2.1.
(3) Even though the ownership of the copyright in particular material confers a
power to exclude others, much of the material in
which copyright subsists will
be of small value and thus the transaction costs of administering the rights,
negotiating licences
and taking enforcement action will be “high”.
High transaction costs can cause market failure if they deter otherwise
beneficial transactions. One solution to high transaction costs in licensing is
to collectively manage licensing arrangements through
collecting societies:
(4) So far as these applications to the Tribunal are concerned, CA, apart from
representing a number of the CopyCo publishers, represents
many non‑CopyCo
publishers (more than 3,500 publishers and over 17,000 publications which it is
authorised to licence). The
transaction costs of MMOs dealing individually with
those content owners, and reciprocally those content owners seeking to deal
individually
with MMOs would rapidly exhaust the value of the transaction for
each side. However, News Corp, Nine Publishing and Seven West Media
examples of corporations not so constrained by transaction costs in the choices
those publishers are in a position to control and determine whether
or not they
deal directly with the MMOs or whether they choose to licence some only of their
works directly (such as the premium
or high reputation or high demand titles as
described earlier under the heading “Withdrawal of titles”), and
other titles through CA. However, there are no orthodox substitution
possibilities available to the MMOs in the sense of an opportunity
the publishers as a rivalrous constraint on the conduct of CA should CA seek to
extract an unreasonable rent for the grant
of the rights. As the negotiations
for the 2016 Isentia Licence reveal, CA acted as an intermediary to reinforce
the monopoly rent
seeking of the publishers rather than each acting as a
constraint upon the other. Publishers such as News Corp and Nine Publishing
elect, and have elected, to supply independently of CA to the MMOs but those
dealings are not a function of choices made by the
MMOs as an exercise in
substitutability.
(5) Returning to the guidelines, the ACCC recognises that although the solution
to high transaction costs can be found in collective
licensing arrangements, the
benefits of enabling copyright owners to act as one, through a collecting
society, must be measured against
the costs associated with the creation and
possible exercise of market power: cl 3.1.1. The guidelines note that by
competitors to act collectively, licence fees will potentially
be higher, and other licensing terms and conditions more restrictive,
be the case if competition between copyright owners was retained”:
cl 3.1.1. The ACCC notes in the guidelines
that in the current copyright
regulatory framework, the competitive constraint offered by “direct
licensing” on the prices
and terms set by collecting societies in relation
to “blanket licences” is likely to be limited by: “existing
collective licensing arrangements” (which may prevent or limit direct
licensing); and, the absence of effective mechanisms
for “reducing blanket
licence fees to take account of any direct dealing”.
(6) These observations are focused upon many of the well‑known collective
licensing arrangements (such as those with APRA,
PPCA and others). However,
they also apply to other collective arrangements by which the owners of literary
works have come together
and conferred power whether through CopyCo or otherwise
upon a collecting society (CA) to grant sub‑licences in respect of
rights (and in the case of CA as earlier noted, there are many publishers and
17,000 publications). The guidelines suggest
that the feasibility of direct
licensing acting as a competitive constraint on the conduct of a collecting
society is to be assessed
essentially in three broad circumstances:
(i) licensees with predictable rights usage requirements who, if
direct licensing is
available and can be accessed efficiently, would only use
direct licensing and not acquire a blanket licence; (ii) licensees
semi‑predictable rights usage requirements who may use direct
licensing in certain circumstances; and (iii) users who have
unpredictable usage requirements and are unlikely to utilise a direct licensing
mechanism. As to those categories, the guidelines
contain this observation:
direct licensing arrangements are available they are a particular
constraint on collecting societies in relation to the prices and
terms of their
licences offered to the first category of users, as the direct licence will be a
close substitute for a blanket licence
(provided there is a sufficiently large
number of users within this category). However, direct licensing in relation to
category of users would only be a direct competitive constraint on
the prices and terms of licences set by collecting societies
if the price
paid by a user for a blanket licence was
to take account of
any copyright material that the user accessed through direct licensing
the other hand, direct licensing would generally not act as a significant
constraint on the price and terms of licences set
by collecting societies in
relation to the third category of users except in limited circumstances.
The ACCC considers that where direct licensing is used and a blanket licence is
still required for the remainder of the licensee’s
usage, that
user’s blanket licence fee should be reduced. ...
[emphasis added]
(7) Inherent in this discussion is the notion that if a person requires a
licence to exercise, for example, the reproduction right
or the public
performance right in a work forming part of a group of works collectively
licensed and the fee for the licence is $X,
the fee ought to be reduced if the
user has secured a direct licence to particular works which would otherwise have
been licensed
collectively. In other words, in the context of the blanket
licence as discussed in the guidelines, there ought to be
adjustments
the licence fee. As to the adjustment to a blanket licence fee, the guidelines
contain this observation (at 3.2.2):
Even if appropriate opt‑out or license back arrangements are in place,
incentives to undertake direct licensing may be dampened
if there is not an
effective mechanism for adjusting a blanket licence fee to take into account the
value of copyright material that
is licensed directly. If such a mechanism is
absent, users who engage in direct licensing, yet also need to obtain a blanket
for the remainder of their usage requirements, may effectively be paying
twice for the use of some material.
In order to ensure that direct licensing is promoted where it is efficient and
feasible, the ACCC considers that blanket licence
fees should be reduced to
reflect the licensee’s lower willingness to pay for the remaining
repertoire that excludes the works
that have been directly licensed. ...
(8) In the present proceeding, the applicants contend that one vice of the CA
proposal for a percentage of revenue fee structure
is that the licence fee does
not adjust when works in the CA repertoire are also the subject of a direct
licence. The applicants
also observe that the example of the negotiation of the
2016 Isentia Licence demonstrates that where two large publishers control
most significant part of the entire CA repertoire, the opportunity available to
the publishers to withdraw from the CA licensing
arrangements and revert to
direct licensing exerted
pressure on the calculation of the CA
licence fee. The applicants contend that when News Corp made it clear that it
would withdraw
particular titles from the CA arrangements unless the increase in
licence fees was secured, CA demanded a large increase in the entire
in order to ensure that distributions to News Corp from the licence fees would
accommodate the demands of News Corp for
an increase in distributions to it. In
the result, Isentia accepted the licence as put to it. After the withdrawal of
the particular
titles described earlier, Isentia is confronting a demand for
licence fees reflected in the three proposals (redacted)
(9) As to Part B which is concerned with pricing principles, cl 4.1 of
the guidelines makes the general point that the focus of pricing
ought to be “countering market power”. At cl 4.2.1, the
guidelines contain this observation:
The ACCC notes that the Copyright Tribunal has considered a range of approaches
in making pricing determinations, including benchmarking,
construction of a
hypothetical bargain and judicial estimation (which takes into account a range
of factors).
Of these broad approaches, the ACCC recommends the following methods as
appropriate for pricing copyright materials, if feasible
in the circumstances of
the particular case:
benchmarking
– using appropriate
rates (which should preferably, as far as possible, be grounded in a more
competitive market) as a source
of information for determining remuneration
construction
– constructing a hypothetical bargain between a
willing, but not anxious, licensor and a willing, but not anxious, licensee
applying an economic model to construct an appropriate licence fee
Where possible, both approaches should be used as a cross‑check against
one another. If there are substantial differences
between prices determined
using the two approaches, then further investigation may be required.
[emphasis added]
(10) As to benchmarking, the guidelines observe that appropriate benchmarks may
include the existing rate for the licensing of the
by previous negotiations or by previous determinations; rates or tariffs paid
for use of the same copyright
material in different uses; rates or tariffs paid
for similar copyright material in other jurisdictions; and/or rates or tariffs
paid in comparable, but more competitive markets: cl 5.1. The guidelines
observe that in the proceedings regarding the licence
fee for nightclubs, the
Tribunal considered the market rate to be “the rate actually being charged
for the same licence in
the same market in similar circumstances” and the
Tribunal regards that conception as what it describes as the “existing
rate”. As to that rate, in the context of benchmarking, the guidelines
make this observation and contain this note of caution
Existing rates
for the particular copyright material in question
be an appropriate benchmark for determining reasonable remuneration.
However, existing rates will be
less appropriate
if they reflect the
exercise of market power
. Market power may affect rates
those rates are determined by arms‑length negotiation between the
collecting society and licensee(s).
One approach to considering the appropriateness of existing rates as a benchmark
would be to consider the
of bargaining power between the parties
who negotiated the existing rates. If this is
roughly equal
existing market rates determined by negotiation between the parties are less
likely to reflect the exercise of market power
by either party and may therefore
be an appropriate benchmark.
Generally speaking
, if there is evidence
that bargaining power is unequal, then existing market rates are more likely to
reflect the exercise of market
power by one of the negotiating parties and may
not be an appropriate benchmark for assessing the reasonableness of proposed
[emphasis added]
(11) Having expressed that view, the guidelines identify the following factors
at cl 5.2 that might be relevant when considering
the use of existing rates
as a benchmark for determining “reasonable remuneration”:
Changes in demand and/or supply conditions
since the previous rates were determined. If demand and/or supply conditions
have changed,
then information about those changes should be combined with
knowledge of the existing rate to make a new estimate.
On the supply side, consideration should be given to changes in the
composition of the collecting society’s repertoire, the
composition and
magnitude of the collecting society’s administrative costs and the
collecting society’s arrangements
with copyright owners.
On the demand side, consideration should be given to factors which may have
altered the value of the copyright material to users,
including changes in the
availability of substitutes for the copyright material licensed by the
collecting society, the ability of
licensees to obtain licences direct[ly] from
(12) Many of these considerations also are taken into account in constructing
the hypothetical bargain as they go to the question
of the basis upon which a
willing but not anxious licensor would strike a price with a willing but not
anxious licensee. As to the
hypothetical bargain, the guidelines contain this
observation at cl 6.1:
The hypothetical bargain approach refers to a hypothetical bargain between a
willing, but not anxious, licensor and a willing, but
not anxious, licensee.
This description is
symmetrical
and implies that
neither party
particular power over the other. In this sense, it reduces the
any market power held by the collecting society. It does so by
symmetry in power between the parties.
The use of a construction approach such as this allows economic principles to be
applied in determining a licence fee.
Using this method, determining the licence fee consists of two steps:
the economic
that is likely to be generated from the licensing
transaction being negotiated compared with the outcomes that would arise should
the licensing transaction
take place.
of this surplus between the negotiating parties by setting a
[emphasis added]
(13) As to calculating the surplus, the guidelines observe that the surplus, or
value of a licence transaction, is the difference
between the buyer’s
willingness to pay (“WTP”) and the seller’s willingness to
sell (“WTS”).
The buyer’s WTP is the price at which a
potential purchaser of a product is “indifferent between purchasing the
and not purchasing [it]”: cl 6.2. That point of
indifference depends upon, among other things, the value of the next best
alternative for the buyer. The seller’s WTS is a price reached at the
seller’s point of indifference between selling
and not selling. It
represents the minimum price the seller would accept and still choose to supply:
cl 6.2. The WTP price point
might be revealed by existing market prices
but where copyright material is the subject matter (conferring exclusive
rights), “stated
preference methods” usually provide “useful
estimates of the distribution of the WTP” and those methods involve
use of survey evidence: cl 6.3. That course, rightly, has not been
pursued in these proceedings having regard to
, the cost of
conducting a survey and,
, the evidential difficulties of survey
evidence. The evidence of experienced industry participants is to be preferred
with, where
appropriate, properly focused expert evidence.
(14) The essential premise of the guidelines in the context of the discussion of
constructing a hypothetical bargain is that the
construct assumes an outcome
(price) reflecting “symmetry”, not asymmetry in the bargain power of
each side of the hypothetical
bargain. The assumption of symmetry in bargaining
power reflects an analogue of a workably competitive market where, in principle,
each side is constrained by substitution possibilities. Assuming for the sake
of the discussion that the supply of the rights is
hypothetically contestable in
the orthodox sense that if the licensor of the rights sought to “charge
more and give less”
the licensee could go elsewhere for those rights in
that subject matter (which it cannot), the applicants say, in that circumstance,
that the WTP is measured by an assessment of the “contribution” the
licensed repertoire makes to the MMO’s products
and services considered in
the light of “all other inputs” going into those products and
services. In other words, the
price point is derived from taking into account
all elements of the so‑called value proposition. The guidelines observe
a licensee’s WTP for copyright material will typically reflect the
contribution of the licensed material to the licensee’s
That being so, the derivation of the contribution to profit involves the
contribution of all other inputs, a notion much along
the lines of taking into
account the totality of the inputs giving rise to the profit.
(15) As to the WTS, the guidelines put the concept this way at cl 6.4:
Estimating WTS
The WTS concept relies on determining what the alternative to participating in
the exchange is for the producer. For many products,
the next best alternative
for a seller is the price that can be received from selling to an alternative
buyer. However, for copyright
materials, selling to another buyer does not stop
the copyright owner from selling to an extra buyer (due to the
non‑rivalrous
nature of most copyright materials). This means that a
common reasonable assumption in copyright is that the WTS is equal to the
marginal cost of supply
(16) The guidelines suggest that in general, for the supply of existing
be close to zero.
For present purposes, we simply note these observations in the guidelines in the
context in which they are expressed,
on the topic of WTS (which Dr Eisenach
describes as the “willingness to accept” (“WTA”)). CA
there are other factors affecting the price point of the WTS
including alternatives in the form of subscriptions lost to the MMOs.
also a debate about whether the relevant measure in all the circumstances is the
average cost of supply. As to subscriptions,
the applicants contest the
proposition that customers who signed with them for their services (within the
various mix of services)
would seek subscriptions to a particular
publisher’s content as a “substitute” to a media monitoring
Topic (5): The activities of and services offered by Isentia
and Meltwater
The activities and services of Isentia
set out a description of the services of Isentia at the end of this section.
Apart from that description, we make these observations.
first thing to note about the activities of Isentia, is concerned with the
concept of “ingestion”. This concept and
its content was the
subject of some confusion in the oral submissions. The position is, however,
this. In order to provide media
monitoring and media intelligence services to
customers by its various suite of services, Isentia monitors particular
publications.
(redacted) There is an issue about the scope of the publications
so monitored. We address that matter under the heading “Licensed
Work” later in these decision reasons. (redacted)
However, Isentia says that not all tagged content is “communicated”.
CA contends that all tagged content is
communicated because it is “made
available” on the Mediaportal platform for customers and that is enough.
activity of, for example, “media analytics” in the product
called “Analytics”, the only media content examined
for that service
is the tagged retained content, not the “universe of content”
licensed by CA. There is no dispute by
the applicants that the act of ingestion
of the content of monitored publications is an initial act of copying or
reproduction.
accepts that there may be “at the margins” some publications of
CA’s list of members that are not monitored by
Isentia but CA contends for
the general position that there is monitoring of the whole of the content of the
publisher’s works
represented by CA (relevantly for the purposes of these
proceedings), and that there is a “wholesale copying” of that
material onto the Mediaportal platform. However, see the discussion concerning
the scope of licensed works later in these decision
emphasises its contention that as to the service of
applicants are attempting to set up a “false dichotomy” between a
service of media research and analysis by reference
to retained tagged content
on the one hand, and acts comprised in the copyright on the other hand, on the
footing that the research
and analysis service does not involve an
“act” falling within the copyright. Whether there is such a false
depends upon whether there are acts undertaken in providing the
research and analysis function which constitute a further act of
reproduction
(or communication of a work or a substantial part of a work) apart from initial
applicants accept that
tagged content
as described earlier may be
communicated to the customer but emphasise that not all tagged content is
communicated. The applicants
accept that the act of ingestion requires a
licence because it involves an act of reproduction of the content but they
contend that
the act of ingestion is, in truth, in effect, a technological step
along the way to a possible communication of an article or part
of an article to
a customer. The act of “communication” is said to be the very point
of monitoring content. The applicants
contend that the fee for the act of
communication ought to include, as part of a reasonable licence fee for
communication, the
anterior enabling
technical step of ingestion. They
say that having paid a reasonable licence fee for the right to communicate
content to the customer
(which ought to take into account the act of ingestion),
any further
utilisation
of the ingested content tagged and saved as
described ought not to attract another fee (in effect, they say, a
licence fee) for an act of undertaking research and analysis of the content.
say that such an approach is merely double‑dipping, especially where
conducting research and analysis of content is not
itself an act comprised in
the copyright.
contends (apart from its analysis of technical steps mentioned shortly which it
says all have to be compensated appropriately)
none of the services could be provided in any event.
turning to Isentia’s particular services, the following further general
matters should be noted.
The critical distinction: full print article v online
the licence proposed by Isentia (and Meltwater), the presently operative
distinction is sought to be maintained between the
provision of access to a
full print article
whether provided as an electronic (digital) PDF copy
or otherwise provided, on the one hand, and the provision of an
on the other hand, on the footing that the two activities of the
licensee are “very different” and indeed, the applicants
preserving the distinction is not only material but “vital” to a
true understanding of what is actually done
by licensees when it comes to
determining a reasonable licence fee in all the circumstances.
the case of a “full print article” (which confusingly is described
as a “press clip service”) provided
by Isentia to the customer, the
customer receives the full article (that is, an entire reproduction of the whole
article generally
by PDF supply). As to that reproduction of the entire full
print article in PDF form (or otherwise), Isentia pays what it describes
“full rate” which is currently (redacted) per full print article
Where the article sits behind a
on that site, in order for the
customer to see the full article after having been taken to the
publisher’s website through
the link, the customer is in the hands of the
publisher. Access will usually be made available if the customer is a
subscriber of
the publisher. Alternatively, the publisher may simply elect to
grant access for a number of reasons including that there are good
reasons for the traffic to be taken to the website.
in the case of a full print article, Isentia communicates or is entitled to
communicate the full article (and pays the full
per article rate), the extent of
online content communicated to the customer is limited to the elements of the
extract (portion as
defined) with the full text available from the
publisher’s website
applicants contend that the distinction between these two acts is qualitatively
significant in fact and the distinction ought
to be recognised in the licence
fee. It would be otherwise, they say, if Isentia simply communicated the online
content as full
text to the customer as if it were exercising a right to provide
a full text article.
says that the portion communicated to the customer with the link is very similar
to the portions freely available on the website
of some publishers and notably
in respect of
The Australian
The Sydney Morning Herald
provided in a
Rights of use: full press article compared with an online
other aspect of the distinction between a full press article and a portion of an
online article is important in the context of
the services of Isentia. When
Isentia communicates a full press article, it pays the full prevailing press
clip fee which it calls
the “full rate”. Isentia says that this fee
is a “large fee” for a right to full text use. Moreover, as
use (for which it says it “pays handsomely”), it enjoys the right to
choose how much of the text it displays
in a report to the customer (perhaps a
little, a lot or the whole) and if it chooses to display half the article as
part of that
service, it is entitled to do so because it is not restricted to
the limitations applicable to a portion for online content.
Accordingly,
there is said to be a danger in comparing an extract of online content confined
by the portion limits with an extract
of, or from, a full press article which is
not so confined. The danger is that use of a full press article in a way
permitted, cannot
be called in aid as an illustration of an extract which is
said to be a portion of an online article beyond the definitional limits
portion or said to be an illustration of a substantial part of an online article
so as to import the proposition that portions
represent a
“substantial part” of the licensed works. In the context of the
Daily Briefings
, CA relies upon examples at para 100(a) to (h) of
the written submissions as emblematic examples of portions that contain
text to constitute a substantial part of the corresponding article.
Those examples, however, confuse material properly used within
the full press
article authority with extracts subject to the limitations applicable to
portions of online items where the extract
used is subject to the definitional
limits earlier described.
to portions, these two matters can be conveniently noted here.
News Corp Australia has a cohort of experienced decision‑makers of
longstanding industry experience. On 5 June 2020, News
Corp lodged a
submission with the ACCC on the topic of the proposed
Mandatory News Media
Bargaining Code
in which it said this on the topic of
Use of Copyright
at para 6.1:
Australian copyright laws provide important safeguards for publishers and is
crucial for protecting news media businesses’
brand and investments in the
creation of original content. In essence, such laws prevent unauthorised use,
reproduction or dissemination
of material by someone who is not authorised to do
While Australian copyright laws do not usually extend to news headlines
and short snippets, they typically protect news articles and
the expression of
that original content in different formats.
These laws recognise the
significant human capital that is expended upfront in the creation of original
content, and therefore provide
important economic incentives for creators to
keep producing original content.
[emphasis added]
course, in this passage, News Corp is stating its corporate view as a general
proposition overall about news headlines and short
snippets and not stating a
position concerning particular examples. However, looking at the matter
overall, the informed understanding
of a participant such as News Corp is
obviously not irrelevant. News Corp’s decision‑makers have no doubt
thought long
and hard about this topic and the quote reflects their view.
Digital Platforms Inquiry Final Report
, the ACCC said this at
para 5.4.2 on the topic of
News headlines and snippets
Digital platforms often reproduce headlines and snippets of content from
original news media articles created by journalists and
media businesses (see
discussion on digital platforms’ use of snippets in section 5.3.1).
Generally, digital platforms’
use of article headlines is unlikely to
infringe copyright protections in Australia. This is because many headlines are
statements of facts and therefore headlines alone are unlikely to be
Digital platforms reproducing a snippet of a copyright‑protected news
article does not infringe copyright protections if the
snippet does not
reproduce a substantial part of the article. Only courts may determine whether
a snippet reproduces enough of a
infringement, which means rightsholders must engage in litigation to seek a
decision whether infringement has occurred in each instance where
a snippet is reproduced.
Aspects of CA’s contentions in relation to the
services provided by Isentia
to Isentia’s services, CA emphasises these matters.
to the ingestion of content, (redacted). As to this step, Mr Gerstmyer did
not know whether there is one copy of ingested and tagged
content on the
platform viewed by all customers or whether further copies are made for each
customer folder. Mr Gerstmyer accepted
that Isentia makes all content on
its platform available in two ways (using the notion of “making
available” in a non‑definitional
sense for present purposes; see the
discussion at [806] and following): either by “actually push[ing]
out” a portion
or by enabling the content to reside on the platform with
the “potentiality” of being seen by the customer. CA says
Mr Gerstmyer likened it to “Spotify” where all of the songs in
the library of songs are available on demand.
Mr Gerstmyer’s
evidence, however, is quite precise and the reference to Spotify was to make a
point of distinction not similarity.
evidence he actually gave, in context, was this. His understanding was that
content was ingested, matched to the “client’s
“keywords”, and “tagged” as relevant. The client might
say, as to the scope of the content,
“I only want national
newspapers” or “only metros” or “certain types of
content”. Mr Gerstmyer
said that he was not aware of any client who
said that they wanted “what’s relevant in the universe [of
or “always tell me what’s relevant in the
universe”. As to broadcasts, for example, a client might say “I
want news bulletins but I don’t want any sports reports”. He said
that there is no‑one who wants everything.
Mr Gerstmyer accepted the
hypothesis that if there was someone who wanted “everything” (that
is, wanted tagged to that
client every ingested article), he “suppose[d]
theoretically” such a service would be possible although he thought that
the cost of the content and communication would be “prohibitive”.
He observed that such an hypothesis was “a different
use case to a media
monitoring organisation” and that the example put to him “spill[ed]
more over to the library research
back over 25 years is interrogated. When pressed about whether, as a
matter”, all scraped (ingested) content on the platform
could respond to a customer’s brief (that is, could all content
if the customer wanted to receive all the content referring to it or responding
to its keywords), Mr Gerstmyer accepted
that such a service was
“theoretically possible” but such a service would be like saying it
is possible to download or
listen to every single song in the Spotify catalogue
“but in practice, and all reality, I can’t see that ever being a
likelihood”: T, p 102, lns 16‑46;
T, p 103, lns 1‑2.
Mr Gerstmyer
was asked about the technical processes engaged in converting raw ingested text
which responds to a client’s keywords
into what he “supposed”
could be described as a “cleaner, more useful format and enriched in that
Mr Gertsmyer said that he was only familiar with these
processes at a high level and not a technical level, but understood that
ingested headline was allocated to one field and the text to another. In the
case of the
Daily Briefing
service, a portion of an ingested and tagged
article (responsive to the keywords) is sent to the customer in an
“email‑layout”
format. As to the technical intermediate
steps, Mr Gerstmyer was asked whether the process of enrichment included a
process of making
a subsequent copy of the text from the scraped
“raw” or “messy” (T, p 119, ln 21)
content and using it for
various purposes. Mr Gerstmyer did not know
whether any
copies were made in
“machine processing”. He gave this evidence at T, p 120,
My understanding is there is a copy in the database and that’s the copy
used for our enrichment – for our information
relevance. Where there
would be other copying ... the daily briefing for example – if someone
gets an email with a portion
in it, there is obviously a copy of that portion in
the email as well as in the database.
Mr Gerstmyer
said that he did not know the processes surrounding enrichment or temporary
copies being made but supposed that there
could be “temporary copies just
in machine processing ... held in memory or something like that”:
T, p 120, lns 33‑34.
end proposition is that for every article ingested there is a reproduction by
ingestion (by scraping). Once ingested content
is tagged as responsive to the
client’s search terms, portions are extracted and made available online on
the Mediaportal platform.
Portions are also communicated in email format as
Daily Briefings
and otherwise communicated to the client. Sometimes, the
whole article is also communicated. CA says that these steps do not take
account of any temporary copies that might be made.
to the service described as
Insight Reports
, CA contends that the
evidence given by Mr Horell and Mr Gerstmyer that the reports (which
summarise the sentiment of media coverage
referable to the focus sought by the
customer) do not reproduce a substantial part of a licensed work (or communicate
a substantial
part), is not correct having regard to two nominated examples.
The first example is a report entitled (redacted). As to
Insight Reports
generally, Mr Horell gave evidence that (redacted). Mr Horell gave
evidence that it is not correct to say that the key findings page
portions of content: T, p 197, lns 21 and following.
explained that the (redacted) is an example of a report where Isentia has sought
to “showcase” or “sample”
Isentia’s “media
insights capabilities” and that other reports such as the reports for
(redacted) “are probably
more reflective of what a client receives”.
The proposition was put to Mr Horell that when the analyst is presenting
findings in a report, it may be appropriate depending on the customer
and the analyst, to include quotes of publisher’s content
in the report.
Mr Horell said this at T, p 198, lns 11‑14:
I think that would be
extremely rare
, and used in the case of instances
like this [the (redacted)] where it seeks to showcase [comments]. I think what
more representative
of what normally sits within a key findings [page]
is what you see on p 11 [an assessment of the impact of the statement,
of support, likely future trends].
[emphasis added]
said that he was not aware of any direction given to the
not to quote “slabs” of text from articles but said this at
T, p 198, lns 21‑24:
I do read a lot of Insights Reports and I – yeah, would restate that the
[vast] majority sit more like the
that you see
after tab 3, as opposed to (redacted)], which is an anomaly of sorts.
[emphasis added]
Isentia (redacted)
Media Analysis Report
of April 2020 is Tab 3 of
the Horell cross‑examination bundle. (redacted) Mr Horell accepted
that the extent to which an analyst
might refer to an article whether by
headline or whether the analyst might “go a bit further and add text from
an article”
is a matter as between the customer and the analyst and every
customer’s report content is different “but there certainly
editorial guidelines that are administered by our insights directors”.
Mr Horell accepted that if the customer saw a reference
to an article in a
report, the customer would be able to go to the Mediaportal platform, use the
dropdown menu and access the article.
Insights Reports
, we accept the evidence of Mr Horell that the
(redacted) Report is characteristic of reports produced for clients by Isentia
that reports of that kind in that form do not reproduce either the whole or
a substantial part of articles of the publishers. We
accept that media content
is analysed in the way described earlier and “used” to produce the
highly interpretive and
analytical findings set out in the reports but none of
that activity of analysis and organisation of a report setting out the findings,
trends, analysis by text, graphs, bar charts and pie charts and other analysis
are acts within the copyright of the publisher of
the articles. Nor is there a
communication of a substantial part of an article to the customer in the
formulation of reports of
the kind illustrated by the (redacted) Report.
A description of each of the services
now to the specifics of the services offered by Isentia, these matters should be
mentioned earlier, a key part of the services Isentia provides, occurs through
Mediaportal, which is Isentia’s proprietary
software that provides
customers with a personalised cloud‑based workspace. It can be accessed
by a customer online or via
a related Mediaportal app. The platform aggregates
relevant media content and data for customers, and provides tools for customers
to understand and review content quickly and efficiently.
a customer engages Isentia to provide its media intelligence services via
Mediaportal, the customer is assigned an Isentia Account
Manager and account
management team to provide personal service. The Isentia team, amongst other
things, develops a “client
brief”. This involves determining a set
of search terms and specific criteria to track the media content of relevance to
customer. These search terms and criteria then inform the process of
“tagging” described above. The use of “briefs”
the provision of duplicate and irrelevant material to the client. The purpose
of this service is for Isentia to review a
large amount of content and then make
available only that which is relevant in a folder for a customer to access. As
mentioned above,
any online information “scraped” from the internet
that does not meet one or more client briefs is discarded.
access tagged documents for a customer’s brief, the customer can view and
of the Mediaportal platform. This includes the online media that is
tagged in accordance with the process above, as well print media,
media and social items. Within the folders, the headline of the content is
displayed with the option to expand the item
to show the first few sentences of
the article, a brief summary of the material in the case of broadcast media, or
the social media
generated by Isentia during the
ingestion process is also displayed when a document is expanded.
press clip content
, customers are given the option to read the entire
article by selecting “read more” or “view original” (the
PDF version). Customers can then share the content shown in the folders with
other individuals within the customer’s organisation.
online media
, customers are only given the option to “view
original” which redirects the customer to view the full article on the
publisher’s website. As discussed above, whether a customer can bypass a
paywall depends on the customer’s specific
arrangements.
Mediaportal
also integrates a number of additional tools and functionalities for customers
to use which are referred to as “modules”.
first of these modules is
which is a journalist and media contact
updated database
of journalists and key media contacts in Australia and
internationally. The module also enables customers to create and distribute
media releases. These media releases are then integrated with other Mediaportal
modules to enable the customer to track the media
coverage associated with that
media release using separate tracking folders. The purpose of this service is
for Isentia to provide
a media-focussed address book for its customers that can
be directly searched, as well as enabling the creation, distribution and
monitoring of media releases generated by the customer.
next of these modules is
which involves typically quarterly or
half‑yearly reports prepared by Isentia employees for the customer that
capture and summarise
of media coverage. The form of
Insights reports has already been discussed above, but it is sufficient to note
here that the purpose
of these reports is for Isentia to inform customers of
information
the media coverage they have received, rather than
specific media items.
a similar vein but focusing on social media content, the next module is
Reputation analysis
. This service provides customers with a score to
reflect public sentiment about the customer, informed by three key drivers:
culture and delivery. This score is based on a combination of
analysis of social media posts (what people say) and survey data (what
think). It also involves a corresponding report that summarises this
information against the three key drivers. It does
not involve any online or
print media content, but it does include social media items, as shown in the
example exhibited to Mr Gerstmyer’s
affidavit of 3 July 2020 at
pp 1 20 of TGG‑5. The purpose of this service is to inform the
customer of what members of the
public think about their organisation, rather
than the content of online or print news.
next module is the
Daily Briefing
report. This report is designed to
provide customers with a snapshot of the most relevant daily coverage and
topics, based on content
selected by Isentia’s Daily Briefing Editors and
according to a customer’s specific requirements. The reports come in
form of an email that includes headlines and short summaries or extracts from
the content and a “read more” link.
For online content and social
media content the “read more” link takes the client to the
publisher’s website (or
relevant social media platform) where a customer
can then view the full text. For print media and broadcast media, the
more” link takes the client to Mediaportal where the client
can view the PDF copy or play the relevant video. The Daily Briefing
also include an executive summary prepared by an Isentia employee summarising
significant news stories relevant to the
customer. This service requires
Isentia to review the content it monitors and communicate those that are
relevant in the form of
summaries it prepares and links to read (or watch) more
to the customer. This is demonstrated in the example exhibited to
Mr Gerstmyer’s
affidavit of 3 July 2020 at pp 21‑25
next of these modules is the
. This service is
designed to allow the customer to prepare its own charts and graphs using
information about the media content on
Mediaportal. It does not involve using
or reading the actual monitored content, but rather the data extracted by
Isentia about the
content (such as data about ‘volume’, audience
reach). The charts and graphs, once created, are displayed on a
. Where displayed on the Dashboard, customers
can click through to the relevant media items. The charts and graphs can also
be exported
or downloaded as a report in the form of an email, PDF or hyperlink.
The exported reports do not include access or click through
links to the media
items. An example of an Analytics report created through this service is
exhibited to Mr Horell’s affidavit
of 15 June 2020 at
pp 76‑88 of RMH‑2. The report includes data such as number of
mentions or commonly used words over
a set period of time. This service is
strictly focussed on communicating data about monitored content and does not
contain any headlines,
extracts, summaries or the like from the actual content.
related module is the
Report Builder
. This service
allows customers to select certain content to create a unique report specific to
their business’ needs. Customers
can choose how much of the online and
print content they display and could therefore conceivably be limited to just a
headline, or
include a more extensive extract. The reports can take the form of
a number of formats and be shared via email or link within their
organisation.
The purpose of this service is to allow customers to extract information stored
on the Isentia database into a report
that can then be shared internally within
its organisation.
of the modules is the
Alerts service
. This enables customers to
customise when and how they are notified of relevant media coverage. Customers
are given the option
to customise how the media items are included in the alerts
– this can be headlines, summaries or full text. It also allows,
depending on the subscription a customer has, an option to for the alerts to
enable customers to view videos of broadcast coverage
and order transcripts.
The purpose of this service is to inform customers of new monitored content that
is relevant to that customer
and, depending on how the customer has configured
the service, to provide them with a way to read the content in full.
are two additional types of alerts Isentia provides, or will soon provide, to
its customers. The first of these is
Smart Alerts
, which is a feature of
the Mediaportal mobile app. Smart Alerts provide immediate notifications
regarding important news relevant
to the customer’s organisation. It does
not involve communicating the actual articles, but does direct customers to view
relevant articles on Mediaportal. The second of these is
, which is still in its development phase. It is intended that the
Peak Alerts will notify customers when a particular story or issue
is trending
across all media types. The purpose is to allow customers to track when a
crisis broke, when the organisation responded,
and to then assess whether
coverage is increasing or settling down as a result of the organisation’s
response. The notifications
will appear on the Mediaportal platform and, like
with the existing Alerts service, customers can choose to receive email
notifications
in relation to their Peak Alerts. Unlike the existing Alerts
service, however, the emails will direct customers to view the content
Mediaportal platform, rather than providing the option to review it through the
to the Mediaportal platform, Isentia also provides
, which is its
own web‑based platform that is offered as a low-cost, basic media
monitoring service. The service is a “do‑it‑yourself”
style product. It involves the customer setting up the relevant folders and
entering search terms to follow. The platform then
uses the information entered
by the customer (rather than an Isentia team as with Mediaportal) to gather
relevant content (press,
radio, television, online media). It is limited to
Australian and New Zealand media sources. Customers receive an email when new
content is available in their folders, but need to log on to the platform to
actually view the new content. Customers can also place
orders via this
platform for transcripts, audio or video files for any broadcast item they have
received for an additional cost.
This service involves Isentia routinely
reviewing the web for relevant results to customer‑generated search terms
and compiling
them for the customer in a folder they can view on the website.
third platform that Isentia provides is
Unified Media Alert
, which is its
most basic legacy platform. The service involves Isentia sending one daily
email alert containing portions of the
news content for the day. This is a
legacy service and not offered to new clients as Mediaportal can provide the
same service.
A description of the activities and services of
operates in a similar fashion to Isentia. Like Isentia, Meltwater delivers most
of its services via a secure online software
platform referred to as either
MI Platform
. Like Mediaportal, it can be accessed
by a customer with a subscription from a web browser or mobile app. Customers
are able to
go onto the Fairhair platform and view and search the relevant
results displayed – including a headline, a short passage of
text from the
article, and an option to read more. For
online content
, the ‘read
more’ option takes the client to the
takes the client to an
of the article and makes
available a PDF version for download.
terms of what articles are presented to customers, this is similar to Isentia in
that only the relevant articles are actually displayed
to a customer when they
access the Fairhair platform. (redacted)
also offers various reporting services.
Licensed Work
mentioned earlier, there is a dispute about the scope of works licensed under
the CA proposals. The applicants claim that they
require a licence to provide
their service but they do not require a licence over the
repertoire. They criticise the reasonableness of each licence proposed by CA on
the footing that CA is seeking to force them
to take a licence of a total field
of works as part of the justification for a significant licence fee and they say
that many of
the publications are not monitored and simply not relevant to the
services they seek to provide. The definition of Licensed Work
is mentioned
earlier but for convenience we set out the definition as it appears in the
Alternative Licence
Amended Alternative Licence
Licensed Work
means each Article published in an Edition or Online
Publication and any other work that Copyright Agency has been authorised to
to MMOX under this agreement, including Domestic Licensed Works and
Foreign Licensed Works, and includes Articles in the publications
publishers listed at (<https://www.copyright.com.au/mmo-publisher-list/>)
as updated from time to time and Major Mastheads
listed in Schedule 3, but
excluding an Excluded Work.
are three separate lists that appear at the webpage to which the reader is taken
by the hyperlink in the above definition.
One list is described as
Licensed Works
and the other two are broadly described as
Licensed Works
with the further sub‑categories of
NLA Licensed
CFC Licensed Works
. To download the lists the person
interrogating the website must enter a name, a company and an email address.
addressing the definition of Licensed Works in his fifth affidavit,
Mr Suckling refers to what he describes as a “non‑exhaustive
list” of publications CA is
to license that includes
over 17,000 publications (Mr Suckling’s fifth affidavit of
25 January 2021 at para 224(b)). Mr Suckling
indicates at
para 225 of that affidavit that “the same repertoire of works are
licensed under the terms of the CA Licence and
the Alternative CA
tendered a number of documents evidencing a list of publishers that are to be
covered by each of CA’s proposed licence
arrangements that provide little
relevance to its business activities. These documents are at Tabs 40 and
41 of Isentia’s
Tender Bundle. These tabs are extracts from tables
prepared by Dr Eisenach in his first expert report (29 September
extracts concern some, but by no means all, publishers
(publications) to which the proposed
Alternative CA
Amended Alternative CA Licence
would apply. These tables
(and exchanges about them at T, p 772, ln 12 –
T, p 781, ln 5) do not, however, provide a sense
of the scope of
all the publications that would be covered by the definition of
. The field of publications comprehended by the definition is very
extensive indeed.
makes the not unreasonable point that CA has never provided it with a
comprehensive list of publications which CA says it
is authorised to licence.
Isentia says that it is apparent that CA seeks to subject the proposed licences
to a charge related to
a licence for an entire “repertoire” which
includes works that the applicants do not wish to licence. In that sense,
“reasonableness” of the proposed charge is said to be supported by
the suite of publications covered by the licence.
By a letter dated
22 December 2020, Baker McKenzie, the solicitors for Meltwater, sought to
clarify CA’s position in relation
to identifying the field of publications
brought within the proposed Pro Forma (redacted). In that letter, Baker
McKenzie said this:
We are not in a position to make judgments about each of the illustrations in
the schedule. However, it is not unreasonable
on the part of the applicants to
call upon CA to identify the publications falling within the licence which in
turn are said to support
the basis for the fee for rights exercised in relation
to those works. Moreover, it is not unreasonable for the person claiming
require a licence for the purposes of s 157(3) to say to CA that it
requires a licence for particular works but not necessarily
the entire block
blanket field of publications for which CA enjoys a field of rights.
Topic (6): The question of whether the Streem FSMM Licence in
the context of the arrangements between CA and Streem made on 9 October
a comparable market bargain or market rate
logical starting point in seeking to understand how the CA/Streem FSMM Licence
(redacted) came to pass and whether the Streem
Licence reflects a contemporary
“market bargain” between a willing but not anxious licensor and a
willing but not anxious
licensee, is the context which gave rise to the
negotiations ultimately leading to the licence, the Deed of Settlement and the
proceeding and the entry into the Deed Polls.
context begins with the position adopted by Streem in its proceeding against CA.
have already noted that on 29 May 2018, CA had provided Streem with the
proposed CA Licence. Streem’s position in that proceeding
was that the
proposed CA Licence contained terms as to charges and other non‑price
terms which were unreasonable.
contended that since the commencement of its licence relationship with CA,
Streem had enjoyed, as part of that licence relationship,
a licence to copy and
communicate and scrape the online content of
The Australian
Weekend Australian
. On 5 February 2020, CA notified Streem that from
20 March 2020, CA would cease to have the right to sub‑licence those
publications of News Corp. Streem’s position in its proceedings was
that those two publications were important sources of
media content to large
corporations and government departments. (redacted) On 5 February 2020, CA
notified Streem that CA had lost
the right to sub‑licence particular
publications of Nine/Fairfax and the list of publications in that notification
same publications withdrawn from Isentia and Meltwater by Nine
Publishing as described at [111] of these decision reasons. The withdrawal
those publications took effect from 17 January 2021. Thus, Streem was
facing the loss of rights from CA concerning each of those
publications
(respectively) absent some other arrangement having been entered into.
the Streem proceeding, Streem contended that the fee payable under the proposed
CA Licence was unreasonable. (redacted) The evidence
of the contended
unreasonableness of the price and non‑price terms of the
proposal put to Streem on 29 May 2018 is set out in the affidavit of
Mr Keith Forbes, Streem’s Commercial Director and Chief
Officer, affirmed on 26 June 2020. The criticisms contained in that
affidavit were put to Mr Elgar Welch, Streem’s
Chief Executive
Officer, in cross‑examination.
was cross‑examined about aspects of the position Streem had taken leading
up to its change of position on 9 October
2020. The applicants observe
that an affidavit affirmed by Mr Welch on 28 January 2021 had been
filed in the proceedings by CA.
The affidavit is very brief and provides little
explanation of the circumstances leading to the sequence of arrangements made
CA and Streem on 9 October 2020. Mr Welch’s affidavit
exhibits the Streem FSMM Licence, the Deed of Settlement and the two
Deed Polls.
He also exhibits copies of emails sent to Streem’s Board of Directors on 8
and 9 October 2020. He describes the
8 October 2020 email by which he
briefed the Board on the proposed arrangements as a “comprehensive account
of the factors
relevant to that recommendation”. He says that on
9 October 2020, the Board approved Streem’s entry into the FSMM
and the other documents. However, Mr Welch says nothing further in
his very brief affidavit about any aspect of the arrangements
with CA which
applicants note that Mr Johnson’s email and the attached draft
licence agreement were produced after Mr Suckling (CA) and
had been cross‑examined. Thus, they were not able to take those witnesses
to the documents. This point is made many
times in relation to other documents
on this topic produced after those witnesses had given evidence or after the
completion of the
the applicants complain that this email was produced after Mr Suckling and
Mr Welch had given their evidence and thus those
witnesses were not able to
be cross‑examined about the content of the documents.
forwarded this email to Mr Suckling. Again, the applicants make the point
that these documents were produced after Mr
Suckling and Mr Welch had
been cross‑examined.
Mr Suckling accepted that identifying whether CA had revenue and usage data
for the nominated companies made clear to Streem
that they were already
customers of either Isentia or Meltwater. Mr Suckling also accepted that
providing Streem with this data
was a breach of the confidentiality obligations
in the interim licence and that the previous denials of the fact were not
and unfortunately were a mistake.
the applicants complain that these documents were produced after the hearing of
the evidence and Mr Suckling and Mr Welch were
not able to be asked
this email was produced after the conclusion of the hearing.
Having regard to the exchanges described above in some detail, it is clear
enough that CA, Nine Publishing and News Corp
conducted themselves on the basis
that the period of the licence between CA and Streem, and the relationship
between the licence
and the period of the Deed Polls were inextricably linked
and were matters about which CA, Nine Publishing and News Corp all needed
and were of a common mind.
Tribunal is invited by CA to proceed on the basis that the case really being put
by it is one of a licence offered to Isentia
and Meltwater on the footing of the
Alternative CA Licence
. A further alternative is that each applicant is
offered the
Amended Alternative CA Licence
if each applicant (either or
both) settles its respective proceeding on the basis of the Pro Forma Settlement
Deed leading to a Pro
Forma Licence (redacted) as amended by the Deed, coupled
with a negotiation with News Corp and Nine Publishing to resolve the final
upon which Deed Polls could be offered to each applicant.
Alternative CA Licence
(redacted) offered as a stand‑alone
document taken out of the context of the Streem Settlement Deed and the Deed
licence provides for a revenue share percentage of 23%. It has no
provision giving the applicants the comfort of a guarantee of
access to the
content of Nine Publishing or News Corp.
other words, to select the Streem FSMM Licence out of the context within which
it necessarily came to pass and hold it up before
the Tribunal ((redacted))
as a stand‑alone example of a market transaction (said, in effect, to
be a determinative market transaction for the purposes
of s 157(3) of the
Act) between parties characterised as a willing but not anxious licensor of that
instrument and a willing but
not anxious licensee of that instrument,
the licence is not to be entirely understood and comprehended
in the context of all of the other factors centred upon all of the elements
the resolution of the Tribunal proceedings and the other critical elements of
the arrangement (especially those in relation to
the Deed Polls), is entirely
will now identify some of the particular difficulties which suggest that the
Streem FSMM Licence is not a comparable market bargain:
(1) The Streem FSMM Licence is not an example of a discreet market rate or
market bargain because it only exists at all due to the
interdependencies with
the Settlement Deed and the Deed Polls.
(2) To the extent that the revenue share percentage of 23% in the
Alternative
(redacted) might be (redacted) the availability of that rate
assumes a settlement of each proceeding before the Tribunal (although
settlement of one is not dependent on settlement of the other) on the terms of
the Pro Forma Settlement Deed coupled with the opportunity
for each applicant to
engage in further negotiations with Nine Publishing and News Corp so as to work
out the final terms of Deed
Polls that might, upon the resolution of any
relevant matter, then be available. That settlement simply did not come to pass
absent settlement on those terms as put by CA, there is no (redacted) and
there are no Deed Polls.
(3) The applicants rightly contend that as to the availability of the (redacted)
and the opportunity to seek to reach finality with
Nine Publishing and News Corp
on the precise terms of Deed Polls, the entire proposal turns on settlement of
the relevant proceeding
essentially on a “take it or leave it” basis
as delivered by CA. The only truly unqualified proposal apart from the
CA Licence proposal (which, in substance, is not pressed although not formally
abandoned), is the
Alternative CA Proposal
. As to the
Alternative CA Proposal
, it leaves extant an argument about adjustments
during the period of the interim licence and is contingent upon settlement of
proceeding on the terms of the Pro Forma Deed.
(4) The availability of the
Amended Alternative CA Licence
higher than an offer to settle each proceeding which was not accepted. Even in
its own terms, it does not propose either
as part of the licence or outside the
licence (by Deed Polls from the two primary publishers) a clear, precise,
unqualified Deed
Poll by each publisher. There always remained the matter of
further discussions to resolve any issues relevant to entry into those
Polls specific to the publishers on the one hand and Isentia on the other, and
the resolution of relevant issues as between
the publishers and Meltwater.
(5) Moreover, as to the Deed Polls, CA (the s 157(3) licensor) does not
offer the guarantees conferred by the Deed Polls. It expressly
says that it
cannot do so. The Deed Polls must be given by third parties standing
the Tribunal proceedings. As to the Deed Polls, CA says (by its
11 November 2020 document) that it understands that if Isentia and
Meltwater accept the terms of either proposal and similar assurances are sought
from News Corp and Nine Publishing as obtained by
Streem, then the publishers
would grant the Deed Polls on “substantially the same terms”.
does not offer the
Alternative CA Licence
coupled with a
commitment procured by it from each head licensor in the form of News Corp and
Nine Publishing. The guarantees secured
by Deed Polls are not offered as an
element of the orders
the Tribunal
might make so far as they relate to
Alternative CA Licence
, let alone any licence that might depart from
the terms of the proposed
Alternative CA Licence
(6) The applicants correctly emphasise the role of the Deed Polls in the Streem
negotiations and the ultimate arrangements with Streem.
(7) (redacted) In these proceedings, the applicants seek orders that
“major mastheads” not be withdrawn from the licence
as ordered by
the Tribunal, during the term of the licence. The Tribunal has previously
determined that it has the power to so order.
CA contests that position.
(redacted) It seems a little odd to the Tribunal that licence terms, both as to
price and non‑price
elements but particularly as to fees and charges,
could be set in consideration of a licence to exercise rights over “major
mastheads” but immediately after the licence is struck, one or more major
Mastheads might be withdrawn by its relevant publisher
fundamentally altering
the bilateral commercial balance in the value of the rights and the licence
itself. (redacted)
(8) (redacted)
(9) As to the particular titles which have now been withdrawn by News Corp and
Nine Publishing as described earlier, (redacted)
(10) (redacted)
(11) (redacted)
(12) The applicants contend that another reason why the Streem FSMM Licence
((redacted)) is not a market bargain emblematic of application
to Isentia and
Meltwater is that the circumstances of each of the three entities is very
different. The applicants say that the
percentage of revenue fee has very
different consequences for each entity because of the different product
offerings of each entity.
(redacted) Applying that perception of the principle
to the evidence of the services offered by Isentia and Meltwater and weighing
the examination of each service the extent to which each service engages, in
whole or in part, or not at all, with the licensed
works, a fee that captures as
a minimum a 23% rate applied to all revenue derived from all services on the
footing of a “but
for” approach fails, unreasonably, to recognise
that the relevant rights engaging a licence fee are acts of reproduction and
communication to the public. A fee for exercising either or both of those
rights must necessarily take into account the scale and
character of the use of
the works and where a range of value‑added services are offered (where
there is little or no use of
the works amounting to reproduction or
communication), the fee must take that matter into account either by discounting
as an “evaluative judgement” (recognising that minds might
differ but also recognising that nevertheless an “evaluative
judgement” must be made), or by taking the matter into account in some
(13) A further point of distinction between Streem on the one hand and Meltwater
and Isentia on the other hand is that Streem is
a relatively early market
entrant which, as Dr Eisenach observes, (redacted)
(14) (redacted)
(15) The Deed of Settlement, central to the arrangements, provided (redacted).
This history, its resolution by the release and the
emphasis given to the matter
(redacted) is an important feature of the arrangements overall that contextually
deprives the Streem
FSMM Licence of the character of a comparable bargain.
(16) (redacted) The applicants correctly say that as a comparable transaction,
none of those factors that caused the FSMM Licence
to come into existence apply
Alternative CA Licence
(17) (redacted) Streem was in part induced to enter into the arrangements so as
to secure the advantage of (redacted) a factor that
does takes the arrangements
and particularly the
Alternative CA Licence
beyond a rational
characterisation as a “comparable market bargain”.
regard to all of these considerations, we are not satisfied that the Streem
Alternative CA Licence
Amended Alternative CA Licence
represent instruments which can be described as a comparable market bargain
for the purposes of these proceedings. The character
and content and detail of
the arrangements make it clear that the instruments are not a comparable market
bargain. They are specific
to their own unique set of circumstances in the
context of the arrangements overall. It is true that the parties engaged in a
of negotiations which began in the first half of 2020 but a careful
examination of the exchanges shows that things fundamentally
24 September 2020 in the context of the intensity of CA’s preparation
of its evidence for the Tribunal proceedings
in which the claims of all three
applicants were to be determined. The text of the emails makes the context
perfectly clear. It
is also true that Streem and CA were represented by
lawyers. These factors have been emphasised by CA in seeking to support the
proposition that the
Alternative CA Licence
Alternative CA Licence
represent comparative market bargains between a
willing but not anxious licensor and a willing but not anxious licensee. We
that contention. We have examined all of the evidence on this topic in
considerable detail to satisfy ourselves that the characterisation
contended for
by CA is not correct.
to the views of Dr Eisenach, it must be remembered that there is a
fundamental matter of fact to be examined before an opinion
can be formed about
whether either the
Alternative CA Licence
Amended Alternative
can be regarded as a comparable market bargain. We have examined
the foundation facts going to that matter. Dr Eisenach has not.
Dr Eisenach was not intimately informed about these foundation facts in
coming to his opinion. In the light of the foundation facts,
satisfied that we can attach weight to Dr Eisenach’s view about the
two transactions.
Alternative CA Licence
departs so substantially from any notion of a
comparable market bargain influenced and informed as it is by all of the factors
have described, that we cannot regard it as a comparable market bargain. To
the extent that the
Amended Alternative CA Licence
is put forward as a
licence proposal rather than a settlement offer, it too falls within the matrix
of facts and circumstances described
above taking it outside the notion of a
comparable market bargain.
now turn to the question of the benchmarking exercise conducted by
Dr Eisenach.
Topic (7): The extent to which Dr Eisenach’s
benchmarking exercise and robustness check is of assistance to the Tribunal in
deciding the questions in issue
order to understand whether the analysis undertaken by Dr Eisenach assists
the Tribunal on the question of the reasonableness of
the charges in the CA
Proposed Licence, it is necessary to first understand exactly how
Dr Eisenach approached the benchmarking exercise.
Section B of Part VI of his report of 29 September 2020
(“ER 1”, [203] and following), Dr Eisenach explains that
benchmarking analysis is designed to assess the reasonableness of the
licence fees in the
CA Proposed Licence
(and also the
MMO Proposed Licence
) based on “market‑based comparable
bargains”. The reference to the
CA Proposed Licence
reference to the CA Licence proposed to Isentia on 21 May 2018 and
Meltwater on 18 May 2018. Dr Eisenach understood that the
licence fee
would be the greater of the sum of a fixed fee and a variable percentage of
“Revenue” and a “Minimum
Guarantee” based on the
MMO’s “Revenue” for the 12 months prior to the
“Commencement Date”.
The licence fee would be based on the amount
of each MMO’s revenues earned “directly or indirectly” from
of “CA Licensed Content” excluding revenues earned from
particular services to the extent that those services were acquired
by customers
as “stand‑alone separately priced service[s]” which do not use
CA Licensed Content. Dr Eisenach then
sets out the definition of
“Revenue” and identifies the scope of the “Excluded
Services”. Dr Eisenach describes
the “revenue amount”
upon which MMO licence fees would be based (after taking into account revenues
from excluded services)
as the “CA Content Attributable Revenue”
(which includes fees collected by the MMO in respect of “downstream
licences”):
ER 1, [131]‑[135]. Dr Eisenach then sets out
the CA Proposed Licence Fees by reference to Annexure A to the licence
is as follows:
Dr Eisenach
also sets out his understanding of the scope of the rights granted under the
CA Proposed Licence.
the benchmarking analysis, Dr Eisenach seeks to estimate a
“reasonable range” for the fair market value of the “Major
Mastheads” to Isentia and Meltwater based on “direct licences”
between (redacted) for
The Australian
. Dr Eisenach says that he
relies on these licences to value the
Major Mastheads
because they are of
“disproportionate value” to the MMOs and their customers as compared
with the “remainder of
the CA repertoire”, and
The Australian
is “among the Major Mastheads”: ER 1, [204].
Dr Eisenach then seeks to estimate a reasonable range for the value of
CA’s remaining (non‑Major Masthead) repertoire based on (redacted)
represent a reasonable proxy for the value of CA’s
Masthead repertoire”: ER 1, [205]. Combining the estimated
valuation ranges for the CA Major Masthead repertoire
and the non‑Major
Masthead repertoire is said to yield an estimated reasonable range for the fair
market value of the “CA
Licensed Content” for each MMO: ER 1,
[205]. Dr Eisenach concludes that the licence fees embodied in the CA
Proposed Licence
fall within or below the reasonable range so benchmarked:
ER 1, [205]. Dr Eisenach also contends that the licence fees
for by the MMOs by their proposed licences fall “well
below” the reasonable range: ER 1, [205]. For the moment, we
propose to focus on Dr Eisenach’s benchmarking of the CA Proposed
the third section of his benchmarking exercise, Dr Eisenach presents a
“robustness check” which operates on the following
footing. The
Major Masthead analysis and the non‑Major Masthead analysis each utilise
“measures of readership”
to “adjust” for the
“relative values” of the “benchmark content” as compared
with the CA Licensed
Content, and like the Major Masthead analysis, the
robustness check also relies on
The Australian
as a benchmark but relies
upon “clip volume data” to “adjust” for “relative
values”: ER 1, [206].
Dr Eisenach concludes that the
robustness check affirms his benchmarking analysis.
Dr Eisenach uses (redacted) to assess the value of the CA Licensed Content
in “online monitoring” in order to assess
the reasonableness of the
online monitoring fee element of the MMO Proposed Licence. Finally,
Dr Eisenach considers other licences
made available to him.
to the Major Masthead analysis, we note the following matters.
(1) Dr Eisenach notes that on 20 March 2020, News withdrew
The Weekend Australian
from the CA Licence
arrangements and that (redacted). These are the licences Dr Eisenach uses
as “comparable bargains”
to estimate the value of the Major
Mastheads in the CA repertoire (and thus their contended value to Isentia and
Meltwater): ER
1, [209] and [210].
(2) Dr Eisenach says that the (redacted) are comparable bargains because,
they are “sufficiently comparable in scope and
coverage” (which means sufficiently comparable for benchmarking the
Proposed Licence of Major Mastheads notwithstanding that both titles
were withdrawn from the CA Proposed Licence on 20 March 2020)
the licences in each case are “market‑based
bargains in the sense that both parties were willing and fully informed”:
ER 1, [211]. Each CA Proposed Licence was proposed to Isentia and
Meltwater in May 2018. The term was two years (with no particular
commencement
date). Had it been accepted on say 1 July 2018, it would have endured
until 30 June 2020 and presumably the licence
The Australian
The Weekend Australian
would have remained within the content grant.
Dr Eisenach is no doubt conducting his analysis on that basis. As at the
the hearing, of course, to the extent that CA continues to
the CA Proposed Licence, it seems difficult to see how
selecting titles as benchmarks which the owner has chosen to remove from the
grant operate to benchmark those titles that do remain within the grant.
However, we examine that matter later in these decision
Dr Eisenach expands upon the two factors mentioned above (at ER 1,
[211]), further at ER 1, [212] to [223].
(3) At ER, [224], Dr Eisenach notes that,
, the (redacted)
(4) (redacted)
(5) (redacted)
(6) Next, Dr Eisenach seeks to make adjustments for the “relative
The Australian
compared with the 12 other Major Mastheads
and does so by relying on “audience measures” compiled by
Enhanced Media Metrics Australia
(“EMMA”) in surveys
undertaken by it (accepted by Mr Eisman (Nine Publishing) as the industry
standard for audience data
for the news media industry) and published in the
Australian Total Audience Report
(“ATAR”). In relying on
audience measures as the basis for the adjustment, Dr Eisenach observes
that it is reasonable
to assume that the value of
The Australian
to other Major Mastheads in the CA repertoire is “proportional to audience
size (or ‘readership’)”.
Dr Eisenach regards that
assumption as reasonable as the value of a publication to an MMO’s
customers is “highly correlated”
with readership. (redacted)
(7) The data relied upon by Dr Eisenach to account for differences in
audience size among the Major Mastheads is “monthly print
“monthly digital audience” and “monthly total audience”:
ER 1, [228]. Dr Eisenach calculates
the ratio of each Major
Masthead’s readership relative to the readership of
The Australian
using those three measures and then multiplies those ratios by the adjusted
benchmark price for
The Australian
: ER 1, [228]. To take an
The Australian
has a print readership of 1,759,000 monthly
readers, a digital readership of 3,044,000 monthly readers and a total monthly
of 4,413,000 readers.
The Advertiser
(one of the other 13
Major Mastheads) has a print readership of 725,000 monthly readers or 41.2% of
the print readership of
The Australian
, a digital readership of 1,242,000
or 40.8% of the digital readership of
The Australian
and a total audience
of 1,632,000 monthly readers or 37.0% of the total readership of
. (redacted)
(8) A summary of the analysis set out in Dr Eisenach’s
Tables E‑4 (for Isentia) and E‑5 (for Meltwater) taking
of the E‑6 sources reveals a contended range of fair market values for the
Major Mastheads for Isentia and Meltwater
(relevantly for present purposes, but
also the values for Streem). (redacted) We will return to some specific aspects
of the schedules
later in these decision reasons.
(9) The benchmarking method adopted by Dr Eisenach for attributing value to
the Major Mastheads rests upon use of the (redacted)
The Australian
The Weekend Australian
(taken as one), on the footing that those
licence agreements are comparable bargains (adjusted for the particular
disconformities
already described) and that each is market‑based in the
sense that both parties are willing (but not anxious) and informed:
[211]. Dr Eisenach says that he estimates the value of the Major Mastheads
because as a
they reflect disproportionate value as compared with
of the CA repertoire and
The Australian
the Major Mastheads. Even if the two factors identified at
ER 1, [211] are true as expanded at ER 1, [212]‑[223] (about
there may be some doubt), those circumstances do not identify
the particular single title,
The Australian
, is the emblematic anchor
point against which all other values are to be measured.
to the non‑Major Masthead repertoire, we note the following
(1) (redacted)
(2) (redacted)
(3) (redacted)
(4) Again, Dr Eisenach adjusts for the circumstance that the CA Proposed
Licence covers a “larger volume of content”
than (redacted). The
adjustment mechanism is “measures of readership” gathered (redacted)
and the June 2020 ATAR Report
concerning 48 publications including 13 Major
Mastheads and 35 other publications including news mastheads, magazines and
multiplatform
publications: ER 1, [237].
(5) (redacted)
(6) Next, Dr Eisenach estimates the fair range of market values of the CA
licensed content for Major Mastheads and non‑Major
Mastheads (as described
earlier) in the aggregate as set out at Table 15. (redacted) Having
isolated the range of contended fair
market values of each publication for each
MMO benchmarked in the way described, Dr Eisenach then compares the maximum
fee payable under the CA Proposed Licence by each MMO with the value
range for each MMO. (redacted)
undertaken those exercises, Dr Eisenach then seeks to check the robustness
of the outcome of his benchmarking method. To do
that, Dr Eisenach adopted
an “alternative measure of relative value” based on the
“number of clips copied and communicated
for each publication”:
ER 1, [248]. Dr Eisenach contends that the results of the robustness
check are consistent with the
benchmarking and supports his benchmarking
analysis. As to the robustness analysis, we note these matters:
(1) To undertake the clip analysis, Dr Eisenach used the clip data
concerning the number of clips copied and communicated by Isentia
(and Streem)
for each publication as an alternative to the ATAR audience data so as to
estimate the relative values of each publication
in the CA repertoire.
Dr Eisenach relies solely on the (redacted) for
The Australian
benchmark. That is, there is no differentiation in value between Major
Mastheads and non‑Major Mastheads in this analysis
is assumed to
per se based on the fact that it meets the
customer’s search criteria regardless of where it is published.
(2) The results of the clip analysis in Tables E‑13 and E‑14
suggest that the fair market value of the content licensed
under the CA Proposed
Licence is that set out in Table 16 at ER 1, [250]. (redacted)
further exercise undertaken by Dr Eisenach is to seek to determine a value
monitoring services based on the value of an agreement
(1) (redacted)
(2) Dr Eisenach considers that the (redacted) is nevertheless useful as a
benchmark for the purposes of establishing the value of
the online monitoring
services in assessing the reasonableness of the online monitoring fees under the
CA Proposed Licence to MMOs
and for assessing how the value of news content has
changed over time.
(3) Another difference is that the CA Proposed Licence covers a much larger
volume of content than the (redacted). Data on readership
of (redacted) is not
available through EMMA. Dr Eisenach notes that Mr Gerstmyer says that
(redacted). Dr Eisenach notes “data”
provided by
Mr Gerstmyer (affidavit, 3 July 2020) that (redacted) Dr Eisenach
says that he used this data to “adjust”
the value of the (redacted)
to establish the value of the CA Proposed Licence: ER 1, [255].
(4) (redacted) and so Dr Eisenach seeks to estimate their fair market value
for the (redacted) using the licence fee paid by (redacted)
adjusted downward
based on the fees paid under the (redacted)
(5) The next step in this part of the analysis is to determine the
“relative reach” of the (redacted) Dr Eisenach does
dividing the number of (redacted)
(6) The next step in estimating the
of the online monitoring
component of the CA Proposed Licence is this. (redacted)
(7) Dr Eisenach draws two conclusions from this analysis of the value to
each MMO of
monitoring services of CA licensed content based on
“relativities” extrapolated from fees paid to (redacted). The
is that the right to monitor and exercise rights in relation to CA
online licensed content provides each of Isentia and Meltwater
“significant value” even in the absence of paywall access and
, the MMO proposed licences “dramatically undervalues”
the use of CA licensed content in the provision of online monitoring
and Meltwater make the following criticisms of Dr Eisenach’s
benchmarking analysis:
(1) The applicants contend that the analysis is based upon unsound assumptions
and that an examination of the results of the analysis
demonstrates absurdities
and anomalies that call the reliability of the entire analysis into question.
difficulty is said to be that the value of the Major Mastheads
is calculated by reference to (redacted) for
The Australian
Weekend Australian
(once those titles were withdrawn from the licence
arrangements with CA) and by reference to print and digital audience reach.
is said to incorrectly assume that “the value of a licence of
of the Major Mastheads to the MMOs is
directly proportional
masthead’s print and digital audience size” [emphasis added]. They
say that Dr Eisenach fails to explain how
he came to choose
as the anchor point for that part of the benchmarking
difficulty is said to be that a value for the remainder of
the CA licensed repertoire is calculated by reference to (redacted) which
is said to incorrectly assume that the value is directly proportional to the
print and digital audience size for each non‑Major
difficulty is said to be that the robustness check using
clip data also incorrectly assumes that
The Australian
is representative
(that is, a relevant benchmark) of the value of
Major Masthead.
difficulty is said to be that Dr Eisenach’s
analysis, in seeking to determine the value of
monitoring services
using clip data relating to (redacted), incorrectly assumes that the (redacted)
is representative of CA’s
online repertoire as a whole such that the value
to Isentia and Meltwater of a licence of each of CA’s online publications
is to be determined by relativities extrapolated from the number of (redacted)
and, judged by that metric, said to be equivalent
in value to (redacted).
Again, as to the benchmarking anchor points of the (redacted)for non‑Major
Mastheads, and the (redacted)for
online publications, the applicants say that
Dr Eisenach has failed to explain how the (redacted)came to be selected as
the benchmarks
notwithstanding that having selected the benchmarks,
Dr Eisenach then seeks to explain certain disconformities and similarities
selected transactions
under which particular licences arise
selected publications
, on the one hand and the CA licensed
publications, on the other hand. The applicants contend that Dr Eisenach
has failed to explain
how the particular publications and the selected
transactions are representative of value of the publications he then values by
(5) (redacted) Isentia also says that (redacted) is targeted at public sector
employees. Isentia contends that (redacted) are publications
which influence
politics and business disproportionately to their audience share. Their
audience size is a function of the fact
that “only paying subscribers have
access to their content” and thus they are not representative of
CA’s repertoire
as a whole and reliance on them as benchmarks of wider
value is apt to throw sand in the eyes of the analysis and inflate the value
the CA repertoire in a benchmarking analysis using audience data. For that
reason alone, the applicants say that the benchmarking
analysis is
“fundamentally flawed”.
The Australian
specifically, the applicants note
Mr Gray’s evidence that
The Australian
“[c]ertainly ...
is one of the leading newspapers in Australia”. The applicants say that
The Australian
(leaving aside paper sales to the public) is,
relevantly for present purposes, a subscription only publication behind a
paywall, its “relative audience size” is simply
not reflective of its “importance” to the Australian
and business community”. The applicants say that because
of the importance of the publication in that context, an MMO, qualitatively,
order to provide a credible media intelligence service must put itself in a
position to be able to access and monitor the content
The Australian
The applicants say that a benchmarking analysis that translates a fee paid for
access to a qualitatively significant publication
The Australian
(because of its contribution to and influence upon national discourse on
matters of politics, business and related cultural issues)
as a benchmark of
value attribution for
other Major Mastheads in the repertoire on the
basis of proportional relativities derived from audience numbers “is
not valid”.
(7) The applicants say that, similarly, (redacted) are publications with
“outsize” importance to the political and business
relative to their audience size. Each is a (redacted) influential in political
and business circles and in the case of
the (redacted). The applicants’
point is that value attribution on the basis that these publications are
representative (true
benchmarks) of the CA licensed repertoire, relative to
audience size, is both unsound and very likely to over‑value the CA
repertoire. Dr Eisenach recognises that audience numbers (readership),
without taking into account qualitative distinctions in the
publications, “would not, by itself, be adequate”. Dr Eisenach
has sought to address qualitative distinctions
by identifying two broad
clusters: Major Mastheads and non‑Major Mastheads. The applicants
contend that isolating these two
broad clusters does not answer the criticism
particular publications
selected as representative benchmarks of
all other publications within the two respective clusters is not truly
representative of
the CA repertoire (or other components of each cluster) for
which the publications are used to attribute value.
force of these criticisms became apparent in the course of the
cross‑examination of Dr Eisenach. As already noted by reference
the summary of values attributed to the mastheads in the Major Masthead cluster
(ER 1, [230]), Table E‑4 sets out the value
assigned to each
Major Masthead for (redacted)
accept that newspapers (print and digital) predominantly associated with
State‑based catchments have a value to entities
seeking to provide media
monitoring services which includes access to and monitoring of the content of
those newspapers and we also
accept that a relevant factor in seeking to form a
view about the value of a particular title is the number of people who
that publication either in print or by digital subscription.
The difficulty we have is the attribution of value on a
relative basis
publication
by reference
to the benchmark publication of
The Australian
audience numbers
by reference to the
in the circumstances of the
by News of its licensing
arrangements for
The Australian
with CopyCo and CA.
Corp elected to take
The Australian
The Weekend Australian
of the CopyCo/CA orthodox licensing arrangements. It sees itself and its
national leading Australian newspaper as
of the ordinary and
outside the ordinary arrangements for its licensing. It is seen by News Corp
and others as a “leading”
newspapers in Australia. Isentia
to have it. (redacted) Audience reach, print, digital and total, is no
doubt one of the important factors in attributing value to
a title. There are
obviously other factors. It seems odd, however, to select as a benchmark of
each and every Major Masthead the
subject of the CA Proposed Licence, a
publication that News Corp, by March 2020, had decided to remove from CA’s
licensed content. At the moment in time when the CA Proposed Licence
(2018) was put to each applicant,
The Australian
was presumably thought
to enjoy its status as a leading Australian newspaper. We know from the earlier
licence negotiations in 2015
and 2016 the importance News attached to the value
The Australian
for the purposes of the Isentia negotiations leading to
the 2016 Isentia Licence. We have also seen the way News secured its special
value as demanded of CA in those negotiations. It seems equally odd to then
benchmark the value of every other Major Masthead in
CA’s repertoire by
reference to the amount paid by Isentia to secure access to the content of
The Australian
once News took its publication away from the orthodoxy of
the CopyCo/CA licensing protocol. One thing that is perfectly clear in
light of the conduct of News in seeking to extract its conception of value for
access to its content, is that News sees the
is just relatively, and proportionally, one of a number of Major
Mastheads, as heterodoxy. Rather, it is seen as special and was
seen as having
special value especially in the 2015/2016 negotiations.
applicants put these matters a little more emphatically by observing that
, as an important national daily paper for record,
publication an MMO
have and therefore
licence in order
to be taken seriously or credibly in providing a media monitoring service. They
say there are no “substitutes”
for it and characterising the annual
(redacted) as emblematic of a price point reflecting a willing but not anxious
licensor and
a willing but not anxious licensee, is
a distortion
because the analytical utility of such a price point must necessarily arise in
circumstances where there is a workably
competitive market that operates to
condition or moderate the critical factors of “willingness” and
“anxiousness”.
the robustness check does not affirm the analytical integrity of the
benchmarking exercise but rather suggests real caution
in embracing it. The
results of the robustness check (that is, the “alternative measure of
relative value” based on
clip data: ER 1, [248]) are set out at
Table E‑13 (ER 1, p 215) for Major Mastheads and
Table E‑14 (ER 1, p 216) for
non‑Major Mastheads.
(redacted). The applicants contend that these values for
The Courier Mail
The Advertiser
as a relative derivation of value based on clip
data produces a value output relative to
The Australian
that is simply
“not plausible” and “unreasonable”. They test the value
by asking: would someone pay News
The Courier Mail
by News Corp within the CA licensing protocol) (redacted) for a licence of the
content of that publication if a licence of
the content of
The Australian
is (redacted) On the clip data robustness check, those two publications
are, for all practical purposes, of the same value.
sets out the estimated fair market value of non‑Major Mastheads to Isentia
(and Streem) (using the robustness
check). It suggests a value for
Townsville Bulletin
(a newspaper serving the Townsville northern catchment)
to Isentia of (redacted) of the value of a licence of the content of
) and to Streem a value of (redacted). At Table E‑9
(see ER 1, [240] and [241]), the analysis of a reasonable range of fair
market values of non‑Major Mastheads for Isentia suggests that the value
The Townsville Bulletin
is (redacted) (print audience),
(redacted) (digital audience) and (redacted) (total audience). The highest
value (total audience)
is (redacted) of the value at E‑14 under the
robustness check.
of the non‑Major Mastheads is a publication called
“Realestate”. Table E‑8 suggests a value range (for
Isentia) for that publication of (redacted) (print audience), (redacted)
(digital audience) and (redacted) (total audience). The
robustness check suggests an estimated value to Isentia of (redacted) and an
estimated value to Streem of (redacted).
Dr Eisenach
makes the point that the virtue and utility of the robustness check lies in
seeking to establish the overall reliability
of the benchmarking exercise even
though some results for some publications may suggest anomalies in the value.
However, the applicants
contend that the wide variations in the values
demonstrates that “the analysis is not reliable in any way as a measure of
(redacted) The applicants say that the method deployed by
Dr Eisenach in attributing value to each of the publications in the table
attributes high value (high postulated licence fees) for many publications of
little (if any) value to the MMOs (and, in particular,
Isentia). The applicants
have identified a range of lifestyle, general interest or real estate
publications of no particular interest
to an entity monitoring
media publications which have been assigned
total audience
(redacted). The publications (with particular emphasis on the
publications in bold) are
The applicants characterise these valuation outcomes as simply
“absurd” calling into question the utility and
reliability of the
valuation methodology.
applicants also emphasise the table at E‑12 of ER 1 which sets out,
relevantly for present purposes, Isentia’s total
clips and the clip ratio
relative to
The Australian
for many of the publications in the above
table valued by reference to total audience value. The number of clips and the
relative to
The Australian
anomalies in the attributed total audience value (to Isentia)
(Table E‑8) for many of the non‑Major Masthead publications
(redacted) (Table E‑12) can be seen in the following
each of the publications in the above table accounted for zero clips, the
“alternative” method of valuation for Isentia
ought to attribute a
zero value to each publication yet the “total audience” valuation
suggests the attributed values
in the above table, which in turn suggests that
the clip data does not confirm the validity of the valuation. The clip data
E‑12) and the attributed total audience values do not sit
comfortably together. The applicants contend that the circumstance
benchmarking analysis assigned a value of (redacted) to the publications that
had zero clip use suggests that the benchmarking
analysis is “dramatically
over‑valuing many publications, to such an extent that it would be unsafe
for the Tribunal
to make any use of it”.
are concerned about these anomalies and the matters of concern already
applicants also emphasise anomalies in relation to the values attributed to
(redacted) and (redacted) benchmarked against
The Australian
The Australian
, (redacted) and (redacted) has a
audience, a
audience and a
audience as follows:
The Australian
– 1,759,000, 3,044,000 and 4,413,000
respectively; (redacted)– 510,000 (one figure which reflects the three
because of the nature of the publication); (redacted)– 129,000,
209,000 and 325,000 respectively. Benchmarked against
The Australian
of (redacted) and (redacted) print, digital and total audience
as a percentage of
The Australian’s
respective audience by category
is: (redacted). The reasonable range of fair market values for Isentia of
(redacted )and (redacted)
benchmarked against
The Australian
these values: (redacted), based on the print, digital and total audience ratios
above, a print audience value of (redacted)
(calculated as (redacted) which is
the adjusted value of
The Australian
); a digital audience value of
(redacted) and a total audience value of (redacted), applying the ratios to the
adjusted value for
The Australian
. As to (redacted), the values are,
applying the relevant ratios: (redacted), (redacted) and (redacted)
respectively.
statistics are set out in the following two tables. The first sets out the
percentage of the print, digital and total audience
for each publication
relative to the audience numbers for
The Australian
and the second table
sets out the value of that percentage relative to the adjusted value of
it follows that the benchmarking method adopted by Dr Eisenach
(benchmarking to the adjusted value of
The Australian
) attributes a value
to a licence Isentia has with (redacted) of between (redacted) (the total
audience ratio value) and (redacted)
(the print audience ratio value), yet the
actual fee paid by Isentia was (redacted). The benchmarking for (redacted) to
(redacted) Licence suggests a reasonable range of fair market
values (Table E‑8) of: print audience value (redacted); digital
audience value (redacted) and a total audience value of (redacted), yet the
robustness check based on the clip data attributed a
value to the publication of
are concerned about these significant variations in the outputs on value derived
from the benchmarking and robustness exercises.
It is correct to say that the
alternative method (the robustness check) produces “erratically”
different results for
particular publications from the results (values) arising
under the benchmarking exercise using audience data. That circumstance
us to reject the analysis as unreliable. The erratically different values for
some publications suggests that the benchmark
publications used to determine
value by reference to audience data are not truly representative of the elements
of the repertoire
sought to be so valued: that is,
The Australian
truly representative of the value of all other Major Mastheads to each applicant
(adjusted for disconformities and measured
by audience size); similarly,
(redacted) is not representative of the value of all other non‑Major
Masthead publications in
the CA repertoire.
accept the applicants’ criticism that in circumstances where
therefore choose not to adopt or rely upon Dr Eisenach’s benchmarking
Topic (9): The terms as to the payment of charges (and other
related terms) contained in the CA Licence, the Alternative CA Licence
Amended Alternative CA Licence
The CA Licence
of the proposed licence casts an obligation on the licensee to pay, quarterly
during the term, an annual “Licence Fee”,
which is defined to mean
“the greater of (a) the Minimum Guarantee; and
(b) the Revenue Charge”. The term “Minimum
Guarantee” is defined by reference to the minimum guarantee amounts set
out in Annexure A to the licence. The term “Revenue
defined by reference to the “Fixed Fee” component and the
“Variable %” in Annexure A. It
is convenient to again set
out the immediately relevant elements of Annexure A (Fixed Fee + Variable %
and the Minimum Guarantee
also contains an illustration of a calculation as follows. If a licensee has
annual “Revenue” of $8m, it would
pay an annual licence fee of
$3.66m based on a fixed fee of $1.5m (in the revenue tier set out above of
$8m ‑ $10m) and a variable
fee of $2.16m based on 27% of $8m,
constituting in all a licence fee of $3.66m. The example recites that because
$3.66m achieves
the Minimum Guarantee threshold, the “Fixed Fee + Variable
%” element determines the amount of the fee. In the revenue
‑ $30m, the Fixed Fee component ranges from $2m ‑ $3m and the
Variable % component is 25%. Revenue derived
by a licensee of $25m would result
in a Fixed Fee of $3m and a Variable % fee of $6.25m amounting to $9.25m. The
Minimum Guarantee
range for that revenue tier is $8m ‑ $10.25m.
A fee of $9.25m represents 37% of the licensee’s revenue $25m. The term
“Revenue” is defined to mean “all gross revenue earned
directly or indirectly by the [MMO] in relation to its Customers
or otherwise
from providing Copies or Communicating Licensed Works or Portions of Scraped
Copies of Licensed Works or material derived
therefrom, except for revenue from
services identified in Annexure F”. Each capitalised term is a
defined term in the licence
and Annexure F sets out six (with the potential
for more to be agreed) services provided by an MMO to its customers as
“stand‑alone
separately priced service[s]”, the revenue from
each of which is “Excluded Revenue”, provided that the service
not use Licensed Works.
we are not satisfied that Dr Eisenach’s benchmarking exercise
provides a foundation for concluding that the terms as
to charges set out in the
CA Licence are reasonable or properly supported by such an analysis, and
the licence fees are not otherwise
shown by any methodology to be reasonable, we
are not satisfied that the licence fees provided for by the CA Licence are
reasonable.
are not supported by the 2016 Isentia Licence having regard to the observations
we have made concerning the evolution of that
agreement. (redacted)
applicants make other criticisms of the CA Licence. We have already
identified some of those criticisms in the earlier discussion.
We will briefly
note some of those criticisms here. The applicants say that if CA’s
general “but for” approach
to “Revenue” is accepted for
the purposes of the CA Licence, CA will, in effect, be participating,
through a large percentage
applied to “Revenue”, broadly construed,
in revenue derived from all of the value added services of the MMO without any
proper consideration of the
of use in a copyright sense of the
Licensed Works in each service (where such use occurs). They say that there are
also many other
inputs into revenue generation in the form of other licensed
rights and access rights which need to be taken into account in the
provision of
media monitoring services including (redacted). They also reassert the
“Portion” point to the effect that
the CA Licence makes no
distinction in the fee calculation between communication of a
“Portion” of a work (which is said
to likely not be a substantial
part of the corresponding article), and the
of the work (a press
clip), by calculating the fees solely on the basis of the Annexure A table
and the licence fee clauses. The
applicants say that the approach reflected in
the CA Licence has been adopted because Mr Suckling has said that he
has formed the
view that CA does not want MMO licences to be characterised by
declining “clip revenue”. They emphasise a concern about
formulation of the licence fee having regard to large fixed fees based on an
MMO’s revenue (and minimum guarantees) in
circumstances where Major
Mastheads might be withdrawn from the licence (degrading its value), at
time during the period of the licence. They say that in a
forward‑looking way, the uncertainty in the scope of the content
licence, especially as to Major Mastheads, ought to be reflected, reasonably, in
the value of the licence as measured by the
licence fee. Isentia emphasises
that it has already had the experience of News Corp and Nine Publishing
withdrawing major critical
titles from the licence arrangements and as to
The Weekend Australian
, Isentia (redacted) to put
itself back in the position it was formerly in under the licence arrangements
with CA prior to withdrawal
of those titles.
it is true that CA has not abandoned the CA Licence, it is also true to say
that it places virtually all its emphasis in
these proceedings on the
Alternative CA Licence
Amended Alternative CA
), and encourages the Tribunal to proceed on the footing that the
version of the licence it truly
Alternative CA Licence
which is said to reflect the Streem Licence (as a contended comparable
market bargain). CA may have elected to take that course because
CA Licence is, in the end result, not supported by Dr Eisenach’s
benchmarking methodology and is not otherwise supported
by any other evidence
identifying the basis upon which the variable percentages were selected. They
seem, put metaphorically, to
have been “pulled out of the air” to
use the phrase adopted by Dr Pleatsikas.
the reasons we have given, we are not satisfied that the CA Licence
containing the licence fee formulation described earlier,
is reasonable.
brings us to the
Alternative CA Licence
Topic (8): The Alternative CA Licence and the Amended CA
Licence and aspects of the evidence of Dr Pleatsikas
have already concluded that we do not accept that the terms as to charges
contained in the
Alternative CA Licence
are reasonable on the contended
basis that they reflect the terms of a so‑called market‑based
comparable bargain as between
CA and Streem. That agreement came to pass in the
circumstances we have already extensively described and we do not propose to
those matters here. We do not accept CA’s contention that the
CA/Streem Agreement ought to be regarded as
determinative
reasonableness of the proposed
Alternative CA Licence
. As earlier
mentioned, Dr Eisenach’s opinion about the economic and probative
value of the CA/Streem transaction is not based
on an informed understanding of
the detailed foundational facts of the exchanges in which the agreement came to
pass. Also, the
particular elements of the proposed
Alternative CA Licence
also need to be understood in the context of the Deed of Settlement and the
third party arrangements made by force of the Deed Polls
between News Corp and
Streem and Nine Publishing and Streem.
the two major market participants do not regard the terms of the Streem Licence
with CA and the translation of it into the
Alternative CA Licence
“reasonable”, for many reasons. They say that the fact that a
relatively new entrant (Streem) with a relatively small
market share (redacted)
entered into such an agreement in the circumstances described earlier in these
reasons, ought to be viewed
carefully and cautiously when it is said that such
an agreement should be regarded as “determinative” of the
reasonableness
Alternative CA Licence
(redacted) put to the two
major market participants. Mr Samuel describes such an approach as
“the tail wagging the dog”.
it is necessary to turn to the fee setting clause set out in the
Alternative
and examine its structure and operation to determine whether the
proposed licence fee mechanism is reasonable or unreasonable. Many
the (redacted)
Alternative CA Licence
have been discussed at [51] to [66]
of these reasons. However, we note the following contextual matters:
(1) Mr Suckling has given evidence about the factors that led to the
formulation of the
Alternative
Mr Suckling says that between November 2017 and the end of 2020, the market
for MMO services and the publishing markets
continued to change. Competition
between Isentia, Meltwater and Streem intensified with Isentia’s position
(market share)
being “chipped away at”. He says that for publishers
of Major Mastheads, “digital content” and
“subscriptions”
became “increasingly important” relative
to print and advertising revenue. He says that CA reflected upon some of the
criticisms made by the MMOs about the
(including criticisms of
the “quantum of the fee” and other “aspects” of the
) to determine whether the concerns could be
“appropriately addressed” whilst continuing to reflect the
“rationale”
underpinning the
Industry Model
. He says that
intended to have a licence term of 2 years” in recognition of changes
the relevant markets. Thus, CA formulated an “alternative licence fee
structure” which was designed to “reflect
licensed content and
” [emphasis added] which “could adapt to the
circumstances of each MMO”.
(2) Mr Suckling says that “given” that CA had entered into the
(redacted) (the “FSMM Licence”), and having
regard to the
matters we have already mentioned at (1) above, CA considered that the
(redacted) ought to be offered to Isentia and
Meltwater. Mr Suckling
explains that CA would do that “by way of two proposals”. It needs
to be kept firmly in mind
that the first “proposal” concerns the
offer of a licence (a so‑called pro forma licence agreement (redacted))
and the second “proposal” is a bundle of propositions comprising an
of each proceeding (although not
interdependent offers) moderating the terms of the FSMM Licence should the
settlement be accepted
(redacted) the “Revenue Fee” percentage from
23% to (redacted) for each year of the two year term. It should also be
firmly in mind that the
Alternative CA Licence
out of the circumstances described earlier in these reasons in CA’s
dealings with Streem in the period essentially from
September 2020 to, in
effect, the day of the scheduled commencement of the hearing in October 2020.
(3) Mr Suckling says that in developing the “tiering based on
revenue” in the
Alternative CA Licence
, CA wanted to have one
licence fee for all MMOs “regardless of the size of their business and
revenue” and wanted to
ensure that
of content were
“appropriately remunerated and captured through reporting”.
Mr Suckling says that CA wanted to be “appropriately
remunerated” for the acts of an MMO in what Mr Suckling describes as:
... processing and storing vast amounts [of licensed content] onto servers;
enriching and analysing it; and then providing it to
customers in a highly
tailored fashion, often in real time; and [doing so] via a host of different
forms (emails, portals and alerts)
and across multiple digital devices.
(4) Mr Suckling contextualises those observations by noting that MMOs are
“finding new ways of extracting value from licensed
content” such as
making money from “offering Software as a Service (SaaS)”.
(5) Thus, the licence fee formulation with its corresponding definitions seeks
to engage CA as a participant in MMO revenue from
of these activities
across the spectrum from use of content engaging the reproduction and
communication right in relevant works,
to analysis of content and interpretation
of trends using the articles even though the particular activities do not, or
further engage either the reproduction or communication right
subsisting in the relevant works, but nevertheless in CA’s formulation,
gives rise to revenue that would not have been made by the MMO “but
for” ingestion of content at the very
. Mr Suckling
notes, in this context, that in relation to the 2016 Isentia Licence with CA,
(6) As to the CGL tiers, Mr Suckling says that the licence fee seeks to
ensure that each MMO pays the same licence fee for customers
of the “same
size” (by revenue) exhibiting the “same usage levels”, and on
the basis of the same percentage
of revenue. Mr Suckling says that
disputes about revenue and usage reporting and the concept of
“attributable revenue”
are sought to be overcome by setting a
“per customer charge” by reference to independently verifiable data
and by defining
revenue in a way that “moves away” from a concept of
attributing revenue to “specific acts” subsisting in
the copyright
in a work, to a “more transparent, certain and objective
definition”. Mr Suckling also says that the licence
is framed in a
way that provides “broader rights” to MMOs which “better
reflect[s]” the way each MMO
publisher content. The
applicants contend that the licence “grant” purports to
“capture” and “licence”
activities (which has the effect
of drawing revenue from those activities into the licence fee mechanism) when
the particular activities
do not engage a reproduction or communication of a
work. Mr Suckling says that the licence is designed to:
... [t]reat content as
content with a licence
of delivery and consumption, as well as the publication
format (i.e. print or online). In particular, the licence moves away from
outdated separation between
rights and embraces
set of rights that better reflects the business practices of
MMOs and how customers use that service.
[emphasis added]
(7) Mr Suckling also says that the licence is designed to provide MMOs with
greater flexibility in “how they price and sell
their services”
including “downstream rights”, to their customers. He says that the
changes to the “structure”
of the licence fee in the
Alternative
are said to reflect the various ways and stages in which content
is used by MMOs, which is designed to “capture” how MMOs
“price” and “sell” their “services”. The
stages of the “use” of the content said
to attract CA’s
participation through the “broader rights” grant and the licence fee
formulation is put this way
by Mr Suckling:
(a) The making of an initial copy of an article, including by scraping articles
from websites;
(b) The storage by the MMO of that copy, including for internal research
purposes; to
(c) The act of the MMO in communicating:
(i) Full text copies of print
articles; and or
(ii) Portions of articles (whether print or online) together with a link to the
full text PDF copy or to the publisher’s website,
to customers in the form of:
(iii) Media monitoring reports such as a daily curated email alert or
newsletter; and or
(iv) A searchable archive of such content that can be accessed by the
customer’s employees; to
(d) The use of copies for further research and analysis; and
(e) The ability of customers to further store and share that content within its
organisation.
(8) Apart from these matters, Mr Suckling says that the
Alternative CA
takes into consideration, in setting the licence fee, the
of customers each MMO has; the
(number of articles) of unique
content all MMOs would typically need to
“in order to
provide media monitoring services” to customers; the
content those customers
(including in that context their
unique nature
of whole of government
procurement arrangements for media monitoring services (which require a
“bespoke” fee structure).
(9) As to the licence fee, each MMO is required to pay, quarterly, for each year
of the proposed two year term, a licence fee which
“Revenue Fee” calculated as 23% of “Revenue” (as defined
and as confirmed in accordance with clause 4(c)
of the licence); and the
sum of three integers: the
Ingestion and Storage Fee
Whole of Government Fee
, otherwise described by
Mr Suckling as a “Usage based fee” and described in these
proceedings as the “CGL fee”.
The content and quantification of
each integer is determined by reference to clauses 3, 4 and 5 respectively
of Schedule 2, with
the sum of those integers measured against the quantum
of the “Revenue Fee” to decide the quantum of the “Licence
Fee” payable under the licence.
The Revenue Fee
relation to the “Revenue Fee”, we make these observations:
(1) As to the “Revenue Fee”, Mr Suckling says that a fee based
on 23% of “Revenue” as defined is “broadly
consistent with and
within the range” proposed in the
, and the definition of
“Revenue” is in the same terms as the
for the reasons already mentioned, the licence fee formulation contained in the
is not supported by any critical methodology and the
benchmarking and robustness check of Dr Eisenach does not assist the
for the reasons already given. Where does the figure of 23% of
“Revenue” actually come from in a true analytical sense,
reflecting CA’s view of a percentage threshold of revenue it seeks to
derive (in the context of the “greater
of” mechanism engaging the
(2) Mr Suckling says that CA regards 23% of “Revenue”,
“where revenue is broadly defined” as “reasonable”
on the following factors.
, 23% of revenue is said to be
“needed” to reflect the “value and cost” of content. As
to “value”,
Mr Suckling says that MMOs have continued to
increase the share of revenue they derive from “subscriptions to bundled
offerings”. By “bundled content offerings”,
Mr Suckling is referring to one or more service offerings of an MMO
combines use of content in a way that might suggest reproduction or
communication on the one hand, and a service such as the
analytics service that
does not engage such an act, on the other hand, but where the services are
offered and sold together as one
service. (redacted).
Mr Suckling says that the
of content consumed by MMOs and
their customers has “risen significantly” due to “digital
consumption”. Mr
Suckling refers to the graph at para 102 of
his fourth affidavit to support this contention by reference to the contended
in the use of “portions” between the 2016 and 2019 calendar
years. We have already discussed aspects of
earlier in these reasons but it is contextually convenient to mention some
aspects of that matter here in the context of Mr Suckling’s
observations. Isentia says that whilst it is true that the number of portions
articles communicated to customers has increased, CA mistakes
the extent of the increase because Isentia’s practice of reporting
“tagged” articles as “communicated” when only 5% or
fewer of tagged online articles were actually communicated
to customers as
portions, creates a misleading impression of the true position. Isentia says
that CA “significantly overstates”
the increase in portions
communicated. We have already accepted aspects of Mr Gerstmyer’s
evidence on this topic. This issue
relationship with the use of
press clips
(whole articles communicated)
and the withdrawal of titles by News Corp and Nine Publishing.
(3) The applicants say, and we accept, that the number of press clips (whole
articles) communicated to customers has declined significantly
as there are
fewer newspapers and as to the remaining titles, there are fewer articles in
print. (redacted). CA contests that proposition
and says that making the
article available and enabling the customer to view it if they wish
(irrespective of whether they do or
not) is enough. As to the numbers, Isentia
says that the number of whole articles communicated has significantly declined
terms (as well as in “practical” terms due to the tagging
point) and the number of portions communicated is vastly overstated
(4) As to the
of the proposed licence, the applicants emphasise in
the context of whether the 23% of revenue is reasonable, that the value of the
licence has declined significantly because the titles of News Corp and Nine
Publishing now withdrawn from the licence (the national
mastheads of
The Australian Financial Review
said by the applicants
to be the two “most valuable mastheads in the CAL repertoire”)
represented (redacted) previously
communicated by Isentia under the prevailing
licence arrangements. The applicants say that apart from an unsupported
that the withdrawal of these titles was taken into account in
determining the “Licence Fee” for the
Alternative CA Licence
CA has failed to demonstrate how the loss of the value attributed to these
titles has been taken into account in setting the licence
fee for the proposed
Alternative CA Licence
(5) Mr Suckling says that the historical and existing webscraping licences
provide for a fee based on (redacted). Mr Suckling says
that this approach
could not be maintained as it is “outdated”; “significantly
undervalued digital content”;
and the concept of “attributable
revenue” is at odds with the “bundled manner” in which MMOs
sell their services.
Thus, the notion of a relationship (which we described
earlier in these reasons as a linear or direct relationship) between revenue
an exercise of a reproduction or communication right (whether described as
revenue “derived from” or “attributable
to” the exercise
of the right), is now said to be outdated because the MMOs derive revenue by
bundling their services some
of which engage the exercise of the right and
others do not, and determining which part of their revenue (across a graduated
of revenue generation) is “attributable” to the exercise of
the reproduction or communication right is said to be inefficient
and difficult
for CA to exercise control over “how the MMOs subjectively choose to
account for and self‑attribute revenue
under [the] licence”.
(6) The CA solution is to strike, as a fee, a percentage of revenue from the
services at large, that is, revenue from bundled services
differentiation of the components of the offering between those engaging the
exercise of a copyright right and those that
do not. Such an approach reflects
the CA notion that all revenue of an MMO is ultimately referable to a use of the
licensed content
in the sense that “but for” ingestion, none of the
revenue could have been derived. As to the difficulties for CA of
attribution, Mr Suckling says that although (redacted)
(7) As to the “cost” consideration leading to the selection of 23%
as a reasonable percentage of revenue, Mr Suckling
simply says that 23% of
revenue reflects a “cost of goods in comparable sectors”.
Mr Suckling also says that the 23%
of revenue figure has been based on a
“more general definition of revenue, in effect, capturing the MMO’s
total revenue
subject to certain exceptions”. This formulation is said to
be “simpler” and to promote “transparency and
certainty”. Mr Suckling says that the “broad” definition
of revenue was adopted to “reduce the opportunity
for the [MMOs] to
unilaterally determine what is or is not included as attributable revenue and to
set the percentage that is paid
accordingly”. Mr Suckling says that
if such an approach “would capture substantially all of an MMO’s
that is simply because the MMO has elected to “bundle its
services on a fixed fee pricing model”. Mr Suckling then says
is the case
and the revenue earned from sales is not divisible
as a result, it is
for a revenue based licence
fee to be applied to
all revenue
to avoid artificially carving it up in a
way that does not bear any resemblance to how that revenue is earned. It also
difficulties associated with attempting to work out and agree how to
attribute revenue to the use of CA licensed works.
[emphasis added]
(8) Thus, it follows in Mr Suckling’s view, that in order to pay a
licence fee on the basis of a percentage of revenue which
might be thought to
reasonably reflect a broadly coherent and fair relationship between
from a service offering and the
of a copyright right
in content by an MMO, the MMO would need to
each of its service
offerings and presumably offer and price them separately. Where service
offerings are not divisible as to sales
and revenue earned, Mr Suckling
says it is “sensible and fair” for a revenue based licence fee to be
“applied to
all revenue to avoid artificially carving it up ...”.
(9) It also seems to follow that the greater the investment in value added
services by an MMO such as more and more sophisticated
analysis of data to
isolate trends in the relevant area of inquiry (where, for example, the service
does not, or arguably does not,
involve a “reproduction” or
“communication” of licenced content), offered as a component of a
suite of offerings
to support the
attractive force
and the revenue it might produce, 23% of the total revenue from the
service would be payable to CA (without any contribution to the
cost of the
development of the service offering by CA).
(10) It would also seem to follow for Mr Suckling that where an MMO has a
service offering that comprises a bundled suite of services
such that it is
“sensible and fair” for a “revenue based licence fee” to
be applied to “all revenue”,
every other content provider (such as
each radio and television broadcaster) would also be acting sensibly and fairly
to demand of
the MMO a licence fee based on “all revenue”. In such
a case, striking the licence fee based on a percentage of all
revenue would not
reflect any objectively reasonable notion of a fee based on the revenue
actually earned
by exercising a copyright
in the relevant
content. What would the position of the MMO be if each broadcaster sought a
substantial percentage of all revenue?
(11) We take the view that in relation to a fee based on a percentage of
revenue, the relevant percentage (once it is established
that the contended
percentage is shown to be reasonable) ought to apply to the revenue derived from
in the relevant sense (that is, referable to the exercise of the
reproduction or communication right)
subsisting in
the licensed content.
Where it is not possible to apply the percentage to identified revenue
, the percentage applied to all revenue, having taken into account
the definition of “Revenue”, must be discounted to
reflect the
circumstance that a number of the services do not engage an exercise of the
reproduction or communication right subsisting
in the content or do so, in some
services, to a very limited degree. Such a discount would be a
setting a fee which attempts to establish, as a matter of fundamental principle,
a relationship between the
use of the content
the relevant sense. We regard this relationship as fundamental to the
“reasonableness” of the licence fee.
(12) Our additional difficulty is that the rate of 23% is simply not supported
by the evidence as a reasonable rate.
now turn to the CGL aspect of the Licence Fee.
The Ingestion and Storage Fee
Mr Suckling
says that this part of the
CGL fee calculation
recognises that making an
initial copy of the content and storing that copied content is
“basic” to providing a media
monitoring service and represents a
“starting point” for all MMOs. Mr Suckling says that this part
of the charge is
“intended to provide” CA with a “simple fixed
fee” for a year allowing for adjustments in the number of “Unique
Articles” The term “Unique Articles” means the total number
of “Licensed Works” calculated according
to cl 3.1(a) of the
proposed licence. For the first year of the proposed licence, the total number
of Unique Articles has been prescribed
by the licence as 2,285,000 articles.
Clause 3.1(a) contains procedures which enables CA to calculate the number
of Licensed Works
of CopyCo and non‑CopyCo members (consistent with the
definition of Unique Articles). The per article charge (commencing on
1 October 2020) is put this way with the following
Volume of Total Unique Articles as calculated under clause 3.1(a) of the
Per Article Charge
1 – 2,000,000
2,000,001 – 3,000,000
3,000,001 and above
For example:
If in the immediately preceding financial year:
Publisher A
published 100 Unique Articles across its 5 Editions
Publisher B
published 250 Unique Articles across its 1 Edition and 5 Online
Publications
Publisher C
published 650 Unique Articles across its 5 Editions and 9 Online
Publications
The Ingestion & Storage Fee payable by MMOX per
Quarter is:
((100 + 250 + 650) x 0.35) ÷ 4 = $87.50
If in the immediately preceding financial year:
Publishers A, B
and C published a total of 1,000 Unique Articles;
Publishers D, E
and F published a total of 2,500,000 Unique Articles
The Ingestion & Storage Fee payable by MMOX per Quarter is:
(100 + 250 + 650 + 2,500,000) = 2,501,000 total Unique Articles
((2,000,000 x 0.35) + (501,000 x 0.25)) ÷ 4 = $206,312.50
first year prescribed count of 2,285,000 articles is said to be attributed by CA
as to (redacted). The nominated number of articles
is said to be based on
“robust data” available to CA from each publisher member within each
class of publisher. For
CopyCo publisher content, the number each year will be
based on the number reported from the immediately preceding year. Any decline
or uplift would be adjusted in the following year. Mr Suckling says that
the “per article” charge is “connected
to what the MMOs
actually use and report to CA”. The applicants contend, however, that
cl 3.1(a) is not at all clear about
the degree of “connection”
and the number nominated by CA actually reflects the number of Unique Articles
by CopyCo and non‑CopyCo members of CA, the subject of
what is described as a “blanket licence”. The applicants
this approach sets a higher per article charge than would be the case if the
charge was based on
of content by an MMO. Mr Hickey puts the
matter more emphatically for Meltwater by saying that the “Unique
nomination process enables CA to calculate a fee based on every
single piece of content CA’s publishers create, irrespective
Meltwater and its customers use it or not. The per article charge is not
connected to
of an ingested article. The charge is based on a fee
per article generated (or originated) by the CA cohort of publishers on the
footing that ingestion of every article produced by the publishers every year
should attract an ingestion and storage fee regardless
of whether an MMO uses
the article, that is, regardless of whether any customer wants the article or
whether the article is responsive
to a customer’s search terms.
CA proposal to adopt a per article charge for each and every article produced by
a publisher (and brought within the blanket licence
of all publisher member
content) regardless of the relevance, interest or use to the customer, is also
said to be “unreasonable”
by Mr Horrell and Mr Gerstmyer
(for Isentia) and Mr Vance (for Meltwater) in their evidence.
Mr Suckling says that
the per article charge as something
related to the
ultimate use
by the MMO of the article (by dealing with it
responsively to a customer’s search terms) misunderstands the role of the
threshold fee
(per article) for the “right” to
ingest (take a copy on to the MMO’s servers) and store the copy on those
“in the context of a blanket licence”.
(redacted).
The position concerning Isentia is different as described earlier. The
applicants complain that CA imposes a
licence of all publisher
content regardless of its utility to the service or the customer base. They say
that in seeking a licence
to conduct a media monitoring business and provide
media intelligence services, the
content licence offered to them is
blanket licence
the content of
CA publisher
members, thus giving rise to a per article charge for all articles produced by
the publisher members on the footing of
a threshold ingestion and storage fee.
Mr Suckling notes Mr Gerstmyer’s evidence that in 2020 Isentia
forecast that it would
ingest copy and communicate (redacted) press clips (whole
articles). This, of course, needs to take into account the “tagging
point” mentioned earlier and the contended distortions in the numbers due
to Isentia reporting tagged articles as communicated
articles. (redacted).
accept that a licence fee for the right to reproduce and communicate licensed
content must reasonably reflect a fee that recognises
that the threshold act of
ingestion of content (and storage where content is to be retained, such as
tagged content) is an act of
reproduction of that content. The act of
communicating the content to a customer also engages an act subsisting within
the exclusive
rights of the copyright owner of the content which needs to be
remunerated as an element of a reasonable licence fee (subject to
taking into
account the content of the act; whether portions or whole articles are
communicated; whether communication has occurred
at all; and other matters
relevant to the content of the service). The
question, however, is
whether the
for determining
and thus the
of the fee is
the extent that the CGL method selects ingestion and storage as one element
attracting a fee, the attribution of a per article
fee to each article ingested
and stored is one method of recognising a fee for the exercise of a right by an
MMO related to each
article taken in. Whether the overall CGL fee is
“reasonable” depends upon the aggregate fee and the method relating
to the calculation of the other component parts, and ultimately whether
segmentation and attribution of price produces an overall
CGL fee which when
compared with a “reasonable” percentage Revenue Fee, gives rise,
overall, to a reasonable fee for
the grant of a licence of the rights subsisting
under the Act in the content. We accept, however, that as to ingestion and
offering a licence fee
on the basis of a
“block” or “blanket” licence, sometimes called a
“push” licence of
content in CA’s entire
repertoire, relevant or irrelevant to the licensee, wanted or unwanted by the
licensee, creates an artificial
threshold fee in the sense that an MMO that
claims that it requires a licence in order to conduct a media monitoring service
for example, Major Mastheads and
Mastheads) and is offered a licence of content for that purpose
terms that it license and pay for, per article generated,
all content
will in the result, pay a fee for an act it does not wish to undertake
concerning articles it does not wish to obtain.
The Customer Fee
Mr Suckling
describes the Customer Fee component as a charge devised to
“capture” the “value” of the
communication
content to the customer and the value of the
downstream use
made by the
customer of the content. It does so by enabling CA to divide the customers of
an MMO into corporate users, local government
users and government users; by
enabling CA to allocate each corporate customer to a particular “Annual
Revenue Band”
and a “Usage Level”; and by enabling CA to
allocate government customers to a particular “Employee Band”
“Usage Level”, all of which is set out according to tiers and usage
levels in “Table One” of the proposed
to the Annual Revenue Band, the allocation is not by reference to the band of
revenue an MMO derives from its contract with the
customer. Rather, by the
particular mechanism adopted by CA, CA has created four revenue tiers into which
it allocates the corporate
customers of the MMO. To determine the annual
revenue of the customer, CA looks to various market‑based reports such as
produced by Illion (formerly known as Dunn and Bradstreet), annual
reports, financial statements lodged with the Australian Securities
Investments Commission (“ASIC”) and other publicly available
information.
four revenue tiers are: Tier 1: $0m - $10m; Tier 2: >$10m -
$100m; Tier 3: >$100m - $1,000m; Tier 4: > $1,000m+.
has also created six levels of usage by corporate customers of content. The
usage level for each customer is allocated by CA “based
on the sum of all
Copies of Licensed Works and Portions of a Licensed Work Communicated during
[the] Quarter to a Customer”.
The six usage levels are these:
Level 1: 1 to 125; Level 2: 126 to 1,125; Level 3: 1,126 to
12,500; Level 4: 12,501 to 37,500;
Level 5: 37,501 to 62,500;
Level 6: 62,501+.
the quarterly corporate customer fee component is determined by looking to Table
One to see where the customer allocation falls
according to the combination of
the customer’s annual revenue and usage. For example, if the customer is
an annual revenue
Tier 1 customer (with, for example, annual revenue of
$9m) with Level 1 usage, the customer fee component of the MMO’s CGL
licence fee calculation will be a quarterly fee of $163.04 ($652.16 annually).
If the customer is a revenue Tier 4 customer with
usage Level 1, the
quarterly customer fee component of the MMO’s CGL licence fee calculation
will be $1,222.83 ($4,891.32 annually).
the MMO’s corporate customer is a revenue Tier 1 customer ($9m) but
exhibits Level 6 usage, the customer fee component of
the MMO’s CGL
licence fee calculation will be a quarterly fee of $978.26 ($3,913.04 annually).
If, however, the MMO’s
corporate customer is a revenue Tier 4
customer exhibiting Level 6 usage, the customer fee component of the
MMO’s CGL licence
fee calculation will be a quarterly fee of $7,336.96
($29,347.84 annually).
applicants contend that this structure is not directed to engaging with the
MMO’s revenue from their downstream activities
but focuses upon the
revenue of the MMO’s corporate and not for profit
say that a corporate customer with up to $10m in revenue that receives 125 Press
Clips or Portions results in a component
fee of $163.04 per quarter or $1.30 per
clip or Portion ($163.04/125) and a customer with revenue of $1b receiving 125
Press Clips
or Portions results in a component customer fee per quarter of
$1,222.83 or $9.78 per Press Clip or Portion ($1,222.83/125). The
say that the position is compounded by the entitlement of CA under the proposed
licence to treat the revenue of the company’s
group as revenue of the customer entity if CA is unable to verify the annual
revenue of the customer entity.
of these examples demonstrate that the customer fee component of the MMO’s
CGL licence fee calculation varies substantially
having regard to the annual
revenue of the MMO’s customer.
understand an hypothesis which suggests that the greater the annual revenue of
the MMO’s corporate customer, the greater
the likelihood of a higher level
expenditure on
the procurement of media monitoring
services (including media intelligence services) and in the absence of data on
the actual use
of such services (and MMO revenue), the annual revenue of a
customer might be deployed as a
very crude way indeed
of establishing a
hypothetical proxy
for use of such services resulting in the attribution
of a fee to the MMO on some particular basis. However, in truth, the critical
matter, rationally, is the extent to which the MMO engages with customers (in
this aspect, corporate customers) in communicating
licensed content, and thus
the level of “usage” is both
We do not accept that the calculation of a customer component of the MMO’s
CGL calculation ought rationally and reasonably
to take into account and vary
according to the annual revenue of the customer derived from whatever the scope
of the customer’s
particular business undertaking may be. Taking the
annual revenue of the customer into account simply creates an increasingly
scale of fee which actually has no relevance at all to the critical
matter of, to what extent is an MMO actually communicating licensed
customers to which a usage fee might properly attach and be calculated in
determining the MMO’s “Licence Fee”.
method is even more removed from the field of reasonableness when it comes to
calculating the customer fee component of the MMO’s
CGL licence fee
calculation concerning government (other than whole of government) customers.
The method concerning these customers
allocates each government customer to a
usage level but also an employee tier by reference to the number of
of the particular government department or agency or local
government body. There are four tiers of employee cohorts and the same
levels of usage. The employee tiers are these: Tier 1:
1 ‑ 60 employees; Tier 2: 61 ‑ 250
employees; Tier 3:
251 ‑ 1,000 employees; and Tier 4:
1,001+ employees. Thus, for a government department characterised as a
Tier 1 customer
by employees and exhibiting Level 1 usage, the
customer fee component of the MMO’s CGL licence fee calculation will be a
fee of $163.04 ($652.16 annually). If the government customer is a
Tier 4 customer by employees with usage Level 1, the quarterly
calculation will be $1,222.83 ($4,891.32 annually). It can be immediately seen
both from the example and Table 1 that CA has
sought to align the employee
cohort element of this component of the Table with the corresponding Tier
applicable to corporate customers
in Tiers 1 to 4 (by revenue), with the
corresponding level of usage within one of the six bands of usage. One approach
adopts revenue
and the other adopts employees as a proxy. We do not accept that
calculating this component of a fee by reference to the number
of employees of
the particular government department, agency or local government body is a
relevant or reasonable way of determining
the quantum of this component of the
to determining the “Usage Level”, cl 4(d) provides that the
allocation of the customer to a particular level of usage
is based on the sum of
all copies of the work (and portions of a work) communicated during the quarter
where four factors are taken
into account.
, a Portion or a link to
a licensed work is counted as “communicated” regardless of whether
it is read by the customer
and regardless of whether a file of the full text of
the work or a link to it is “opened” by the customer or not:
4(d)(ii)(A).
, if a Portion of a Press Clip is counted (as
it must be under cl 4(d)(ii)(A), and a particular “Permitted
(as defined) of the customer opens the link, the communication
of the Press Clip resulting from the opening of the link by the Permitted
Recipient is
not counted again
“for that Permitted
Recipient”: cl 4(d)(ii)(B).
, as to “Archive
Access”, only those Press Clips, Portions and any link to a licensed work,
electronically transmitted
or otherwise “served” to a customer or a
Permitted Recipient of a customer, are counted (although under
cl 4(d)(ii)(B)
a communication to a particular Permitted Recipient is not
counted again): cl 4(d)(ii)(C).
, if the same item is
communicated to more than one Permitted Recipient, “it is counted for
each such permitted recipient
” [emphasis added]:
cl 4(d)(ii)(D).
provisions are confusing. Mr Suckling says that where a work is made
available to a customer in a searchable archive and an
employee of the customer
(a Permitted Recipient) conducts a search for and retrieves the
... that is properly a
separate act
of communication that needs to be
captured to develop a true picture of a customer’s usage especially in
circumstances where
the Customer Fee [component of the CGL Fee] is intended to
reflect the downstream use of content. To suggest, as
does, that this is “double dipping”, is not correct.
[emphasis added]
Mr Suckling
also says that the evidence of Mr Horrell and Mr Gerstmyer to similar
effect (where the clause is said to create a “multiplier
effect”) is
also incorrect. Mr Suckling says that if an MMO communicates a
“Portion” to a customer and that customer
further communicates it to
10 additional users, there is only one use by the MMO not 10. He says that the
MMO does not have to look
to “every use of every work by every Permitted
Recipient”. However, he says that if the MMO puts that work into an
for a customer and an “employee of the customer
Mr Suckling also says that Meltwater’s concerns
(redacted) misunderstands the “reporting obligation” cast upon
MMO under the
Alternative CA Licence
. Mr Suckling says that
Portions and links are to be reported if they have been communicated; the
licence does not require an MMO
to identify individuals who have clicked on the
link; and the licence does not require an MMO to monitor when and whether emails
have been forwarded to others within a customer’s organisation (Permitted
Recipients). He expresses his view of the clause
to the effect that the only
limitation “is that an MMO can only communicate content to Permitted
Recipients at a Customer”.
applicants contend that the clause is confusing and they say that they are not
comforted by Mr Suckling’s individual views
as to the construction
and meaning to be attributed to the clause as his view on those matters will not
be binding in any subsequent
proceedings.
The whole of government fee
Mr Suckling
says that because whole of government procurement covers so many departments and
agencies, the Customer Fee component
of the CGL calculation has no operation in
relation to such arrangements. Thus, the fee method adopted by CA is that an
pay in each quarter the greater of 23% of the amount payable by the
government party to the MMO (and where an annual fee is involved,
the quarterly
amount is simply one quarter of the contract amount) on the one hand, and the
following “fixed fees”, on
the other hand, as follows:
(redacted).
makes a point about this aspect of the CGL calculation (which is also adopted by
Meltwater) to this effect. Mr Suckling gave
evidence that he had
negotiated the whole of government formula (redacted). However, to the extent
that the (redacted) would be sought
to be applied to Isentia and Meltwater, this
particular component of the CGL fee would have both relevance and application to
business undertaking of both companies. The applicants say that the
percentage in this component of the fee based on the “greater
formulation adopting 23% is unsupported and unreasonable. As to the
“fixed fee” element of the formulation,
the applicants say that it
has no basis and, objectively viewed, is “large”.
follows from the discussion of the
Alternative CA Licence
that we do not
Revenue Fee
component as reasonable. As to the elements of
the CGL fee calculation, we are not satisfied that the
Ingestion and Storage
component is soundly based. Nor are we satisfied that the
Customer Fee
is consistent with principle. We do not accept that calculating a component
of a possible fee by reference to the annual revenue
of the customer or the
number of employees in a government agency’s cohort of employees is
reasonable. Ultimately, each component
of the CGL fee must be calculated
according to CA’s allocations and once the aggregate sum of all those
component parts is
known, the quantum is to be compared with an amount
representing 23% of the MMO’s Revenue. In other words, each limb of the
calculation suffers from serious concerns as to its basis in fact and as a
matter of principle rendering the formulation unreasonable.
is now necessary to turn to the
Amended Alternative CA Licence
Amended Alternative CA Licence
Amended Alternative CA Licence
proposal is very problematic indeed.
, it is not a licence proposal at all in the true sense of an
amended alternative licence proposal. It is an
of an offer to
settle the proceedings on the basis of a particular deed and is not available
unless the relevant proceeding is settled
(although the offers to each applicant
are not interdependent) on the proposed terms coupled with an opportunity to
negotiate the
final terms of a Deed Poll with each of News Corp and Nine
Publishing.
, the settlement proposal contemplates a licence being
granted to each acceptor on the basis of the terms of the
Alternative CA
but for a “Revenue Fee” calculated on the basis of
(redacted) of Revenue rather than 23%. The percentage continues to
suffer from
the difficulty that the basis for the foundational percentage of 23% is not
identified nor the basis for the (redacted)
(which presumably would endure for
only the two year term of the licence before reversion to a rate of 23%.
, the components of the CGL fee continue to suffer from the concerns
we have already expressed.
, the elements of the Deed Polls
remain, in any final sense, to be negotiated in any event.
in these reasons, we have explained the elements and character of the
Alternative CA Licence
proposal within the context of a settlement of the
relevant proceeding and we will not repeat those remarks here again.
is now necessary to turn to the proposal of the applicants.
Topic (9): The licence proposals of Isentia and
central aspect of the licence proposal of Isentia and Meltwater is a rejection
of Mr Suckling’s view that a licence of the
content ought to be
“agnostic to both the mode of delivery and consumption as well as the
publication format (i.e. print or
online)”. The applicants contend that
it remains relevant and important as a matter of customer demand to recognise a
distinction
between press clips (whole articles) sought by customers (which
might be delivered electronically) and
online delivery and consumption
which engages a response to search terms, the extraction of a portion and
typically the communication of only a “Portion”
coupled with a link.
The applicants say that as to press clips (whole articles communicated), it
remains relevant to price that aspect
of capturing and communicating an article
on the basis of a “price per article communicated”, whether the fee
per article
be (redacted) (or some other amount thought to be reasonable
although the applicants contend for (redacted) as the reasonable rate).
applicants also contend that a percentage of revenue (and certainly 23% of MMO
“Revenue”) is an inappropriate and
unreasonable method of striking a
licence fee for the rights granted.
MMO proposal retains a rate per clip of (redacted) for the copying and
communicating of whole articles which was the rate reached
by 2015 based on CPI
increments on the 2001 rate. The applicants say that retaining that rate is
reasonable as the “average
value” of the Mastheads licensed by CA
has declined (in effect, “averaged down”) due to the withdrawal of
valuable Mastheads from the licence (
The Australian
Weekend Australian
The Australian Financial Review
related titles). In 2018, Meltwater was paying CA an amount of (redacted) per
clip for the copying and communicating of
whole articles. The applicants say
that since there is demand for the communication of whole articles as a matter
of market behaviour
and the practice continues to occur in order to service that
demand, it thus remains relevant to
that particular aspect of
the communication of works in the licence and to price that activity on a per
article basis. It is said
to represent a clear direct relationship between a
licensed act and a change for the act. This aspect of the licence proposal is
Press Monitoring Service Fee
: cl 4.1 and Annexure A to
Isentia’s Proposed Licence. In describing aspects of the licence proposal
of the MMOs, we will
refer to the Isentia document.
(redacted),
because the act of making available a Portion does not “generally involve
the communication of a substantial part
of the copyright work” and
although from time to time a Portion might be characterised as a
“substantial part’
of the relevant work (subject to satisfying the
tests described in
IceTV Pty Limited v Nine Network Australia Pty Limited
(2009) 239 CLR 458
at 473 [30], French CJ, Crennan and
Kiefel JJ; at 508‑509 [154] and [155] (as to the first two sentences)
and 512 at [170],
Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ), the characterisation of the
“Portion” in the context of the corresponding article is likely
be regarded, generally, as other than a “substantial part” of the
Licensed Work.
the applicants emphasise that that was a position adopted by the Publishers
ACCC Digital Platforms Inquiry
(redacted).
The applicants note that Google has said in a release (on 31 May 2020) that
in “2018 Google Search accounted for
3.44 billion visits to large and
small Australian news publishers for free”. This, no doubt, is the very
matter that led to
a range of interventions (and threatened interventions) by
regulators and the Commonwealth government.
applicants contend that if 3.44 billion visits occur to Australian publisher
sites (redacted).
(redacted).
This is said to highlight the unreasonableness of CA’s proposal at 23% of
MMO revenue. As to the behavioural impact
in the market of the conduct of
Facebook and Google, the applicants say that the platforms have trained users to
view snippets (essentially
Portions) as
or at least of
we accept that Mr Gray has an informed understanding of what lies behind
each search inquiry using “Google Search”,
“Google News”
and “Google Alert” (and thus the likely number of snippets
produced), and we accept that Google
has nominated, as the number of
to the sites of Australian publishers for which it is responsible is
3.44 billion visits (in respect of which, in 2018, it paid nothing
publishers).
suspect that historical factors, the domicile of the parent entity of each
platform, the market power of each platform and the
dynamics of the engagement
between the foreign parent owner of each platform and the national government of
the sovereign polity
of Australia ultimately resulted in a payment influenced in
its quantum by all of these factors rather than anything entering or
approaching the universe of a willing but not anxious publisher and a willing
but not anxious platform operator.
(redacted).
This is said to be particularly so in the case of Isentia as it has (redacted).
However, the fee proposal is said by the
applicants to be reasonable
of the licence and thus in order to
secure that value and the continuing reasonableness of the fee proposal, the
applicants contend
that a term of the licence must include a prohibition upon
the withdrawal from the licence of Major Mastheads during the term of
licence. The applicants say that it would not be reasonable to adopt a term
providing for a “substantial fee”, including
the per customer
minimum guarantee proposal of the applicants in a licence that enabled CA to
withdraw Major Mastheads from the grant
(except in the case of a fee based
directly on the number of Portions communicated where the fee would adjust as
the number of Portions
communicated varied). The applicants say that an
agreement which provides for the payment of substantial fees as the
consideration
for the grant of a licence to communicate works in respect of a
repertoire of “uncertain scope” cannot be regarded as
reasonable.
(redacted).
An important point of distinction between the approach adopted by CA and the
applicants, emphasised by the applicants,
is that Isentia and Meltwater accept
that there must be a fee which reflects the act of taking licensed works
the servers (platforms) of the applicants (redacted). However, the
point of distinction is that the applicants say that imposing
a further fee (in
effect) for the grant of a “right” to “analyse stored
copies” of works is inconsistent
with principle and experience.
applicants say that their fee proposal provides CA with “adequate”
compensation for the ingestion and storage of the
licensed works including the
copying and communication of press clips and Portions. We, of course, are
seeking to determine whether
the overall fee proposal in the various proposals
is reasonable or unreasonable.
further matter emphasised by the applicants (but which CA says is an unfair
comparison) is the media analytics reports produced
by Mediaverse Pty Ltd
(“Mediaverse”). Mediaverse is wholly owned by Mediality Pty Ltd
(“Mediality”). Mediality
is jointly owned by News Pty Limited and
13 other publisher entities associated with particular newspaper titles
(including entities
related to News Corp, Nine Publishing, West Australian
Newspapers Limited and others). Mr Reid is a Director and the Chair of
He also has the title, Group Executive, Corporate Affairs, Policy
and Government Relations, News Corp Australia. Mediaverse provides
analytics services. It competes with Isentia. An example of a Mediaverse
report (relating to Clayton Utz as an example) reveals
that the report examines
media coverage to determine a number of factors including: Commendable
Coverage, Favourability responses
(Favourable, Neutral, Unfavourable),
Prominence, Trends, number of articles or broadcast items mentioning the
“tracked organisation”
and other rankings. It sets out an
“Executive Dashboard” and displays the analysis of the coverage by
bar charts and
pie charts on every topic it addresses. It contains references
to the titles of some newspapers. It analyses the sectors of the
participant and reflects other features of analysis. The point of this is that
Mediality’s Chief Executive Officer,
Mr Bruce Davidson, confirmed by
letter dated 19 October 2020 that neither Mediaverse nor Mediality holds
any copyright licences “with
any owner of works in which copyright
subsists”. Mr Reid accepted in his evidence that the reason
Mediaverse does not hold
a licence from any publisher (or rights owners) is that
its media analytics service does not engage with the exclusive rights of
publisher’s in any significant way.
examined the examples of media analytics reports in evidence prepared by, for
example, Isentia, and the report prepared by
Mediaverse for Clayton Utz, we
accept that the essence of each service and the report produced by engaging with
the service is focused
upon interrogating and examining the publications so as
to report responses, presence in markets, positioning and other interpretive
outcomes. We accept that it seems odd that like conduct by Mediaverse does not
require a licence from CA (or the rights owners directly)
for such activities
and yet the publishers, through CA, seek to participate (to the potential extent
of 23% of MMO Revenue) in the
revenue derived by MMOs for a like service on the
footing that such activities require a licence. If the matter is approached as
a matter of principle applied to like conduct, a question arises as to why
Mediaverse is not paying CA or the publishers whose works
are analysed, the
greater of 23% of Revenue and the quantum of the CGL fee (to the extent that any
of the integers of the CGL fee
apply). If the activities of the applicants (and
Mediaverse) do not engage with the exclusive rights of the publishers in any
significant
way, the only basis for such a fee is the “but for” test
adopted by CA:
ingestion and storage none of these activities
could take place. That is not a position adopted by Mr Reid.
example further suggests that, as a matter of principle, to the extent that a
charge for an activity of the licensee is to be
based on a percentage of revenue
derived from engaging in the particular activity, the activity itself ought to
reflect an exercise
of a right subsisting in the copyright, and the revenue
ought to be attributable to that act, not simply a function of an upstream
“but for” ingestion and storage causation notion.
difficulty we have in addressing the proposal of the MMOs is that it is not
clear to us where the (redacted). The applicant seeks
to support the
reasonableness of their proposal on the basis of Mr Samuel’s income
and market analysis resulting in Mr Samuel’s
view that the fee
proposals of the MMOs are at the top of the range that he would consider
reasonable (applying that method of analysis)
and that the fees proposed by CA
are unreasonably high.
it is necessary to turn to the analysis of Mr Samuel.
doing so, it is necessary to say something about the evidence of
Dr Pleatsikas and Mr Ross.
Aspects of the evidence of Dr Pleatsikas
to Dr Pleatsikas, although CA criticises the discussion by
Dr Pleatsikas of the economic principles relevant to developing a licence
as between rights owners and an MMO, and especially the authority of the nine
economic principles identified at para 16 of his report
(Confidential
Exhibit CJP‑6 to his affidavit of 4 August 2020) and the
discussion of those principles at paras 18 to 51 of
the report, we are
assisted by those principles and that discussion. Paragraphs 15 and 16 of
the report are in these terms:
objective of any licence to intellectual property (IP, such as copyrighted
material) is to properly reflect its fair market value
while promoting its use
to the extent that will ensure an efficient market outcome. In economic terms,
this, ideally, implies that
the price and non‑price terms of a licence
should be designed to ensure that the cost of the IP to users reflects a
competitive
market price.
economic principles are important in this context. These
(a) The willing buyer/willing seller principle
(b) The entire market value proposition
(c) The applicability of the patent thicket concept
(d) The centrality of value
(e) Efficient pricing models
(f) Non‑discrimination
(g) Transaction costs and licensing efficiency
(h) Switching costs
(i) Contract term considerations
first criticism is that the reference in para 15 to the need for the
licence to “properly reflect” “fair market
value” on the
one hand, while promoting “use” of the licensed rights (to the
extent that use will ensure “an
efficient market outcome”) on the
other hand, which suggested to Dr Pleatsikas that the terms of the licence
should be designed
to ensure that the “
of the IP to
competitive market price
” [emphasis added],
is said to demonstrate that Dr Pleatsikas is focused on the interests of
and does not address the interests of licensors “at
all”. CA says that the nine principles omit the need to ensure that
licensors are sufficiently remunerated so as to incentivise rights owners to
create new works. CA contends that the discussion of
the nine principles is
“remarkably skewed” in favour of licensees at the expense of
licensors. However, we do not view
the discussion of the nine principles in
that way. We understand the discussion to reflect the notion that in taking
into account
each of the nine principles a balance must be struck in any such
licence to ensure that the licence “properly reflect[s]”
market value” which is a notion that accommodates the interests of the
licensor and the licensee within a framework
promotes use
licensed rights rather than adopting price and non‑price terms that
use of the licence by the licensee, so as to ensure efficient
market outcomes. We do not understand Dr Pleatsikas to be contending
principles that do not take into account the interests of licensors.
second “fundamental” weakness in the methodology adopted by
Dr Pleatsikas based on the nine principles is said to
be that it is no
methodology “at all” as the principles are simply nine
“freestanding and seemingly independent”
principles with no
indication of how they are to be weighed in the balance and applied in
determining whether particular price and
non‑price terms are reasonable or
unreasonable. CA says that the approach adopted by Dr Pleatsikas is not
found in the ACCC
Guidelines and nor is it referenced to any authoritative
professional or academic literature. Dr Pleatsikas does not contend that
the nine principles he has identified as considerations informing a discussion
of the topic he is addressing, have been gathered
together elsewhere (whether in
professional literature or otherwise, to his knowledge) or that they represent
something in the nature
of a “standard” or “rule” to be
met and addressed when seeking to understand how an MMO licence might be
developed which reflects the objective he describes in para 15. We
understand each of the principles discussed by Dr Pleatsikas
the topic might be approached from
first principles
Dr Pleatsikas seeks to apply matters of sound economic principle which are
capable of assisting an analysis of the benefit and
burden of the licence in the
broad sense of the discussion of each principle and the extent to which it
serves the objective Dr Pleatsikas
has identified. Obviously enough, some
factors in the context of the market, the circumstances of the parties, the
rights in issue
and other considerations will result in a greater contribution
of one or more of the principles than some others to the analysis.
regard, as CA does, the statements of principle by Dr Pleatsikas to be the
expression of
. We think they are useful, as far as they go.
real difficulty we have, however, is that Dr Pleatsikas did not (and was
not asked to) apply any of the nine principles so as
to express a view about
whether the price and non‑price terms of any of the licence proposals in
issue in these proceedings
are reasonable or unreasonable. He simply did not do
that because he was not asked to do so.
that sense, it is necessary to move on to the evidence of Mr Samuel who did
seek to form a view, based on the method he propounds,
terms in the various proposals are reasonable or unreasonable.
examining the evidence of Mr Samuel, it is necessary, however, to mention
some aspects of the attack on Dr Pleatsikas, both
personally and
methodologically.
principle that the
of any licence of intellectual property is
that it ought to “properly reflect its fair market value” (when
striking the
balance earlier described) is in part given expression by
principle 4 described as the “centrality of value” principle
but which is actually described by Dr Pleatsikas as “the
, rather than
aspirations
for setting a licence
fee” [emphasis added]. We understand that statement as recognising that
the terms of a licence of intellectual
property ought to fairly reflect the
extent to which the licence provides
to the parties (both licensor
and licensee) rather than reflecting terms which are
aspirational
(especially as to price) or terms (again, especially as to price) that might be
based on a view that the
historical cost
of developing the intellectual
property is the
determinant of
are many examples of substantial investments in, for example, the development of
a process, a method, the use of compounds in
a novel way, molecular engineering
or any advance on current knowledge or ways of doing things which result in an
item of intellectual
property where the value is not reflected in the cost of
development. Dr Pleatsikas takes the view (he says a presumption) that
incurred by publishers in generating protected content is an
important consideration in determining
what to produce
(the number and
of production (hard
copy, online, both, and the scope of the precise content). Dr Pleatsikas
says that decisions as to those matters
influenced by costs as
“an important consideration” but the decisions also take into
account a plurality of revenue sources
(“mainly advertising and/or
subscription fees”). He contends that MMO revenues, as part of that
plurality, represent
a “very small proportion of total publisher
revenues” and thus “it follows that publisher decision‑making
on what content to develop and how much [of it] to develop” is “not
significantly influenced” by the
of the MMOs and the
customers of the MMOs. He says that such decision‑making may not be
influenced by the MMOs and their customers
understand Dr Pleatsikas to be saying that
developing content of a particular kind, type and scale influences decisions as
to what to produce and at what level having regard
to the primary or dominant
sources of revenue
related to that content
, the notion of focusing upon
the costs of the publishers
or generally “as the
a licence fee” [emphasis added] distorts the fee
setting process if the central principle is one of isolating the value of the
licence. Focusing on the costs so as to attribute costs to licence fee setting
without identifying a process for distributing the
costs amongst the plural
sources of revenue is inconsistent with determining the real value of the
licence. Dr Pleatsikas says that
the role of
MMO revenues
decision‑making about
(kind, type and scale (level and
quantity)) is such that those costs of the publishers are “not
relevant” to “setting
value‑based MMO licence fees”.
do not regard the costs of the publishers as irrelevant to licence fee setting.
However, we accept that force of the views expressed
by Dr Pleatsikas on
this issue and we would say this. The core business of, for example, News Corp
and Nine Publishing (so far as
its newspaper business is concerned) is to supply
news and other information to readers, and to supply space to advertisers who
to put their products and services before those readers (sometimes called
the “eyeballs” factor). Each MMO provides
a separate source of
revenue for the publishers’ news content product. Undoubtedly, there were
original set‑up costs
in order to supply content to the MMOs and, no
doubt, there are some ongoing costs but each class of cost is likely to be
small. More particularly, little if any, cost would be
by the publishers if they ceased supplying the MMOs with content. Any cost
incurred in the supply of content is unlikely to vary
(or vary significantly)
with the number of articles supplied to the MMOs. That being so, the marginal
cost of supply of content
to the MMOs is likely to be zero or close to zero and
the marginal and average cost of supply of content will be equal or
approximately
accept that licence fee setting ought to reflect the value contributed to the
licence where the balance point is determined by
the standard of the willing but
not anxious licensor and the willing but not anxious licensee (that is, by
parties who would normally
find themselves with
among multiple
market participants where
competes away inefficient costs and
prevents a participant from
setting prices
by reference to
, efficient and inefficient, historical or otherwise. As to this issue
generally, it is important to keep in mind the analysis which
undertaken. Sometimes a bargain is struck and the context of the
to be addressed requires a court or a tribunal to determine whether
the bargain as struck, in the circumstances of the parties, the
relevant market
and the particular statutory integers governing whatever the prescription may
be, is the expression of an outcome
represented by a willing but not anxious
seller/licensor and a willing but not anxious buyer/licensee. In these
proceedings, there
is no bargain struck (in terms of the various proposals).
The Tribunal is seeking to determine in relation to a range of competing
proposals as to the price and non‑price terms of content licences (where
each postulate is sought to be measured against the
notion of whether, if any
one of those competing versions were to be adopted by the Tribunal the
particular terms would represent
reasonable or unreasonable terms for the
purposes of ss 157(3) and (6) of the Act),
the terms can
properly be characterised as an outcome consistent with the willing but not
anxious seller and the willing but not
anxious buyer standard or framework. We
make further observations about that matter shortly.
Dr Pleatsikas
also contends that the process of determining the value of the licence (that is,
value‑based licence fees) needs
to take account of the contribution of the
licensed rights to the field of rights shaping the services provided by the
also accept that a question that would need to be addressed in examining a price
that a willing but not anxious licensor of content
would accept is whether the
cost of supply of content to the MMOs is the marginal cost or the average cost
of supply. However, we
repeat the observation at [631].
a factual level, CA contests the proposition of Dr Pleatsikas that the
“MMO revenues represent a very small proportion of
total publishing
revenues” such that it follows that “publisher decision‑making
on what content to develop and
how much to develop are not significantly
influenced (or not influenced at all) by the MMOs and [their] customers”.
(redacted).
We respectfully suggest that the point that Dr Pleatsikas seems
to have been developing is that MMO revenues represent a small proportion
total publisher
revenues” [emphasis added] such that MMO
revenues do not significantly influence (if at all) “publisher
decision‑making
to develop” [emphasis added]
and how much of it, with the result that the costs of
development
, put simply, cannot be allocated to MMO revenues for the purpose
of “setting” licence fees by
those costs
the question of the proper approach to the willing but not anxious buyer/and
willing but not anxious seller “framework”,
we simply make these
observations:
(1) The Tribunal is required to take the ACCC Guidelines into account and we
have examined the Guidelines earlier in these reasons.
The Guidelines recognise
that the Tribunal is “intended to act as a constraint on the exercise of
market power” and
the focus of the principles in the Guidelines is upon
constructing a hypothetical bargain between licensor and licensee “with
equal bargaining power” as a “practical means” of determining
terms as to price and other terms.
(2) The very notion that the standard or framework comprehends a measure of
whether a transaction (in fact or as a postulate) represents
or would represent
if struck or adopted “fair market value” (as CA contends for),
assessed by reference to whether the
transaction can properly be characterised
as one struck between a willing but not anxious seller/licensor and a willing
but not anxious
buyer/licensee (as CA contends for), engages the notion of the
willingness
of the party to enter the transaction, a lack of anxiousness
in entering
the transaction and the concepts of
market value
fair market value
(3) We accept that the standard or framework recognises: that the parties are
not constrained in their willingness to enter except
as a matter of individual
choice; that neither party finds itself in a state of anxiousness to enter the
transaction; that the bargain
as influenced by informed choices so made is not
the expression of the market power of either participant; and, consistent with
last consideration, the bargain under assessment (or proposed bargain) must,
as all parties to these proceedings accept, “reflect
fair market
(4) We accept that these features of the standard or framework necessarily
recognise that each party to the transaction enjoys choices.
Dr Pleatsikas
and the applicants contend that the standard or framework, by reason of these
considerations, engages the concept
of whether the transaction is one which
reflects an outcome in a “workably competitive market”. We accept
that the standard
or framework measures the transaction on the
of an absence of market power in either party in, analogically at least,
circumstances where
confers market choices characterised by
prices where substitution possibilities exist. Ultimately, these factors
condition an assessment
of whether the proposed terms are capable of being
described, in the statutory sense in issue, as reasonable or unreasonable. If
it were not so, the willing but not anxious price point of an exclusive rights
holder would be a monopoly rent price point. That
is precisely why
s 157(3) was introduced into the Act.
Dr Pleatsikas was criticised on the footing that, in effect, he had allowed
himself to become an advocate for the client
by adopting positions of heterodoxy
to advance the client’s interests and second, he had not previously in
written submissions
to regulators or in oral submissions before such bodies
advanced a proposition along the lines of the nine economic principles to
applied in determining the fair market value of an intellectual property licence
described in his report. We do not propose to
expose further these contentions.
We are satisfied that the views expressed by Dr Pleatsikas are genuinely
held expressions of expert
opinion. Nor do we accept that Dr Pleatsikas
has “fashioned” his nine principles to meet the demands or
expectations
of the client which is a conclusion we are, in effect, invited to
reach essentially by drawing an adverse inference from the fact
of the nine
principles not having been gathered together and expressed or extemporised by
Dr Pleatsikas in other forums.
Nevertheless,
as we mentioned earlier, Dr Pleatsikas does not take the step of engaging
with any one or more of the nine principles
on the one hand, and the terms of
each of the various licence proposals on the other hand, so as to form a view
or otherwise of the price and non‑price terms of
any of them.
being so, it is necessary to turn to the evidence of Mr Samuel. Before
doing so, we simply note for the moment (although we
will return to the evidence
of Mr Ross) that Mr Ross did not seek to express a view about the
reasonableness of the terms of any
of the proposed licences. Mr Ross
accepted that in terms of his professional experience he had never been called
upon to undertake
such a task and he accepted that he did not have the expertise
to do so. The role discharged by Mr Ross for CA was one of assessing
critiquing the analysis and calculations undertaken by Mr Samuel.
Topic (10): The evidence of Mr Samuel and the critique of
aspects of that evidence by Mr Ross
accept that Mr Samuel is highly experienced in the discipline of forensic
accounting and the various methodologies applied in valuing
assets and in
assessing whether proposed fees for the grant of a licence of intellectual
property rights reflect a reasonable fee
(otherwise called throughout
Mr Samuel’s discussion, a reasonable “royalty rate”).
as we did with the evidence of Dr Eisenach, we propose to first examine the
evidence of Mr Samuel to identify precisely the tasks
he undertook and the
views he formed, and then assess whether the analysis and the expert opinions he
expresses assist us in deciding
whether any one or more of the licence fee
proposals are reasonable.
has provided a number of reports (six in all including supplementary material by
letters). The first report is dated 7
August 2020 and it addresses aspects
of the earlier licences between CA and Meltwater, the proposed
(the 2018 CA proposal) and what is described as the
amended Meltwater proposal which is the proposal ultimately put by both Isentia
and Meltwater, described earlier in these reasons.
first report is Mr Samuel’s primary report in the sense that it sets
out the methodology adopted by Mr Samuel which he applies
throughout his
other reports. Those other reports are concerned with analysing the
Alternative CA Licence
proposal, the
Amended Alternative CA Licence
proposal and further aspects of the proposal of the applicants. The later
reports also address (among other things) the proposals
in the context of
updating the analysis to take account of the most recent financial information
available to Mr Samuel. For example,
in Mr Samuel’s letter
dated 12 March 2021 (described as Mr Samuel’s sixth report), he
sets out updated calculations to
take account of the financial results for
Meltwater to the year ended 31 December 2020 and the financial results to
Isentia for the
year ended 30 June 2020 and the six months to
31 December 2020. In order to prepare the sixth report, Mr Samuel was
provided with
Meltwater’s profit and loss account to 31 December
2020; invoices issued by CA to Meltwater showing details of the actual CA
paid during the year ending 31 December 2020; Isentia’s financial
statements to 30 June 2020 and the six months to 31
December 2020 as
disclosed on the
Australian Securities Exchange
website; details of
Isentia revenue for Australia for the financial year ended 30 June 2020 and
the six months to 31 December 2020;
and details of actual fees paid by
Isentia to CA for those periods.
turning to the updated financial information underpinning Mr Samuel’s
analysis, we propose to begin with Mr Samuel’s
first report which
identifies his approach and the principles he has applied.
that report, Mr Samuel says that in his experience the most frequently used
approaches for determining a reasonable royalty (fee)
“whether for the
purpose of entering into a licence, or for valuing IP in the context of a
transaction, tax, transfer pricing
or a dispute” are:
(a) a market approach, which considers the royalty by reference to other
transactions in the market [Method 1];
(b) an income approach, which has regard to the incremental cash flows to be
derived from the IP and, in some circumstances, the
profitability of the
licensee [Method 2]; and
(c) a cost approach, which has regard to the costs of creating an asset of equal
utility [Method 3].
says that he has assumed, based on his experience as a valuer, that a reasonable
royalty should be defined as “that
sum which would be agreed between a
willing licensor and a willing licensee in an arm’s length negotiation
with both parties
knowledgeably
without compulsion
at the date the licence is granted” [emphasis added].
to Methods 1 and 2, Mr Samuel observes that these methods are
recognised as acceptable methods of determining a reasonable royalty
context of valuing intangible assets in
International Valuation Standards 210
Intangible Assets
(“IVS 210”). Paragraph 60.19(b) of
IVS 210 addresses the topic of determining the value
intangible asset by reference to the value of the hypothetical royalty payments
(as contemplated in IVS 210, para 60.18) and
contains this observation
on the topic of developing a royalty rate for the relevant intangible asset:
Two methods can be used to derive a hypothetical royalty rate. The first is
based on market royalty rates for comparable or similar
transactions. A
prerequisite for this method is the existence of comparable intangible assets
that are licensed at arm’s length
on a regular basis. The second method
is based on a
split of profits
that would hypothetically be paid in an
arm’s length transaction by a willing licensee to a willing licensor for
to use the subject intangible asset.
[emphasis added]
propose to focus upon Mr Samuel’s application of the income approach
(Method 2) to the proposed licences in issue and then
to the income approach, Mr Samuel says that it is a commonly accepted
method for valuing any asset and that in the context of determining
a reasonable
royalty rate, it would be applied by considering the following two factors:
incremental cash flow benefits
to be derived from the use of the
asset. This is sometimes referred to as the “available profits”
approach. The
behind this approach is that a licensee would be
prepared to pay a
of its incremental cash flow benefits to the
licensor in order to
flow benefits; and
(b) the extent to which the asset being licensed
contributes
licensee’s profits. For example, the licensed asset may be the
contributor
to the underlying product (as with a patented pharmaceutical
compound, or the copyright in a book) or may be only a
minor contributor
to the underlying product (as with a licence for only one patent in a motor
vehicle engine, for which there are many hundreds of
patents as well as
trademarks and copyright).
[emphasis added]
Mr Samuel observes that the income approach assumes that a willing licensee
would be prepared to forego a portion of its anticipated
incremental cash flow
benefits (or profit) from the use of IP rights by way of a royalty in return for
the ability to earn the remainder
of those benefits. Mr Samuel says that
in using the income approach it is necessary to identify the benefits foregone,
and obtained,
by the parties as a result of the licensing agreement which in
turn requires:
identification
quantification
of the incremental cash
flow benefits arising from the use of the IP; and
(b) the appropriate
of those benefits between licensor and
[emphasis added]
observes that an important aspect of the income approach is the underlying
fundamental valuation concept that the value
of any asset is the value of the
future cash flows which will be derived from its use. Mr Samuel says that
in simple terms, “this
concept is that the amount a willing buyer (or
willing licensee) will pay to acquire an asset from a willing seller (or willing
is dependent on the cash flows the willing buyer (or willing licensee)
can derive from the use of that asset.
approach involves identifying and quantifying the “increments” in
cash flow due to the licence of the rights in question
(in this case, the CA
repertoire in the circumstances as discussed by Mr Samuel). The approach
recognises that the licensee provides
a service made up of a number of features,
and contributions may occur to one or more of those services from various rights
or a service in the aggregate may engage contributions from a
combination of rights holders. (redacted).
of the benefits (in the sense described above),
Mr Samuel says this:
The allocation of profits between licensor and licensee for the purpose of
determining a reasonable royalty is ultimately a matter
of judgment. In my
experience, a widely used
starting point
for allocating profits is to
attribute a 25% share of the profit to the licensor. For example, a
on a patented product would suggest a starting
point for a royalty rate at 10% of sales. In other words, conceptually, a
would be prepared to pay a royalty of 10% of sales (being 25% of its
profit margin) in order to retain the remaining 30% of sales.
[emphasis added; footnote omitted]
puts the utility of the starting point in this way:
Some valuers use this 25% share as a
rule of thumb
, however I
that it should be
no more than
starting point
Various factors will impact whether the share should be higher or lower than
[emphasis added; footnote omitted]
to the factors which would tend to increase the royalty rate beyond the starting
point, Mr Samuel identifies the following considerations:
(a) the licence being exclusive;
(b) the licensee being a competitor with the licensor in the relevant
(c) the licensee providing limited or no added value to the licensed product;
(d) the licensee having to make little or no capital investment in order to
manufacture or distribute the product;
(e) the licensee having to make little or no marketing investment in order to
sell the product; and
(f) the licensee benefitting from the sale of other products sold in tandem with
the licensed product.
also identifies factors which would tend to decrease the starting point, as
(a) the licence being non‑exclusive;
(b) the licensee providing access to a market that the licensor could not
otherwise access;
(c) the licensee providing substantial added value to the licensed product;
(d) a high level of investment by the licensee in order to manufacture or
distribute the licensed product;
(e) a requirement for the licensee to make a large marketing investment in order
to sell the licensed product; and
(f) the licensee not benefiting from the sale of other products in tandem with
the licensed product.
Mr Samuel’s second report of 9 October 2020, Mr Samuel
(among other tasks) reviewed the report of Mr Andrew Ross dated
September 2020 and at Section II, Mr Samuel sets out his
reasons for disagreeing with Mr Ross in relation to seven topics. As an
introductory matter to that discussion, Mr Samuel at para 14(c) says
that in his opinion “the 25% rule of thumb is a widely
used starting point
for allocating profits in the context of determining royalty rates, and has been
throughout my nearly 30 years’
experience in considering reasonable
royalty rates (including in Hong Kong, the UK, the USA and Australia)”.
Although Mr Samuel
again uses the phrase “starting point”, he
seems to have moved a little closer to the notion of a “rule of
by the second report. Mr Samuel returns, however, to the
phrase “widely used starting point for allocating profits”,
para 26(c) of the second report. At para 35 of the second report, the
reference to a 25% rule of thumb is again described as
a “widely used
starting point for allocating profits”.
Dr Eisenach
eschews, as unsound, any engagement with an allocation of profit of 25% to the
licensor as a way of determining a reasonable
fee whether as a starting point or
propose to now identify the way in which Mr Samuel has applied the income
approach to reach particular views and the conclusions
reached in his first
report. We will then turn to the way in which the analysis has been updated by
reference to the most recent
financial information and aspects of the criticism
made of his approach.
The income approach: Meltwater
his first report, Mr Samuel considers Meltwater’s historical
financial performance and the consequences of applying the previous
licence fee
formulation between CA and Meltwater in the context of the financial
information, the effect of applying the proposed
effect of applying the amended Meltwater proposed licence. In considering the
various tables prepared by Mr Samuel references
are made to
“Nationwide” which is a News Corp entity. Sometimes in the text we
make reference to News Corp (Nationwide)
and on other occasions we simply refer
to Nationwide. Mr Samuel always refers to Nationwide.
starting point is that Mr Samuel summarises the financial performance of
Meltwater in the three years then most recently available
to him ending
31 December 2017, 2018 and 2019. That summary is in these
the case of CA, each calculation in Table 3 strikes the Table 2
licence fee as a percentage of the Table 1 revenue. (redacted)
regard to the (redacted), Mr Samuel analysed Meltwater’s profits
licensing costs (position 1) and also its profits before
licensing costs
the (redacted) (position 2). The results for
each position are set out as a summary in Table 4.
next step is to identify the licence fees paid by Meltwater as a percentage of
licensing fees and the (redacted). The
summary for
all licence fees
paid by Meltwater is set out in
also sets out another table which is designed to show the outcome (inclusive on
this occasion of the (redacted)), as a percentage
of the profit (remaining after
payment of the (redacted)), before licensing fees. The outcome is shown in
concludes based on Table 6 that the licensing fees have represented between
then examines the payments made by Meltwater under the previous licence
arrangements between CA and Meltwater arising out
of the “Scraping
Licence” (which Mr Samuel describes as the “Scraping
Agreement”) and the “Press Clipping
Agreement”. These
agreements are discussed extensively earlier in the reasons. (redacted).
actual fees paid to CA
under those previous licence arrangements were as
order to derive the statistics in Table 7, Mr Samuel was provided with
invoices issued by CA to Meltwater for the years ended 31
December 2018 and
2019 in respect of the Scraping Licence and the Press Clipping Agreement.
Mr Samuel notes that the amounts reflected
in Table 7 vary slightly
from those set out in Table 2 and the differences appear to be
differences
between amounts payable and amounts paid in particular periods.
Mr Samuel observes that the amount of the variance is not significant
does not affect his analysis or his conclusions.
The proposed CA Licence
then begins his examination of the
18 May 2018. He notes that the licence fee under that document is the
greater of both a flat fee determined by reference to the
amount of gross
revenue derived directly or indirectly by Meltwater and a percentage of revenue
on the one hand, and a “Minimum
Guarantee” amount on the other hand.
The particular table at Annexure A of the proposed
is set out in these reasons at [522] and [554] and repeated at [704] of these
reasons. The effect of the table is set out in Table
Table 8: Fee payable under CAL Proposed Licence
Variable Fee %
[Variable] Fee
Minimum Guarantee
(redacted).
Mr Samuel also notes that the term “Minimum Guarantee” is
defined to mean, for each year of the two year term,
the Revenue for the 12
months prior to the “Commencement Date” with the result that for the
two year period of the proposed
licence the Minimum Guarantee ensures that the
Revenue will not be less than the Revenue in the 12 month period prior to the
Commencement
Date. (redacted)
(redacted).
Mr Samuel then sets out the total fees that would have been payable in
2017, 2018 and 2019 under the proposed
in Table 11.
notes that on 5 February 2020, Meltwater was notified that as from
20 March 2020 CA would cease to have the right to sub‑licence
Corp titles
The Australian
The Weekend Australian
and that as
from 17 January 2021, CA would cease to have the right to sub‑licence
the Nine Publishing title
The Australian Financial Review
(and titles
related to that title). (redacted). As to these matters, Mr Samuel
contends that to the extent that the publications
in question are covered by the
but are now
from the licence,
the following matters ought to be noted:
(a) in order to continue to provide coverage of those publications to its
customers, Meltwater will
to enter into separate arrangements with
the relevant publishers and therefore incur
licence fees;
(b) the value of the services provided by CAL, will
accordingly.
The [proposed
] does not provide for a reduction in
licence fees to compensate for any such reduction in the value of the services
provided. (redacted).
[emphasis added]
Table 12, Mr Samuel sets out the effect on Meltwater profit of the
(which Mr Samuel calls the “CAL
Proposed Licence”). Table 12 assumes that the licence had been in
force during each
year and it assumes that (redacted). On that footing,
Table 12 is as follows.
noted earlier, Mr Samuel concluded that the
actual fees paid
by Meltwater (having regard to Tables 5 and 6) were excessive for the
reasons noted at [670] of these reasons. (redacted)
also says that on the basis of the analysis at Table 12 (which does not
allow for the (redacted).
then prepares a table which takes into account the (redacted) in FY 2017,
2018 and 2019. The table identifies the CA fee
as a percentage of
Meltwater’s profit, as follows:
then prepares a further table which takes into account the (redacted) on the
assumption that
would have been payable in the earlier years on
the assumption that the
had been on foot in those years.
(redacted). On those assumptions, Table 14 is in these
sets out the position if the (redacted) is taken into account.
The licence proposed by the applicants
Mr Samuel considers the
amended Meltwater proposal
which is the
licence proposed by each of Isentia and Meltwater. Again, the elements of the
proposal by the applicants have already
been discussed in these reasons but
briefly it will be recalled that there is a per article charge of (redacted).
Had the proposal
of the applicants been the basis of the licence in the years
ending 31 December 2018 and 2019, the licence fee payable to CA would
been the fees set out in Table 17.
mentioned, Meltwater was notified in February 2020 that CA would cease to have
the right to sub‑licence the relevant News
Corp titles and that from
17 January 2021 CA would cease to have the right to sub‑licence
The Australian Financial Review
(and associated titles). Mr Samuel
has assumed that the licence proposal of both applicants will cover a period in
the right to sub‑licence the News Corp titles (up to
20 March 2020) and a period when it would
have that right (after
20 March 2020). Mr Samuel then seeks to identify the
licensing cost
(Table 18) that would have been payable by Meltwater
assuming that the proposal of the applicants had been on foot during 2018 and
2019 and assuming that:
18 is in these terms.
the Meltwater proposed licence (described by Mr Samuel as the Meltwater
Amended Proposed Licence which is the present proposal
of the applicants) and
assuming that the (redacted), Mr Samuel calculates what Meltwater’s
total licensing costs
would have been, in the relevant years, as a
proportion of its
. That calculation is set out in Table 19.
regard to Table 19, Mr Samuel makes these
observations:
again notes his earlier view that a starting point for considering the
appropriate proportion of profits that should be
paid as licensing costs (the
allocation point) is 25% and observes that having regard to the tables set out
above, (redacted)
then undertakes a calculation which incorporates the (redacted). Although there
might be a debate about whether the measure
of the (redacted)
20 is as follows:
then considers the income approach as it would apply to Isentia. We will then
by Mr Samuel as a result of
having applied the income approach.
The application of the income approach to
the starting point is to examine Isentia’s profit or loss position for the
financial years ended 30 June 2017, 2018 and
2019. It is not necessary to
set out all of the detail of all of the various tables. The method applied by
Mr Samuel is consistent
with the method adopted in relation to
Meltwater’s position. The results as Table 21 are
regard to Table 21, Mr Samuel concludes that:
Australian results
for the financial years 2017, 2018, 2019 and the 10
months to 30 April 2020 are set out in
terms of the historical fees paid to CA by Isentia under the licence which had a
term from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2018, Mr Samuel
sets out the
fees in respect of press monitoring, online monitoring and downstream use (for
both corporate customers and government
users). These fee arrangements have
been discussed earlier in these reasons. Applying those terms as described at
paras 140‑142
of Mr Samuel’s first report, he then
calculates at Table 24 the
actual fees paid to CA
under the licence
arrangement for the financial years ended 30 June 2017, 2018 and 2019 and
the 10 months to 30 April 2020. Table
24 is in these terms:
observes that the total amounts paid in 2017 and 2018 were equivalent to the sum
of the (redacted). Having regard to Table
24 setting out the actual fees
paid and Table 22 setting out Isentia’s financial performance for
Australia only
, the following percentages can be seen. (redacted)
then considers the proposed
convenience, Annexure “A” to the proposed licence is again set out
the table at Annexure “A”, Mr Samuel identifies the fees
payable in the event of revenue at $80m and $90m as
Table 25: Fee payable under CAL Proposed Licence ($)
[Variable Fee %]
then identifies the fees that would have been payable by Isentia to CA, assuming
had applied, in the financial years ending
30 June 2017 to 30 June 2019 and to 30 June 2020 ((redacted)) as
notes that the fees which would have been payable according to Table 26 do
not include government downstream fees.
then sets out in Table 27 the effect on (redacted)
then considers the licence proposed by Isentia (which reflects the Meltwater
proposal, described earlier by Mr Samuel as
the amended Meltwater
proposal). It is not necessary to again identify the components of the fee as
these matters have been discussed
earlier in these reasons. Mr Samuel sets
out at Table 29 the fees that would have been payable under the Isentia
proposal for the
years ending 30 June 2019 and 2020 (based, so far as 2020
is concerned, on actual results to 31 May 2020 including an estimate for
June 2020). Table 29 is in these terms:
Mr Samuel calculates the
total licensing costs
that would have been
paid by Isentia based upon the above table; other licensing costs; and an
assumption that (redacted) would also
have been payable. Table 30 is in
these terms:
then takes the
total licensing costs
adopting the Isentia proposed
licence and assumes that the (redacted) so as to calculate the proportion of
for the year ended 30 June 2019 represented
by those total licensing costs. That calculation is contained in Table 31
in these terms:
observes that the consequence of the Isentia proposed licence is that for the
financial year ending 30 June 2019 Isentia
would have paid (redacted)
identified those calculations and the method inherent in them, it is now
necessary to return to the opinion expressed by Mr
Samuel. As to the
(or CAL Proposed Licence), Mr Samuel says that at
para 26 of his first report:
para 27, Mr Samuel says this:
In my opinion, the CAL Proposed Licence will be even more unreasonable after:
(a) 20 March 2020, as CAL will cease to have the right to sublicence the ability
to monitor News Corp titles, The Australian and
The Weekend Australian; and
(b) 17 January 2021, as CAL will cease to have the right to sublicence the
ability to monitor Nine Publishing (formerly Fairfax Media)
titles, The
Australian Financial Review (
), and associated titles,
to the Meltwater proposal (which he describes as the Meltwater Amended Proposed
Licence), Mr Samuel says this at para 28:
second report of Mr Samuel dated 9 October 2020
(“Samuel 2”) is concerned with considering aspects of the
Mr Ross dated 25 September 2020 and the report of
Dr Eisenach dated 29 September 2020. We have already expressed the
view that we
are not assisted by Dr Eisenach’s benchmarking exercise
or his robustness analysis so far as the
is concerned.
relation to the report of Mr Ross, it must be remembered that the role of
Mr Ross was to check the calculations of Mr Samuel and
comment upon
errors or anomalies in the calculations in the sense of errors in the strict
sense of the term or contended anomalies
in the conclusions or data not properly
taken into account. Mr Ross accepts that he has no expertise at all in
assessing whether
a particular fee or royalty or rate payable for a licence of
IP rights is “reasonable” or not, either by reference to
and valuation expertise deployed in seeking to answer such a question or
otherwise. Mr Ross has never been asked to undertake
such a task and has
never done so. Also, Mr Ross has not identified any alternative basis for
assessing what might be a reasonable
fee payable to CA for a licence of the
rights in question and in that sense, the assistance he offers the Tribunal is a
of the accuracy and utility of Mr Samuel’s approach.
Nevertheless,
Mr Ross raises a number of methodological and other criticisms of the
approach adopted by Mr Samuel. They include use
of the 25% starting point
for the allocation of profit in determining a royalty rate; (redacted); and the
notion that Mr Samuel’s
calculation of what is reasonable should
focus only on the proportion of
incremental
revenue payable to CA not the
percentage of
revenue. Mr Samuel, however, notes that
CA’s estimates of MMO revenue the subject of the licence fee (as mentioned
suggest that CA was treating all revenue as engaged by the licence fee
formulation. Mr Samuel and Mr Ross also disagree about the
the “market approach” adopted by Mr Ross when considering a
reasonable royalty rate. Mr Samuel says that
the approach adopted by
Mr Ross produces rates that vary by (redacted) and lack rigour.
Mr Samuel says that the approach of Mr Ross
also suffers from the flaw
of failing to consider the economic benefits derived from a licence before
determining if it is a reliable
comparator.
to Dr Eisenach, Mr Samuel accepts and agrees that a percentage of
revenue approach is, conceptually, “one possible reasonable
structure in this proceeding”. However, Mr Samuel says that it is
“unworkable” because it applies a percentage
of revenue structure to
revenue which is
“a function of other licences” and
therefore it would require a “reduction in both the fixed fee and the
rate to reflect that reliance on other licences”.
the course of the concurrent evidence, the Tribunal put this question to
Dr Eisenach (T, p 691, ln 13 and following) which resulted
in the sequence of responses set out below:
His Honour: Dr Eisenach, can I ask you this question that is connected with
this methodology topic, and I think it’s fair to
Dr Pleatsikas takes the position that it’s unreasonable to calculate
a licence fee as a percentage of all revenue
where that revenue includes revenue
from sources or inputs that are other than the CAL licensed content. Now, you
strongly contest
that view, don’t you? Could you speak to this point
undertake themselves in terms of analytics and other things, but also revenue
that they derive from sources or inputs other
than the CAL licensed content and
whether or not it’s reasonable to strike a licence fee which is a
percentage of total revenues
where there may be a series of revenues from
various sources which come from beyond exploiting the CAL [licensed] content
Dr Eisenach: Absolutely, and I will make two points, and I think I can
summarise both of them as “it all comes out in the wash”.
first point is let’s suppose that 100% of the MMOs revenue was dependent
entirely on the ... CAL licensed content.
And based on that, the reasonable
percentage of revenue rate was 46%, and we could all agree that that was
reasonable. And now
I will change the assumption and say let’s assume
that only 50% of the CAL – of the MMO revenues are dependent on the
licensed [content] instead of 100[%] – licensed content.
His Honour: Yes.
Dr Eisenach: What percentage of the revenue would now be a reasonable fee?
Well, back of the envelope, one might think 23%. So
the 23% number is not in
and of itself a fact. It’s based on 100% of revenues. Take into account
the fact that the MMOs earn
revenue from other sources, based on other
activities. So that’s one. Second point is that’s specifically why
benchmarking
is such a powerful tool. [Dr Eisenach then spoke to the
advantages of his benchmarking exercise and benchmarking generally].
His Honour: Dr Pleatsikas, would you like to speak to that topic?
Dr Pleatsikas: Well, yes. I mean, the problem here is it may come out in
the wash, but, you know, nobody knows what detergent’s
being made or
what’s being thrown into the wash. You know, the number is a number that,
as far as we can tell, has been pulled
out of the air, the 23%. That’s
why, you know, we need to have a firmer and more empirical or even theoretical
basis for this.
... Somebody doing, you know, some analysis that they can show
us to show that this is a reasonable number. The number is just a
nobody has shown us where this number has come from. At least I haven’t
seen any information of where the number
came from ...
Mr Samuel: ... May I comment as well?
His Honour: Yes.
Mr Samuel: ... A couple of things fell out of that. Firstly, I think we
actually have an agreement that – based on what Dr
Eisenach said,
that if there are material other inputs to the generation of revenue, the
percentage of revenue rate should be lower
than it would otherwise be, and
that’s a point I made in my reports. And I’m sure he will correct
me if I’m wrong,
but I think Dr Eisenach has agreed with that with
his example of 50% and the 46% rate falling to 23%. The second point is that
no empirical analysis of which I’m aware on which the 23% is
based. I don’t know where that has come from.
in his second report agrees with Dr Eisenach that a fixed fee or a fixed
fee per customers/user should be calibrated over
time in the event that the
usage of the licensed rights increases or decreases over time. Mr Samuel
says that this does not affect
his conclusions that the
total licence
payable under the Meltwater and Isentia proposals are (redacted). As to
an error, Mr Samuel agrees with Dr Eisenach to the effect
Mr Samuel’s estimate of the licence fees Meltwater would pay to CA
was (redacted). Mr Samuel says that this error is
of no consequence to his
conclusions.
provided a third report dated 21 December 2020
(“Samuel 3”).
his third report, Mr Samuel provides further analysis in relation to the
and he then addresses what he describes as the “New
CAL Proposed Licence” (“NCALPL”) otherwise described
Alternative CA Licence
. He also takes into account the (redacted)
from 23% to (redacted) reflecting the
Amended Alternative
to the NCALPL, Mr Samuel says this (inserting where relevant the acronym
my opinion, the NCALPL
the opinion set out in my First Report
that the First CAL Proposed Licence [the
unreasonable, as it results in licence fees that would have been, in the most
recent year (2019 or FY 2020):
9. In my opinion, the NCALPL is unreasonable as:
(a) (redacted)
(i) it results in a
disproportionate payment to CAL of:
➢ (redacted)
(ii) (redacted)
(b) (redacted)
(i) it results in a disproportionate payment to CAL(redacted)
(ii) (redacted)
(redacted).
Mr Samuel then looks at the collective position of the three MMOs taking
2019 as an example. (redacted)
then sets out a new table (Table 1) which sets out the effect of the
NCALPL. Table 1 of Samuel 3 is in these
then expresses these further opinions:
10. In my opinion, the NCALPL will be even more unreasonable after:
(a) 20 March 2020, as CAL will cease to have the right to sublicence the ability
to monitor News Corp titles, The Australian and
The Weekend Australian; and
(b) 17 January 2021, as CAL will cease to have the right to sublicence the
ability to monitor Nine Publishing (formerly Fairfax Media)
titles, The
Australian Financial Review (
), and associated titles,
from these observations, Mr Samuel expresses some views about the CGL
component of the NCALPL. He says this (inserting NCALPL):
in my opinion, the “usage” fee component of the NCALPL is
unreasonable as:
(a) it includes an “access” fee (being the Ingestion & Storage
Fee). This appears to be, in effect, a minimum fee.
In my opinion, this fee is
superfluous and unnecessary as access is effectively included in any fee based
on the MMO’s actual
copying and communicating. It appears to be no more
than an artificial basis for charging an additional fee. This is apparent from
the first leg of the NCALPL, (i.e. the percentage of revenue approach) which
does not include any such fee;
(b) the Ingestion and Storage Fee effectively treats every article as having an
equivalent value. In my opinion, this approach is
incorrect, as many customers
will have no requirement for articles from certain publications, and will value
the articles in some
publications more highly than others;
(c) it charges an additional fee to corporate customers based on an MMO
customer’s revenue, when there is no relationship between
that revenue and
the copying of the articles. In other words, the articles do not contribute
directly to the revenue generated by
those customers (and may not contribute
indirectly to that revenue). It follows that there is no sound basis for
determining a fee
based on the revenue of the customer. A royalty based on
revenue in this instance is structurally unsound and fundamentally flawed.
consequence of this flaw is that the royalty will be a function of the
customer’s revenue, not the customer’s usage
of the relevant
articles; and
(d) it charges an additional fee to government customers based on the number of
employees, when there is no established relationship
between the number of
employees and the copying of the articles. A royalty based on the number of
employees in this instance is
structurally unsound and fundamentally flawed.
One consequence of this flaw is that the royalty will be a function of the
of employees, and not:
(i) the number of employees who
in fact view the articles; or
(ii) the customer’s usage of the relevant articles.
[footnote omitted]
provided a further report dated 9 February 2021 (“Samuel 4”)
which is responsive to a report prepared by Mr
Ross dated 25 January
2021 and the second report of Dr Eisenach. Mr Samuel notes that
Mr Ross had been instructed that the NCALPL
had been formulated on the
basis that the News Corp and Nine Publishing titles earlier mentioned had been
excluded. Mr Samuel says
that, on that footing, any assessment of the
reasonableness of the NCALPL has to assume that additional fees would be payable
the MMOs “to cover” those excluded works. As a result,
Mr Samuel set out a series of conclusions taking into account
the fees that
the applicants (and as a matter of reference, Streem) would be likely to have to
pay for those works in addition to
the fees contemplated by the NCALPL.
also says that for consistency he has used, in Samuel 4, earnings before
interest and tax (EBIT) in reaching and setting
out his conclusions. However,
he says that the chosen profit measure does not affect his conclusions because,
in his opinion, the
NCALPL fees are unreasonable regardless of the profit
measure adopted: see Samuel 4 at para 13.
the EBIT measure, Mr Samuel says this, inserting where relevant, the
acronym NCALPL:
my opinion, the NCALPL confirms the opinion set out in my First Report that the
First CAL Proposed Licence [the
] was unreasonable, as it
results in licence fees that would have been, in the most recent year (2019 or
FY 2020), and assuming a
rate of 23% of revenue:
my opinion, on a percentage of revenue royalty rate basis, the NCALPL is
unreasonable as:
one section of the remaining parts of Mr Samuel’s fourth report, he
addresses factors which suggest to him that the licence
agreement entered into
between CA and Streem is not a comparable market bargain. Mr Samuel
observes that Isentia and Meltwater’s
businesses are significantly more
mature businesses than that of Streem which is in a start‑up phase.
(redacted). Mr Samuel
observes that “significant care” should
be taken in using the terms agreed to by a significantly smaller company for
purpose of establishing the fees that should be paid by two substantially larger
corporations. Mr Samuel described such a phenomenon
in his oral evidence
as the “tail wagging the dog”. We have already examined these
factors (and many others) in reaching
the conclusion that the CA/Streem Licence
is not a comparable market bargain.
to the financial implications of each licence based on the financial information
available to Mr Samuel, he says that the consequences
of the NCALPL for
Streem are very different to the consequences for Meltwater and Isentia.
remaining aspects of Mr Samuel’s fourth report deal with an extensive
sequence of contentions between Mr Ross and Mr Samuel
topics. We do not propose to take each of these topics point by counterpoint
and describe them and seek to resolve
each and every one of them in these
reasons. We have taken all the material and contentions into account. However,
we will address
a number of the major criticisms of Mr Samuel’s
approach and aspects of the evidence from the concurrent evidence sessions
the experts after examining aspects of Mr Samuel’s fifth and sixth
will, however, presently address the following matters, in large part because it
gives coherence to aspects of Mr Samuel’s
sixth report.
(redacted).
Mr Samuel agrees that in formulating the table it is necessary to adopt a
consistent measure of profit. Doing so in relation
to the information set out
in Table 1 of Samuel 3 results in the following table which sets out
the profit (loss) figures from Samuel
3, Table 1; the position based
on EBITDA; and the “profit before tax” position (
as corrected by
Mr Samuel in Samuel 5
of Mr Samuel’s third report was attempting to identify the effect of
the NCALPL fee on
MMO profits for Meltwater, Isentia and
Streem. The above table seeks to do the same thing but takes into account the
way in which
point of all this is that Mr Samuel observes that, first, if profit before
tax is adopted uniformly then the result is not
materially different from the
conclusions described at para 9(d)(i) and (ii) of his third report (as
described at [726] of these
reasons), supported by Table 1 in that report
and, second, if EBITDA is adopted, then a different result arises due to
says that in view of the comments of Mr Ross as to the measure of profit
used (and the year considered), Mr Samuel has calculated
the proportion of
profit that would be paid by Meltwater, Isentia and Streem combined, as CA fees,
under the NCALPL for both 2018
and 2019 on the basis of
(that is, after depreciation),
(redacted) and
. Table 8 sets out that analysis in the following terms
as corrected by Samuel 5
(redacted).
Mr Samuel says that in
measures of profit,
the NCALPL is, in his view, unreasonable.
notes that Mr Ross had criticised the earlier analysis for not properly
taking into account a licence fee calculation of
(redacted) of revenue as well
as 23% of revenue. Mr Samuel observes that such an analysis is of limited
relevance, in his view,
as the availability of the (redacted) rate is
“linked to settlement of these proceedings”. Nevertheless,
Mr Samuel has
calculated the effect of reducing the revenue percentage to
(redacted) as reflected in Table 10 of Samuel 4 which, again, updates
Table 1 of Samuel 3. Table 10 also takes into account the fees
payable in respect of excluded works. Table 10 is in the following
as corrected by Samuel 5
a result of that calculation, Mr Samuel concludes (inserting the acronym
adopting the corrections in Samuel 5
concludes that, in his opinion, the NCALPL is “unreasonable in all of
these circumstances”.
Mr Samuel makes this observation at para 15 of
now brings us to Mr Samuel’s letter dated 12 March 2021
(Samuel 6). We have already indicated that this letter consists
calculations to take account of the financial results available to
Mr Samuel for Meltwater for the year ended 31 December
2020 and for
Isentia for the year ended 30 June 2020 together with the six months to
31 December 2020. One of the first calculations
Mr Samuel undertakes
is to update Table 10 from Samuel 4 (which in turn had updated
Table 1 from Samuel 3). The update (described
as Table 1 in
Samuel 6) is in these terms:
regard to the updated information, Mr Samuel reaches these
conclusions:
(a) assuming a 23% of revenue rate basis:
(i) (redacted)
(ii) (redacted)
(b) (redacted)
observes that he remains of the opinion that the NCALPL is unreasonable.
away from the consideration of the
aggregated position
as discussed in
these tables (ultimately taking forward the analysis at Table 1 of
Samuel 3), Mr Samuel sets out the updated calculation
for Meltwater.
Table 2 sets out that calculation in the following
then sets out the calculations for Isentia which are
next exercise conducted by Mr Samuel is to update the estimated fees
payable by Meltwater and Isentia under the licences proposed
Mr Samuel prepares a table setting out the expected fees payable by
Meltwater as Table 4 of Samuel 6. That table updates Table
Mr Samuel’s first report. Table 4 is set out
Mr Samuel calculates Meltwater’s
total licensing costs
adopting the Meltwater proposal, as a proportion of Meltwater’s EBIT for
the years 2018, 2019 and 2020 in Table 5 as
also calculates the expected fee that would have been payable by Isentia under
the proposal of the applicants. Table 6
is in these
says that the figures for the future column are taken from a restricted access
exhibit to the affidavit of Mr Gerstmyer
dated 11 December 2020
(TGG‑11, Folder 2).
Mr Samuel calculates the
total licensing costs
on the basis of the
Isentia proposal, as a proportion of Isentia’s profit for the year ended
30 June 2019. The calculation
is set out at Table 7 as
table Mr Samuel is referring to is Table 8 in Samuel 6 which is
in these terms:
regard to all of the updated figures, Mr Samuel expresses this opinion at
para 21 of Samuel 6:
21. I remain of the opinion that the proposed MMO Licence is
(a) (redacted)
(b) the fees that would have been payable by Isentia and Meltwater in aggregate:
(c) (redacted)
to Table 8, the calculation reveals that the total licence fees payable by
Isentia and Meltwater in aggregate, for 2019 and 2020
applicants contend (which appears to be correctly put) that the instructions
provided by CA to Mr Ross were that the licence fee
structure adopted in
Alternative CA Licence
Amended Alternative
has been formulated on the footing that the publications
withdrawn by News Corp and Nine Publishing are not included in those licences.
As mentioned earlier, Mr Samuel has concluded that the
Alternative
fee proposal is unreasonable for Isentia as it results in a
disproportionate payment to CA which has the effect of (redacted)
mentioned earlier, Mr Samuel at Table 1 of Samuel 6 calculates
the proportion of profit that would have been paid by Meltwater,
Isentia and
Streem for each of 2018, 2019 and 2020 under the CA proposal both on the basis
of 23% of revenue and (redacted) of revenue.
regard to that calculation, Mr Samuel expressed these views at
paras 11 and 12 of Samuel 5 (inserting the acronym
Some aspects of the criticism made by Mr Ross of
Mr Samuel’s approach
unfortunate aspect of the criticism made by Mr Ross in his various reports
and his oral evidence of the approach adopted by Mr
Mr Samuel’s various reports, is that Mr Ross did not seek to
engage with Mr Samuel and caucus with him about his
concerns on a range of
matters and seek to resolve those concerns prior to the concurrent evidence
session. As a result, many of
the points of difference between Mr Ross and
Mr Samuel which might have been resolved, were required to be ventilated
and closely
examined in the concurrent evidence session before the Tribunal.
From time to time, concessions were made by Mr Ross on points of
distinction he had raised with the result that sometimes the point was abandoned
or the issue became narrowed. It would have been
interactions had taken place between Mr Ross and Mr Samuel before the
concurrent evidence sessions. Some
reduction and synthesis might well have
taken place.
Tribunal expressed some observations about this at the time. We do not propose
to revisit that matter in these reasons. We understand
that time pressures
arose. However, the Tribunal is assisted by experts making every effort they
can to caucus and resolve issues
wherever possible. Since many of the matters
fell to Mr Ross having regard to his critique of the work of
Mr Samuel, it seems to
us that it was incumbent on Mr Ross to take
steps to engage with Mr Samuel on these issues. For present purposes, we
simply move
on to deal with some of the points of difference.
have already mentioned briefly some of the topics about which Mr Ross and
Mr Samuel disagree. We address the following matters.
(1) Mr Ross emphatically put the proposition that when the income approach
is used to determine a royalty or fee, only the additional
or incremental
revenue derived from exercising the particular rights is relevant, together with
the incremental costs incurred by
a licensee in taking up and exercising the
licence. Mr Samuel contends that he applied the income method by looking
incremental
and observed (as we
have mentioned earlier), that CA had previously made estimates of
Isentia’s revenue upon which the licence
fee clause in its proposals would
operate, which captured all of Isentia’s revenue. Moreover,
Mr Samuel took the position
that the definition of revenue in the CA
proposed licences seeks to attach, in practical and textual terms, all of the
revenue derived
by the licensee on the footing that all of the licensee’s
revenue is said to derive from using the licensed rights. CA has
asserted over
time an approach to the scope of the revenue of Isentia and Meltwater upon which
the licence fee calculation operates
which brings to account all revenue and in
these proceedings CA, consistently with that view, asserts a “but
Having regard to those factors, Mr Samuel in his analysis
adopts the position that
all of the revenue is relevant then so too
all of the costs are relevant. We accept that if all revenue is to be taken
into account
in the calculation of the relevant profit, all costs should be
brought to account in determining the profit and in consequence the
the allocation.
(2) Mr Ross criticises Mr Samuel for deploying as a “starting
point” or at all the so‑called “rule of thumb”
allocating 25% of the relevant profit calculation to the licensor as a fee or
royalty adjusted by reference to the factors identified
at [655] and [656] of
these reasons. Mr Samuel is an experienced valuer who has undertaken many
exercises in seeking to identify
reasonable transactional royalty rates or fees,
in a range of settings over 30 years. Although 25% might be a starting point
to assessing the adjustment factors, Mr Samuel has recognised that a
percentage of profit in the range (redacted) could, in the relevant
transaction,
be reasonable although such a fee would be at what he describes as the
“high end” of reasonableness. These
matters inevitably call for an
evaluative judgment against the background of a set of principles that over time
have been of greater
or lesser assistance on a case by case basis, depending on
the transactional circumstances, in deciding whether a particular fee
proposal is reasonable. We do not accept that Mr Samuel simply selected a
rule of thumb at 25% and applied it in some sort
of dystopian robotic way.
(3) As to Mr Samuel’s evaluation of the financial implications of the
proposal of each of Meltwater and Isentia, Mr Ross accepted
concurrent evidence session that Mr Samuel’s reference to an
of (redacted) of profit to the licensor was a reference to
fees payable for
all licensing costs
(including CA).
(4) Mr Ross criticised Mr Samuel on the footing that many of his
calculations (and opinions derived from them), adopted a
“backward‑looking
approach” in the sense of seeking to
identify the fee (and whether the fee is reasonable) by examining the fee that
been payable in the recent years for which data is available.
Mr Samuel contended that applying the various proposals to a set of
financial information so as to test and illustrate the actual effect of each
proposal is both useful and informative. Mr Samuel
also contended that
since CA suggests that the future operation of the various proposals ought to
look to a horizon or term of two
years, the best indicator of what is likely to
happen over those years is by testing the proposals by reference to the known
facts over the immediately preceding few years. The applicants
correctly observe that Mr Ross accepted in the concurrent evidence
that a major factor in seeking to assess likely future performance is the recent
actual performance of the business. Mr
Ross also accepted that, not
surprisingly, he had previously relied on past financial results to assess the
reasonableness of a forecast
of performance. We accept that the approach
adopted by Mr Samuel is a rational and sound approach. We also note
Mr Samuel’s
point that the various proposals will apply to a
significant period of past events.
(5) (redacted)
(6) (redacted)
(7) (redacted)
(8) The applicants observe that Mr Ross was also critical of Mr Samuel
on the footing that licence fees paid to licensors other than
CA ought to have
been excluded from the calculation of profit and thus from the profit allocation
as part of the income method.
Mr Ross contended that bringing to account
other licence fees carries with it an implicit assumption that these other
licence costs
are themselves reasonable. (redacted). The applicants observe
that in the conclave, Mr Samuel explained that it was a “mathematical
certainty” that if he adjusted the profit of each of Isentia and Meltwater
to increase costs, that would increase the profit
share that goes to CA. The
applicants note that Mr Ross appeared to accept that mathematically that
must be so. They observe that
Mr Ross observed that there was an
alternative approach that he was thinking of which was to consider the profit
allocation “before
all licence fees”. However, as the applicants
observe, Mr Ross in his oral evidence appeared to withdraw from that
expressing uncertainty about the correct approach as a matter of
principle. The applicants note Mr Ross’s evidence on this
these terms (T, p 1008, lns 1‑10):
Mr Ross: [T]o my mind, it’s a simple proposition and I don’t
have the answer to this. You know, it’s not really
for me to answer but
Mr Samuel may have a view as to what the right approach is to splitting
profit. Should it be
all licence fees
only before the last licence fee. My only comment on it is that if one does it
in the way that Mr Samuel proposes, then if a
licence fee has been entered
into with another [licensee] or that is not a market licence because of some
coercion or some suggestion
that they’re paying too much for the
alternative licence, that will – that effect will flow to
Mr Samuel’s calculation,
because the totality of that licence fee
that’s actually paid in the real world will reduce the profit that’s
to split between CA and the licensee.
[emphasis added]
(9) Mr Samuel’s response at T, p 1008, lns 14‑17
Mr Samuel: Yes, I think I do have the answer for this, your Honour. So the
problem with the approach that Mr Ross is proposing or
appears in the third
table ... of the aid‑memoire is that he’s not identifying the
incremental cash flows attributable
to the licences and as a result, you get
these distorted percentages.
(10) Mr Samuel then sought to illustrate that point in the next section of
the transcript. We will not set out those examples.
It is sufficient to note
that Mr Samuel maintained that his view was the correct approach and
asserted that including licence fees
before determining the profit split was a
conservative approach in favour of CA. As to the confirmation of that view,
had previously expressed the view that it is
consider all licence fees paid for licences that contribute to the generation of
revenue in the undertaking because CA seeks to
determine a fee as a proportion
all of that revenue
, and the issue of assessing the reasonableness of
any other licence is irrelevant to the CA Licence because none of the other
could be varied and the amounts paid represent the
or expenses
by each MMO in order to conduct the media monitoring
undertaking. The applicants note Mr Samuel’s view that, in any
he had no basis
to think that other licence fees each
MMO had to pay were unreasonable, (redacted)
(11) It should also be noted that in the context of Mr Ross’s
evidence quoted above he makes a reference to taking into account
“actually paid in the real world” and in other places Mr Ross
criticised Mr Samuel’s view as incorrect because
it conflicted
“with the outcome of a real‑world transaction”. There seems
to be some inconsistency in the criticism
that Mr Samuel’s approach
on unbundling seeks to operate on the basis of the actual real world
circumstances in which the MMOs
are operating, on the one hand, and the
assertion of error because Mr Samuel has failed to take into account
outcomes arising in
real world transactions, on the other hand, in other parts
of the critique by Mr Ross.
(12) There are other matters raised by Mr Ross. We have taken them all
into account. We do not propose to set each and every one
of the criticisms.
(13) We propose to now deal with one matter in particular. Mr Ross
criticised Mr Samuel on the footing that Mr Samuel had presented
results of his analysis selectively in order to advance Meltwater’s
interests. The contention emerged in the third report
of Mr Ross, served
during the course of the hearing. The Tribunal raised issues about the way in
which the matter emerged during
the course of the hearing. Mr Ross sought
to take the Tribunal to nine references which were said to support his having
contention earlier. Ultimately, Mr Ross accepted that he had not
made the allegation earlier. Mr Samuel was concerned by and, as
contends, affronted by, Mr Ross’s suggestion. Mr Samuel
contested the matter strongly. The point of all this is
that Mr Ross
contended that Mr Samuel had not presented or had not properly taken into
account the result for Isentia in 2017 so
as to deliberately distort his
analysis. Mr Samuel contests the allegation on the facts as there are a
number of references in his
analysis to the 2017 year. (redacted).
Mr Samuel presented results for all MMOs for all years. The applicants
emphasise that in
the course of the conclave Mr Samuel explained why he had
concluded that CA’s proposals were unreasonable (redacted)
(14) (redacted) The applicants emphasise Mr Samuel’s observation that
the conclusion as to whether any of the CA proposed licences
are reasonable in
terms of the fee formulation, does not require a separate conclusion on each
year but rather requires a conclusion
on the reasonableness of the royalty
rates. To do so, Mr Samuel considered all years. The applicants say that
Mr Ross’s criticism
is that Mr Samuel did not
opinion based on or taking into account the results in 2017.
(15) The Tribunal does not accept that Mr Samuel approached his analysis
with bias or as an advocate for the applicants.
(16) The applicants also observe that Mr Samuel approached his analysis in
ways which were favourable to CA.
, Mr Samuel attributed no
profit at all to the value‑added services by each of Isentia and
, he attributed no profit at all to the other licences.
, he excluded from Isentia’s EBIT figures (redacted) because
he could not determine whether those costs related to the media
business. Mr Samuel emphasised that all of these three considerations were
and they were all
conservatively
treated in CA’s
(17) Finally, the applicants note that at the end of the concurrent evidence
session, Mr Ross sought to amend aspects of his third
report in light of
the explanations given by Mr Samuel in the course of the concurrent
evidence. As to an aspect of para 2.9.1 of
Mr Ross’s third
report annexed to his affidavit of 22 February 2021, Mr Ross said that
in all fairness to Mr Samuel, he would
rather parts of that paragraph not
be on the record. In that paragraph, Mr Ross said that in his opinion the
results presented by
Mr Samuel from his “profit‑split”
approach cannot be relied upon and observed that in many cases they rely on
of profit that Mr Samuel says are not to be preferred.
Mr Ross said that he retracted the comment: “in other cases, they
proceed from reliance on analyses which support his previous opinions, while not
disclosing other analyses which contradict them”.
Mr Ross withdrew
that remark because Mr Samuel had explained the true position and the view
previously recited in para 2.9.1 by
those words no longer represented
Mr Ross’s view. In addition, in para 2.9.1, Mr Ross said:
“Finally, Mr Samuel’s
conclusions in relation to the
reasonableness of his clients’ fee proposals conflict with his opinions
that the CA fee proposals
are universally unreasonable: ‘in all years,
for all measures of profit’. His own analyses establish that this is not
the case”. As to the phrase “in all years, for all measures of
profit”, Mr Samuel’s evidence was that that
statement was
intended to be referable only to 2018 and 2019 and in light of that observation,
Mr Ross said that he would retract
his comment so far as it referred to
“all years”.
and Dr Eisenach disagree about a number of things. We have taken the
reports into account and we simply wish to make these
observations:
(1) Dr Eisenach criticises the proposal of Isentia and Meltwater on the
basis that a per press clip rate and a per customer fee are
not linked to usage
or value. Mr Samuel disagrees on the basis that a rate per clip is
directly tethered to usage and a fee per
customer is indirectly tethered to
usage as each new customer results in increased usage. Mr Samuel says that
a flat per customer
fee implicitly reflects average usage across the customer
(2) Dr Eisenach says that at a behavioural level, the MMOs would pass on
the increased licence fees charged by CA, to their customers.
says that as to the past, that could not be done and as to the future, if it
could be achieved it would not have the effect
of changing the MMOs’ lack
of profitability, and would increase the risk of MMOs losing customers. If
“pass‑through”
could not be achieved it would result in losses
increasing or profits falling. The applicants emphasise the evidence of
Dr Pleatsikas
on this topic when he said this: “I can tell you that
based on economic principles the likelihood that they [MMOs] could pass
whole of [CA licence fee increases] through is virtually zero”.
(3) Mr Samuel sought to address the role of Dr Eisenach’s
“lower bound” analysis by observing that the fees that
would be required to pay to CA under the
are (redacted).
Mr Samuel also notes that Dr Eisenach’s lower bound is based
upon the MMOs’ unbundling their services
which is not the real world
position on the facts.
(4) The applicants also emphasise that Dr Eisenach understood that the
revenue MMOs derive from social media (redacted)
(5) Mr Samuel expresses extensive criticisms of benchmarking exercise
undertaken by Dr Eisenach. We do not propose to examine that
extensively reviewed the evidence of Mr Samuel, his various reports, the
evidence of Mr Ross and the reports of Dr Eisenach,
we find that we
are assisted by Mr Samuel’s analysis both as to matters of principle
and in terms of the utility of the calculations
he has undertaken. We accept
the evidence of Mr Samuel.
A brief summary of conclusions
the result, we summarise the conclusions we have reached as appears from the
reasons we have expressed:
(1) The proposed
is unreasonable for all of the reasons
we have identified in the discussion in these reasons and for the reasons
identified by Mr
(2) We are not assisted by the benchmarking exercise undertaken by
Dr Eisenach coupled with the robustness analysis he has undertaken.
have extensively explained why that is so.
Alternative CA Licence
is unreasonable both having regard to
the percentage of revenue contemplated by the licence and having regard to the
CGL formulation,
for all of the reasons we have identified in the extensive
discussion earlier in these reasons. The proposed licence is also unreasonable
having regard to the analysis undertaken by Mr Samuel.
(4) We are not satisfied, to the extent that the
Alternative CA Licence
(redacted) that the FSMML is properly characterised as a comparable market
bargain, for all the reasons we have extensively set out
earlier in these
reasons. The FSMML came to pass for the purpose of enabling CA to put the
document forward as a postulate in the
continuing proceedings against Meltwater
and Isentia. We repeat here everything we said about that transaction earlier.
(5) So far as the
Amended Alternative CA Licence
concerned, we do not regard it as a licence proposal
but rather is
properly characterised as an
offer to settle
the proceedings put to each
applicant (although not on an interdependent basis). We repeat here the views
we previously expressed
Mr Samuel’s calculations concerning the (redacted) revenue rate.
(6) As a matter of the evidence which we have accepted, we have the proposal of
each of Isentia and Meltwater. The proposal of the
applicants is supported by
the analysis undertaken by Mr Samuel.
(7) We accept that the consumption of information or content (put in its
broadest terms but also specifically as it relates to the
consumption of content
contained in news articles) will occur, fundamentally, in a digital environment
where users seek to access
content online. That may occur: by a person
accessing news content through Facebook or Google news alert services and in the
those services are presented online; by a person taking up a subscription
service of a publisher and accessing content according
to the terms of the
subscription service or any other direct means authorised or enabled by a
publisher; by, so far as an MMO service
is concerned, a person accessing online
a “press clip” (which, of course, is actually presented digitally as
a PDF version
of the published article, and we note again the confusing use of
the term “press clip” in this context); by a person
taking up one of
the online services of an MMO, or both.
(8) The notion and taxonomy of a “press clip” is an anachronism in
the sense that it harks back to a physically published
article but the fact
remains that whole articles are extracted (clipped in the old language) except,
of course, that there is no
relevant physicality in the service as a PDF
(digital) version of the article as published is conveniently accessed by the
user online.
(redacted). The provision of such press clips (now PDF digital
versions of the published article) has been incremented to an adjusted
(redacted) per clip. It represents a fee
directly related
provision of an electronic copy of the whole article in the published format.
There is a market demand for such a version
as users want to obtain PDF versions
of the articles responsive to their search terms. However, the demand for press
clips in this
sense is declining and it may decline at an accelerated rate (and
perhaps at a greatly accelerating rate) in favour of accessing
content online,
that is, a true online service made up of the various elements described in the
suite of services offered by each
of Meltwater and Isentia as described earlier
in these reasons.
(9) The online service is characterised, fundamentally, by these steps:
ingestion of content onto the platforms of Isentia and Meltwater;
Isentia’s modality, the ingested content responsive to the relevant search
terms is tagged and the remainder discarded;
both Isentia and Meltwater
communicate “portions” of articles responsive to customer’s
with hyperlinks to the publisher’s website
where the article, corresponding to the portion, can be accessed on that website
either because the customer has a subscription agreement with the publisher or
because the service provided to the user carries with
it an entitlement to go
behind the publisher’s paywall; other forms of accessing an article on an
MMO’s platform can
occur as described in these reasons.
(10) We recognise that the applicants emphatically contest
Mr Suckling’s proposition that a reasonable licence ought to be
agnostic as to content delivery. As we discussed earlier in these reasons, they
take that view because press clips (in the sense
just described) remain relevant
and a price per press clip is directly related to an act of communication. They
say such a structure
makes total sense. Should the demand for press clips
decline dramatically the act of communication would decline and the revenue
directly related to it would decline in which event the online service, its
content and the fee structure become more and more relevant.
The two, however,
can subsist together.
(11) If we were to take the view that the licence fee structure ought to operate
on the footing of a fee based on a percentage of
revenue (irrespective of the
content delivery method thus, in effect, extinguishing the distinction between a
press clip and an online
service), a number of fundamentally important
considerations are immediately engaged by adopting a percentage of revenue as
for the fee payable for a licence of the rights in issue. The
considerations are these:
(a) We take the view that it is fundamentally important to connect a licence fee
directly to the revenue derived from exercising
the licensed rights.
(b) It would first be necessary to determine what a reasonable royalty rate is
in all the circumstances of the transaction. We do
not accept that 23% of
revenue is reasonable and nor do we accept that the percentage rate reflected in
the 2016 Isentia Licence
is reasonable for all the reasons we have already
identified. It is truly unfortunate that CA did not engage more affirmatively
in this period by setting out a clear statement of the methodology applied to
determine and support the contended percentage rate.
Doing so may have led to a
discussion that might have avoided much of the ground subsequently trodden in
these proceedings. We
repeat the observations we made at [219] to [223] of
these reasons.
(c) Having identified a rate it would be necessary to then discount the rate to
recognise a number of factors informing what is reasonable
in the circumstances.
, not all revenue derived by the licensee is attributable to an
exercise of the licensed rights.
, revenue is derived by each MMO
which is a function of the provision of services where there are significant
value‑added aspects
to the services provided by the licensees to which CA
does not contribute at all. Even where licensed rights are exercised, there
remain significant contributions to the value of the service made by the MMO.
, revenue is also a function of exercising a pool of rights not
just, in a linear sense, the rights licensed by CA.
extent that communication is a focus of the rights exercised by MMOs, it is
important to keep in mind that there is, article
by article, a significant
question about whether communicating a portion of an article involves a
reproduction and communication
of a substantial part of a work.
the discount to take account of these factors would be a significant discount.
, apart from the discount to take account of those factors, the
quantum of the licence fee would need to reflect an adjustment or
discount to recognise the significant licence fees paid by Isentia and Meltwater
to the relevant publishers to gather in
the exercise of rights in relation to
such significant publications as
The Australian
The Weekend
The Australian Financial Review
(and related titles),
as a licence granted by CA is so substantially weakened in its value by the
removal of these nationally significant
titles. We note that in principle
Dr Eisenach accepts that where there is a plurality of rights contributing
to total revenue, a
discount (as a proxy) to isolate the revenue relevantly
related to an exercise of the licensed rights is a proper approach (although
Dr Eisenach may not include all of the factors we have identified as
informing the discount), see [721] of these reasons.
licence does not contain a prohibition on the withdrawal by CA of titles that
comprise the repertoire and which thus determine
the field of content
to the licence, the licence fee would need to be adjusted down
each time a title is withdrawn. An appropriate adjustment mechanism
to be adopted in the licence. Plainly, it would not be reasonable to strike a
licence fee on the basis of rights in relation
to titles that were then removed
from the licence without adjusting the licence fee. The mechanism would need to
be clear and take
effect immediately so as to avoid protracted and unnecessary
contest about it.
, CA offers a “block” or
“blanket” licence sometimes called a “push” licence of
its entire repertoire
to support the value it ascribes to the licence. We have
already noted in these reasons the issue raised between CA and the applicants
the licensed repertoire. We will not repeat those
remarks here. However, there
seems no good reason why a licensee ought to be
non‑price term of the licence, to take a licence of
each and every
of CA’s publications when it simply does not want a licence of
many of the publications. A
block licence
of CA’s entire
repertoire is, in effect, put to each applicant on a take it or leave it basis
in support of the licence fee
proposals of CA.
(12) As to the approach to identifying the relevant compensable conduct, that
is, the conduct attracting the payment of a licence
fee, we do not accept that
the correct approach is to identify, in effect, a mosaic of conduct and to try
and attribute a fee to
each and every part or step making up the total image.
The proper inquiry is to identify the
of the licence
relationship. The substance of the licence arrangement between CA and each
applicant is one in which the content
of the publishers (within CA’s
repertoire) is ingested, content is isolated or selected according to the search
fields or protocols
nominated by the client, and portions identifying the
article and the defined elements are communicated to the client with a link
the publisher’s website, with ultimate access to the article on that site
being dependent upon factors relating to paywalls
and subscription (or not). It
is true that processes may be deployed that may cause transitory or intermediate
electronic copies
to be made of content along the way to performing each of the
two essential functions for which the MMO has the licence. It is also
a client folder might be created on the MMO’s platform that is capable of
being interrogated. It is also true that
the analytics service and other
services might involve the MMO’s staff or teams that provide the service,
interrogating the
content on the MMO’s platforms so as to produce
interpretive commentary, bar and pie charts and various forms of comment and
analysis. However, the fee ought to represent a reasonable fee directed to the
acts of substance of reproduction and communication
not each and every
intermediate step that may or may not engage an exercise of a right conferred on
the copyright owner, by the MMO
on the way to each licensee exercising the two
functions for which the licence exists.
(13) Part of the arrangements inherent in the relationship also involves the act
of communicating
articles to the customer, presently the subject of
PDF access arrangements with the publishers and the subject of the press clip
licence for that purpose.
(14) We can say that in principle we are attracted to adopting a methodology for
calculating a fee based on a percentage of revenue
provided that all of the
factors described at [778](11) are properly addressed. They are not properly
addressed by CA for all of
the reasons described in these reasons.
Matters raised by CA in the course of oral closing submissions
and the response to those matters
the course of closing oral submissions, counsel for CA raised a number of
matters to which objection is taken by the applicants
and especially Isentia, as
not having been raised before nor pleaded (recognising, of course, that
documents in the Tribunal take
the form of statements of points). There are
three matters in this category and they are these.
CA relies upon s 36(1A) of the Act. Section 36(1A) has a relationship
with s 36(1) of the Act which provides (among other things)
of the copyright and without the licence
of the owner of the copyright,
in Australia, or
the doing in Australia, of any
act comprised in the copyright. Section 36(1A) provides that in
determining, for the purposes of
s 36(1) whether or not a person has
the doing in Australia of any act comprised in the copyright
in a work, without the licence of the owner of the copyright, the matters
be taken into account
the following:
(a) the extent (if any) of the person’s power to prevent the doing of the
act concerned;
(b) the nature of any relationship existing between the person and the person
who did the act concerned;
(c) whether the person took any reasonable steps to prevent or avoid the doing
of the act, including whether the person complied
with any relevant industry
codes of practice.
contends that the MMOs engage in an act
in the copyright in a
literary work when they send customers a link to a work on a publisher’s
website because they are
authorising
the doing in Australia of an act
comprised in the copyright in the work (without the licence of the owner of the
concedes that this contention has not been pleaded. For that
reason alone, the applicants contend that CA should not be allowed
to raise the
point, for the first time, in closing oral submissions. There is, of course, no
good reason why this contention was
not advanced from the very outset.
Nevertheless, we will consider whether leave ought to be given to now rely upon
CA contends that Isentia is engaged in an act of communicating works to its
customers by
the relevant work ingested and held on the
Mediaportal platform. That conclusion is said to arise because by tagging the
the way described, Isentia has engaged in an act falling within the
definition of “communicate” and one of the exclusive
rights of the
s 31(1)(a)(iv). Although we have addressed
the notion of
“communicate” earlier, it is convenient to note that the term means
“make available online or electronically
transmit (whether over a path, or
a combination of paths, provided by a material substance or otherwise) a work or
other subject‑matter
... within the meaning of this Act”:
s 10(1) of the Act.
CA handed up to the Tribunal in the course of oral submissions a table described
Overview of Acts comprised in Copyright by Isentia
. As to that table,
Isentia focuses upon the suggestion in the table that Isentia’s
media monitoring
involves acts that require a licence from CA. Isentia says
that this proposition has not been pleaded. It says that the contention
incorrect because CA does not
enjoy rights
in the subject matter that it
says Isentia ought to be paying it for. Again, we will give consideration to
whether leave is to be
granted or refused to now rely upon this point in
relation to social media.
turning to these three matters, Isentia addresses further submissions in
relation to the scope of the inquiry emphasised by
CA which is also the topic we
have just addressed at [778](12) of these reasons. Isentia contends that
CA’s approach in oral
submissions focused upon the wrong inquiry in the
sense that the task is not one of undertaking a “technical
assessment”
of the number of acts which would constitute an infringement
in the absence of a licence. Isentia says that the real task is one
in the sense of ascribing a reasonable licence fee, as a
valuation exercise, for the right to reproduce and communicate works. Isentia
says that in determining what is a reasonable or an unreasonable fee, it is
necessary to focus upon the
protected by the subsistence of
under any of the proposed
licences. Isentia says that the interest of the
rights owner (the publishers) is not “impacted by a technical breach or an
internal reproduction” and it emphasises in response to CA’s oral
submissions that a licence fee ought not be greater
than the amount that would
be recoverable as damages for infringement of the copyright (as discussed
earlier in these reasons).
Isentia says that that principle requires the
Tribunal to consider the
to the copyright owner caused by the
activity in question and the
in which the interest protected by
the copyright is affected or has been
contends (noting some exchanges between the Tribunal and counsel for CA in the
course of the oral submissions) that “technical
reproductions”
occurring as an “anterior step” to the licensee setting itself up so
as to be in a position to engage
in the act of communication are
matters that ought not, or ought not greatly, bear a severable
fee. CA contends that the Act recognises a bundle of exclusive rights
proper and reasonable to isolate each and every exercise of any one of those
rights and weigh the totality of the conduct
in the balance in striking what is
or is not a reasonable fee.
observes that in the case of a photocopier, for example, a person making a copy
of a page from a publication might find that
the photocopier, in order to
accommodate that task, actually makes a number of digital copies of the page,
stored in memory, as steps
along the way to producing a physical reproduction of
the page in issue. Isentia says that it would be nonsensical to require a
licensee to pay for a copy of the page and a fee for every copy made in memory
enabling the copy for which the fee is paid, to be
made. Isentia says that this
illustration is analogically relevant to the conduct of Isentia in the sense
that there may be technical
copies made along the way to exercising the
communication right but it would not make sense to impose a fee on each and
every anterior
says that the correct approach involves these considerations.
focusing on the communication of articles to customers correctly identifies that
the communication of a
is very different from the communication
(an entire article), noting that portions are made freely
available to the public by the publishers themselves on their own websites.
it recognises that ingestion involves a reproduction and clearly requires a
licence. However, Isentia says that the licence fee
for the ingestion of
content appropriately (and historically, and in line with all other current
licences) is included in a reasonable
licence fee for the “resulting
communications”.
it notes that research and analysis are not acts within the copyright and are
not compensable to CA and that undertaking those activities
utilises ingested
material which is tagged and saved for the purpose of communication to
customers. Isentia says that a second licence
fee ought not to be payable on
the use of this material for research purposes as the licence fee will have
already comprehended ingestion
and communication. A second licence fee is said
to be simply in the nature of “double dipping”.
even if a separate fee was thought to be a reasonable approach, the
Alternative CA Licence
put to the applicants includes “a modest fee
only for ingestion”.
ultimate proposition is that the Tribunal should assess the
holistically
in assessing reasonable charges. It says that it is
nevertheless instructive to note that on CA’s modelling of the licence
fees payable by Isentia for the financial year 2020 for the purposes of the
Alternative CA Licence
Ingestion & Storage Fee
amount to (redacted). Isentia notes that because the fee structure under the
Alternative CA Licence
provides for a fee on a “greater of”
basis as earlier described, the fee payable by Isentia, had the licence applied,
would have been on the basis of 23% of revenue resulting in a fee of
approximately (redacted). Isentia observes that the
Ingestion & Storage
comprised approximately (redacted) of the licence fee that would have
been payable by Isentia and approximately (redacted) of the
total CGL fee.
Isentia says that it is clear that CA regards the act of ingestion and storage
as being of “comparatively low
have already expressed our views at [778](12). We accept the submissions of
Isentia on this matter.
now address the three matters raised by CA in oral submissions.
authorisation
, Isentia makes these observations.
says that it is important to keep in mind that CA is relying on s 36(1A)
which means that CA must demonstrate that Isentia
has authorised the doing of an
act comprised in the copyright without the licence of the copyright owner.
Because CA is relying
on s 36(1A), it must be understood as not contending
that the sending of the link to the customer is an act of primary infringement
by Isentia. CA is contending that the act of sending the link is an act of
authorising the doing of an act comprised in the copyright
by another consistent
with the observations in
Roadshow Films Pty Ltd v iiNet Limited [No 2]
[2012] HCA 16
(2012) 248 CLR 42
and [135] per Gummow and Hayne JJ (in
the context of s 101(1A) concerning subject matter other than works). The
act of transmitting
the link is not itself said to be an act of infringement by
communication by Isentia by doing an act comprised in the copyright because
s 36(1A) is
engaged for the purpose of determining whether or
not a person has authorised the doing of any act comprised in the copyright and
CA’s contention expressly rests on s 36(1A).
is the act of primary infringement said to have been authorised by Isentia?
Isentia says that there are two problems confronting
CA in addressing this
contention.
first is that a person who views a webpage on their computer is not involved in
an act of reproduction. Nor is the person accessing
the webpage engaging in an
act of communication. When an individual to whom a link to a publisher’s
webpage has been transmitted
engages with the link and opens the webpage of the
publisher, the
communicates the content on its website to the
viewer and the publisher either does or does not enable the viewer to examine
content. The person viewing the content is not engaging in any act which
would otherwise be an infringement and the transmission
of the link is not
authorising “the doing” of an act which would infringe the rights
subsisting in the content on the
publisher’s webpage. Isentia says that
in no sense is there an unauthorised or unlicensed act done by a person which
amount to an infringement of the copyright owner’s rights and in
respect of which Isentia has authorised the doing of an infringing
only person engaging in a communication of content is the publisher.
to the communication, Isentia says that when a customer clicks on the link
transmitted to the customer by Isentia, one of three
things may occur.
, the publisher, by its website, might have blocked access to the
, the publisher might display on its website a paywall
enabling the customer to engage with the relevant protocols, pay a fee and
beyond the paywall.
, the publisher might display on its website a
webpage including the article together with images and advertising. Thus, what
“communicated” to the person (customer) is a matter within the
publisher’s control and determined entirely by the
publisher (including by
reference to any arrangement that may have been made by the publisher with an
MMO by which access behind
a paywall is granted to a customer on a particular
says that on 24 March 2021, Clayton Utz, on behalf of Isentia, wrote to
CA’s solicitors noting that the oral submission
in relation to
authorisation was unclear, in particular, because no
infringement
had been identified. Isentia, by its solicitors, requested CA to provide a
pleading of its authorisation point. In
response, CA’s solicitors,
MinterEllison, asserted that when a person clicks on a link transmitted to it,
the person “downloads”
or “otherwise makes” a
of the content and
can be read on the
person’s computer. The conduct of clicking on the link and downloading
the content onto the customer’s
screen is said to be the “infringing
conduct”. Isentia says that if that is the formulation of the primary
conduct, it cannot be correct. Isentia says that if a web browser
makes a copy of a webpage in displaying the communication sent
by the publisher
of the webpage to the person’s computer, the electronic copy so appearing
on the user’s screen is necessarily
“authorised by the publisher of
the webpage”. Isentia says that there can be no serious doubt that the
publisher’s
webpage has been designed and configured with the intention
that it be “viewed” or interrogated by web browsers designed
that very purpose. Isentia says that if it were otherwise, all internet users
engaging web browsers to seek out websites hosting
a particular page would be
constantly infringing copyright.
also observes that CA has not identified any authority that supports the
proposition that sending a person a link to a webpage
engages an act of
authorising the doing of an infringing act by a person on the footing that when
the person clicks on the link the
person is engaging in an infringement with the
result that the act of transmitting the link is an authorisation of that
infringement.
also says that it is a denial of procedural fairness to Isentia for CA to be
allowed to rely upon the allegation of authorisation
when it was not pleaded and
was raised for the first time only in closing oral submissions. That
proposition, apart from the lateness
of the point, is said to be clear enough
because a person who is said to have authorised an infringing act is entitled to
that contention against the background of the factors in s 36(1A)(a)
to (c) quoted earlier. That issue and any conclusion about
it on the facts
“depends upon all the facts of the case” including facts Isentia
would wish to adduce going to those
Roadshow Films Pty Ltd v iiNet
Limited [No 2]
[2012] HCA 16
(2012) 248 CLR 42
and [63], French CJ,
Crennan and Kiefel JJ. As to that, Isentia says that had the issue been
pleaded or otherwise raised at an appropriate
stage of the proceeding
(especially given the adjournment from October), “relevant factual matters
could have been addressed
in evidence and in cross examination”. Isentia
says that one of those matters would have been the control of the publishers
over their websites and whether a link will display the paywall, a webpage
including an article or nothing at all. Also, Isentia
says that it may have
adduced evidence about its lack of control over those matters and thus the point
would have been the subject
of both evidence and cross‑examination of the
witnesses of CA. Isentia also says that because of the lateness of CA’s
contention that “viewing a webpage using a browser also infringes
possible for Isentia
to address in cross‑examination the issue of “whether the publishers
authorise internet users to
view their websites using internet browsers”.
accept that leave ought not be given to raise the point.
the extent of the material before us, we are not satisfied that the point has
any merit in any event.
to the second matter concerning
communication
of the works, we note these
contention on this issue, in the case of Isentia, is that by tagging particular
ingested content taken on to Isentia’s
Mediaportal platform responsive to
the customer’s search fields (recognising that non‑tagged content is
discarded from
the platform) and retaining that tagged content on the platform,
Isentia has made the content “available online”. That
is said to be
so because the “functionality of Mediaportal includes the capacity of the
customer to go in and do a whole suite
of different things with their tagged
content” including that “a customer might wish to be made aware of
everything that’s
been tagged” and “you [the customer] can
call up the entirety [of the customer’s tagged content] if you
T, p 1191, lns 20‑23.
says that whether or not the customer actually does that is “beside the
point” because “the making available
online is an act comprised in
the copyright in respect of each item of tagged content” such that
“each time a customer
logs onto Mediaportal, by analogy with [
Films Pty Ltd v iiNet Ltd
(2011) 194 FCR 285 (“
FCAFC”)], involves Isentia making it available”:
T, p 1191, lns 19‑30.
Accordingly,
the question is, by tagging particular ingested content of relevance to the
customer (according to the search protocols),
storing the tagged content on the
Mediaportal platform and enabling it to be seen, by enabling customers to log
onto the platform
and see the customer’s tagged content (if they so
desire), has Isentia “made [the work] available online”? CA
T, p 1191, lns 28‑29 that Isentia has done so “by
analogy” with
Roadshow Films
FCAFC. (redacted)
then is the
analogical point
derived from
Roadshow Films
which leads to the conclusion that Isentia and Meltwater make the CA content
available online?
Roadshow Films
FCAFC, the applicant and a range of other companies (the
appellants for the purposes of the Full Court appeal) were the owners or
exclusive licensees of the copyright in thousands of commercially released
cinematographic films. iiNet was a carriage service provider
customers with internet access services. It was common ground that some of
iiNet’s customers had used the internet
services provided to them by iiNet
to infringe the appellants’ copyright in particular films by making the
films available
online. They did so by using a peer‑to‑peer file
sharing software known as
. A user of the BitTorrent software
could download an electronic file which contained pieces of a film. That file
would then be
shared with other users of BitTorrent who could share other pieces
(other electronic files) of that film with other users. Put simply,
users could form part of a “swarm” of users (computers) downloading
pieces of the particular film and uploading
those pieces to other computers in
the file sharing peer‑to‑peer swarm (a torrent of bits) thus
ultimately aggregating
the files to effect a consolidated copy or reproduction
of the whole film. To enable the files containing the various pieces to
shared as part of the swarm, the files had to pass between users of the
BitTorrent software over the internet. iiNet was not
the host of any website
from which any files or any pieces of a film were downloaded and it did not host
on its site the BitTorrent
software. Its services were used to enable the
infringing swarming conduct of the users, to occur.
(using the BitTorrent software)
to the internet (through iiNet)
files relating to the relevant film stored in that computer would be
automatically to other members of the swarm as files made available
to be uploaded to those other computers by operation of particular
within the software. The users made the “files” available online
“by connecting” their computers
to the internet and the relevant
pieces of the film were made available online each time a connection occurred:
Roadshow Films
FCAFC: Emmett J at [152]‑[154], [157] and
[158]; Jagot J at [327]‑[330].
put the factual matters in this way at [154]:
Where an iiNet user downloads or installs a BitTorrent Client Programme on a
computer, the iiNet user must have made a conscious
decision to enable the
relevant computer to participate in the BitTorrent System. When an iiNet user
switches on that iiNet user’s
computer and connects it to the internet,
through a modem using the service provided by iiNet, the iiNet user must be
taken to have
intended that the BitTorrent System would operate in accordance
with the BitTorrent Protocol. Each time that the computer is connected
internet and is capable of participating in the BitTorrent System, any Film file
stored in that computer is made available
online for other members of the swarm,
namely, those other computer operators who are participating in the BitTorrent
System by having
a BitTorrent Client Programme operating on their respective
computers. From the point of view of an iiNet user whose computer participates
in the BitTorrent System, every time the computer is connected to the internet,
all files relating to a Film will be made available
to be uploaded, albeit in
pieces, by means of the BitTorrent System, using the BitTorrent Client Programme
on the computer, as well
as the Tracker and the BitTorrent Protocol.
Transmission cannot occur when there is no connection to the internet.
Participation
in the BitTorrent system, so described, was participation in a system which
film files to be transmitted and sent
in the swarm logged on to the internet. That is not what happens when a
customer engages with either the Mediaportal
platform of Isentia or the MI
platform of Meltwater.
regard to that description of the method by which the various files were made
available online according to the findings, Isentia
contends that there is no
analogy relevant to the circumstances in which Isentia (but also Meltwater)
conducts its business method
as an MMO. Isentia contends that the act of
tagging content is not an act of making that content available online and it is
until an Isentia customer logs onto the Mediaportal platform (in
Isentia’s case) that the content could even arguably be described
having been made available online (although Isentia recognises that relevant
content might be communicated to the customer by
email or in some other online
way in particular circumstances). Mr Gerstmyer gave evidence about the way
in which the customer might
gain access to content. We examined aspects of that
evidence earlier (including the notion that some content is “pushed
and other tagged content is sitting on the platform with the
potential to be seen) and we also noted the point of distinction
Gerstmyer makes between the Isentia business method and what is
described as the “Spotify model”: as to that, see
[334]‑[337].
to Isentia, CA’s contention is that all content tagged and held on the
Mediaportal platform is, by a combination of isolating
and tagging particular
articles and by holding them on the platform for examination by the customer
(should the customer choose to
do so), sufficient to constitute an act of making
all tagged content available online.
in the case of Isentia, CA takes up the evidence of Mr Gerstmyer that only
communicated (in the
sense in which Mr Gerstmyer understands an act of communication). CA says
that there is a substantial body
of ingested content which is used to determine
whether articles are responsive to search fields of the customer so as to tag
articles. CA contends that it ought to be remunerated not simply for
Isentia’s act of communicating (as Mr Gerstmyer sees
it) 5% of tagged
articles but also for the initial ingestion of all content at the threshold
which also ought to take into account
all content tagged and held on the
platform as an “act of communication”. CA says that, as a matter of
principle, the
process of reporting and paying for only those articles that are
communicated (as Mr Gerstmyer understands the notion of
communication) underreports an important class of conduct constituted by
“communication”
because the
accessibility
to the tagged
content on Isentia’s platform is said to be an act of making that content
available online for the purposes of
whatever the particular service may be then
being used by the customer.
accept that the evidence in these proceedings does
suggest that when
a customer of Isentia or Meltwater logs onto the respective platform, systems or
software programs on those platforms
are automatically engaged so as to transmit
or communicate (in a non‑definitional sense) content on the platform
the customer in Isentia’s case or otherwise available in
Meltwater’s case, to the customer’s computer. We accept
that sense there is nothing analogous, in the model adopted by the MMOs, to the
functionality of the BitTorrent software
evident each time the computers of the
users of that software logged onto the internet.
note again the text of the definition of the term “communicate” in
s 10(1) of the Act and particularly the
available online ... a work”.
Roadshow Films
FCAFC, Nicholas J said this at [661]:
The first limb, which consists of making available online, covers a situation
where a person makes a film available on the internet.
How widely the film is
made available is relevant only to the question of whether it is made available
to the public. The act of
communication by making available online does not
require that there be any actual communication in the
ordinary sense
that word. A person who
uses a computer to make a film available online
“communicates” it for the purpose of s 86(c) [in the case of a
literary work the corresponding relevant provision is
s 31(1)(a)(iv)]
whether or not it is transmitted to or accessed by any person.
[emphasis added]
also note that Emmett J at [257] and Nicholas J at [795] and [798]
found that iiNet had not authorised the infringements of the
users of the
BitTorrent software (and the iiNet service). The issue before the High Court
was confined to the question of whether
iiNet had authorised the primary
infringements of the various copyrights by the users of its services on the
particular grounds advanced
in that matter. All members of the High Court
concluded that it had not: French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ at
[77]‑[79]; Gummow
and Hayne JJ at [114]‑[116] and
[139]‑[146]. It is not necessary to examine the reasoning as to those
notion that Isentia’s conduct of tagging content and holding the ingested
and tagged content on its platform accessible
to customers of a relevant service
a communication to the customer of every tagged article
(leaving aside for the moment the difficulty of not confusing the total number
of tags as the total number of communications) was raised for the first time in
closing submissions. Neither applicant presented
its case or responded to the
case advanced against it by CA, on the footing that the reasonableness of the CA
licence fee proposals
comprehended a communication as now formulated nor that
the reasonableness of their own proposal ought to be tested against the
that they each engage in an act of communication as now formulated.
Not surprisingly, the applicants found it necessary to put on
supplementary
written submissions on the question. CA filed responsive supplementary written
submissions.
on the facts related to Isentia for the moment, Isentia accepts that copies of
articles, tagged as relevant to a client’s
brief, are held on
Isentia’s database (the Mediaportal platform). As to tagging, Isentia
emphasises Mr Gerstmyer’s evidence
that an article might be
responsive to the customer’s field of “properties and
keywords” such that an article may
well be tagged multiple times to the
same customer with the result that the number of tags (even on CA’s
contention) does not
represent the number of times an article is communicated.
CA’s contention, however, is not based on the notion that the number
tags represents the number of times an article is communicated but rather that
each article, once tagged at all and stored on
the database, is by that system,
made accessible and thus made available online. In order to address that
matter, it is now necessary
to return to the conduct in issue.
already explained, there are two classes of conduct on the part of an MMO that
have formed the foundation of a fee over time.
The first has been the act of
supplying a press clip (usually the whole article) to the customer at a per clip
rate of (redacted)
as the CPI adjusted rate. To the extent that the provision
or transmission by the MMO of an article represents a communication of
that act is governed by the “press clip” arrangement and the fee
just mentioned.
second class of conduct is the online service of monitoring content published
online. That service involves a system. The system
comprises steps (taking
Isentia as an example) by which the online content is taken onto the Mediaportal
platform and subjected to
electronic search protocols to isolate (tag) content
responsive to keywords or other “properties” nominated by the
A portion (as defined) is then sent to the customer together with a
link to the publisher’s webpage where the article electronically
If the customer elects to engage with the link, the customer might find a
paywall access protocol displayed on the site
requiring a
to the publisher for
, or that the publisher has decided to make
the article accessible (without a fee paid by the customer) together with images
and advertising
for which the publisher receives a fee. The publisher’s
website might be blocked entirely although the publishers’ drive
income suggests that websites holding such content are accessible by these other
means. Once one of these methods are engaged
by the customer, a web browser
displays the content held on the publisher’s webpage by displaying a copy
of the content on
the MMO’s customer’s computer. It does not seem
to be suggested that the transmission of the link to the publisher’s
website is an act of communication of the article by the MMO (although it is
said to be an act of s 36(1A) authorisation, about which
we disagree as
described earlier).
the case of Isentia, the tagged content is retained on the Mediaportal platform
and it would be open to a customer to go to the
platform and see the tagged and
stored article if the customer wanted to go back and engage with the article.
we accept that there is no relevant analogue in the facts of
Roadshow Films
FCAFC, we nevertheless accept that the act of establishing a website
platform by which ingested and tagged CA content, in the case
of Isentia, and a
(redacted) is held on the various servers of each applicant (or on the servers
of their service providers for that
purpose), by which customers
to the platform and either identify and see tagged content in Isentia’s
case or interrogate the site in Meltwater’s
case and see ad hoc any
one or more articles responsive to the search terms, is an act of making the
content available online in
the definitional sense of the first limb of the term
“communicate” for the purposes of the Act.
that act must be understood within the system within which it is designed to
operate especially having regard to its role
in serving the process of ingestion
and tagging (or other means of isolating relevant articles) and
communicating
the existence of relevant articles by the process within that
system, that is, the portion notification process coupled with a link
publisher’s webpage where the publisher determines whether it wants a fee
from the customer to pass behind a paywall;
whether it has already obtained
subscription revenue from the customer; whether it is content to raise
advertising revenue by enabling
the customers “eyeballs” to see the
page (and the advertising attached to it).
present contention as to communication is an entirely new formulation and one
that ought to have been raised on CA’s
statement of facts (and
contentions) from the outset. CA is unclear about how the newly formulated acts
of communication find expression
in the various formulations of what is said to
be a reasonable fee. The proposal CA predominantly relies upon is the
Alternative CA Licence
(and the amended version) which contain a fee
formulation of the greater of a percentage of revenue at 23% (or (redacted)) and
CGL fee. The CGL fee is made up of three components: a fee attributable to
Ingestion + Storage
(based on CA’s nomination of the
number of published articles (assumed to all be ingested as falling within the
licensed repertoire));
Customer Fee
by reference to the
Annual Revenue Band
Usage Level
Whole of Government Fee
. As to the Usage Level component, the
calculation is said to operate on the footing, according to Mr Suckling,
that portions and
links are to be reported
they have been communicated
which suggests that CA does not see the licence formulation operating on the
basis that all tagged and
stored content is treated, of itself, as communicated:
see [586]‑[589].
seems clear enough from Mr Suckling’s evidence that not all tagged
content nor all ingested content is to be
as communicated at
least for the purpose of the Usage Level fee (even though not actually
transmitted to the customer). CA’s
ultimate position might properly be
understood (although not put this way by CA) as being that whatever the scope of
the CGL components
may be according to the text of those provisions of the
schedule, the “greater of” formulation engages a percentage rate
revenue at 23% (or under the amended version, (redacted)) supported on the basis
of ingestion (reproduction) and the contended
act of communication by tagging
and storage in the case of Isentia and (redacted) coupled with the protocols for
accessibility to
the content (whether the customer exercises a right of access
do not accept that it is appropriate in determining whether a proposed fee is
reasonable or not, to segment steps and attribute
a fee to ingestion as an act
of reproduction and another entirely separate fee for an act of communication
(in the way we have described
it) and other fees for each sequential step and
then aggregate all those fee attributions to bring about a single fee (and then
it with 23% of revenue (or (redacted) of revenue)). Doing so is very
likely indeed to overstate the value of the grant of the licence.
matter mentioned at [783] of these reasons, the position is
mentioned earlier, CA contends by its document described as
Overview of Acts
comprised in Copyright by Isentia
that Isentia’s
social media
involves acts falling within the scope of the copyright which
would otherwise be the subject of the licence from CA. CA’s contention
that where the
in a social media post is
social media monitoring by either of the applicants will involve a reproduction
and a communication of a
, sometimes
and sometimes the
of the work. The applicants contend that CA does
not enjoy the right to licence any social media posts. The applicants say that
CA has not contended in its various statements of facts and contentions that the
MMOs require a licence from CA for any of the steps
involved in their social
media monitoring activities and thus their social media monitoring services.
the applicants say that there is an apparent inconsistency in CA’s
position because the licences proposed by it in
these proceedings, (redacted)
provide for an
of revenue derived from social media monitoring
in the calculation of the licence fee in circumstances where revenue so derived
separate (that is, “unbundled”).
applicants also say that the evidence adduced by CA does not suggest that a
licence from CA is required in order to reproduce
social media posts. The
applicants say that the platform providers of social media services are not
members of CA and they do not
fall within the licensor cohort conferring rights
applicants say that the rights in relation to content contained within social
media posts is a function of the licences granted
by the platforms such as
Twitter, Facebook and Instagram. The operators of those sites grant worldwide
licences in relation to all
content posted on their sites. For example,
Facebook’s services are the subject of a licence in these terms: “A
non‑exclusive,
transferrable, sub‑licensable, royalty‑free and
worldwide licence to host, use, distribute, modify, run, copy, publicly
or display, translate and create derivative works of users’ content that
is shared, posted or uploaded on or in connection
with Facebook products and is
covered by intellectual property rights”.
in similar terms are granted by Twitter and Instagram.
applicants say that CA is well familiar with the terms of these licences.
addition, the applicants note that material is available on social media sites
because publishers post their content to those sites.
(redacted). The
applicants contend that raising, on the last day of oral submissions, the notion
that each applicant requires a
licence from CA in order to provide their
respective social media monitoring services, in circumstances where that notion
take into account,
, that publishers post content to those
monitored sites;
, that CA does not enjoy the right to grant
licences in respect of those social media sites (forum licences); and,
, the licences granted by the forum operators are well understood,
is all apt to be confusing.
applicants make a number of other criticisms of the
handed up by CA during the course of oral submissions. Many of the matters the
subject of those criticisms have already
been mentioned. We will simply mention
some of them here. Isentia says that having regard to the evidence, services
such as “Mediaportal
Sentiment” and “Analytics
Dashboard” do not engage reproductions and communications of full text
articles and portions
of works unless the contended reproduction is a reference
to the initial ingestion of content which is subsequently analysed. The
applicants do not accept that sending a
relating to an article (as
previously described) involves a reproduction or communication of the article.
Nor do the applicants accept
that sending the
of an article
involves a communication of the work or a substantial part of the work. That
view is supported by
Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd v Reed International
Books Australia Pty Ltd
[2010] FCA 984
(2010) 189 FCR 109.
applicants also reassert that the isolation and segmentation of every
deconstructed act falling within the essential conduct of
providing media
monitoring services so as to support the contended reasonableness of CA’s
proposed fee structure (calculated
Alternative CA Licence
the basis of the greater of 23% of revenue and the CGL fee) not only fails to
take account of the difficulties with those two
formulations (as already
discussed), but also seeks to operate on the basis that a fee should, in effect,
attach to every sequential
step along the way to the performance of the
essential classes of conduct for which the licence exists. The applicants say
the substance of the licence is characterised by the provision of PDF
versions of articles (under the press clip structure) and the
online/portion
mechanism. The applicants say that to the extent, for example, that any
intermediate or internal copying occurs for
the purpose of making content
available in accordance with one or other of those two mechanisms, those
intermediate steps ought not
to be, in effect, counted up with fee attribution
also takes issue with CA’s closing oral submissions to the effect that
Isentia ought to be paying a fee to CA to reflect
the value to the customer of
being able to access a webpage on a publisher’s website (paywall bypass)
by using the link provided
by Isentia, as that result has been brought about, it
is said, by CA discharging its
best endeavours
obligation. CA says that
paywall bypass is only enabled by reason of the licence obligation and thus the
best endeavours obligation
is a valuable one under the licences proposed by CA.
says that the submission is essentially inconsistent with
Mr Suckling’s evidence that CA cannot provide access to a
publisher’s website (content webpages) and could not charge for access to
the publisher’s content webpages. Isentia
also says that the MMOs enter
into separate direct contractual arrangements with the publishers for physical
access including paywall
bypass. Thus, the applicants contend that they do not
secure paywall bypass for customers as a
of CA’s best
endeavour’s obligation but rather the access is secured by the applicants
on entirely commercial terms negotiated
directly with the publishers.
best endeavours obligation in the licence might be called in aid in
circumstances where a CA publisher, for any particular reason,
is refusing to
engage in a commercial negotiation with an MMO about access to content pages.
CA contends that the obligation is
real and valuable. It says that
Mr Eisman and also Mr Gray gave evidence that their respective
companies permit access to content
webpages “by reason of”
CA’s best endeavours obligation (redacted)
accept that Mr Eisman’s evidence does not go that far in the sense of
linking any practice about which he speaks to CA’s
best endeavours
obligation. Mr Gray, however, clearly had in mind CA’s best
endeavours obligation so far as it relates to
links to webpages behind paywalls.
Nevertheless, the witnesses seem to accept that both News Corp and Nine
Publishing could impose
charges on MMOs for paywall bypass to content webpages.
best endeavours obligation may be weighed in the balance in determining the
attitude of the rights owners to any negotiation but
it seems clear enough that
ultimately granting such access is a commercial matter as between the rights
owner and the MMO and no
doubt each party seeks to extract whatever commercial
advantage it might obtain from such an arrangement, in the negotiation of the
arrangement.
now turn to the non‑price terms.
Topic (11): The non‑price terms
do not propose to analyse each and every one of the contested non‑price
terms in the proposed
, in these reasons. Although that
licence has not been abandoned, CA places its real and abiding emphasis in these
proceedings on
Alternative CA Licence
Amended Alternative
. We have extensively described the relevant factors in relation
to the proposed
. We do not accept that it is a reasonable
proposal. We do not accept that its unreasonableness, in effect, can be rescued
by analysing
all the non‑price terms and seeking to make judgments about
which terms are reasonable and unreasonable so as to bring about,
reductionist way, a body of terms and conditions which taken in conjunction with
the fee formulation brings about a reasonable
is unreasonable.
Alternative CA Licence
, we are not satisfied for all the reasons
we have indicated that the licence fee formulation in that document is
reasonable. It
suffers from many difficulties. Again, we think that little is
to be gained by examining in these reasons the various challenges
to particular
clauses in the proposed licence. We have examined all of the contentions of the
parties on the proposed non‑price
terms of that document. However, the
formulation of the licence fee is very problematic indeed. We are not satisfied
Alternative CA Licence
is reasonable.
are satisfied that the claim of the applicants that each of them requires a
licence as proposed and that CA has refused or failed
to grant the licence or to
procure the grant of the licence, and that in the circumstances it is
unreasonable that the licence should
not be granted, is
“well‑founded”. The
relevant circumstances
the circumstances described extensively in these reasons. We have examined
carefully all of the terms of the licences
proposed by the applicants and the
debate about those terms and particularly the non‑price terms. We do not
propose to examine
each of the non‑price terms textually in these reasons
and the debate about them. As mentioned, we take the view that the
the applicants are well‑founded and that the terms as to charges and the
non‑price terms cohere. We do, however,
propose to express some
observations about particular matters, mentioned shortly. Thus, it is open to
the Tribunal under s 157(6B)
to order that each applicant be granted a
licence in the terms proposed by it: s 157(6B)(b). Alternatively, it is
open to the Tribunal
to make an order specifying, in respect of the matters
specified in the order, the charges, if any, and the conditions, that the
Tribunal considers reasonable in the circumstances in relation to each
applicant: s 157(6B)(a).
Tribunal proposes to act under s 157(6B)(a).
the proposal put forward by each applicant, each applicant proposes a licence
for a term of (redacted). CA, by its proposals, contends
for a two year licence
term. A two year licence term is said to be important because of the rapid
technological changes affecting
the industry and the need to retain flexibility
to adjust to those changes over a reasonably short horizon. There are at least
difficulties with CA’s proposition.
is that in circumstances of high volatility, transactions have very
recently been struck between significant commercial parties for
licences over
content in this industry with a term of (redacted)
difficulty is that these proceedings and similar proceedings in
the Tribunal exhibit very high transaction costs. (redacted). It
realistic to think that the parties should, put metaphorically, go back to the
well within two years.
the other hand, (redacted) is unrealistic. In addition, we think that there is
merit, as a matter of principle, in a fee based
on a percentage of revenue
provided that a formulation properly articulated and supported by a methodology
which takes into account
all of the factors discussed at [778](11) could give
rise to a reasonable fee. The Tribunal has already expressed the observation
these reasons that it is a little unfortunate that CA did not more
enthusiastically seek to identify in the early days a proper
methodology for
calculating a fee and seek to engage, for example, with at least some of the
factors at [778](11) of these reasons.
the result, the Tribunal has been persuaded that the evidence in the proceeding
supports the propositions contended for by the
applicants.
further matter concerns the question of whether a licence ought to contain a
condition imposing a prohibition upon CA withdrawing
titles from the licence
(that is, from the definition of “Licensed Work”) once granted. The
Tribunal has considered
this matter carefully and recognises that there may be
some practical difficulties adopting such a condition in circumstances where
is conscious that publishers might seek to withdraw their titles from CA during
the course of a licence. The answer to CA’s
concern, from a
licensee’s perspective, might simply lie in the fact that in entering into
a licence at any moment in time,
for the grant of a licence
purports to act on behalf of its portfolio of rights owners as the agent for a
disclosed principal in the form of each publisher
which it represents. Although
it might be open to a publisher to withdraw a title from CA for the purposes of
some future transaction,
it is difficult to see how a publisher, as CA’s
principal, would not be bound by the contractual arrangements, through the
licence, brought into existence for the term contemplated by that licence, by
its agent, CA.
seeks to deal with that problem by preserving a protocol (condition) by which
titles can be excluded from the licence during the
currency of the licence.
Viewed objectively, it is difficult to conclude that it is reasonable to
withdraw a title from a licence
once the licence has been struck. The fee and
other terms of the licence represent a total commercial bargain the value of
at the moment in time when it is struck, rests on the scope of the rights
granted and the way in which those rights might be exercised
once granted. If a
licensee finds, for example, the day after the licence is struck, that one or
more significant titles are withdrawn
from the licence, the entire bargain is
undermined. A power residing in CA to withdraw titles from the licence could
only ever be
reasonable if the licence also contained a mechanism which had the
effect of valuing in some way the titles withdrawn from the licence
reducing the licence fee by the measure of that value. Such a provision would
have to be clear and would need to take effect
without the need to have what
might amount to a large scale hearing to determine a methodology for measuring
the value of the lost
titles and the corresponding reduction in the licence fee.
a publisher principal, by its agent, CA, binds itself to an agreement for the
term of the licence, why should it be able to then
turn around and simply give
notice that it is no longer bound by the agreement? Apart from the
discretionary nature of such a fundamental
right, the scope of the
“Licensed Works” falling within the grant is fundamental.
take the view that during the period of the licence as struck by CA on behalf of
its portfolio of publishers, neither CA nor any
one of its publisher principals
ought to be able to withdraw titles from the licence. The way in which the
applicants deal with
the problem is to remove provisions which would otherwise
enable CA to withdraw a title by giving the appropriate notice. A further
matter concerns the per clip rate. We note that the rate was adjusted to reach
a rate of (redacted) in 2015. We note that since
then the important titles
The Australian
The Weekend Australian
Australian Financial Review
(and titles related to it) have been removed
from the licence and no doubt the rate of (redacted) reflected a commercial
between price and the scope of the titles falling within the licence.
That balance no longer subsists. (redacted). Obviously enough,
those titles are
not nearly as significant as the major titles just mentioned. Having regard to
all of these factors (redacted)
we think that the appropriate per clip rate is
(redacted).
the result, the Tribunal orders that a licence be granted to each applicant on
the terms and conditions proposed by each applicant
first, as to the
proposed by each applicant and, second, as to the
proposed by each applicant and to that extent we
for the purposes of s 157(6B)(a) of the Act,
these matters:
(a) the term of the licence shall be (redacted);
(b) the licence shall (redacted);
(c) the licence is to (redacted); and
(d) the press clip rate shall be (redacted).
licence proposals of the applicants are these: as to Isentia, the Proposed
Licence at Annexure A to the S
econd Further Amended Statement of Points
in Support of the Applicant’s Case
filed on 1 December 2020; as
to Meltwater, the Proposed Licence annexed to Meltwater’s
Amended Application
filed 18 September 2020 as amended by [49A] of the
Further Amended Statement of Points in Support of the Applicant’s
filed 1 December 2020.
applicants will be directed to submit formal orders giving effect to the
Tribunal’s decision.
I certify that the preceding eight hundred and
sixty‑four (864) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Determination
herein of the Honourable Justice Greenwood (President),
Dr Rhonda Smith (Member) and Ms Michelle Groves (Member), Australian
Dated: 15 October 2021
RTF format (11.7 MB)
Signed PDF/A format