Application by Isentia Pty Limited [2020] ACopyT 1 (22 April 2020)
Application by Isentia Pty Limited
File number:
CT 2 of 2018
The Tribunal:
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT)
Date of decision:
Legislation:
Cases cited:
Application by Isentia Pty Limited
[2018] ACopyT 4
Date of hearing:
21 February 2020 and 27 February 2020
Date of last submissions:
No Catchwords
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr P Brereton SC with Ms L Thomas
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr C Dimitriadis SC with Ms E Whitby
Solicitor for the Respondent:
MinterEllison
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 2 of 2018
APPLICATION BY:
ISENTIA PTY LIMITED (ACN 002 533 851)
ISENTIA PTY LIMITED
(ACN 002 533 851)
(ACN 001 228 799)
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL DIRECTS
amended application filed on 17 January 2020 is dismissed.
costs of and incidental to the application are reserved for later determination.
request of the applicant and other applicants who have filed applications under
(Cth) (the “Act”),
Meltwater Australia Pty Ltd (“Meltwater”) and Streem Pty Limited
to refer particular questions to the Federal Court of
Australia for a determination is refused.
five questions referred to at [202] of the decision published today are set
aside for determination separately from other questions.
representatives for Isentia Pty Limited, Meltwater and Streem are directed to
advise the Associate to the President of dates in
May when counsel and
solicitors will be available to participate in a hearing of matters in relation
to the five questions referred
to in Direction 4.
costs of and incidental to the request to refer the five questions to the
Federal Court of Australia are reserved for later determination.
parties are directed to conduct discussions so as to propose directions for the
future conduct of the applications with a view
to submitting proposed directions
to the Tribunal by the end of April but preferably by 4.00pm on Monday,
27 April 2020.
REASONS FOR
DETERMINATION
GREENWOOD J (PRESIDENT):
proceedings are most immediately concerned with an amended application for
interim orders under
applicant, Isentia Pty Limited (“Isentia”), seeks an order with
effect from 17 January 2020 (the date of filing of
the application) until
further order that the per‑clip rate payable to Copyright Agency Limited
(“CA”) in accordance
with an Interim Licence (described as
Clipping Service Licence Newspapers and Magazine: Copying & Communication
) ordered by the Tribunal on 23 April 2019, be varied to the
amount of the per‑clip rate payable by Meltwater Australia Pty
(“Meltwater”) to CA pursuant to orders made by the Tribunal on
23 May 2018 (in proceedings CT2 of 2017) concerning
an interim licence in
favour of Meltwater.
Isentia per‑clip rate ordered on 23 April 2019 is the amount in the
Confidential Schedule (“CS”) at CS1. The
Meltwater per‑clip
rate is the amount at CS2.
also seeks an order that the Downstream Licence Fee payable to CA in the Isentia
Interim Licence (otherwise known as the
Scraping Licence
) ordered by the
Tribunal on 23 April 2019 be varied to the amount per annum at CS3, payable
pro rata per quarter.
proceedings are also concerned with an issue which has emerged between the
parties to the proceeding and which also engages
Meltwater and another interim
licensee, Streem Pty Limited (“Streem”). The further issue is the
question of whether
a matter ought to be referred to the Full Court of the
Federal Court for determination of a question of law concerning the power
Tribunal to make orders of a particular kind as against particular entities.
This question is a matter of considerable practical
and financial concern to
each applicant and, of course, the question is a matter of concern to CA, CopyCo
Pty Ltd (“CopyCo”),
publisher members of CopyCo and non‑member
publishers of CopyCo. I will return to that matter later in these reasons.
is a further issue alive between Isentia, Meltwater and Streem, on the one hand,
and CA, on the other hand, concerning procedural
orders and the completion of
necessary steps in the march towards a hearing of each of the principal
proceedings commenced by Isentia,
Meltwater and Streem all to be heard together,
presently set down for October this year. I will also return to that matter
in these reasons.
amended application was heard on 21 February 2020 with a further related
matter reviewed and heard on 27 February
2020. The Tribunal had hoped to
reach a decision on the amended application during March. However, due to the
intervention of a
number of other urgent matters requiring decision, and the
emergence of the present circumstances confronting the Tribunal and the
the disposition of matters, it has not been possible to deal with the
application and related matters until now. Having
regard to the extent of the
affidavit material relied upon by the parties and the work and cost involved in
preparing that material,
it is necessary to examine the material in some detail.
Isentia’s amended application
starting point in relation to the amended application is the reasons of the
Tribunal of 16 November 2018:
Application by Isentia Pty Limited
[2018] ACopyT 4.
It should be noted that as a result of the decision
and reasons published on 16 November 2018, the parties engaged in
negotiations
in relation to all aspects of those reasons so as to present orders
to the Tribunal to be made arising out of those discussions.
Those negotiations
did not come to fruition until April 2019 for a number of reasons, resulting in
the orders of 23 April 2019.
is not necessary to set out the terms of the orders of 23 April 2019 in
these reasons. However, these reasons should be read together
with the orders
of 23 April 2019 and Attachments A and B to those orders, together
with the reasons of the Tribunal published on
16 November 2018. All of the
observations in the reasons published on 16 November 2018 remain important
both contextually and in
an operative sense. I do not propose to set out in
these reasons much of the history described in those reasons. However, the
published on 16 November 2018 ought to be read closely as they
explain the context in which an issue of pricing parity emerged between
and CA, having regard to the orders made in the interim application by
Meltwater. They explain the evolution of the notion
emerging from CA that the
preferred position of CA is that all entities, engaged in the market for the
provision of media intelligence
services, ought to be put on a common footing
(in terms of the final preferred position) through the adoption of a common
standard licence. The reasons also explain the differential
circumstances which historically resulted in individual transactional
being reached between CA and Isentia, Meltwater and Streem.
the earlier reasons, the Tribunal set out an analysis of the evidence of the
parties and discussed the competing contentions about
the question of whether a
differential per‑clip rate payable to CA, of the kind
issue, had the effect of giving rise to distortions in rivalry in the market for
the provision of services by, in particular,
Isentia and Meltwater, to clients
of those entities, based upon sub‑licences to exercise rights conferred
upon those entities
by CA. At [89], the Tribunal said this:
accept that having regard to all of the affidavits there is at least a serious
question as between the parties as to whether the
different Licence Fee
provisions concerning the Isentia current licence and the Meltwater current
arrangements give rise to distortions
in rivalry in the market for the provision
of each entity’s services. The extensive loss of the substantial clients
in the Schedule in the material (with other references in the text of
the affidavits) from Isentia to, in the main, Meltwater, is
at least consistent
with an advantage that Meltwater enjoys in the Licence Fee it pays for the grant
of the rights it enjoys.
of the contentions advanced by CA was that there were material differences in
the scope of the rights granted by CA to Isentia,
on the one hand, and
Meltwater, on the other, which explained a difference in the per‑clip rate
in each licence arrangement.
Isentia contended that these material differences
relied upon by CA were “distinctions without a difference” and to
the extent that these differences gave rise to different treatment in the
per‑clip rate, Isentia took the position, for the
purposes of the interim
licence, that it was willing to be put on
footing as Meltwater in terms of the scope of rights and thus, ought to enjoy
the same per‑clip rate as Meltwater. All of
this was put forward on the
footing that it provided an interim answer to the prejudice Isentia was
suffering pending the determination
of the principal proceeding, by reason of
the pricing disparity said to be operating in the market.
to these matters, the Tribunal said this at [98] to [102] of the earlier
also says that because it regards the matters of contended “material
differences” in the scope of the rights granted
by CAL to Isentia and
Meltwater emphasised by CAL, as “distinctions without a difference”
or “de minimis”
differences, it says that on an
basis it is willing to accept precisely the same scope of rights enjoyed by
Meltwater which would then address the so‑called
material differences and
on that footing, or on those terms, Isentia ought to be paying the same licence
fee as Meltwater, pending
the determination of the principal application(s).
Isentia says that this approach would then enable the contended distortions
the so‑called material differences are thought to be
a principled basis
for differences in the Licence Fee in each case.
to the question of material differences, I accept that there are certainly
differences in each relevant licence concerning the character of
the rights granted to Isentia, on the one hand, and Meltwater, on
hand, as described at [80] – [82] and [85] – [86] of these reasons.
However, I am not satisfied that these
textual differences make a significant
practical working difference having regard to those things that Meltwater
in providing to clients its media intelligence services as
compared with those things which Isentia does. In that regard, I note
particularly Meltwater’s own statement of its activities in relation to
the Licensed Works as set out in the Confidential Schedule
response which does not seek to challenge the content of that statement of
Meltwater’s activities. In fact,
CAL seems to embrace those activities as
a basis, no doubt, for arguing that Meltwater ought to be paying a substantial
industry‑wide
licence fee.
also accept that there seems to be no rational or principled basis for
differential treatment in the licence fees, on an
interim basis
the determination of the principal applications, paid by Isentia and Meltwater
for the exercise of the rights once it has
accepted that the textual differences
do not seem to be giving rise to a real difference in that which is offered by
Isentia as compared
with that which is offered by Meltwater at least in terms of
exercising rights in relation to Licensed Works.
also accept that Isentia has lost a number of significant clients to Meltwater
and that the differential copyright cost is at least
an element of substance in
that outcome. Human experience of rivalry in markets is that once a client is
lost to a rival, it is
likely to take real time and effort to win back that
client, if at all. This is another feature of prejudice. Some examples of
clients lost by Isentia to Meltwater and the grading or significance of those
clients to Isentia is set out in the Confidential
the textual differences in each of the licence arrangements with Isentia and
Meltwater as to the grant of rights are, in fact,
material, it seems to me that
those material differences can be smoothed out by establishing, on an interim
basis, terms of a licence
by CAL to Isentia on the same terms as the licence
granted to Meltwater, as to the character of the rights granted to each
Isentia says that it is willing to be put on the same footing as
Meltwater as to that matter. Once a licence is granted to Isentia
in respect of
the same class of rights licensed to Meltwater, it would seem to follow that
there ought to be a licence fee payable
by Isentia, during the
period, which reflects the same licence fee paid, in substance, by
[103], the Tribunal notes the important debate about the manner in which the
rights, the subject of the licence to Isentia (and
each of Meltwater and
Streem), are to be valued especially having regard to the changing nature of the
[104], the Tribunal notes that in seeking to address the prejudice contended for
by Isentia, by reducing the then prevailing per‑clip
rate based on the
2016 Isentia Licence (being the amount at CS4) to a lesser amount, CA would also
suffer prejudice in the interim
by being deprived of the cash flows which would
have been received referable to the rate at CS4. The Tribunal notes that the
between the rate at CS4 and the Meltwater rate at CS2 was an amount
[105], the Tribunal said this:
order to provide CAL with some relief from what would be the deprivation of the
full difference [at CS5 of these reasons], the
per clip licence fee to be paid
by Isentia is to be the amount [at CS1 of these reasons]. A per clip rate at
that amount goes some
way at least towards smoothing out the differential rate
as between Meltwater and Isentia and yet provides a continuing contribution
CAL’s cash flow deprivation that would occur if the per clip rate was
merely the amount [at CS2].
to the role of the interim licence as established by the decision and reasons of
16 November 2018, the Tribunal said this at [109]
Tribunal proposes to establish an interim licence in favour of Isentia to apply
for the months of December 2018 and January and
February 2019 and then review
the position with a view to establishing a further licence for a further period
of three months for
March, April and May 2019 and then, if necessary, for a
further period thereafter until the determination of the principal applications.
The hearing of the principal applications will need to be expedited so that
final terms and conditions might be established. The
parties ought to caucus
is practicably possible.
terms of the interim licence for December 2018 and January and February 2019
ought to include a provision to the effect that should
the Tribunal establish
terms and conditions of a licence which contain a higher rate of licence than
that prevailing in the interim
period, the higher rate of licence will be paid
by Isentia as from 1 December 2018 and, correspondingly, should the
Tribunal determine
a lower rate of licence fee, Isentia would be entitled to
recoup the difference between that paid and the lower rate.
it can be seen that the Tribunal had in mind that the interim licence
established by the Tribunal would operate for the months
of December 2018 and
January and February 2019 with a review then taking place with a view to
establishing a further licence for
a period of three months for March, April and
May 2019 and then further periods thereafter. In other words, it was
anticipated that
the matter would need to be kept under review to determine
whether circumstances might have changed which would influence the question
whether any aspect of the interim licence ought to change. However, as already
mentioned, the negotiations leading to the agreed
orders did not come to
fruition until 23 April 2019.
the context of the remarks at [109] and, particularly, [110], the Tribunal also
observed, as a matter of impression, the matter
at [111] in these
[111] It seems, impressionistically at least, that it is
unlikely that the Tribunal will determine a lower rate of Licence Fee than
interim Licence Fee.
the Tribunal noted that an interim licence was established in favour of Streem
on 28 June 2018 and at [113] and [114], the
Tribunal said this:
the case of Streem, an interim licence was established as an exercise of power
of the Act by extending the pre‑existing licence. In
terms of the interim arrangements relating to Streem, the Tribunal regarded
very influential the circumstance that the parties had recently struck a bargain
on two separate occasions in which Streem itself
had elected to extend the
licence on the terms of a particular bargain. In the case of Isentia, the 2016
Licence was struck in April
2016, that is, two and a half years ago.
Tribunal also observed that a particular fee structure applicable in an interim
arrangement might well operate differentially
as between a mature business and a
new entrant business. So far as that principle is concerned, it has no
application here as Meltwater
is not a new entrant business undertaking. It is
a mature participant in the market and it has established a market share of
says that since 23 April 2019, the prejudice which led to a reduction in
the per‑clip rate and other changes to the
interim licence has accelerated
across the period of the last 12 months.
principal evidence relied upon by Isentia is the affidavit of Mr Sean Smith
sworn on 18 December 2019. Mr Smith is the Chief
Commercial Officer
at Isentia. Since 24 November 2019, he has shared this role with
Mr Horell as part of a handover of the role
to Mr Horell.
Mr Smith is able to speak to the primary matters said to support the
continuing prejudice Isentia is experiencing.
Mr Smith swore an affidavit
in the proceeding on 17 July 2018. Mr Smith was the National Sales
Director of Isentia from April 2012
to May 2013. He was then the Chief
Executive, Media Intelligence, from June 2013 to February 2018 and the Chief
Commercial Officer
from March 2018 to 18 December 2019. Mr Smith
explains that the different media intelligence plans offered by Isentia to
range from a “basic light touch online service model”
currently called “Essentials” through to strategic
management by a plan known as “Enterprise”. Each media intelligence
plan provides the customer with different
levels of access to a range of
modules. The “Essentials” plan provides customers with a basic
level of analysis while
the “Enterprise” plan provides the highest
level of analytical service. The media intelligence plan selected by the
customer determines the threshold
subscription
fee charged by Isentia.
of Isentia’s fee charged to the customer is based
on the volume of content and data that a customer receives from Isentia.
in turn, is based upon a number of data packages of different sizes offered by
Isentia to customers. Mr Smith says that the
“key input” in
determining the price of the data package is the “cost of copyright which
Isentia pays to the publishers
of that content and data”. Mr Smith
says that the copyright cost is used as the “starting cost base for each
data package”.
Isentia then adds, to that cost base, an additional charge
based on a margin that Isentia considers to be “an acceptable
The combination of the two determines the overall amount charged
to the customer for the particular content and data package. For
customer might purchase a data package which includes material drawn from press
publications, broadcast sources, online
sources and social monitoring and within
that data package there will be a particular maximum number of media items
provided to the
customer for a set price.
says that as discussed in his earlier affidavit, he has some understanding of
the licensing arrangements as between CA and
Meltwater and Streem. He says that
he understands the position to be that the per‑clip rate that Isentia is
paying under the
current interim arrangement remains higher than the
per‑clip rates paid by Meltwater and Streem. He says that “due to
the higher price per clip” paid by Isentia under the current interim
licence, as compared with the per‑clip rate paid
by Isentia’s
competitors, the volume of clips which Isentia is able to offer to customers for
a particular price, is “much
lower than” the volume of clips a
competitor on a lower per‑clip rate could offer to a customer for the same
Mr Smith says that immediately after the interim licence came into
effect, Isentia used the new reduced per‑clip rate to dictate
the price of
the content and data packs offered to customers. Mr Smith exhibits to his
affidavit the adjusted rate card used to
calculate the overall fee charged to a
customer which sets out details of the functionalities currently offered to
of his affidavit, Mr Smith addresses the topic of clients of
Isentia lost to Meltwater and to Streem and other competitors during
of Isentia’s current interim licence.
way of introduction to a discussion of five particular customers, Mr Smith
makes a number of overarching comments.
says that in circumstances where there is a lack of parity in the marketplace in
the amount that businesses offering media
monitoring services are paying to CA
for a licence to copy and communicate works in which copyright subsists,
competitors of Isentia
with a more favourable fee invariably have an advantage
during price negotiations with clients. He says that he has reviewed
records and has caused to be created a list of all clients that
Isentia has lost to either Meltwater or Streem since 1 December 2018.
copy of the list is Confidential Exhibit “SAS‑2” to his
affidavit. The list consists of the number of customers
at CS6. The list
identifies the number of clients lost to Streem (CS7) and the number of clients
lost to Meltwater (CS8). The list
also shows the value of the customer to
Isentia in terms of the amount of billings to the customer in the last
12 months (1 December
2017 to 30 November 2018). It also shows,
in respect of the customers who undertook a tender process, the
offer made by Isentia and then the
offer made by Isentia to try and
secure the customers’ business. It then shows the
bid accepted by the customer. As to the winning competitor bid,
Mr Smith only has information as to that matter for a limited number
clients where a lost customer has reported the winning figure to him (or a
colleague), or for certain government clients where
the amount of the winning
bid is publicly available.
says that “amongst the [CS6 number of] customers” in the list, there
are a number of examples “where Isentia
has not been able to take a
competitive position in terms of its pricing due to the lack of parity in the
market”, which must
be taken to be a reference to a lack of parity in the
price paid to CA by Isentia as compared with Meltwater, but also includes a
reference to lack of parity in the price paid to CA by Streem as compared with
Isentia and also Meltwater.
of the five lost customers is the customer at CS9.
has been providing media monitoring and daily briefing services including
particular additional services to CS9 for over 15
years. Mr Smith says
that Isentia has been receiving “positive feedback” from CS9 over
that time and in Mr Smith’s
opinion, Isentia’s services are
held in high regard by CS9. He says that CS9 requires a premium level of media
services, which he describes. He says that CS9 adopts broad search
terms across a number of print, online and social media platforms
which means
that CS9 regularly receives a high volume of content and data primarily across
social and traditional print media. He
says that in September 2019, CS9 went to
tender for its media monitoring and daily briefing services. He says that the
revenue generated
by Isentia from providing services to CS9 during the 12 months
to 30 November 2018 constituted the amount at CS10.
says that in tendering for the provision of services to CS9, Isentia sought to
offer greater value to the customer by including
its “Insights
service”, its service called “analytics features” and its
service called “command centre”.
It offered to embed an Isentia
employee at CS9 and offered a price for the service at CS11. It revised its
price to the amount
at CS12. He says that at the CS12 price, Isentia was
required to significantly “strip” its service offering to ensure
that it did not suffer a net loss in the provision of the services. He says
that the service offering did not then compete with
the service offering of
competitors in the market given CS9’s “need for a premium media
monitoring service”.
was unsuccessful in its bid. In a debrief, Isentia was told that CS9 was
impressed with the service offering of Isentia and
that its presentation was the
best that CS9 had seen throughout the tender process but that “in the
end” price was a
significant part of why CS9 chose to go elsewhere for the
service. He says that Isentia was told that the fact that CS9 could obtain
they thought was the same offering for a significantly lower price “was a
big determinative factor”. The contract
was won by Streem for the amount
of the five lost customers is the customer at CS14.
says that Isentia has been providing media monitoring and daily briefing
services to CS14 for over 10 years. The services
include addressing sensitive
matters and providing a number of key persons in public positions with the
service: CS15. Mr Smith
says that a significant component of CS14’s
overall fee is the cost associated with the volume of content it receives and
the subject matter will differ depending upon the issues of the day,
the volume of content has been consistently high due to the
broad nature of the
brief given to Isentia particularly in relation to online and print content. In
May 2019, CS14 put the acquisition
of media monitoring services out to tender
for a three year period. The revenue derived by Isentia from CS14 for the 12
30 November 2018 is the amount at CS16. In the tender process,
Isentia’s first offer was the amount at CS17 and its best offer
amount at CS18. The contract was won by Streem for the amount at CS19. Isentia
was advised by CS14 that the main reason
that the contract was awarded to Streem
of the five lost customers is CS20.
says that Isentia has had a relationship with CS20 for over 10 years. He says
that Isentia has consistently received “positive
in relation to service provision. The revenue derived by Isentia from CS20 is
the amount at CS21. In
April 2019, Isentia, in the course of negotiations for a
new contract, offered the price at CS22. After the orders made on 23 April
2019, the price offering was revised to the amount at CS23. The customer
advised Isentia that it wanted to stay with Isentia but
the bid prices were
“too big to ignore” with the result that Isentia submitted a best
and final offer of the amount at
CS24, although the contract, if won at that
price, would not be profitable. The contract was won by Streem for the amount
Isentia was advised by the customer that the decision was
“completely based around price”.
of the five lost customers is CS26.
says that CS26 has been a customer of Isentia since 2008 and during that time,
Isentia has provided media monitoring and
daily briefing services to CS26. The
customer receives a high volume of content and data due to its broad brief and
the nature of
its business. The revenue derived by Isentia from CS26 in the 12
months to 30 November 2018 is the amount at CS27. In early 2019,
undertook a tender process for a three year contract. The contract contained a
provision which enabled CS26 to terminate the
contract at any time “for
convenience”. Three weeks after the new contract between CS26 and Isentia
began, CS26 gave
Isentia notice that the contract was to be terminated and CS26
would be acquiring services from Streem. Mr Smith spoke with
the General Manager of CS26. Mr Gurney told Mr Smith
that CS26 was “very pleased” with the services offered by Isentia
“but there is such a big difference in price between Isentia and
Streem”. Mr Gurney said that CS26 could “get
the same service
at a much lower price”. Isentia’s offer was the amount at CS28.
Mr Smith was not given an opportunity
to revise Isentia’s bid.
Mr Gurney told Mr Smith that “given the significant difference
in price I can’t refuse
Streem’s deal” and “I am not
going to change my mind”. Mr Smith understands that the price
differential
between Isentia and Streem in seeking the contract with CS26 was
greater than the amount at CS29.
of the five lost customers is CS30.
says that Isentia has provided media monitoring and daily briefing services to
CS30 for over 15 years. CS30 receives a high
volume of content and data.
In November 2018, CS30 issued tender invitations to particular parties to make
submissions for the provision
of the services. Isentia initially submitted a
tender, pricing its services at the amount at CS31. Isentia revised its offer
the amount at CS32 in January 2019. Isentia subsequently reduced its price
to the amount at CS33. Mr Smith says that the CS33 price
was the lowest
price Isentia could offer based on the predicted volume of content, “and
to [CA]”. Mr Smith says that
the price reduction to the CS33 amount meant that Isentia would not receive a
profit if it was
successful in winning the tender. In January 2019, Isentia was
advised that the tender had been won by Meltwater. Isentia understand
position to be “Meltwater’s price was far below Isentia’s
price”. Mr Smith is not able to identify the
Meltwater’s winning bid.
says at para 63 of his affidavit that these five examples are not
exhaustive. He says that there are “a large number
instances” in the customer numbers at CS6 where Isentia has received
“express feedback from the customer that
price was a significant factor in
deciding to change service providers to a competitor of Isentia, in particular,
Streem or Meltwater”.
Mr Smith says that in many of those cases, he
does not know the specific price offered by Streem or Meltwater: para 63.
that he believes that one of the main reasons why Isentia’s
competitors are able to offer lower prices to customers is “because
current copyright environment where, due to the lack of parity in the copyright
fees paid to [CA], Streem and Meltwater are able
to offer better pricing because
their copyright costs are significantly lower”: para 64. He also
says that by the time Isentia
receives feedback from the customer “to
adjust our pricing”, it is often too late to re‑engage with the
and this has resulted in the number of customers of Isentia’s
services declining from the number at CS34 in July 2018 to the
number at CS35 in
December 2018. He says that as at October 2019, the customer numbers had
declined to the number at CS36: para
65. He says that most of these
customers lost by Isentia are “high value clients”: para 65.
By that, he means that
they are customers requiring a high volume of content and
data and therefore they are customers that would have paid “substantial
fees” for that content and data, to Isentia: para 65. He says that
it follows that the loss of these customers has had a
significant impact on
Isentia’s revenue: para 65.
the clients in the list lost to Meltwater, the 12 month value of billings to the
period ending 30 November 2018 included, apart
from the customer at CS30,
customers whose billings amounted to, respectively, the amounts at CS37. Of the
clients lost to Streem
(apart from those already mentioned), the 12 month
billings by Isentia to those customers to the period ending 30 November
included the amounts at CS38. In each case, in the examples identified,
the Confidential Schedule notes at CS37 and CS38 the first
and best offers of
Isentia (where identified by Mr Smith) and the winning bid (where
identified by Mr Smith).
should be kept in mind, at this point, that the interim arrangements so far as
the per‑clip rate is concerned, reflected
in the orders of 23 April
2019 arising out of the reasons published on 16 November 2018, came to pass
because Isentia took the position
that it was willing to be put on precisely the
same footing in terms of the scope of rights licensed to it by CA as the scope
rights licensed by CA to Meltwater, with the corresponding proposition that
since there was no point of distinction in the scope
of the rights, there ought
to be no point of distinction in the per‑clip rate payable by Isentia and
Meltwater. It should
also be noted that in relation to the five particular
customers of real significance lost by Isentia (as identified by Isentia),
of those customers have been lost to Streem (CS9, CS14, CS20 and CS26), and one
has been lost to Meltwater (CS30). The majority
of the customers in
Mr Smith’s list at “SAS‑2” (the number at CS8)
were, however, lost to Meltwater, although
the extent of the analysis of those
customers is confined to the observations at paras 63, 64 and 65 of
Mr Smith’s affidavit.
says that the loss of clients to Isentia as described does not reveal the entire
picture because new clients won by Isentia
tended to be smaller in value than
the clients lost. Mr Smith says that of the total number of customers he
identifies (CS6), the
list includes the number of customers at CS39 whose
billings were worth more than the amount in annual revenue identified at CS40,
whereas the average value in terms of annual billings of new customer contracts
won since the interim licence came into effect on
23 April 2019 (from the
earlier effective start date), is approximately the amount at CS41. This result
is said to arise because
the new customers require a small volume of content
and, in relation to those customers, Mr Smith says that Isentia is able to
more competitive on price because “the overall differential in
smaller”. Nevertheless, Mr Smith says that the price reductions to
these new customers has eroded Isentia’s margin
on these smaller
says that he is aware that in order to win customers, Isentia has had to offer
large discounts on both the previous contract
with the customer and its current
rate card “because of the price disparity of copyright fees between
Isentia and its competitors,
particularly Meltwater and Streem”.
identifies the discount range offered by Isentia to its customers as set out in
“SAS‑2” which is said to
be the range at CS42. Mr Smith
says that in some cases where Isentia has secured a contract, he believes that
the discount applied
in winning that contract will mean that Isentia will not
make a profit on the contract. As to that, Mr Smith gives an example
the customer at CS43. Mr Smith says that in November 2019, CS43
put out a tender for the acquisition of media monitoring services.
valued the CS43 contract in the amount at CS44, per annum. This included a
profit margin at CS45. Isentia submitted an
offer to CS43 in the amount at CS46
which involved a percentage discount as indicated at CS47, in order to win the
business. Mr Smith says that while Isentia was successful
in winning the tender, the discount meant that Isentia’s profitability
eroded to the percentage figure set out at CS48.
says this at para 71 of his affidavit:
Isentia’s limited capacity to negotiate
concessions on contract prices, which is restrained by the copyright fees that
must pay to [CA], has been the greatest challenge I have experienced in
my role over the last 3 years since the Press Monitoring
and Online Monitoring
Licence between Isentia and [CA] (
2016 Isentia Licence
) was in place. In
particular, I have struggled to achieve a balance between ensuring the business
remains profitable while also
ensuring that Isentia maintains business with
existing customers who have themselves provided positive feedback to Isentia
the services that Isentia has delivered. It has also been extremely
time consuming and difficult to win work from new customers
in an environment
where Isentia is at a disadvantage in terms of its copyright costs.
at Section E of his affidavit makes other observations about
Isentia’s revenue decline based upon announcements made
to the Australian
Securities Exchange (“ASX”).
reported on 23 August 2019 that revenue had declined for Australia and New
Zealand from $97.7M in financial year (“FY”)
2018 to $87.6M in FY
2019, a 10.3% decline. This decline is said to have had a direct impact on the
Earnings Before Interest, Tax,
Depreciation, and Amortisation
(“EBITDA”) for the “Isentia Group” which declined from
$33.1M in FY 2018 to
$23.1M in FY 2019, a decline of 30.2%. Mr Smith says
at para 74 that although the “costs of copyright” were lower
FY 2019 due to a reduction in copyright costs by operation of the interim
licence (orders), “the absence of a level playing
field between
competitors in the market has, in my view, had a significant impact on
Isentia’s revenue”. Mr Smith also
says that he considers that
the decline in revenue and EBITDA “can be directly attributed to the
client losses and price discounts”
described in his affidavit.
Section F of his affidavit, Mr Smith expresses some observations on
the topic of Isentia’s “press clip volumes for
monitoring”.
on Isentia’s declarations to CA consistent with its reporting obligations
under the licence, Mr Smith says that the total
number of press clips
(works the subject of the CA Licence) which have been copied and communicated by
Isentia during the period
of the interim licence are these. For the period
1 December 2018 to 31 March 2019, the press clip numbers at CS49; for
1 April 2019 to 30 June 2019, the number at CS50; and for
the period 1 July 2019 to 30 September 2019, the number at CS51.
on the CS1 per‑clip rate for those press clips, Isentia either has
paid or will be required to pay CA the amounts, respectively,
for the periods
represented by the press clip numbers at CS49, CS50 and CS51, as set out at
CS52, CS53 and CS54. Mr Smith says that
if the per‑clip rate had
been the CS2 Meltwater rate, the per‑clip licence fees payable to CA, in
respect of the relevant
periods discussed above, would have been reduced,
respectively, by the amounts at CS55, CS56 and CS57.
says that since the commencement of the interim licence on 1 December 2018
to the period ending 30 September 2019 (the last
reporting date), the
amount Isentia has been required to pay CA for
press clips
communicated
during the period is the amount at CS58. Had the Meltwater CS2 press clip rate
applied, the amount payable would have
been the amount at CS59, the difference
being the amount at CS60.
says this at para 82 of his affidavit:
If I had had the ability to discount the contracts
offered by Isentia since December 2018 by a total amount [as set out at CS61],
Isentia would have been in a position to have been more competitive with
Meltwater and Streem, and I am very confident that Isentia
would have lost fewer
customers to Meltwater and Streem during that period.
basis for that observation is set out at paras 83 and 84 in these
is because the interim per clip rate has been used to inform Isentia pricing for
all new and existing opportunities. Due to
the price disparity of copyright
fees between Isentia and other media monitoring organisations, this has meant
that Isentia is still
too expensive in the marketplace and our proposed rates
are not competitive. If Isentia is going to win new and existing opportunities,
it means that we need to offer further discounts which can push the account in
low margin or unprofitable work.
reduction in fees, so that Isentia pays the same as its competitors would mean
that Isentia can be more competitive in pricing its
services. It would level
the playing field and mean that competitors could not create pricing advantage
due to copyright fees.
This reduction is very important to Isentia and our
ability to price services and win/retain clients in the Australian market.
says that he has reviewed invoices issued by CA to Isentia during FY 2019
and says that Isentia paid CA the total sum at
CS62 in accordance with the terms
of the 2016 licence and the interim licence as it applied in the relevant
says that he has examined CA’s Annual Report for the financial year ending
30 June 2019 which sets out CA’s revenue
by category. For FY 2019,
CA received $17.6M of its revenue from media monitoring organisations and having
regard to the amount
paid by Isentia in FY 2019, the amount paid by Isentia
represents the percentage at CS63 of CA’s revenue from media monitoring
organisations. Mr Smith says that in his earlier affidavit he had
estimated Isentia’s market share by value as the percentage
at CS64 with
Meltwater holding most of the remaining market share. Mr Smith says that
based on his present knowledge of the market
he estimates that Isentia has the
market share at CS65 with Meltwater and Streem holding the market shares at
from these matters, Mr Smith also says that the “continued lack of
parity in the market place” has significantly
damages Isentia’s
business and, as a consequence, its revenue and share price. He says that, for
the reasons already discussed,
he believes that the terms of Isentia’s
interim licence have materially contributed to a further decline in
share price since 1 December 2018. Mr Smith refers to
the earlier affidavit of Mr James Orlando of 18 July 2018 in which
asserts that the 2016 Isentia’s Licence had materially
contributed to a “significant decline” in Isentia’s
price from late June 2016 to July 2018. Mr Smith says that since
18 July 2018, Isentia’s share price has declined from
share in July 2018 to $0.35c per share in December 2018 to $0.26c in late
November 2019.
then makes some observations about the potential consequences of a further
extension of the current per‑clip rate in
the interim licence.
says that in circumstances where Isentia’s revenue and share price has
continued to decline despite the reduced per‑clip
rate payable under the
interim licence as compared with the 2016 Isentia Licence, it is
“crucial”, in Mr Smith’s
view, for Isentia, its clients
and its shareholders, that “parity of copyright costs” between
“market participants”
be achieved as soon as possible.
says that if Isentia is required to pay copyright costs that are significantly
higher than Meltwater and/or Streem’s
between now and the final determination of the principal application,
Mr Smith believes that it
is “inevitable” that Isentia will
continue to lose clients to Meltwater and Streem “because Meltwater and
will be able to offer more competitive pricing that Isentia is unable to
match”. Mr Smith says that if “parity of copyright
costs” is not achieved until the conclusion of the hearing,
Isentia’s business (and particularly its shareholders), in
his opinion,
“may suffer irreparable harm that will not be fully remedied even if
parity of copyright is implemented at a later
date”. He also says
irreparable harm will be suffered that will not be fully remedied even if parity
of copyright is implemented
at a later date.
on this application, relies upon every aspect of Mr Smith’s affidavit
and exhibits.
is also placed upon the affidavit of Mr Timothy Webb who is the solicitor
acting for Isentia. Mr Webb is a partner of Clayton
has some things to say about the Scraping Licence which is Attachment B to
the orders of 23 April 2019. He observes that
the Scraping Licence refers
to a Downstream Licence Fee in the amount at CS67 per annum payable
pro rata per quarter. Mr Webb says
that he understands that that fee
was calculated by multiplying an integer called the “Downstream Customer
Rate” by the
total number of Isentia customers in FY 2018 that received an
online monitoring service.
says that pursuant to clause 4.4 of the Scraping Licence as between CA and
Meltwater of 1 December 2014 (as varied on 7 October
Downstream Licence Fee payable by Meltwater for the period 1 October 2016
to 30 September 2017 is the amount at CS68.
He says that he understands
the number of Meltwater customers as at 10 April 2018 was the number at
CS69. He says that the Downstream
Customer Rate for Meltwater is calculated by
dividing the Meltwater Downstream Licence Fee at CS68 by the number of Meltwater
at CS69 which results in a Meltwater Downstream Customer Rate in the
amount at CS70.
says that he is instructed by Isentia’s general counsel that the total
number of Isentia customers in FY 2018 that received
an online monitoring
service is the number set out at CS71. Mr Webb observes that Mr Smith
has given evidence that as at October
2019, Isentia’s customer numbers had
declined to the number at CS36, and thus, at that time, Isentia had the
percentage at
CS72 of the customers that it had when the Downstream Licence Fee
was calculated for the purposes of the Scraping Licence as Attachment
the orders of 23 April 2019. Mr Webb says that Isentia is of the view
that it is now more appropriate to adjust the Attachment
B Downstream
Licence Fee to reflect the CS72 percentage of the Downstream Licence Fee at
also relies upon the affidavit of Mr Thomas Gerstmyer.
Mr Gerstmyer
is the Chief Operations Officer at Isentia Group Limited, the listed parent
entity of Isentia. He has held this position
since February 2018 and held a
range of other positions described at para 8 of his affidavit. He says
that in his current role,
his specific responsibilities include leading the
production of Isentia’s media monitoring activities (including press,
online and social content), search activities, responsibility for
Isentia’s distribution/contact database and responsibility
provision of daily briefings services, data/content sourcing/procurement, and
program management of Isentia’s strategic
initiatives. He says that he
has had over 20 years’ experience in the “media circulation,
logistics, data sourcing/procurement
and intelligence industries in
Australia” and that he has an extensive knowledge and understanding of
Isentia’s functions,
technical capabilities and service offerings; the
arrangements for licensing copyright in publications; and the needs of media
intelligence
organisations including the need to respond to changes in
technology.
to the trend in the use of press clips by media intelligence organisations such
as Isentia and the consequent effect upon licence
fee revenue, Mr Gerstmyer
has the following things to say.
Mr Gerstmyer
says that it is apparent to him that the decline in fees paid to CA in the
period between about 2012 and mid‑2016
was, at least in part, caused by
the decline in Isentia’s use of clips which, at that time, attracted a
per‑clip fee.
He says that the number of clips “ingested” by
Isentia (that is, copied so as to be available for searches that may
be required
by customers) has been falling steadily over the past decade and has been
falling steadily since 2015 (and possibly for
a much longer period although
Mr Gerstmyer does not have data for any period prior to the third quarter
of 2015). Mr Gerstmyer says
that this reduction is due to the increasing
importance of digital media and a reduction in the size and number of
publications.
Mr Gerstmyer
says that assuming that other media intelligence organisations maintained
stability in their customer numbers or market
share, he would expect their use
of clips to have declined as well and thus the decline in CA’s revenue is
due, in part at
least, to the “falling use of clips”.
Mr Gerstmyer says that he is not able to comment on CA’s evidence
the accuracy of “aggregate figures” for all media intelligence
organisations to the effect that there has been an increase
in the use of press
clips, but can say that that proposition is not consistent with Isentia’s
falling use of clips.
Mr Gerstmyer
also expresses a view about the marketplace operation of the Isentia Interim
Licence. He says that the “lack of
parity in the market place with
respect to licence fees that Isentia and its competitors are paying to [CA] for
licences to copy
and communicate copyright works has significantly damaged
Isentia’s business, including its revenue and share price”.
that he has calculated the fall in the market capitalisation of Isentia’s
issued share capital in the period between
June 2016 and late November 2019 and
notes that the share price has fallen from $3.47 to $0.26c with the result that
the decline
in the total value of issued shares from $694M to $52M represents a
total decline of $642M.
Mr Gerstmyer
also expresses views about the effects of the proposed licence fee variation.
Mr Gerstmyer
says that it is important to note that the majority of clips communicated by
Isentia (and thus the subject of payments
to CA and distributions by CA) are
sourced from the dominant Australian media organisations of News Corporation and
Nine Publishing
(formerly Fairfax). Mr Gerstmyer says that in calendar
year 2019, of all clips copied and communicated by Isentia, the percentage
CS73 came from News Corp Publications and the percentage at CS74 came from
publications of Nine Publishing (including Australian
Community Media).
Mr Gerstmyer also says that any reduction in copyright fees paid by Isentia
to CA in respect of News Corp and
Nine Publishing (with consequent distributions
to those entities) represents “an extremely small part of their
Mr Gerstmyer gives gross revenue figures for 2018/2019 for
News Australia Holdings Pty Limited (a subsidiary of News Corp) and Nine
Entertainment Co of $5.78B and $1.84B, respectively, with Nine Publishing
revenue at $425M.
Mr Gerstmyer
also says that News Corp and Nine Publishing are organisations which are able to
address (“offset”) any reduction
in licence fee revenue which might
be ordered by the Tribunal, by withdrawing their publications from the scope of
the interim licence
(by giving notice that the relevant publications are
excluded from the licence given by CA), which Mr Gerstmyer says has the
of forcing media intelligence organisations to negotiate separate
licences for their respective publications. He says that this
is exactly what
has happened recently.
effect from 20 March 2020, News Corp has withdrawn
The Australian
The Weekend Australian
from the scope of the licence granted by
CA. With effect from 17 January 2021, Nine Publishing has withdrawn
Australian Financial Review
(and four other titles) from the scope of the
licence granted by CA. All of these publications are licensed by CA to media
intelligence
organisations by means of a sub‑licence of a licence granted
to CA by CopyCo. News Corp and Nine Publishing have withdrawn,
from CopyCo, the
right to grant licences in respect of the nominated publications.
and CA have put on evidence from economic experts about various matters. I will
the period between publication of the reasons on 16 November 2018 and the
making of the orders on 23 April 2019, negotiations took
place between the
solicitors for CA, MinterEllison, and the solicitors for Isentia, Clayton Utz,
in relation to a number of matters
but, in particular, in relation to the
Downstream Licence Fee. In particular, the Tribunal has been referred to a
letter from MinterEllison
to Clayton Utz dated 7 December 2018, a letter
from Clayton Utz in reply dated 11 December 2018, a letter from
MinterEllison to Clayton
Utz dated 12 December 2018 and a letter from
Clayton Utz to MinterEllison dated 18 January 2019. Other letters are
included within
“AAS‑2” to the affidavit of Mr Adam
Suckling affirmed 13 February 2020. I will return to this correspondence
in these reasons.
considering the evidence relied upon by CA in resisting both limbs of
Isentia’s present application, the following matters
emphasised by Isentia
in reliance upon the evidence just discussed, should be noted.
says that Mr Smith is a person “close to the action” in dealing
with customers and the problem of loss of customers.
Isentia says that in the
interim period prior to determination of the principal application, it is
suffering “irredeemable
prejudice” by the loss of clients that
cannot be retrieved easily once the principal application is determined. It
although there are, no doubt, a range of factors that determine
whether a current customer might elect to re‑appoint (or not)
choose to appoint Isentia (or not) in deciding the outcome of a particular
selection or tender process, one of the factors,
on the state of the evidence,
is price. Isentia observes that Mr Smith says that price is at the heart
of winning contracts, and
within the price matrix, “parity” in the
price paid for the interim licence to exercise the rights subsisting in the
subject matter is “critical”.
says that on the basis of the evidence of Mr Smith and Mr Gerstmyer,
there is at least a serious question made out that the
difference in the
per‑clip rate as between Isentia and Meltwater (and, it is said, Streem)
is playing a role in the selection
decision of customers prejudicially to
says that, although CA says that the disparity in the interim rate has not been
shown to be a cause of competitive disadvantage
giving rise to the contended
prejudice, the answer, to the contrary, is to be found in the evidence of
Mr Smith and Mr Gerstmyer.
Isentia also says that although CA,
between now and the final decision, will receive lesser revenue from Isentia
should the interim
reductions sought by Isentia be accepted (with consequential
lesser distributions to the relevant copyright owners), the interim
prejudice to
CA of this additional cash flow deprivation is offset by two important
considerations.
if CA is correct in its view about the true value of the rights the subject of
the licence and the reasonableness of the charge
it seeks to obtain for the
grant of those rights, CA will receive a “catch up” payment
which, in time, will put it in
the position it says it ought to have been in
from the outset of the interim arrangement, whereas Isentia cannot be put back
the relationships it enjoyed with customers lost to rivals in part due to
the lack of parity in the “copyright cost”
in the interim period.
the contended prejudice of disruptions in the budgeting processes undertaken by
the rights owners by receiving a lesser level of
distributions in the interim
period (but caught up later should CA be shown to be correct on the
value/price/licence charge question)
is ultimately only a matter of
“timing”, not a matter of irremediable prejudice.
also says that although CA says that the loss of customers has something to do
with the quality of the Isentia service and
Isentia’s lack of state of the
art technological functionalities, one thing that is clear on the evidence is
that the “input
price” for access to the rights is different, and it
is bringing about irremediable distortions in customer selection.
contests the entirety of these propositions.
says in brief summary, that Isentia’s evidence does not establish a basis
for concluding that the difference in the price
paid by Isentia for access to
the rights, as compared with the price paid by Meltwater (and Streem), is a
cause of the loss of customers
from Isentia to Meltwater or Streem and thus the
foundation for the application falls away entirely. Moreover, CA says that the
prejudice to it and the publisher members of CopyCo (and some
non‑publisher members of CopyCo whose rights are said to have
exercised by Isentia without the authority of those non‑publisher
members), is significant should the Tribunal accept
either or both of the limbs
of Isentia’s present amended application.
primary response to Isentia’s application is to be found in the evidence
of Mr Adam Suckling, the Chief Executive
Officer of CA. Mr Suckling
has been in this role since August 2015.
from his own knowledge of relevant matters, Mr Suckling was informed about
matters relevant to the application by other individuals.
In December 2015,
Mr Jeremy Jacobs commenced in the role of Chief Operating Officer.
Mr Jacobs is assisted by Mr Carlin Campbell
and Dr Neil Fraser.
It is not clear when these individuals commenced in their particular roles. In
May 2016, Mr Guy Johnson assumed
the role of Director of Commercial
Licensing and Visual Arts Licensing. He is assisted by Ms Lucinda Gardiner
who, since July 2017,
has been the Licensing and Compliance Manager at CA.
to Mr Suckling’s background, in 1997 he was appointed General Manager
of Regulatory Affairs with Optus and appointed Director
of Singtel’s
International Finance Operations in 2001. In 2002, he left that role and joined
Foxtel as General Manager Wholesale.
He was appointed Director of Policy and
Corporate Affairs at Foxtel in 2008. From 2012, he was the Director of Policy,
Affairs and Community Relations at News Corp.
his role at CA, he is responsible for leading the development of CA’s
business strategies; overseeing CA’s statutory
and voluntary licensing
arrangements; and leading the voluntary licensing negotiations between CA and
media intelligences organisations.
He is broadly aware of the changing nature
of the market in which Isentia, Meltwater and Streem operate and the changing
of their businesses. He is familiar with the interim licences subsisting
between CA and, respectively, Isentia, Meltwater and Streem
and he is familiar
with the 2016 Press Monitoring and Online Monitoring Licence between CA and
Isentia otherwise known as the 2016
Isentia Licence.
to these interim licences, Mr Suckling says that they have had the
following consequences for CA pending the final determination
proceedings.
the licences have prolonged, at least on an interim basis, an “outdated
set of licensing arrangements”.
it has prolonged, at least on an interim basis, a “licence fee structure
and quantum” that in CA’s view undervalues
the content licensed by
apart from the fact that CA seeks a higher licence than that which is
presently being paid, pending the determination of the principal
proceeding,
Mr Suckling says that CA has not had the benefit, in the interim, of any
CPI adjustments to the licence fees.
Mr Suckling
says any further decrease in the per‑clip rate and the online Downstream
Licence Fee as a result of this application
would “aggravate” the
matters described at [91], [92] and [93] of these reasons especially, it is
said, in circumstances
where it is unclear that the current differences in
interim licence fees are
of the detriment that Isentia says it
is suffering.
Mr Suckling
observes that CA maintains records of the licence fees invoiced to, and paid by,
each of Isentia, Meltwater and Streem
in the period between 2004 and calendar
year 2019 under the various licences each company has with CA. Based on that
information,
Mr Suckling has caused a graph to be prepared by
Mr Campbell using that information: CS75. The information is, of course,
confidential. However, some general observations can be made about the
graph in these reasons. The graph shows the rise in fees
paid by licensees (in
the aggregate) in the period 2005 to 2012. It has a certain progression. The
graph then shows a decline in
fees in the period between 2012 and 2014 and a
slight rise in the period between 2014 and 2016. The graph then shows a very
significant
increase in fees in the period between 2016 and 2018. In the period
2017 and 2018, the licence fees begin, graphically, to reflect
the progression
and approximation of fees which would have been derived in the 2017 and 2018
period had the trend, revealed in the
period 2005 to 2012, continued and found
expression in the period 2017 and 2018.
course, it should be noted that the 2016 Isentia Licence bears that description
because it commenced in 2016 and since Isentia
was, at that time, responsible
for that percentage of the total market for licence fees derived by CA noted at
CS63, the event of
Isentia and CA entering into the 2016 Isentia Licence would
have played a large part in establishing the pattern reflected in the
the period 2017 and 2018.
graph also shows a dotted line which reflects the progression in licence fees
which would have been received had the trend reflected
in the period 2005 to
2012 continued throughout to 31 December 2019 and into 2020. As to FY
2020, the graph reflects a forecast
by projecting the fees paid in the first
quarter of FY 2020 for the full year. The graph shows three end points at 2020.
point is the dotted projection line. The next, lower, point reflects
the end point for licence fees from licensees for the period
2019 and the next,
lowest, point reflects the difference between fees to be paid by licensees under
the current arrangements and
the fees that CA would receive should Isentia be
successful in this application. In terms of the quantum of the difference, CA
be worse off, in terms of interim revenue deprivation, by approximately the
amount at CS76.
enough, there is a certain fundamental inconsistency between
Mr Suckling’s “broad awareness” of the “changing
nature of the market” in which Isentia, Meltwater and Streem operate and
the “changing nature of their businesses”
on the one hand and an
expectation, in an age of pronounced disruption, that licence fees reflecting a
pattern of growth in the period
2005 to 2012 can simply be projected from 2012
to 2020. The question of the underlying value of the copyright in the works the
of the licence by CA to the various media intelligence entities, upon
which the projection from 2012 to 2020 seems to be based, is
a contested
question, and so too is the question of whether the “payment of
charges” CA seeks (or conditions) are “reasonable”
“unreasonable” for the purposes of
of the Act.
Mr Suckling
addresses a number of topics in his evidence.
topic concerns the position in relation to rightsholders
(publishers) who are not members of CopyCo.
Mr Suckling
observes that under the 2016 Isentia Licence, Isentia was licensed to
“scrape and communicate portions” of
works owned by non‑CopyCo
members. Thus, non‑CopyCo rightsholders regularly received distributions
from CA, from the
licence fees paid by Isentia under that licence. However,
under the interim licence established by the orders of 23 April 2019,
Isentia is not licensed to scrape and communicate portions of non‑CopyCo
content. Thus, non‑CopyCo rightsholders will
not receive distributions,
from CA, from the licence fees paid by Isentia under the interim licence. CA is
not aware of whether
Isentia otherwise holds a licence directly from
non‑CopyCo rightsholders to scrape and communicate portions of their
two largest non‑CopyCo publishers are the McPherson Media Group
(“McPherson”) and the Star News Group (“Star”).
Mr Suckling says that based on the number of press clips reported by
Isentia in FY 2019, Isentia paid the amount at CS77 to copy
and communicate
McPherson press clips. Mr Suckling says that had the “effective
rate” at CS4 continued to apply, McPherson
would have received the amount
at CS78. As to Star, Isentia paid the amount at CS79 and would have paid the
amount at CS80 had the
rate at CS4 continued to apply.
Mr Suckling
says that where copyright fees are decreased, or payments delayed, smaller
regional publishers like McPherson and Star
experience an immediate impact, and
because smaller publishers do not have the advantage of subscription and
advertising revenues
of larger publishers, royalties are particularly important
Mr Suckling
says that since December 2019, CA has received a number of enquiries from
non‑CopyCo rightsholders asking about
why they have not received
“webscraping distributions” or why their distributions have been
“reduced” or
“delayed” from CA (including in
circumstances where rightsholders say they are aware that Isentia has been using
from their websites). Mr Suckling gives an example in relation to
the publisher at CS81. Mr Suckling says that on 13 January 2020,
received an enquiry from CS81 to the effect that its last payment was in May
2019 and since then very small amounts have been
paid to it. The publisher at
CS81 advised CA on 2 February 2020 that Isentia had obtained digital access
to content behind CS81’s
paywall. On 4 February 2020, CA advised
CS81 that there had been significant delays in invoicing and distributing
Isentia licence
fees and on that day CS81 advised CA that it receives no
volumes had increased by the amount at CS82 between calendar year 2018 and
calendar year 2019.
Mr Suckling
understands that McPherson has a PDF supply agreement with Isentia which
provides Isentia with access behind McPherson’s
paywall for the supply of
content. Mr Suckling says that although McPherson will receive delayed
press clipping distributions from
CA for Isentia’s use of those works,
McPherson will not be receiving webscraping distributions from CA as Isentia is
licensed to undertake webscraping under its interim scraping licence.
topic concerns the position in relation to CopyCo rightsholders.
Mr Suckling
says that since April 2019, CA has received a number of enquiries from CopyCo
rightsholders, such as News Corp and Nine
Publishing, asking why they had not
received distributions from CA or why they had received “so little”
by way of distributions
from CA. Mr Suckling understands that the
royalties these publishers receive, or expect to receive, from media
intelligence organisations
(through the mechanism of distributions by CA), for
the use of their content, affects their financial planning and budgeting
Mr Suckling’s experience tells him that by February 2020,
most publishers will have commenced their budget processes for the
year based on the current interim rates prevailing under the interim licence
which, in turn, affects their operations including
staffing and revenue
projections. Mr Suckling says that if the interim fee payable by Isentia
is reduced, he anticipates that CopyCo
publisher rightsholders would experience
significant prejudice including shortfalls in their budget (and thus expected
adversely affecting their operations as a whole. Mr Suckling
gives two examples of this particular impact and its prejudice.
on 29 April 2019, CA received an enquiry from News Corp to the effect that
the new interim licence fee had commenced. News Corp’s
representative
said that News Corp was currently performing its month end financial close and
wanted to understand how the new licence
fee would affect its revenue. News
Corp asked for an estimate of both prospective and retrospective revenue.
Mr Suckling says that on 27 February 2019, CA received an enquiry from
Nine Publishing advising that it was in the “full throws
planning” and noting that CA had previously given a forecast/estimate of
payments for the next financial year. Nine
Publishing asked whether this was
something that CA would be able to do.
Mr Suckling
says that based on the press clips reported by Isentia in FY 2019, Isentia paid
the amount at CS83 to copy and communicate
press clips of CopyCo rightsholders
under the interim press clipping licence and observes that had Isentia continued
to pay the effective
rate at CS4, it would have paid the amount at CS84 to use
that content. In other words, the CopyCo publisher members suffered a
in distributions from CA for FY 2019 by reason of the earlier interim reduction,
of the amount at CS85. These past amounts,
like the earlier amounts
Mr Suckling mentioned, are calculated on the basis of the difference
between the effective rate at CS4 and
the interim rate at CS1. The proposed
interim further order sought by Isentia would operate on the basis of a
forward‑looking
reduction calculated by reference to the difference
between the amount at CS1 and the amount at CS2.
topic Mr Suckling addresses is the inconsistency he observes
between the decline in CA’s overall revenue from Isentia, Meltwater
Streem, on the one hand, and the use of CA licensed works by those entities, on
the other hand.
Mr Suckling
says that CA maintains records of the number of press clips and
“portions” reported by each of those entities
under their particular
licence. The total press clips for the financial years 2016 to 2019 and total
corporate downstream press
clips, total government downstream press clips and
total portions for those financial years is set out in the table at CS86.
Suckling notes that the use of portions dropped significantly in FY 2018
and CA is not able to explain that decline. Mr Suckling
also notes an
apparent anomaly in the decline in Meltwater’s reported use of portions
from CS87 in FY 2017 to CS88 in FY 2018
in circumstances where there does not
appear to have been a substantial change in Meltwater’s method of
operation. Mr Suckling
observes that between FY 2018 and FY 2019,
CA’s revenue from Isentia, Meltwater and Streem declined by the percentage
and yet the use of press clips increased by the percentage at CS90. As
there may be an “anomaly” in the data set for
FY 2018, it may
be more useful to look at the data for FY 2016, FY 2017 and FY 2019. In the
period between FY 2016 and FY 2017,
total press clips declined by the number at
CS91. In the period between FY 2017 and FY 2019, press clips declined by the
topic Mr Suckling addresses is Isentia’s press clip
rate under the interim press clipping licences.
a general comment, Mr Suckling says that the per‑clip rate is a rate
that has not been increased other than “intermittently”
CPI increases, since 2001. Mr Suckling observes that the Meltwater Interim
Licence involves a press clipping licence
which involves the per‑clip rate
at CS2 plus a per‑clip card for downstream use. Mr Suckling observes
that the interim
stream licence is subject to a minimum amount but “is
otherwise identical to the Meltwater Clip Rate” which is the
rate at CS2. The Isentia Interim Licence per‑clip rate was
set by the Tribunal in the reasons of 16 November 2018 in the amount
but otherwise it would have been the rate at CS4.
illustrate that matter, it means that under the 2016 Isentia Licence and the
licence arrangements struck by CA with Meltwater (and
the otherwise identical
Streem licence, both of which continue to apply on an interim basis), if Isentia
was trying to hold an important
customer with a demand profile of, say, 100,000
press clips or win a new customer of that kind, it would be required to pay CA
amount at CS93 whereas each of Meltwater and Streem would be required to pay
the amount at CS94, a difference of the amount at CS95,
and under the interim
licences Isentia would be required to pay the amount at CS96 and Meltwater and
Streem would pay the amount
at CS97, a difference of the amount at CS98.
Mr Suckling
observes that the press clip rates currently paid by Meltwater and Streem have
not been adjusted for CPI since 2016.
Mr Suckling says that the
per‑clip rate currently applied to Meltwater represented a CPI adjustment
to the then historical
per‑clip rate applying in or about 1 July
2015. Mr Suckling says that if that rate had been adjusted for CPI to the
the per‑clip rate in FY 2019 payable by Meltwater would be
“in the order of [the amount at CS99]”, which is not
significantly
different from the Isentia interim rate at CS1.
Mr Suckling
says that, in short, Isentia’s application to further reduce its
per‑clip rate from the amount at CS1 to the
amount at CS2 would be an
“unreasonable reduction” in circumstances where CS2 reflects a fee
set in 2015 under a now
expired licence that has not been adjusted for changes
in the CPI since 2015. Mr Suckling says that if Isentia, in FY 2019, had
paid the per‑clip rate at CS2 instead of the rate at CS1 that reduction
would have reduced the amounts payable by Isentia,
through CA, as set out at
CS100, CS101 and CS102.
topic Mr Suckling addresses is the topic of Isentia’s
online downstream licence fee under the interim scraping licence.
Mr Suckling
says that he understands that Isentia is seeking to adjust the downstream
licence fee under the interim scraping licence
by the amount at CS103. The
affidavit of Mr Webb suggests that the downstream licence fee ought to be
the percentage at CS72 of
the amount at CS67 which seems to constitute the
amount at CS104.
Mr Suckling
observes that at [108] of the interim decision, the Tribunal determined that it
would make sense to determine the fee
payable to CA in respect of downstream use
to be an amount based on the application of CA’s rate card. That rate
card applied
a rate for the downstream use of press clips but not for portions.
Mr Suckling says that deriving a downstream licence fee in that
have resulted in an increased licence fee payable by Isentia as compared with
the fee it had been paying under the 2016
Isentia Licence and, plainly enough,
that was not what was intended by the Tribunal. In the result, Mr Suckling
says that CA sought
to adopt a pragmatic and reasonable approach to determining
a methodology to derive an online downstream licence fee for Isentia
the fee methodology adopted for determining Meltwater’s downstream licence
fee to the extent that that was possible
as a benchmark. These negotiations on
a “without prejudice” basis took many months. The amount was
ultimately included
in the orders of the Tribunal on 23 April 2019.
Mr Suckling says that CA understood that the result of these negotiations
was an “interim solution agreed between the
parties” rather than one
determined by the Tribunal. Mr Suckling says that CA agreed to this fee on
a “fixed fee basis”
and not one that would be adjusted based upon
changes in customer numbers (in the way suggested by Mr Webb) while the
interim licence
was on foot, particularly in circumstances where CA is not in a
position to unilaterally adjust the fees payable by other media intelligence
organisations under the respective interim licence arrangements. As to these
matters, Mr Suckling refers to the correspondence between
MinterEllison and
Clayton Utz to which I will return.
to the Meltwater customer rate at CS70, Mr Suckling observes that if that
FY 2018 rate was adjusted for CPI at FY 2019, the customer
rate would be
approximately the amount at CS105. Mr Suckling observes that if the CS105
rate was applied to Isentia’s point
in time online monitoring customers as
at October 2019 (being the number of customers at CS36), the annual online
downstream licence
fee would be the amount at CS106. Mr Suckling observes
that Isentia acts as CA’s agent in granting customers a downstream
to make internal use of the portions they obtain from Isentia and CA understands
that Isentia absorbs the online downstream
licence fee and does not separately
charge its customers for that downstream licence.
topic that Mr Suckling addresses is the nature of the
businesses conducted by Isentia, Meltwater and Streem.
Mr Suckling
says that a proper understanding of the reasons why customers transition between
services provided by competing media
intelligence organisations involves
understanding the factors taken into account by customers in assessing competing
services. Mr
Suckling says those factors include price, platform
functionality, the nature of the service offered, whether the service meets the
needs of the business of the customer, and the level of service provided by the
to Isentia, Mr Suckling says that Isentia has historically had a large
incumbent customer base with a high volume of corporate
and government clients.
Mr Suckling extracts a number of comments about Isentia from a
investment blog
and an article published on a
particular website, published respectively on 7 January 2020 and
5 June 2019. The Morgan’s
investment blog suggests that
Isentia is “back in the game”; that narrowing the gap in technology
and price have been
critical; and that Isentia’s under‑investment in
technology, products and processes has allowed competitors to take market
by being quicker with response times, cheaper solutions and better customer
says that Isentia is under siege from upstart rivals
including Meltwater and Streem, but that Isentia has a strategy for its
based on “an efficient operating model ...
automation the best possible tech tools ... world class market centric
innovations
... and creating regional scale”.
is not clear that (and given the confidentiality around these numbers, I doubt
that) the authors of the opinions in the Morgan’s
blog and the
site (and I do not know on the evidence the status and
authority of these sites), know anything of the per‑clip price
differential
payable by Isentia to CA under the 2016 Isentia Licence as compared
with the Meltwater and Streem per‑clip rate, and thus the
differential rate may (or may not) have played in downstream rivalry between
these entities.
Mr Suckling
also notes a presentation by Isentia at a conference on 21 November 2019 in
which it says that it is the leading provider
of media intelligence in the Asia
Pacific region; that it is well positioned for success with unique strengths;
that it has a new
executive team; that it has sought to restructure its cost
base and has described its interim licences as “favourable”;
has introduced, or is seeking to introduce, important changes including
automation (as “press relevancy processing
is now 80% automated using
machine learning”), launching a mobile app, establishing an efficient
operating model underpinned
by a single platform, automated production workflow,
adopting and operating a single platform business and undertaking significant
operating and capital investment in building new products and technology; that
78% of Isentia’s revenue is recurring; and that
a rapidly evolving media
landscape is driving demand for media intelligence.
to Streem, Mr Suckling says that the business was formed in 2013 (although
it seems to have been launched in 2017) with a strong
focus on automating and
streamlining media monitoring (intelligence) services. It has actively targeted
government and blue‑chip
clients that are or were previously serviced by
Isentia. Streem has a high volume of corporate and government clients.
Mr Suckling
refers to articles downloaded from
. One article dated 29 January 2020 observes that Streem
launched its business in 2017 and quickly won major government departments
its “comprehensive, real‑time product suite, reasonable pricing and
responsive customer service”. The article
observes that Streem has
“eaten into” Isentia’s government base. It says that Streem
has brought “massive
innovation to the sector” which has prompted
“a large migration of blue‑chip customers”. Another article,
dated 23 January 2020, says that Streem has allocated significant
resourcing to transitioning customers to its platform with a revision
words and search terms. A third article on Streem’s website, dated
11 June 2018, records that Streem states it has
brought significant
innovation to the media intelligence market.
to Meltwater, Mr Suckling says that it was first licensed by CA in 2014 and
emerged with a technology‑driven focus on providing
scraping services in a
way which differentiated it from Isentia. Mr Suckling says that Meltwater
has tended to target Isentia’s
customer base. Mr Suckling quotes one
of Meltwater’s business leaders who describes his company as providing
“an offering
that is extremely hard to compete with”.
topic Mr Suckling addresses concerns matters relating to
Mr Smith’s affidavit.
Mr Suckling
says that CA sought a range of documents from Isentia (as between the
solicitors) and although CA’s solicitors have
received “a bundle of
documents”, CA is nevertheless not in a position to ascertain whether the
difference in fees payable
by Isentia, Meltwater and Streem under their interim
licences is adversely affecting Isentia or whether lowering the interim fee
sought would have “any effect” on Isentia’s ability to win and
maintain customers.
to specific matters, Mr Suckling notes an article of 15 August 2019 in
which Isentia’s CEO, Mr Ed Harrison, observed, in
an interview, that
Isentia’s operating model now (as at 15 August 2019) automates 80% of
the work of ingesting print material,
determining its relevance to a customer
and distributing the material to the customer, whereas a year earlier, 80% of
that work was
undertaken by individuals. Mr Harrison says that the shift
to automation involves a re‑focus from operational manual work
“high‑skilled tech work”. Commenting on the competitive
market for media monitoring services, Mr Harrison also
says that “we
renew the vast majority of our clients, whether it’s big corporates or
whether it’s big government
accounts”. Mr Harrison also said
We have people coming back to us who have maybe been
away for some time as well. That’s just the cut and thrust of business.
So, it’s not surprising to us at all that occasionally people want to try
a different solution and then we really expect that
over a period of time,
we’ll have the opportunity to bring them back
Suckling says that Streem launched a full suite of services in 2017 with
approximately 50 employees using automated processes with
the result that Streem
“has an employee cost base that would be substantially lower than
Isentia’s”, in Mr Suckling’s
view. Mr Suckling says
that Streem’s services are characterised as “faster and cheaper due
to full automation”.
Mr Suckling
also notes the remarks of Isentia’s Chairman in the FY 2018 Annual Report
on the topic of competition. He quotes
these observations from the
(i) The number and type of competitors has increased
across all markets as technology and the shift to digital media lowers the
to entry for the provision and reporting of media intelligence. As a
result, price compression and customer churn have increased,
especially in the
Australian market. This is expected to remain a factor in the medium term;
(ii) At the back end, the cost‑out program has prioritised the automation
of several labour‑intensive activities to streamline
operations.
Mr Suckling
quotes another article from the
site dated 22 February
2019 which says that despite the restructuring of the Isentia business,
“the group’s operating
costs only fell by 0.3% to $51.2m”.
Mr Suckling,
in commenting upon the matters mentioned by Mr Smith (described at [51] and
[52] of these reasons), says that the cost
difference between the Isentia rate
and the Meltwater interim rate (CS1 and CS2 respectively) is the annualised
amount at CS107 which
is approximately the percentage at CS108 of
Isentia’s reported cost base of $99.4M in FY 2019.
to the clients lost by Isentia to Meltwater and Streem, Mr Suckling says
that Mr Smith’s examples show that large reductions
Isentia’s pricing had no impact on the success of Isentia’s bids.
Mr Suckling says that of the number of customers
at page 1 of
Mr Smith’s Exhibit “SAS‑2” (at page 8 of
the exhibit) being the number of customers at CS109,
two of those customers,
although not identified by Mr Suckling (but the two customers seem to be
the two customers at CS110) are
examples where the winning bid was higher than
or equal to Isentia’s offer price.
Mr Suckling says that Exhibit “SAS‑2” provides
“many examples” where Isentia’s first
tender offer was equal
to, or higher than, the last 12 months of billings to that customer by Isentia,
and Isentia was not invited
to submit a further offer. Again, although
Mr Suckling has not undertaken the exercise of identifying the number of
customers in
that category, there appear to be the number at CS111 in that
category when each entry in “SAS‑2” is properly examined.
Mr Suckling
then comments on four of the five specific customers described by Mr Smith
at Section D of Mr Smith’s affidavit.
No comment is made by
Mr Suckling about the fifth customer at CS30. Mr Suckling says that
for the period 1 December 2017 to 30
November 2018 (before the Isentia
Interim Licence commenced), Isentia reported that the number of press clips for
each of the four
customers is the number set out at CS112.
table at CS113 (having regard to the period of reporting) sets out the
per‑clip rate under the 2016 Isentia Licence, the
rate under the Isentia
Interim Licence, the Meltwater rate and the total cost of the clips described in
the table at CS112.
difference in the copyright input cost having regard to the table at CS113 is
the amount in the table at CS114. Mr Suckling says
that the difference in
the per‑clip rate (under the interim licence) represents the percentage of
the winning bid identified
winning bid for the customer at CS26 is not known and therefore the calculation
cannot be undertaken.
topic addressed by Mr Suckling is the differences in the
interim licences prevailing between CA and Isentia, Meltwater and Streem.
Mr Suckling
says that there are differences in the scope of the rights granted by CA to
Isentia and Meltwater, on the one hand, and
the scope of rights granted by CA to
Streem, on the other hand. Mr Suckling says that Streem has the
“broadest grant of rights
of any MMO under the interim licences”.
Mr Suckling observes that the per‑clip rate payable by Streem was
2017 and “is subject to a minima but otherwise identical to the
Meltwater clip rate [at CS2]”. This is so even though
it has the broadest
grant of rights.
to Isentia, Mr Suckling observes that it elected to put itself on the same
footing as Meltwater and Mr Suckling says that Isentia
is therefore no
longer licensed to store press clips and portions for more than six months; or
to make scraped copies of non‑CopyCo
works and communicate portions
thereof; or to fax or make press clips available online; or to copy and
communicate licensed works
outside Australia. Mr Suckling says that
non‑CopyCo works historically comprised 20% of the volume of portions
reported by
Isentia. CA does not know whether Isentia now has a licence from
non‑CopyCo publishers directly.
Mr Suckling
says that Isentia has not complied with the interim licence ordered by the
Tribunal so as to operate from 1 December 2018.
are three contended breaches of the interim licence.
although Isentia took the position, through its solicitors on 11 December
2018, that it would be in a position to comply with the
reporting obligations
under the interim licence, CA says that it did not receive accurate data from
Isentia (in accordance with the
quarterly reporting obligation) that would
enable CA to invoice Isentia for use of the licensed works since 1 December
distribute fees to rightsholders), until 27 November 2019. Thus,
distributions to rightsholders were delayed by about one year.
CA says that
consequently, the licence fees payable for use of the content are being paid
more than 12 months in arrears. As a
result, CA has been receiving queries from
CopyCo rightsholders since April 2019 and from non‑CopyCo rightsholders
since December
2019 asking why the distributions have either been not paid or
delayed in payment.
CA says that Isentia has said that it will not be in a position to comply with
an obligation under the interim scraping licence
to report click‑through
rates in respect of portions until the second quarter of FY 2020. CA says that
it has not received
any further information as to that matter.
CA says that under the interim press clipping and scraping licences, Isentia is
only licensed to store copies of portions and press
clips for up to six months.
CA says that it has an Isentia media monitoring service as part of its business
operations and, as at
7 February 2020, CA personnel were able to access
portions and full text articles over six months old. Screenshots of these
and full text articles form part of
Exhibit “AAS‑1” to Mr Suckling’s affidavit.
The exhibited content is
Sydney Morning
Australian Financial Review
from the matters mentioned at [149], [150] and [151], Mr Suckling says that
Isentia makes full text licensed works available online through its
mediaportal
service, that step is not presently licensed to Isentia under
the interim press clipping licence. However, CA says that it does not
information that enables it to assess whether or not Isentia is taking that
Mr Suckling
also says that Isentia has made enquiries of CA about a licence to deliver press
clips and portions to New Zealand and
to supply content to overseas media
monitoring organisations. Copies of the relevant letters are identified in
Mr Suckling’s
affidavit. Mr Suckling notes that Isentia is not
licensed by CA under the interim licence to do those things.
Mr Suckling says that CA does not “presently have any visibility over
how Isentia calculates and attributes revenue
under its interim scraping
to the Meltwater and Streem Interim Licences, Mr Suckling says this.
primary position is that notwithstanding that CA would prefer that Meltwater and
Streem were licensed under CA’s
proposed licence, those licences
“should not be further adjusted at this time”. CA’s position
is that if the Tribunal
is minded to adjust an interim licence because of a lack
of parity, then an alternative approach it urges is to vary the relevant
fees payable by Meltwater and Streem to elevate their per‑clip rate to
align it with that of Isentia.
Mr Suckling,
on that footing, sets out some calculations on the potential effects of such an
adjustment. Mr Suckling says that if
Meltwater’s interim press
clipping licence had been varied to replace the Meltwater clip rate with the
Isentia (interim) clip
rate in calendar year 2019, Meltwater would have paid the
amount at CS116 instead of the amount at CS117, being an increase set out
CS118. Mr Suckling says that if Streem’s interim licence was varied
to replace the Streem clip rate with the Isentia (interim)
clip rate in calendar
year 2019, Streem would have paid the amount at CS119 instead of the amount at
CS120, being an increase set
out at CS121.
the additional licensing revenue that would flow from each of Meltwater and
Streem if they had paid, in calendar year 2019,
the Isentia interim clip rate,
is the amount at CS122.
to Meltwater’s online downstream licence fee, Mr Suckling makes the
point that the fee was commercially negotiated as a fixed
annual fee.
Mr Suckling says that the fee was not subject to adjustment based on
customer numbers, or otherwise, during the term
of the 2016 scraping licence and
nor has it been adjusted under Meltwater’s interim scraping licence.
Mr Suckling says that
if the Meltwater customer rate was applied to the
number of online monitoring customers that CA estimates for Meltwater in FY 2020
based on its reporting to CA (the number at CS123), Meltwater’s annual
online downstream licence fee would increase to the
number at CS124, being an
annual increase of approximately the number at CS125. Mr Suckling says
that if the adjusted customer rate
was applied to the number of online
monitoring customers that CA estimates for Meltwater in FY 2020,
Meltwater’s annual online
downstream licence fee would increase to the
number at CS126, being an annual increase in the amount at CS127.
to Streem, Mr Suckling says that Streem has a broader set of rights under
its licence with CA and the licence fee structure applied
to online monitoring
and downstream use is different to that which applies to Meltwater and Isentia.
In particular, Streem does
not pay CA a separate online downstream licence fee.
Instead, it pays CA the greater of a minimum amount per year, being the amount
at CS128 and the percentage at CS129 of online monitoring revenue it derives,
for both the right to copy and communicate portions
and for the downstream use
of those portions.
is now necessary to examine the exchanges between the solicitors which led to
the downstream licence fee agreed for the purposes
of the Isentia Interim
The downstream licence fee negotiations
a letter dated 7 December 2018 to the solicitors for Isentia (Clayton Utz),
the solicitors for CA, MinterEllison, put a proposal
to Clayton Utz based on the
customer numbers reported by Isentia that CA pay an annual downstream licence
fee in the amount at CS67
plus GST. In that letter, MinterEllison observed that
the means by which the CS67 figure had been calculated was set out in the
and that in CA’s view the amount represented a fair and equitable way
forward in the circumstances. The method set
out in the letter (by reference to
a document described as “Restricted Access Attachment 1”) was
in the terms set out
at CS130. The relevant numbers in Restrictive Access
Attachment 1 are the numbers already discussed in describing
letter dated 11 December 2018, Clayton Utz responded to the MinterEllison
letter and at point 5, the author, Mr Webb, said this:
CAL has proposed that there be an “annual”
Downstream Licence Fee of [the amount at CS67] plus GST. Would you please
confirm whether CAL proposes that this amount remain fixed for the duration of
the interim period, or be adjusted by reference to
changes in the number of
Isentia clients that receive an online monitoring service during that period.
letter dated 12 December 2018, MinterEllison responded to the Clayton Utz
letter and, as to point 5, MinterEllison said this:
Our client proposes that the online annual Downstream
Licence Fee remain fixed for the duration of the interim period. This is
with what has been ordered in relation to Meltwater.
a letter dated 18 January 2019, Clayton Utz responded in relation to a
range of matters but as to the topic of the definition of
“Downstream Licence” and “Downstream Licence Fee”,
Clayton Utz said this:
– Isentia will agree, on a
non‑precedential basis (as per clause 8 of the current CAL/Isentia
licence), to the proposed
annual Downstream Licence Fee set out in
paragraph 3 of your “without prejudice” letter dated
7 December 2018.
Paragraph 3
of the MinterEllison letter of 7 December 2018 is the matter described at
[162] of these reasons.
[50] of these reasons, I note the evidence of Mr Smith in relation to the
total press clip numbers which have been copied and communicated
during the period of its interim licence. Three periods are identified that
cover a total period from 1 December 2018
to 30 September 2019. The
total number of press clips copied and communicated by Isentia during that
period is the number at CS131.
If Isentia had been required to pay CA the
amount at CS2 rather than the amount at CS1, it would have paid, or have been
to pay, CA the amount at CS59 rather than the amount at CS58, the
difference being the amount at CS60.
and Mr Gerstmyer say that this difference is material and irremediably
prejudicial. Mr Suckling says that the difference
between the rates at CS1
and CS2 is not material because Isentia has failed to demonstrate that the
difference has actually resulted
in the loss of a client. Although
Mr Smith seeks to illustrate the point of prejudice by reference to five
emblematic customers
which have been lost by Isentia to, in four cases, Streem,
and in one case, Meltwater, Mr Smith does not analyse each of those
customers by reference to the matrix of the number of press clips in
play for each customer and the
the differential press clip rate as
between CS1 and CS2 played, or reasonably could be thought to have played, in
the loss of a customer.
Nor does Mr Gerstmyer address that matter. Both
Mr Smith and Mr Gerstmyer say that their view is, based on their
experience, that
the amount of the difference, in the aggregate, in the
per‑clip rate over the period 1 December 2018 to 30 September
amount at CS60) has made a difference in the loss of clients in the
number at CS6 from Isentia to Meltwater and Streem.
is necessary to look a little closer at the five emblematic examples of lost
customers upon which Isentia places so much emphasis.
customer is CS9. Isentia’s best offer to CS9 was the amount
at CS12. The winning bid was the amount at CS13. Had Isentia
had the benefit
of a per‑clip rate at CS2 rather than CS1, it would have had an input
CS132 less than the input cost under the
interim licence rate at CS1 assuming that the press clips for the customer at
the order of the press clips suggested by Mr Suckling at CS112.
That being so, Isentia would have been in a position to make a best
offer of the
amount at CS133 rather than the best offer at CS12. The winning bid for the
customer at CS9 was the amount at CS13
which means that Isentia would have
remained less favourable as compared with the winning bid by the amount at
customer is CS14. Isentia’s best offer to CS14 was the
amount at CS18. The winning bid was the amount at CS19. Had Isentia
benefit of a per‑clip rate at CS2 rather than CS1, it would have had an
input copyright cost which was the amount at
CS135 less than the input cost
under the interim licence rate at CS1 assuming that the press clips for the
customer at CS14 was of
the order of the press clips suggested by
Mr Suckling at CS112. That being so, Isentia would have been in a position
to make a best
offer of the amount at CS136 rather than the best offer at CS18.
The winning bid for the customer at CS14 was the amount at CS19
which means that
Isentia would have remained less favourable as compared with the winning bid by
the amount at CS137.
customer is CS20. Isentia’s best offer to CS20 was the
amount at CS24. The winning bid was the amount at CS25. Had Isentia
benefit of a per‑clip rate at CS2 rather than CS1, it would have had an
input copyright cost which was the amount at
CS138 less than the input cost
under the interim licence rate at CS1 assuming that the press clips for the
customer at CS20 was of
the order of the press clips suggested by
Mr Suckling at CS112. That being so, Isentia would have been in a position
to make a best
offer of the amount at CS139 rather than the best offer at CS24.
The winning bid for the customer at CS20 was the amount at CS25
which means that
Isentia would have remained less favourable as compared with the winning bid by
the amount at CS140.
customer is CS26. Isentia, in early 2019, secured a three year
contract with CS26. However, three weeks into the new contract, CS26
the contract advising Isentia that it would be acquiring services from Streem.
Isentia’s offer to CS26 was the
amount at CS28 (although it was
Isentia’s first and only offer). The winning bid for CS26 is unknown
although CS26 told Mr
Smith that the price difference between
Isentia’s offer and Streem’s offer was so significant that CS26
could not refuse
the “Streem deal” and Mr Gurney for CS26 was
not going to change his mind. Mr Smith understands that the difference
between Isentia’s offer and Streem’s offer was greater than the
amount at CS29 with the result that Isentia was never
going to lose the contract
with CS26 on the footing of a price differential in the rate for press clips as
between the rates at CS1
customer is CS30. Isentia’s best offer to CS30 was the
amount at CS33. The winning bid is unknown. Isentia understands the
to be that Meltwater’s price was “far below Isentia’s
price” as described by Mr Smith in his affidavit
at paras 61 and
62. It seems unlikely therefore that had Isentia been paying CA an input
rate at CS2 rather than CS1,
Isentia would have been likely to hold CS30 as a customer. There is no evidence
before the Tribunal
as to the number of press clips likely to have been provided
seems unlikely (and it is certainly not demonstrated) that any one of the five
emblematic customers cited and relied upon by Isentia
were lost by Isentia to
either Meltwater or Streem
by reason of
the interim per‑clip rate
at CS1 applying as an interim input copyright cost rather than the rate at CS2,
being the Meltwater
rate. If the
of the position that Isentia
contends for is to be
illustrated
by any or all of the customers said to
be emblematic of the problem Isentia confronts, the difficulty immediately seems
Isentia has not been able to demonstrate that any one of those
emblematic customers was lost to it
it was required to pay an
interim per‑clip rate at CS1 rather than the rate at CS2.
from those matters, there are two customers in the list at
Exhibit “SAS‑2” that suggest that factors other
price were determinative and where the difference in the per‑clip rate as
between CS1 and CS2 made no difference. The
customers are those at CS141 and
CS142. As to the customer at CS141, Isentia’s best offer was the amount
at CS143 whereas
the winning bid was the amount at CS144. As to customer CS142,
the position is not as clear, but Isentia’s best price (CS145)
to the winning price (although the winning bid might have been “slightly
higher”, according to Exhibit “SAS‑2”
winning bidder). Yet, Isentia was not selected.
of the difficulties in reaching a conclusion about just what discrete role the
between the already adjusted CS1 rate and the CS2 rate plays
customers to be lost by Isentia to Meltwater and/or Streem
pending the determination of the proceeding is that the Tribunal has no
or understanding of the cost base of the three rivals and the role the
differential rate actually plays in the
be recovered in pricing services. Perhaps the cost base of Meltwater and Streem
renders them more “lean and hungry”.
Perhaps automation is playing
a much larger role in enabling Meltwater and Streem to bid more advantageously
as compared with Isentia.
Tribunal in these reasons has noted carefully the evidence of Mr Smith and
Mr Gerstmyer that in winning and losing clients the
differential interim
rate as between CS1 and CS2, in their view, plays a critical role. However,
Mr Smith and Mr Gerstmyer in expressing
that view, are, in one sense,
not just expressing a view but swearing the issue. When the emblematic critical
examples of the problem
Isentia is confronting are identified, those examples do
not actually support the central proposition. Although I accept that
Smith and Mr Gerstmyer are experienced people engaged in the daily
battle downstream of CA to win and hold customers within the field
(and Mr Suckling is not), I find it difficult to act as they would wish in
exercising the discretion when the five primary
nominated examples do not make
the case they seek to advance and at least two other examples are against them
I do not accept that the revenue decline and the share price decline is
attributable to the
matter now under consideration, that is,
the role the difference in the per‑clip rate in the interim licence as
between the
rates at CS1 and CS2 plays in causing customers to be won or lost by
Isentia in comparison with Meltwater (and Streem).
to other matters, I do not accept that Isentia stood back before commencing its
proceedings. It acted appropriately in the circumstances.
the parity argument is said not to take account of the special circumstances
applicable to Streem, Mr Suckling essentially
says that so far as the
per‑clip rate is concerned, Streem is (apart from “a minima”)
on the same per‑clip
rate as Meltwater (the CS2 rate).
am not persuaded that matters of impact upon budget preparation by CopyCo
rightsholders is a significant matter
in terms of
the discretion on the matter now under consideration, if it were to be the case
that I was otherwise persuaded that Isentia had
demonstrated actual irremediable
prejudice arising out of the
of the differential as between CS1
have also had the benefit of reading the expert report,
Exhibit “CJP‑3”, to the affidavit of Dr Christopher
filed in support of the application by Isentia and the expert report,
Exhibit “JPO‑1”, to the affidavit of Jason
Ockerby filed
on behalf of CA. Although I have taken these reports into account as part of
the evidence filed on the application,
the reports do not assist me on the
critical question of whether the differential in the rates as between the rates
at CS1 and CS2
is an operative cause of Isentia either losing customers or
failing to win customers in rivalry in the market for provision of media
intelligence services in relation to specific customers.
all of these reasons, I am not willing to further adjust the interim
per‑clip rate and impose a further interim reduction
to the Downstream Licence Fee, the exchanges between MinterEllison and Clayton
Utz on behalf of the clients brought about a very
clear resolution of the
position. The parties have agreed the amount at CS67 as the “annual
Downstream Licence Fee”.
By that arrangement, reflected in the
correspondence, the parties agreed that the CS67 amount would prevail as the
annual fee governing
that part of the arrangement the subject of the interim
licence. A question that arises is whether the Tribunal’s intention
establish the Isentia Interim Licence for a threshold period of December 2018
and January and February 2019 with a review taking
place thereafter to establish
a further interim licence for the months of March, April and May 2019 and
further periods thereafter,
gives rise to a construction of the arrangement
reflected in the correspondence such that the agreement should be construed not
an annual Downstream Licence Fee in the CS67 amount, but rather an annual
Downstream Licence Fee subject to three monthly review.
The correspondence
speaks for itself. It addresses the position agreed to prevail as the annual
fee for that part of the licence.
The parties had the reasons of
16 November 2018 before them when the agreement reflected in the
correspondence was struck. The
correspondence does not make the agreement
subject to any period of review. That was consistent with the notion that what
to be looked at after three months is how the licence was operating in
light of the per‑clip rate determined by the
am also concerned, in the exercise of the discretion, about the contended
failure on the evidence before the Tribunal on the part
of Isentia in performing
its quarterly reporting obligations so as to enable CA to invoice Isentia for
fees, secure payment of the
fees and enable distributions to the rightsholders
to be made. It is not necessary to examine that matter further because I am not
satisfied that sufficient analysis has been undertaken by Isentia in relation to
the customers so as to demonstrate that the differential
in the per‑clip
rate between the rates at CS1 and CS2 is making the difference contended for by
Accordingly,
the amended application is dismissed with the question of costs reserved for
later determination.
remaining matter concerns the question of whether there ought to be a reference
to the Full Court of the Federal Court for the
determination of a question of
law. That matter needs some explanation.
The referral of questions to the Full Court of the Federal
Court of Australia
applications to the Tribunal by Isentia, Meltwater and Streem are made under
of the Act.
Section 157(3)
addresses the topic of the
integers that need to be satisfied to enable a person to apply to the Tribunal
where “no licence
scheme” (as to which see
of the Act)
applies and a licensor (see
refuses or fails to grant a
“reasonable licence”.
Section 157(3)
provides that where a
person claims (as Isentia, Meltwater and Streem claim) that they each require a
licence, in a case to which
a licence scheme does not apply (as is the case in
these proceedings), and a licensor (as CA is said to be, although it says not),
has “refused” or “failed” to grant the licence, or
failed or refused to “procure” the grant of
the licence and,
“in the circumstances”, it is “unreasonable” that the
licence should not be granted, the
relevant person may apply to the Tribunal:
s 157(3)(a).
Alternatively, in circumstances where a person who claims
they require a licence in a case such as the principal applications where
licence scheme applies, and a licensor proposes that a licence should be granted
subject to “the payment of charges”
or to “conditions”
that are “unreasonable”, such a person may apply to the Tribunal
and, in particular,
s 157(3)(b).
such an application, the orders that the Tribunal might make, and thus the power
to make orders arising out of an application to
the Tribunal under
, are addressed by
of the Act. That subsection
provides that if the Tribunal is satisfied that the claim of an applicant under
although, relevantly for present purposes, the
proceedings are concerned with an application under
“well‑founded” the Tribunal “must” either make an
order specifying, in respect of the “matters”
specified in the
order, the charges, if any, and the conditions, that the Tribunal considers
“reasonable in the circumstances
in relation to the applicant”
(s 157(6B)(a))
, or an order under
s 157(6B)(b).
s 157(6B)(b)
, the Tribunal is conferred with the power, where it is
satisfied that the claim of an applicant under
well‑founded, to order that the applicant be “granted a licence in
the terms proposed by the applicant, the licensor
concerned or another party to
the application”.
the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant’s claim under
is well‑founded, it must make an order under either (a) or (b) of
contextual circumstances, in which a proposal by Isentia, Meltwater and Streem
to refer questions of law to the Full Court of
the Federal Court for
determination, are these.
discharges a number of roles under the Act. CA is a declared collecting society
for the purposes of
, Division 4 of the Act in relation to
statutory educational licences in works (other than a work included in a sound
recording or
a cinematograph film). It is a declared collecting society for the
purposes of
, Division 2 of the Act in relation to statutory
government licences of works and published editions of works (other than works
in a sound recording, cinematograph film, or a television or sound
broadcast). However, in the applications under
, CA is not engaged
in its statutory role as a declared collecting society. The rights licensed by
CA to each of Isentia, Meltwater
and Streem, are licensed on a
non‑exclusive and voluntary basis.
rights licensed by CA to each of those entities find their source upstream of
immediate upstream source is an Agency Agreement between CopyCo and CA.
Particular publishers including News Limited and Fairfax
Digital Pty Limited
(recognising that the Fairfax works are now controlled by the entity described
in these reasons as Nine Publishing)
and at least three other publishers are
shareholders in CopyCo. Historically, those publisher shareholders, together
with five other
publishers, have, since March 2000, granted CopyCo a
non‑exclusive licence to sub‑licence specified rights in certain
publications. The publishers that have taken that step are described as CopyCo
publishers. CA’s right to grant licences in
respect of copyright owned or
controlled by a CopyCo publisher is conferred under the Agency Agreement between
CopyCo and CA. Under
that agreement, CA has the right to sub‑licence
those licensed rights and it has an obligation, under the Agency Agreement,
collect fees in respect of each sub‑licence and an obligation to
distribute the proceeds of those licence fees. Some publishers
non‑CopyCo publishers, have conferred rights upon CA to sub‑licence
rights in their works to media monitoring
organisations.
can be seen therefore that there is a particular continuum which is relevant to
the present applications under
It starts with a publisher who
owns the copyright in a relevant work. It involves the conferral of a licence
by such a publisher
upon CopyCo to grant particular (specified) rights
subsisting in the relevant work (licensed rights). It involves the appointment
by CopyCo of CA as CopyCo’s agent for the purpose of granting
sub‑licences of the licensed rights to others which, relevantly
involves media monitoring organisations. Thus, CA’s standing is one of an
agent, standing in the shoes of CopyCo, to
grant sub‑licences of licensed
rights in particular subject matter. It can readily be seen, as the letters
from MinterEllison
dated 23 January 2020 and 5 February 2020 (at
pp 5 to 7 of Exhibit “TGG‑1” to the affidavit of
Mr Gerstmyer) reveal,
that a particular publisher might, at any moment in
time, elect to withdraw from CopyCo the specified licensed rights in particular
publications thus depriving CA of the power to grant sub‑licences of the
withdrawn licensed rights. Those withdrawn rights
would rapidly become excluded
rights or excluded publications for the purposes of the licence between CA and
follows that Meltwater, in particular, but also Isentia and Streem, are
concerned that they might prosecute their proceedings before
the Tribunal to
demonstrate, for the purposes of
, that the claim made under
is “well‑founded” so as to seek to establish a
licence, by order of the Tribunal, which specifies the charges and
that the Tribunal considers reasonable in the circumstances in relation to each
applicant, to find that the victory in
such a claim is a
because publisher rightsholders have simply withdrawn the licensed rights in
publications from CopyCo, thus collapsing CA’s
standing to confer
sub‑licences and ending each MMO’s standing as a sub‑licence
of the licensed rights. Each of
Isentia, Meltwater and Streem are right to be
concerned about the ultimate consequences for each of them arising out of the
publisher/CopyCo/CA
rights supply chain at the end of which they sit as a
sub‑licensee.
of the licensed publications is precisely what has happened as reflected in the
two letters from MinterEllison earlier
mentioned where News Corp has given
notice of the withdrawal from CopyCo of the licensed rights in
The Weekend Australian
as from 20 March 2020 and
Nine Publishing has given notice of withdrawal of the licensed rights as from
17 January 2021 in
The Australian Financial Review
The Financial
Review Smart Investor
The Financial Review BOSS
The Australian
Financial Review Magazine
The Weekend Financial Review
publications controlled by News Corp and Nine Publishing are significant press
publications.
Accordingly,
questions arise about whether the Tribunal has power to make orders to grant
licences in the particular circumstances
reflected in the proposed questions.
It is necessary to mention some further background matters in relation to the
proposed questions.
the Agency Agreement, CopyCo has appointed CA to grant sub‑licences to
rights in particular works (comprising a printed
edition of a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical; and an electronic
of a newspaper, magazine, website or other electronic news service
(other than a journal)), otherwise described as the Licensed Works.
the commencement of each of the proceedings by Isentia, Meltwater and Streem, CA
offered each applicant a licence on particular
terms otherwise called the CA
Licence. Each applicant proposed a licence on different terms to the CA
Licence. Each applicant seeks
an order under
s 157(6B)(a)
or (b) of the
Act in respect of the licence each of them has proposed. The licence proposed
by each applicant includes rights which
CA says it is not authorised by CopyCo
to grant. Those rights are the rights described at CS146. CA simply says that
can be granted by the Tribunal which engages with those rights which
CA does not have the power to grant under the Agency Agreement
because CopyCo
has simply not authorised CA to grant those rights.
regard to all of these matters, Isentia, Meltwater and Streem seek to refer five
questions for determination by the Federal
Court under
of the Act.
That section provides that the Tribunal may, of its own motion or at the request
of a party, refer a question of law,
arising in proceedings before it, for
determination by the Federal Court. The questions will be determined, if
referred, by the
Full Court of the Court.
questions are these.
(1) In circumstances where CA has proposed the CA
Licence, then, with the exception of charges and conditions which may be
or varied by the Tribunal, is the form of the licence that may be
ordered by the Tribunal under
limited to the terms of the CA
(2) If the answer to Question 1 is “yes”, which terms of the CA
Licence are neither charges nor conditions and thus outside
the power of the
Tribunal to vary?
(3) In an application brought under
Act, does the Tribunal have the power:
s 157(6B)(b)
of the Act, to
order that the applicants be granted licences on all the terms of the proposed
licences; and/or
s 157(6B)(a)
of the Act, to make an order specifying the charges,
if any, and the conditions that it considers reasonable in the circumstances
respect of each of the proposed licences?
(4) See CS147.
(5) If the answer to Question 3(b) is “no”, with respect to
which (if any) of the rights and terms referred to in Question
Tribunal not empowered to make an order pursuant to
s 157(6B)(a)?
aid of the request of Isentia, Meltwater and Streem to refer these questions to
the Federal Court, the parties have formulated
a stated case. The stated case
is supported by a folder of documents to which the Full Court would turn should
there be any contest
by reference to the documents.
simply, the difficulty I have with the proposal to refer the five questions,
together with the documents, is that my expectation,
having regard to the debate
that has taken place before me between the parties to date, is that contentions
are likely to arise about
underlying aspects of the documents or factual
questions which might well need to be resolved before the questions can be
by the Full Court of the Federal Court. I am apprehensive that there
is a serious risk that a reference to the Federal Court and
thus to the Full
Court might miscarry due to such a controversy emerging with the result that the
reference might, for one reason
or another, “go off”. Accordingly,
I propose to refuse to refer the questions to the Federal Court. Rather, I
to set aside the questions as separate matters to be dealt with by the
Tribunal. I propose to deal with these questions at the earliest
opportunity, hear the parties and answer the questions as a matter of urgency.
If there is to be an appeal from the Tribunal’s
decision, a Full Court can
be convened quickly to deal with any appeal arising out of a determination of
the separate question.
Moreover, the determination of the separate question and
any urgent appeal arising out of that determination ought not to disrupt
progression of the preparation of the matter to a hearing in October (which is
over five months away). I propose to hear the separate
question at a time
convenient to the parties within the first three weeks of May.
Accordingly,
the parties are requested to advise my Associate as soon as possible of their
availability for the hearing of the separate
an attempt to overcome the difficulty arising out of the particular set of
circumstances reflected in the matters described at
[194] to [196] of these
reasons, the dilemma arising out of the matters described at [197] and [198] of
these reasons, and the proposition
that CA is not authorised under the Agency
Agreement with CopyCo to grant sub‑licences to media monitoring
organisations for
the scope of rights they seek by the licences they have
proposed, the Tribunal sought to establish a position where, for the purposes
these applications, CopyCo would agree to confer upon CA the field of rights
sought by the applicants so that the question would
become simply one of whether
the charges and conditions are reasonable or unreasonable. Such a conferral,
transactionally, for the
purposes of these three applications might also involve
the publishers granting an expanded field of specified rights to CopyCo to
enable CA to grant an expanded field of sub‑licence rights, under the
Agency Agreement, to each of the applicant media monitoring
organisations. The
Board of CopyCo met to consider that matter. It has refused to transactionally
expand the scope of CA’s
Agency Agreement and I infer that the publishers
have refused to grant CopyCo an expanded field of rights which would enable
to expand the scope of the Agency Agreement.
regard to all of the issues raised by the three applications which are to be
heard together and the matters I have already
mentioned in these reasons, the
Tribunal proposes to seek the views of the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (“ACCC”)
as to whether it proposes to ask, for the
purposes of
of the Act, to be made a party to the applications.
remaining matter concerns directions which ought to be made for the further
conduct of the applications. I have already indicated
that the parties are
requested to advise my Associate as to their availability for the hearing of the
separate questions. The parties
are also directed to conduct discussions with a
view to proposing to the Tribunal directions for the further conduct of the
applications.
Those directions will take into account the steps involved in
preparing for the hearing of the further questions. The parties are
to submit proposed directions by the end of April but preferably by 4.00pm on
Monday, 27 April 2020, if possible. The
possible, and likely, joinder of the
ACCC is not a matter which should be thought to involve any delay in deciding
directions for
the future conduct of the matter. Any joinder of the ACCC will
take its course.
I certify that the preceding two hundred and
eight (208) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Determination herein of the Honourable Justice Greenwood, President,
Australian Copyright
Dated: 22 April 2020
RTF format (546 KB)
Signed PDF/A format