FCA US LLC [2023] ADO 1 (30 May 2023)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE
REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re: Request for examination of
design number 201810300 in the name of FCA US LLC
Louise Tuohy
REPRESENTATION:
Patrick Flynn of Senior Counsel instructed by Gilbert + Tobin and Pizzeys
Patent and Trade Mark Attorneys
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) – examination of design under
considered – design new and distinctive over the
prior art base – certificate of examination to issue
18 January 2018, FCA US LLC (‘
’) filed an application
Designs Act 2003
’) to register
the following design (‘
Product Name:
Automobile Exterior
Priority Date:
6 September 2017 (US number 29/616,449)
Relevant Date
Representations:
Design was registered on 19 February 2018 and examination of the Design was
requested by the Owner on 10 November 2020. On 5 March
2021 a first examination
report issued raising a ground for revocation. The examination report stated
that the Design was not distinctive
because it was substantially similar in
overall impression to a single design (‘
prior art base which I have reproduced below:
6 August 2021 the Owner filed written submissions responding to the first
examination report. The Owner submitted that the Citation
should be excluded
from the prior art base in accordance with
and/or 18 of the Act. On 11
August 2021 the examiner issued a second examination report maintaining the
Citation as a ground for
revocation. In the examiner’s view the
Owner’s submission did not satisfy the requirements of ss 17 or 18 of the
For reasons that follow it was has not been necessary for me to decide this
aspect of the Owner’s case.
2 September 2021 the Owner filed a request to be heard on this examination
matter. The Owner duly filed written submissions together
with the Declaration
of Brian H. Nielander, Chief Designer of Performance, Passenger and Utility
Vehicles at the Owner, made on 17
February 2023, with Attachment BHN-1
’), and the Declaration of Ralph E. Smith,
Assistant General Counsel Intellectual Property at the Owner, made on 20
2023, with Attachment RES-1.
a delegate of the Registrar of Designs, I heard the matter in Canberra on 1
March 2023. Patrick Flynn of Senior Counsel appeared
on behalf of the Owner
instructed by Gilbert + Tobin and Pizzeys Patent and Trade Marks Attorneys.
Legislative framework
to s 63(1) of the Act, a registered design must be examined if any person
requests, or a court orders, the Registrar to do
so. Examination of a design
requires the Registrar to have regard to s 65(2)(a) of the Act which creates a
ground of revocation if
the ‘design is not a registrable design’.
Section 15(1) of the Act states that ‘a design is a
registrable
if the design is new and distinctive compared to the prior art
base for the design as it existed before the priority date of the
prior art base is defined in s 15(2) of the Act which
prior art base
for a design
designated design
) consists of:
(a) designs publicly used in Australia; and
(b) designs published in a document within or outside Australia; and
(c) designs in relation to which each of the following criteria is
(i) the design is disclosed in a design application;
(ii) the design has an earlier priority date than the designated
(iii) the first time documents disclosing the design are made available
for public inspection under section
60 is on or after the priority date of
the designated design.
constitutes a new and distinctive design is defined in s 16 of the Act which
Designs that
are identical or substantially similar in overall impression
(1) A design is new unless it is identical to a design that forms part of
the prior art base for the design.
(2) A design is distinctive unless it is substantially similar in overall
impression to a design that forms part of
the prior art base for the design (see
section 19).
(3) Subject to paragraph 15(2)(c), the newness or distinctiveness of
a design is not affected by the mere publication
or public use of the design in
Australia on or after the priority date of the design, or by the registration of
another design with
the same or a later priority date.
design is ‘new’ unless it is the exact copy of a design that forms
part of the prior art base. It follows that the difference
of a single visual
feature, irrespective of its significance, in either of the designs under
comparison will be sufficient to establish
that the design is ‘new’.
In this case, the examination report did not take a ‘newness’
objection based on
the Citation. For reasons detailed below this was, in my
view, the correct approach.
determine whether a design is ‘distinctive’, the decision maker must
assess whether the design is substantially similar
in overall impression to any
design that forms part of the prior art base. Section 19 of the Act sets out the
approach to be taken
in assessing substantial similarity in overall impression
and provides:
to be considered in assessing substantial similarity in overall
(1) If a person is required by this Act to decide whether a design is
substantially similar in overall impression to
another design, the person making
the decision is to give more weight to similarities between the designs than to
differences between
(2) The person must also:
(a) have regard to the state of development of the prior art base for the
design; and
(b) if the design application in which the design was disclosed included a
statement (a
statement of newness and distinctiveness
identifying particular visual features of the design as new and distinctive:
(i) have particular regard to those features; and
(ii) if those features relate to only part of the design—have
particular regard to that part of
the design, but in the context of the design
as a whole; and
(c) if only part of the design is substantially similar to another design,
have regard to the amount, quality
and importance of that part in the context of
the design as a whole; and
(d) have regard to the freedom of the creator of the design to
(3) If the design application in which the design was disclosed did not
include a statement of newness and distinctiveness
in respect of particular
visual features of the design, the person must have regard to the appearance of
the design as a whole.
(4) In applying subsections (1), (2) and (3), the person must apply
the standard of a person who is familiar with the
product to which the design
relates, or products similar to the product to which the design relates
standard of the informed user
(5) In this section, a reference to a person includes a reference to a
The Citation
first examination report states that the Citation was posted on the JL Wrangler
Forum (‘Forum’) website
www.jlwranglerforum.com
29 August 2017. However, the Owner does not accept that the publication date of
the Citation is that attributed to it by the examiner
and submits that the
images on the Forum website including the Citation and advertising are not
Citation was posted on 29 August 2017 by ‘Jay’, an Administrator of
the Forum on the website www.jlwranglerforum.com.
The date of 29 August 2017
appears in the byline of Jay’s post. The Citation appears in thread number
15 dated 29 August 2017.
It is Jay’s response to a comment by ‘Chuck
h’ that appears under thread number 6 dated 29 August 2017.
agree with the Owner that some images appearing in the JL Wrangler Forum website
are dynamic because the evidence suggests particularly
that images associated
with advertising on the site regularly change. However, in the absence of
evidence to show an administrator
of the Forum altered the several posting dates
or the Citation image appearing in the post by Jay, it appears on balance that
Citation image appearing in the post by Jay, was published on the website on
26 August 2017. This is before the Relevant Date and
therefore forms part of the
prior art base for the Design.
Owner has raised the issue that the Citation only shows a front perspective of a
vehicle, no detail of the rear of the Citation
vehicle is shown, and only
limited detail of the top of the Citation vehicle and its interior is depicted.
Bitzer Kuehlmaschinenbau
the owner argued
that the examiners’ reports did not include representations which
disclosed all angles of the prior art designs,
merely single perspective views.
It was argued by the owner that the examiner therefore had to infer an overall
impression of the
earlier designs. Delegate Lyons in that case referred to the
criteria set out by Jessup J in
of Technologies (Aust) Pty Ltd v Tempo (Aust) Pty
and further observed
Designs Manual of Practice and
(‘the Manual’) notes that ‘[i]t will
frequently be the case that a citation does not expressly display the cited
product from all perspectives.’ This is because many publications
containing images of designs, such as advertising materials,
only show the
product from a single angle. IP Office databases also only occasionally show the
entire design. As far as I am aware,
only the USPTO requires full disclosure of
all angles of a design as a prerequisite for registration. Australia certainly
If it were the case that all angles of a design in the prior art base
were required before it could form the basis of an objection
this would severely
constrain the ability of the Registrar to conduct effective examination of
registered designs. This would in
turn mean that many designs that are not new
and distinctive would pass examination, against the intention of the
the present case, I am satisfied that the single view disclosed in the Citation
shows sufficient detail against which to assess
the distinctiveness of the
Design, for example, there is a general expectation that the right hand side
view of an automobile exterior
will mirror the left hand side view.
Standard of the informed user
19(4) of the Act requires that factors prescribed in s 19 are to be assessed
from the perspective of the informed user. The
standard of the informed user is
that of familiarity.
Therefore the
informed user is a notional person that is familiar with the product to which
the Design relates or similar
the first examination report the examiner considered that the informed user is a
person who is familiar with four-wheel-drive motor
vehicles, or a motoring
journalist who may write for a motoring magazine and have a particular knowledge
of, and familiarity with
motoring trends and designs across a range of vehicles.
Owner submits that Mr Nielander, a person with experience in vehicle design, is
an informed user. In Nielander, Mr Nielander identifies
as the Chief Designer of
Performance, Passenger and Utility Vehicles at the Owner. Prior to Mr
Nielander’s current position
he was the Chief Designer for Jeep Exterior
Design and has been employed as a designer at DaimlerChrylser. As such, I accept
Mr Nielander’s professional experience in automobile exterior design
gives him the requisite degree of familiarity to qualify
as an informed user
within the meaning of the Act.
State of development of the prior art base
state of development of the prior art base plays an important role in assessing
whether a design is distinctive for the purposes
of the Act. The maturity of the
prior art base, or lack thereof, influences how the informed user will perceive
any differences between
the design and the prior art. If the prior art base is
well developed, the informed user is likely to have a greater appreciation
smaller visual differences between the design and prior art for the purposes of
distinctiveness. If the prior art base is underdeveloped,
more significant
visual differences between the design and prior art will usually be required to
avoid a finding of substantial
similarity.
product name of the Design is described as ‘automobile exterior’. Mr
Nielander declares the 2018 Jeep Wrangler (JL)
is the subject of the Design and
that the Jeep Wrangler is a direct descendant of the Willy MB and Civilian Jeep.
Mr Nielander declares
that the Jeep Wrangler line of vehicles has been designed
and manufactured and sold by the Owner and its predecessor companies since
examination searches conducted for the Design include a set of Google image
motor vehicles; and
sports utility vehicles. These results disclose the existence of a diverse range
of automobile exterior designs.
Whether looking at four-wheel-drives generally
or only the Jeep Wrangler subset, at the Relevant Date there existed a crowded
art base, and so the significance of smaller differences between the
Design and the Citation should be carefully weighed when assessing
the overall
impression of each.
Freedom of the creator of the design to
designer’s freedom to innovate is informed and guided by the development
of the prior art base. As described above the prior
art base is mature and
functional constraints have naturally emerged. That is, motor vehicles are
required to include functional
features such as headlights, grilles, hoods,
doors, windows and bumpers.
informed user, being a person familiar with the design of automobile exteriors,
would be aware these features effectively serve
to constrain the creator of the
Statement of Newness and Distinctiveness
Owner did not file a SoND. The description of the representations noted that any
broken lines in the drawings depict environmental
subject matter only and form
no part of the claimed design.
Amount, quality and importance of
the similarities in the context of the design as a whole
Design and the Citation share obvious visual similarities. A comparison reveals
that each design depicts a four door, open top
vehicle with a raked front grille
and round headlights.
examination report considered that an informed user would be aware of the
features that are considered substantially similar between
the Design and
Citation. These similarities include the shape and configuration of the bonnet,
the indicator lights within the front
guards, the shape and configuration of the
front bumper, the lights and shape of the front grille, the side fender having a
shape behind the front guards, fuel filler and the rear protection bar.
Owner submits that this assessment of the substantially similar features between
the Citation and the Design is incorrect. The
Owner submits the only evidence
before the Office of an informed user is that of Mr Nielander and as set out in
Nielander many of
the features which the examiner considered to be substantially
similar are in fact, points of difference.
regards to the dissimilarities, significant differences between the Design and
Citation exist in prominent areas where the informed
user’s attention
would likely be drawn. For the purposes of this side-by-side comparison I have
outlined Mr Nielander’s
evidence and reproduced the actual sections of the
Citation together with the corresponding sections of the Design below:
In relation to
the shape and configuration of the hood formation, Mr Nielander declares that
the Citation does not disclose the raised
power dome styling feature
(‘nose’) of the Design; and the Citation’s hood bump stops for
the windshield are round,
in comparison the bump stops in the Design are
rectangular. Mr Nielander also notes that the Citation includes a JEEP badge on
front of the hood which is not present in the Design. In relation to the
hood hatch, Mr Nielander declares that the hood hatch in
the Citation is smaller
and a different shape to the hood hatch in the Design:
In relation to
the front bumper, Mr Nielander declares that the centre portion of the front
bumper in the Citation is smooth and lacking
in detail; it lacks the access
point for a winch; and is missing the split lines and exposed bolts for the
removable endcaps, all
of which are disclosed in the Design. In relation to the
tow hooks, Mr Nielander declares that the red tow hooks in the Citation
squarer than the tow hooks in the Design which are rounded:
In relation to
the headlamps, Mr Nielander declares that the headlights are flush with the
grille in the Citation, in comparison the
headlights in the Design are set back.
In relation to the grille, Mr Nielander declares that the Citation does not
disclose the angled
bend in the grille of the Design:
In relation to
the rear indicator formation, Mr Nielander declares that the Citation does not
disclose the protruding rear indictor
formation of the Design. In relation to
the fuel door, Mr Nielander declares that the fuel door in the Citation is
smooth, in comparison
the fuel door in the Design has cut outs on either side of
a horizontal bar which runs the diameter of the
In relation to
the wheel fares, Mr Nielander declares that the Citation does not disclose the
Design’s thin ribbon of material
which separates the body colour on the
wheel fares. In relation to the front turn signals, Mr Nielander declares that
the Citation’s
front turn signals are small squares, in comparison the
Design’s turn signals are long rectangles. In relation to the side
fender vent, Mr Nielander declares that the Citation’s front fender vent
employs a sharper angle than the Design:
In relation to
the roof supports, Mr Nielander declares that the Citation does not disclose the
protruding sections of the Design’s
In relation to
the door curve, Mr Nielander declares that the angles of the curve at the bottom
on the Citation’s front doors
end significantly above the hinge of the
rear doors, in comparison the Design’s door curve ends at the hinge. In
relation to
the door hinges, Mr Nielander declares that hinges on the Citation
doors are not the door hinges disclosed in the Design:
Similarity in overall impression
determining whether the Design is distinctive over the Citation the Act mandates
that the standard of the informed user must be
applied in undertaking this
assessment and that the more weight is to be given to the similarities between
Design and Citation than
to differences between them. In
Multisteps Pty
Limited v Source and Sell Pty Limited,
...although the test is based on impression, it is not based
merely on a casual comparison between designs for a given article. There
to be a studied comparison based on the prescriptions of s
Nielander’s submissions are comprehensive with respect to listing the
differences that exist between the visual feature of
the Design and the
Citation. As set out above these differences include but are not limited to the
hood, grilles, lights, bumper,
hinges, roof supports and wheel fares.
my view, there are major and minor visual differences between the Design and
Citation. Collectively these differences serve to
distinguish the overall
impression conveyed by the Design when compared to the Citation. I consider the
differences Mr Nielander
has highlighted sufficient to confer the Design with
the requisite distinctiveness.
am satisfied that the Design is not substantially similar in overall impression
to the Citation.
find the Design to be new and distinctive. Accordingly, examination of the
Design has been completed and I direct that a certificate
of examination issue
for Australian design number 201810300.
Louise Tuohy
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and Designs
[2015] ADO 1 (Delegate
[2007] FCA 114.
[2015] ADO 1
Multisteps Pty Limited v
Source and Sell Pty Limited
[2013] FCA 743
[67] (Yates J).
Hunter Pacific International
Pty Ltd v Martect Pty Ltd
[2016] FCA 796
, [39] (Nicholas J).
Ferrari S.p.A
[22] (Delegate Barbey).
[2013] FCA 743
RTF format (6.43 MB)
Signed PDF/A format